*Intro*
You may have noticed how a lot of games
are getting remastered this generation.
Tomb Raider, The Last of Us,
Devil May Cry 4, DMC, Final Fantasy 10 and 10 2, which is just a rerelease of a
previous remastering, all the Halo games,
Resident Evil and Resident Evil Zero, Wind Waker.
Heck, the last generation had
a ton too. All the other Devil May Cry games,
God of War Collection, I co, Shadow of the
Colossus, Prince of Persia Trilogy,
Kingdom Hearts Final Mix 1 and 2, Final
Fantasy 10 and 10-2... no i said that one already
Silent Hill HD Collection, yessss, Okami,
Metal Gear Solid Collection;
the list goes on and on. And these
remastered games seem to be getting an
even bigger marketing budget and PR push
than they used to.
In some ways this is a great thing and
in some ways this could be a terrible thing.
And overall, I'm just not sure how
to feel about it.
So, the reason we're seeing so many
remasters, and so many high-profile ones,
is because making new content for this
generation is expensive, time-consuming, and risky,
even more than last gen.
Remastered games, especially remastered
games from earlier platforms that were
already HD like the ps3 or 360, cost a
lot less to create. They already have a
built-in fan base and they can be
updated relatively cheaply; making
remasters a far less risky proposition
than making some new thing. Now, normally
these games would get lost in the flood
of other high-profile, new games being
released, but because of the time, expense,
and difficulty of creating really top
tier content for these new systems,
we're just not seeing as many big, new
triple-a titles hitting the market.
That means that there's more chance for these
remasters to get attention from the
press and get noticed by fans; which, in turn, means that publishers can see a
bigger return on giving these sort of
titles a bit of a marketing budget.
Besides, platform holders like Sony and
Microsoft are desperate to get more
content on their platforms, especially
that increasingly rare, exclusive content.
Which means they're more likely to give
a little bit of love to these types of
projects than they were in the past.
Which I guess brings us to the big
question: 'is this a good thing?'.
On the positive side, I like the fact
that we as a community are getting used
to the idea of remastering a game not
only to function, but to actually seem
appealing on current hardware.
This is an important part of preserving
the best pieces of gaming history.
There are a lot of genuinely great games out
there that if you don't have the nostalgia
that comes with playing them back in
their heyday,
it can be really hard to go back to
because they simply haven't aged very well.
They were cutting edge tech when
they came out, but today they may just
look like a low-res low poly mess.
This is, of course, assuming you can even
still find reasonably priced copies of
the game and hardware to play it on. By
updating these games, we make them more
accessible for modern audiences and make
them more approachable for future game
designers looking to understand what
these games did well. This is a very good thing.
I mean it's essential that we preserve
these classics in their original form too
but I'm also thrilled that more people
will be able to play them because
they're on modern hardware with a fresh
coat of paint.
But despite that, I can't ignore the
downsides. There's always the concern
that a company doing a remaster might
fundamentally misunderstands its own game,
as with the Silent Hill HD Collection
for last generation.
There's also the worried that these
remastering projects might claim
developer talent and resources that can
otherwise be applied to crafting new
experiences, but neither of those are my
main concern.
My main concern is that it's yet another
indicator that we're struggling to make
new experiences at all, at least on a
AAA console front.
The parallels with Hollywood are too clear.
Remakes often fall into the same
category as unnecessary sequels and
desperate reboots.
They sound like safe bets when
discussing numbers in a boardroom, but
they're often creatively, and ultimately,
financially bankrupt, and I feel even
more concerned looking at what's being
remade. Many of the recent or upcoming
high-profile remakes are just from last
gen.
This makes sense financially as these
are the games that are easiest to up-res
to something that looks good on
modern hardware, but I'd argue that
they're also the least necessary.
I mean, I love The Last of Us and DMC, but
those are still quite playable in their
original forms on hardware a lot of us
still probably have hooked up to our TVs.
They aren't exactly inaccessible to
people who are just now getting into
games, and they certainly aren't
unpalatable to those of us who are used
to the cutting edge of modern fidelity
either. They don't really preserve
history; so much as simply extend the
sales chart a bit. Which, I guess is fine,
but certainly doesn't seem as urgent.
This is one of the problems with
remastering games to modern fidelity
standards, though. The games that actually
need a graphics facelift the most are
likely to cost just as much as making a
new game because none of the old assets
are usable anymore.
The original game is little more than a
blueprint. Like, okay, let's talk about the
recent big announcement:
a Final Fantasy 7 remake.
The original game was released
almost two decades ago.
It looked like this.
None of this is reusable. Not the art
assets. Not the code. Not even the sound files.
They're gonna have to build it all
again from the ground up, and all those
tricks they used back in the day to make
Final Fantasy Seven's world feel expansive
and interesting just won't fly by
today's standards.
All those towns and landscapes we ran
through that we're really just 2-D
pre-rendered images... they can't do that
anymore.
Now the development team is going to
have to actually build all those towns
and fill them with all the details that
our imaginations had filled them with.
And they'll have to populate them with
lovingly rendered people who walk around
and talk with actual voices and these
might seem like small things but these
are all the small things that add up to
make a budget astronomical.
And final fantasy world maps don't look
like this anymore. They look like this...
Look at this! Look at all this money just,
everywhere.
All told the remake of Final Fantasy 7
is probably gonna cost just as much,
maybe more than, a brand new Final
Fantasy game, and we've seen how much
time and money those take. Remember  when
Final Fantasy 15 was announced like
eight years ago, before Final Fantasy 13
came out, as like a sort of semi... whatever.
And this is true of most of the games
that really need a modern remake and
when that's the case, these remasters
suddenly moved from being a financial
sure thing to an enormous risk. Even with
the original's popularity and all of our excitement,
Final Fantasy 7 might, might be
profitable but only if it lives up to
the gigantic hype that such a remake has,
and a lot of games that really need to
be remastered for a new generation don't
even have that advantage.
This is why I'm so torn on how to feel
about seeing more remade or remastered games.
I mean, I love seeing new versions of old
games that have been made visually
accessible to a modern audience. But any
game that's old enough to actually need
it costs just as much as making a new
game, and remastering more recent games
as yet another safe bet this industry
can cling to to avoid the risk of
building rich new experiences.
We gotta start finding tricks to
bringing those primitive low res game
worlds to life. A way of realizing those
worlds that our minds used to fill with
imagined detail, or providing us a way to
recapture that active imagination today.
A method that doesn't involve just
rebuilding those world's to modern
visual standards because those old games
do deserve to be experienced by modern
players, but if we don't find a
financially viable way to remaster the
classics;
the only realistic candidates left are
the ones that don't cost that much to
upgrade and those aren't without value,
clearly, but when those efforts could be
going to the creation of great new games
instead, I'm not entirely sure the
trade-off is worth it.
We'll see you next week.
*Outro Music*