[Music]
There is one day out of the year that
one can be completely and unabashedly
proud of being a member of this
industry. One day a year where we step
past what we are and for an evening be
what we could be. On this night we cease
to be an industry. Rather we become a
brotherhood united in doing something
good. This night is the Child's Play
charity dinner auction. Now, I realize
this sort of topic probably isn't what
most of you came to see here at Extra
Credits, but all we've ever wanted to
accomplish with this show is to
encourage dialogue about games and to
maybe do some good. So, bear with us
this week as we do what little we can to
recognize those people in the industry
who are putting forth their time and
effort to acknowledge that gaming is
about more than just what happens on the
screen and doing some real good in the
world while they're at it. So, first
off, what is Child's Play? Child's Play
is an effort of unambiguous good. Think
about how many things you can really say
that about. It's a charity set up by the
folks over at Penny Arcade to provide
games and systems to children in
hospitals. Almost all the revenue
actually goes to charitable efforts. And
every year they managed to raise over a
million dollars to make the lives of
suffering children worldwide just a
little bit easier. The headlining event
of this annual fundraiser is the Child's
Play charity dinner auction. So, what
marks this auction out? What makes it so
special? Aside from its amazing cause,
of course. Well, for a moment in the
skybridge of the Seattle Convention
Center, we as an industry transcend
being a money-making machine and return
to what at the core we really are,
purveyors of joy. The industry finds its
heart again, and we do so with grace and
dignity. We do so with the class and
elegance befitting the occasion. We do
so with laughter and cheer and a spirit
of human kindness. To get to the event,
you have to ascend through four quiet
stories of Seattle's unique convention
center. Once you pass the lip of the
final escalator, you enter another
world. It's like a scene out of some
strange philanthropic gamer Fcott
Fitzgerald novel. Everywhere your
friends and acquaintances, your t-shirt
and jeans buddies are dressed in tuxes
or formal gowns. There's a sense of
regal dignity and mirth, levity and
gravitas. The champagne flows freely and
all around you familiar faces smile and
friendly hands clasp your shoulder or
embrace you or grasp your hand. For a
moment, this game-making community is a
family. In that moment, you remember why
you took up playing games in the first
place. the joy and wonder, the
unlimitable possibilities, and the
friendships it's brought you. And for
those who make games, you look around
and you remember why you decided that
this was the only thing you could do
with your life, that you would be
underpaid and overworked for the rest of
your days just so you could give a
little bit of that back. The night
begins with the silent auction, which is
anything but silent. Here, people mill
about, chatting with acquaintances and
examining the lots to be bid on. Walking
around the room is incredible. Lying
before you is a visceral outpouring of
love. Around the room are treasures,
unique in all the world. things that
clearly had meaning to their owners, but
were given freely to help those who need
it most. The room is decked with art,
originals donated by their creators, and
development artifacts offered up by
teams who spent years of their lives to
create the product associated with them.
When the clamor of the silent auction
ends, we proceed to the live auction.
Here, everyone sits at white linen
tables, breaking bread and sharing a
meal as they bid on the finest items of
the night. Before everything begins, the
guys from Loading Ready Run take the
stage. They managed to raise over
$200,000 per child's play this year by
subjecting themselves to one of the most
unpleasant games of all time non-stop
for 6 days. That buys a lot of happiness
in the coldest months. Our hats are off
to you fellas. You guys have done
something incredible. After that is a
mix of comedy and earnestness as Mike
and Jerry or Tao and Gabe from Penny
Arcade take the stage to act as our
auctioneers. A wild array of wonders
from our culture come and go, earning
prices far beyond even their
considerable worth. People are here to
give, not to receive. In the afterlow of
the event, James was struck by exactly
what he had just witnessed. The game
industry is just starting to recover,
but it's still been a grim season for
everybody with reports of companies
closing their doors and wave after wave
of layoffs happening every day. And yet,
there they all were, all coming together
to give. The gainfully employed, the
recently laid off, members of penniles
startup studios, all there making actual
sacrifices to do something simply
because it was good. As hard times
continued to loom over both the industry
and the nation at large, in this
microcosm, James saw us grow up as an
industry and saw hope, real hope, that
by coming together to support those less
fortunate, we may weather the worst and
come out the better for it. Never has
the spirit of the season felt so clear.
To Mike, Jerry, Robert, and Kristen,
Lindsay, thank you from the bottom of
our hearts for organizing this event,
and even more importantly, the charity
itself. We can't begin to say it enough.
If any of you guys would like to
contribute to Child's Play, you can do
so at child'splay charity.org. board.
The toy drive lasts till the end of
December, but they take donations year
round. Thanks for watching, guys. Go
have yourselves an awesome holiday.
Merry Christmas.
[Music]