Last time we talked about basic game
literacy and why it might be important,
but there's another type of literacy we
need to discuss. The type of literacy
which allows us to analyze, interpret, and
get more out of our games than just
what's there on the surface level,
advanced game literacy.  But where do
we begin?
Well, we have to start with consumers, you
good folks, the people who buy and play
the games and with developers the people
who put these games together. Now, I
suspect that a tiny sub-segment of
you are probably letting out horrified
gasps at this; having noticed that there
is a group i just left out:
academics. For years academia has
believed itself to be the purveyor and
driving force behind advanced game
literacy, and I realize I'm gonna ruffle
some feathers saying this, but it's not.
Now, that is not to say that academics
and the academic world are not super
important to advanced game literacy,
they are, and I'm going to get to exactly
why later, but academia just is not where
advanced game literacy is really going
to come from.
So, why do I focus on consumers and
developers instead?
Well let's tackle the question of
developers first because you may think
of developers as being highly game
literate. After all, we're the ones who
make these things, but that's often not
the case.
Many developers do a solid workman-like
job without ever really thinking too
deeply about what they do and
unfortunately there are a lot of
developers working out there who don't
even deliver on a fundamental level
flooding the market with mediocre clones
and big-budget flops. If we can raise the
level of game literacy amongst the
developers not only will we do more
holistic development in our industry and
waste far less dev money as a result,
but perhaps more relevant to this
discussion, we'll produce more games that
have stuff going on a deeper level.
This will give the rest of the community
something more to think about and
analyze as they play and just by
regularly exposing players to work with
more substance will raise the level of
game literacy in the community as a
whole because right now we only get a
few games a year that really function on
a deeper level. That's just not enough to
kick-start this process. Anyone really
looking to read more deeply into their
games has to
wait months between releases that they
can really sink their teeth into and
that's just not enough to sustain a
culture of analysis.
Oh, and before anybody tries to argue
that trying to make more games with
depth will make gaming less fun...
Not at all! So many of the hit games that
have historically received praise for
having more to them are games that can
be enjoyed on every level and often are
nearly universally loved.
Silent Hill 2, Bioshock, Undertale,
basically anything From Software makes.
Building more substance into a game
filters through all levels of enjoyment
because taking the time to really think
through how all of the games parts need
to fit together in order to deliver on
the substance beneath a game's surface will
make all of the surface level elements
even better.
So, how do we go about this? Well, that's
sort of on us as developers. It's a
discipline. It requires us to better
manage our projects, to work to
self-educate, to communicate clearly, and
to have a central vision that we share
on the project.
Oddly enough, the one thing that it
doesn't require is that we do more work.
It takes just as much time and money to
build a bad Dark Souls clone or another
empty shooter as it does to craft
something that will still capture the
minds of players a decade later.
Which brings us to consumers; because if
the consumer isn't examining, enjoying, or
getting something from the depth we
strive to build into our games, all that
effort is wasted.
So, what can we do to increase advanced
literacy among consumers? Well, as I
mentioned, some of it'll just happen
naturally by osmosis if there are more
games with substance out there. Simply by
being immersed in it; players will start
to look for metaphors and mechanics more
often, to more frequently question why
certain elements are placed as they are,
to search out connections to other
themes and other works, but we need more
than simply that.
First, we're going to need more from game
reviews. We've talked about it before,
ages ago, but we need more than reviews
which simply list the game's surface level
contents. We need more reviewing which is
truly worth reading instead of simply
skipping to the number at the end. I know
that sounds harsh, but if all a review
ultimately tells you is how good the
graphics or the controls are, there's no
real reason to read anything before the
bullet points and the numerical
breakdown at the
bottom, and if the players have no reason
to read these things they'll will never benefit
from whatever analysis the reviews might
provide. We need more reviewing which
critiques and examines, even if only for
a portion of the review. This is a huge
part of how universal film literacy
increased over the last half-century and
I think we should look to that example
and I know that there are writers and
outlets already striving to do this and
that is wonderful!
Please keep going, but we need that to
become the norm. We need reviews that
don't simply apply useless labels like
'good' and 'bad'.
We need reviews which really dig into why
parts of a gaming experience felt good
or bad. Even that simple exercise, when
applied to a game that has a little more
meat on its bones, will yield results
that are truly worth reading.
Next, we as a consumer base have to be
willing to examine our medium. Games are
a medium as worthy of examination as any
other. Phrases like 'reading too much into
it' or 'making too big a deal out of it';
strike that nonsense from your
vocabulary! We've got to stop being
afraid of somehow killing the fun by
examining our games more closely.
I mean think of all the hours and years
of fun that we've had just digging into
the lore and meaning of three dark
souls games. We also have to be civil to
each other. People have got to feel safe
positing ideas and throwing out theories.
Even if we think somebody's theory is
utterly absurd;
we need to engage in that dialogue in a
civil manner, demonstrating why we
disagree using the text, the game itself,
rather than launching into a mere
shouting match. We can't just be looking
to prove we're right. And now, finally,
academia! I think it's been a mistake to
try and lead the advanced game
literacy charge with academia. The
academic role here is incredibly
important, but sequentially, I think it's
the last roll. Once game makers are
creating more games with depth worth
unraveling, and more of the audience is to
some degree looking for and enjoying
that depth; then, it's academia is roll to
be the Vanguard; to push that as far as
it can go. To give us the
interpretations and examinations that no
one outside of academia could give. This
will validate creators and trickle down
to consumers; providing them with new and
reading ways to think about their games.
Once we hit a certain critical mass of
advanced game literacy, academia will
serve to continually push that universal
literacy level higher and higher; much as
it has done with every other art. Okay, I
won't labor this idea of literacy any
further, but just one final thing.
Increasing advanced games literacy
doesn't mean that everybody has to be
searching for meaning in every game they
play all the time.
It simply means that more people have
the option to. That you won't miss it
when some game with the potential to
deeply resonate with you comes along, and
that the developers don't miss the
chance to put those resonant elements in
there in the first place. At the end of
the day, higher universal advance games
literacy means getting to have more of
those moments where you gather your
friends at a diner and talk late into
the night about just what that
incredible game you played today was
really saying. Because those are some of
the most rewarding moments you can have
over a film or a book or any media, and
we deserve to have more of those with
games.
See you next week!