[Music]
Joining us once more this week is
Shannon Meisner, lead artist at Lo and
Behold Games, who you'll probably be
hearing us mention a lot in the coming
year. So, long ago when talking about
Western and JRPGs, I mentioned this idea
that we're fundamentally looking at our
game genres wrong. This topic is a bit
heavy on the game design theory, but
it's an important discussion for
designers and possibly useful for
players as well. So, here it goes. Back
in the early 2000s, there was a paper on
design theory published by Robin Huniki,
Mark Leblanc, and Robert Zbec called
mechanics, dynamics, aesthetics. It's
one of the earliest attempts to
formalize the field of game design
theory, and it's fundamental to how we
look at game genres. Today, we're going
to give a highly interpreted and
expanded view on the ideas contained
within the first section of that paper,
the portion on the aesthetics of play.
James usually has an hour to give this
talk, but we'll see how this goes. To
start, we have to talk about the way
games are categorized. This idea of
mechanics, dynamics, and aesthetics is a
useful framework for dissecting games.
So, what are these three? Mechanics are
the rules and systems that create the
play we experience. So, the math for how
shooting works in an FPS. Dynamics are
the actual experiential play those
mechanics come together to create that
we engage in, i.e. the running and
gunning gameplay in that FPS. And the
aesthetics are the underlying emotive
reasons we go to that game for the
challenge or the fantasy of being a
marine etc. So the mechanics come
together to create the game's dynamics
which all come together to form the
overall aesthetics of play. A key
insight in the mechanics dynamics
aesthetics paper is that game designers
and players fundamentally approach games
from the opposite ends of the spectrum.
Players are going to most viscerally and
directly experience the core aesthetics,
the broad emotive play experience that
the game offers. But designers, due to
the nature of production, have to start
with the mechanics and build their way
up. Unfortunately, this leaves many
designers so focused on the mechanics
that they're not actually thinking about
the aesthetics of play they're trying to
deliver. Or perhaps worse, they
mistakenly think that specific mechanics
always deliver specific aesthetics,
which is not the case. Take the mechanic
of leveling. Leveling in Mass Effect
serves a completely different aesthetic
than leveling in Call of Duty
multiplayer. Many a terrible clone and
knockoff have been made by designers
failing to realize this fact. But okay,
what does all this have to do with
genres? Well, in every other medium out
there, genres are defined by the
underlying emotive reason that we go to
that genre for comedy, drama, action.
But in games, we've haphazardly defined
our genres over the years so that we now
lump everything that's superficially
similar into the same genre. Take the
first person shooter. We've defined an
entire genre by the fact that it has a
firsterson camera and involves shooting.
And that's ridiculous. What if we
defined film genres that way? Wide-angle
punching, close-up kissing, steady cam
running. Here's the thing. We already
know this first person shooter
definition is faulty because we're
breaking it all the time. We may not be
able to explain exactly why, but we all
know that Portal and Fallout 3 don't
really fit in the first person shooter
category. I mean, they're both in the
first person. They both involve
shooting. They fit the rigid criteria.
And yet, we can all tell that they're
fundamentally different. Why? Because
they fulfill different fundamental
needs. They may share mechanics with
other first-person shooting games, but
they have completely different
aesthetics. So, what are these
aesthetics specifically? Well,
surprisingly, there are a very finite
set of underlying reasons that we enjoy
games. In the mechanics, dynamics,
aesthetics paper, they define eight core
aesthetics that draw us to play. In
James' entire time designing, he's only
added a few of his own to this list,
most of which we'll save for another
time. And he's found that the appeal of
almost every single game can be defined
by two, three, maybe four of these
aesthetics. Now, there are a handful of
exceptions out there that may deliver on
even more games that are so expansive
that they're practically multiple games
all bundled into one single executable.
For example, Minecraft delivers quite
well on more than four aesthetics, which
is one of the reasons it's been such a
huge success. But there's a lot of
different games wrapped up in that
package. The people playing on giant
cooperative monument building servers
are practically playing a completely
different game from the folks playing in
survival mode. Oh, and one more thing
before we start defining the aesthetics
themselves. When we talk about the
aesthetics of play, we're talking about
the core aesthetics of a game, the
fundamental reasons you play it, because
you'll find that most games contain
elements of all of these aesthetics, but
that doesn't really tell us much. The
useful information comes from talking
about the core aesthetics which the game
tries to deliver. Because sure, even
Mario games have a narrative, but most
of us aren't playing those for the deep
interpersonal drama between Mario,
Peach, and Bowser. So, that's not a core
aesthetic. All right, so here's the
list. The first is sense pleasure. Sense
pleasure is perhaps the simplest
aesthetic to define. It's any game that
you go to for how it stimulates your
senses, sight, sound, touch, taste,
smell. So, if it's a game that you play
for the visuals or one that you go back
to time and time again just for the
music, that's a game with sense pleasure
as a core aesthetic. Games like Rez,
Child of Eden, DDR, or even Tag at
Recess or Boxing all deliver on sense
pleasure as a core aesthetic. The second
is fantasy. Fantasy is the ability to
step into a role that you're not able to
participate in in real life. They boil
that experience down to its essence and
deliver it to you in a steady drip.
Games like Call of Duty, NFL Blitz,
Cabela's Hunting Games, Eve Online, Rock
Band, these all use fantasy as a core
aesthetic. The third is narrative.
Narrative is game as drama. It's about
the stories and human drama you witness
rather than the fantasy you live
through. Games like Final Fantasy, The
Sims, Mass Effect, Journey, Plscape
Torment. These all deliver on narrative
as a core aesthetic. The fourth is
challenge. Challenge is one of the
hardest for young designers to grasp.
It's defined as game as obstacle course.
It's about the engagement you find in
overcoming arbitrary obstacles. You find
this aesthetic at the core of any Mario
game. Charades, Call of Duty, Ikaruga.
Often I see young designers mistakenly
define this as difficulty. Now,
difficulty is a dynamic that might help
deliver this, but it is absolutely not
the same thing as challenge. For
example, Kirby's Epic Yarn uses
challenge as a core aesthetic, but you
can't actually lose Kirby's Epic Yarn.
Nonetheless, the joy in that game is in
overcoming arbitrary obstacles. We could
do a whole episode on the difference
between difficulty and challenge, but no
time. Moving on, the fifth one is
fellowship. Fellowship is found in any
activity where we work cooperatively as
a group to achieve a goal. It's that
innate desire we have as social animals
to work as a pack. Games that help
establish that feeling of camaraderie
are games that use fellowship as a core
aesthetic. So games like World of
Warcraft or Team Fortress, Borderlands,
Journey, even I Love Bees are all games
that use Fellowship as a core aesthetic.
The sixth is competition. I'm sort of
unofficially adding this one to the
list. In the mechanics dynamics
aesthetics paper, they mention
competition but don't formally define it
as an aesthetic. I see it as games as
expression of dominance. There's
something in us very evolutionary and
innate that wants to express our
dominance over other members of our
species. Competition games let us
demonstrate our superiority over others
in some way. Games like Team Fortress,
League of Legends, Starcraft, Call of
Duty, and Magic the Gathering are all
examples of this. Weirdly enough, you'll
often find it in social games as well,
the ones that push Keeping Up with the
Joneses as a major element. The seventh
is discovery. Discovery is the act of
uncovering the new. It can be anything
from discovering new territory in Skyrim
or World of Warcraft to discovering new
recipes in Minecraft or new cards in
Magic. It can even be learning new
things about a system such as
discovering new emergent interactions in
Dwarf Fortress. Anytime you go to a game
to find out what there is left to find,
you're going there for discovery. The
eighth is expression. As human beings,
we have an innate need to express
ourselves. You can see it in everything
from the clothes we wear to the very
fact that we choose to create art. Games
can be a powerful vehicle for this
expression. Anytime you go to a game
because it lets you express some aspect
of yourself. From World of Warcraft
classes and gear to Scribblenaut's
Creative Solutions, you're fulfilling
that need. Minecraft, DSEX, The
Incredible Machine, City of Heroes.
These are all games that use expression
as a core aesthetic. And finally, the
ninth one, Abnigation. Abnigation is
game as pastime. In the paper, they
title this category submission, but I
don't think that properly expresses the
underlying desire here. If you've ever
gone home after a long day and just
turned on a rerun of a comfortable show
because you wanted to tune out because
you wanted to do something that let you
disengage, that's abnigation. In games,
you find it in grinding. You find it in
any Skinner box game. You find it
anywhere that you can just zone out.
Games like Farmville, Lineage, Endless
Mode, and Bejeweled, these use
Abnigation as a core aesthetic. Okay, so
now that we've covered all of that, what
makes this information beneficial? And
what does it have to do with genres?
Well, if you start to really think
carefully about game genres and try to
dissect them, I think you'll find that
there are a few core aesthetics that
almost every game within any given
currently accepted genre will have in
common. That is how we actually know
genres. And that's how we instinctively
know that certain games don't fit in
with the rest. It's what we're feeling
when we say that Portal is more of a
puzzle game than a shooter. Really, it's
how we instinctively know to call Mass
Effect an RPG despite its thirdp person
shooting. It's the subconscious guide
that actually separates how we think
about genre in games. So, I say it's
time we start talking about them
consciously in this manner and looking
to the aesthetics to define our genres.
Cuz let me tell you, when designers
start to think of mechanics as defining
a genre, all sorts of bad game design
happens. Knowing and delivering on their
core aesthetic is what separates great
games in a genre from those terrible
clones and knockoffs that just fall
flat. But even more than that, this will
also help us as consumers to voice our
opinions more specifically to more
clearly convey what we want from our
games, which will allow the industry as
a whole to break the cycle of turning
out mechanically similar clones. Because
once you start thinking of a genre in
terms of core aesthetics rather than
just the mechanics underneath, you can
find whole new methods of play to
deliver on the core aesthetics of any
genre. I hope that was interesting and
see you next
[Music]
time. Heat. Heat.
[Music]