Hey! Long as we're talking about that Sony thing, let's venture into a topic only semi gaming-related
Anonymous. Specifically their involvement in the PSN fiasco and the follow up Sony attacks. Now Sony's laid the blame on their shoulders
And it's fairly likely that any formal government inquiry will as well, but should we accept that at face value?
I'm not so sure. In order to weigh the evidence in any meaningful Manner
We're gonna have to do a little bit of trying to pin down what Anonymous is, because otherwise this happens
Anonymous threatened us without Sony! Anonymous has no leadership. No one can make statements for Anonymous. Your perceived
Threat is invalid. Anonymous is anyone
Well, then we got a note from the hackers saying it was Anonymous, and if Anonymous is anyone then technically Anonymous
Did it. That's just what the criminals would do to throw the blame on Anonymous.
Well, even if they are just trying to use Anonymous as a scapegoat
so Sony doesn't track them down, by your logic if the criminals say
They're part of Anonymous, a disorganized group that anyone can be a part of, then technically those criminals are still part of Anonymous
That's a little confusing and I can't do voices. Alright, enough of that. Anyway
We can all see the fallacy in this argument. You might as well blame elves, Hillary Clinton's secret cabal, or the international Anarcho-
Syndicalist movement. It could have been a Sony inside job
And it would, by this definition. still be just as valid to say Anonymous did it. But this definition of anonymous has never made any sense.
Yes, anonymous can be anyone. Yes, they have no leadership
Yes, they act on a broad range of issues sometimes seeming to be pulled in opposite directions
But there are a lot of movements that could be said about
Take the punk movement, or if you prefer your antiquated movements, the romantic movement
To be a punk or a romantic all you have to do is say you are. There are no qualifications for joining
And there's no leadership you have to follow. But not many people are going to believe you're punk if your favorite source of information is
Fox News
And you throw fits when people raise taxes on the ultra-rich. Why?
Because even though movements like these have no leadership and no entrance requirements
They do have ideals, and that's true of Anonymous. In fact, I'd argue that's what makes Anonymous Anonymous
Here's my understanding:
1. Anonymous stands for freedom of information.
2 . Anonymous stands for free speech
3. Anonymous stands for an unregulated internet
4. Anonymous
Generally only stages organized attacks on groups that attack them directly or infringe on their core ideals
5. Anonymous does not engage in criminal activity for the financial benefit of members of its community. And finally, number 6
Anonymous believes in mischief for the Lulz
Anonymous' initial dispute with Sony was over Sony's treatment of Geohot for cracking the PS3. This falls firmly in to the internet freedom/
Freedom of information side of what anonymous is, but the actual attacks on PSN make no sense in this context. First,
Anonymous doesn't steal credit cards
Anonymous may be many things
But I wouldn't say thieves is one of them. If Anonymous wanted to marshal its resources to engage in Credit-card theft or fraud
God help us all. And let me tell you, if Credit Card theft was their ultimate goal, Sony probably isn't where they would start
Second, and this one's debatable
But, taking down PSN sort of seems to me to be, I don't know,
anti-Lulz. Sure, it's funny for a day or two
Maybe a week
but to cause the sort of catastrophic failure
Alienates not only the very sort of people they want to appeal to but also the very people that many of them are
Taking down a game network for weeks doesn't really make the world more entertaining
It doesn't add levity to a dour society plagued by seriousness, it just means people can't play their games for a while
And I bet you there are a fair amount of Anons who are stung by this attack
I mean, you got to figure plenty of them are gamers. If the attack was carried out by Anonymous my guess
Is that they'd have found a funnier, if crasser, way to mess with Sony
Lastly the anonymous calling card left in the system just seems a bit too obvious and bland for them. Now, it may just be my
Conspiranoia talking, but what better way to cover your ass if you're Sony than to say "Hey we found a file saying Anonymous
Did it." It's a story any government inquiry will believe because Anonymous has earned itself no love in the marble Halls of Washington
And it's pretty much an impossible thing to disprove
Now many of you may remember that Sony at first said that it wasn't Anonymous, a statement
Reiterated by Anonymous through the same channels that the threats to Sony were made. So if you accept the threat as speaking for Anonymous you
Have to at least consider the validity of the denial
but soon it became evident that this wasn't just a minor hiccup. The cost of this outage was going to be tens of millions if
Not hundreds of millions between having to pay government fees, totally revamping the network
Remunerating their audience for a month or more of lost time, and then suddenly a file claiming the attack was by Anonymous was found.
It could very well be a fortuitous coincidence
But the timing certainly is odd. Alternatively, as mentioned earlier,
If I was a cyber criminal you'd bet I'd leave an anonymous calling card for everything I did
between their mysterious nature and their reputation for mischief
They're one of the easiest scapegoats ever. I'm afraid this is the sort of thing that could actually be the downfall of Anonymous
not a nefarious government scheme to conduct false flag operations against them just
Simple thieves using them as a patsy. So, no, personally
I don't think Anonymous did it, but I do think this will be a pivotal moment for Anonymous as a movement
Love them or hate them you have to admit Anonymous has the power to do great things. In fact it may be the only group
Out there that can effectively expose many of the frauds and hypocrisy this modern world
But they may well get torn apart by this crisis
Denying that the hacked Sony means accepting that they stand for something and this in turn means accepting that not just anyone can be Anonymous
Simply because they claim to be. Anonymous may well tear itself apart in a fight over whether or not having ideals violates their ideals
Anyway, That's my take on it
The fate of Anonymous and the real facts behind the Sony case, like many truths, will come to light in time
Thanks for indulging us in this slight deviation from our regular subject matter. We'll be back to talk about games next time
Thanks for watching see you next week!