Re-traversal or backtracking is one of
the most common pacing issues in games
and yet it's also one of the easiest
types of issues to solve.
[INTRO SONG]
This episode is brought to you by audible, the leading
provider of audiobooks with over 250,000
books from all kinds of genres to listen
to. Go to audible.com/extra credits for
a free 30-day trial, link in the
description. Surprisingly we still
see this in an enormous number of games today.
Have you ever cleared an area only to
find out that now you gotta walk back
through it with everything already
beaten and nothing interesting to do
along the way? That is the re-traversal
problem. That is poor level design in
action, and today we're going to talk
about how it can be addressed. The
problem looms largest in open world
games. We've all had that moment where
you clear your way to the top of a
building or you've gotten to the end of
a dungeon in an open world game and you
had to tramp back to where you started
to get back outside and carry on your
adventure.
We all know how boring that is. It completely kills the pacing of the
experience.
It's easy to fix if you just build your
dungeons with a back exit and your
buildings with a ladder from the roof to
the ground but before we even talk about
solutions we have to talk about a few
subtler aspects of the problem.
First off why is this a larger problem
and open world games?
Well because in most linear games, stages
simply cut off at the end. When you get
to the top of the building or you beat
the boss of the dungeon in most linear
games a cutscene plays and you're taken
directly to the start of a new level;
No re-traversal needed. Now that's not
to say that re-traversal is any less
bad in linear games, it's just as much of
a pace killer as it is in an open world
situation.
Fortunately it's at least less common
and more easily addressable. Linear games
do still occasionally have that problem
where you go down a side path of an
otherwise linear map and eventually it
leads to a dead end. When you get there
and you find whatever goody was down
that path,
you now have to waddle all the way back to
where you first took the fork with
nothing to shoot or slash along the way
which is boring.
The nice thing about linear level design
though is that you usually have one main
channel in the level from beginning to
end with small side paths off of it.
This means that rather than dead ending,
your side paths can simply reconnect with
the main channel and voila,
no re-traversal needed! Our heroes can blow a
hole through a wall, knock over a tree
to serve as a bridge, or
simply throw a switch that opens a door
to lead them back. Or heck you can have
the path re-converge with the main
channel with no sleight of hand at all
and we're back to stomping over old
ground. But what makes this trickier and
not always viable in a linear experience
is that doing so means you have to dump
the player however far down the main
channel the branch went,
which means they skip content which
might be something your team wants to
avoid for a plethora of reasons. There
are possible workarounds of course if
you're creative.
If your particular design warrants it,
say your level takes place in a
spaceship or some such.
You can have the branching path go up a
small ladder or a slope and have a
90-degree turn in it and then all of a sudden the branch you're creating can
wind back and forth above or below
the main channel, and because your
branch is at a right angle to wherever
the player was at the main channel, you
can create long paths without actually
pushing the player further down the main
channel at all,
and when you drop them back down by
blowing through the floor, or taking an
elevator, or just walking down a gently
descending ramp, the player almost
certainly won't even have seen through
your trick in the heat of the running
and gunning, because they're not getting
a top-down view of what's going on. To
them they're just taking a turn maybe
without even noticing it and are
fighting in normal corridors.
So back to open world games. In these
games there are often scores if not
hundreds of small buildings and dungeons
to explore.
Given that fact it should just become a
design best practice for the project to
always have a way for the player to get
from the end of them back out into the
open world. Sometimes this can involve
having them loop around so that the
player pops back out at the start.
Sometimes these can end with the player
stumbling out into an entirely new part
of the world or being teleported off to
the distance, but more often than not it
simply involves some vertical trickery.
Buildings are easy,
if you send the player up a building
then a ladder or a group of conveniently
placed terraces or other rooftops the
player can jump down to are all you need.
For small dungeons, if they take place
below the surface of your world
you've got a ton of space to build them
however you want. There are all sorts of
options for avoiding re-traversal: making
them loop back on themselves, having the
lowest floor end right next to where the
top floor begins in everything but the
Z dimension, having a convenient lift or
a ladder back to the surface.
All very easy solutions and all of this
works because game spaces are absolutely
nothing like real world spaces. So long
as they look like real world spaces from
moment to moment, we as players buy into
them without hesitation. So you may see a
grand castle from a distance but never
think about the fact that when you're
inside of it it's really just a bunch of
zigzaggy corridors you're fighting
through.
You may be shooting your way through an
industrial plant and as long as every
room looks like a room that could be in
an industrial plant,
you'll never notice that those rooms are
cobbled together in a floor plan that
just makes no sense for any real-world
industry ever. But this leads me to a
subtler point about re-traversal in open world
games.
Very often the player doesn't want to
leave a dungeon only when they get to
the end of them in these sorts of games.
Maybe they need more ammo, maybe they got
stuck on some part, or heck maybe they
bought the game to experience an open
world and maybe they don't want to be
trapped in one place doing one sort of
linear activity for two or three hours
at a time before getting back to
exploring new spaces. When people talk
about FromSoftware having amazing level
design,
this is a big part of that. If you ever
want to examine levels that are built to
allow the player plenty of ways to skip
re-traversing through boring or
taxing parts of a level, From games are a
great collection to study.
They do everything they can to avoid
re-traversal that would kill the pacing and
create frustration,
well ok more frustration. And some other
time we can talk about how simply by
creating these exit points that cut down
on re-traversal time, From creates
checkpoints for the player and creates
smaller more achievable sub goals for
them as opposed to having them simply
slog through a whole dungeon. And
specific to their game,
these points that cut down on re-traversal
create a whole risk/reward dynamic
around whether the player risks trying
to find the next checkpoint or packs up
their souls, and heads back to cash them
in, knowing that that means they're
gonna have to fight their way through
the whole segment again.
But no matter what your building, cutting
down on the time the player has to pass
through areas they've already
depopulated of enemies or stripped clean
of loot is always positive.
Those sorts of moments cause your
engagement curve to come crashing down
and make the player all too aware that
they're playing a game.
These are easy problems to avoid if
taken into consideration from the outset
of your level building,
but are almost impossible to compensate
for if you didn't think about the
re-traversal problem till later. And the
larger the dungeon or the building
you're creating the more important those
shortcuts become, but the more
pre-planning they require. So as you're
building your levels or even just
playing your games
be mindful of back-tracking
and look for simple solutions
to the re-traversal problem. See you
next week.
Once again, big thanks to audible! Audio
books are great for making travel,
traffic, chores, any of that stuff a lot
more enjoyable.
This week our recommendation is
"Frankenstein", the first sci-fi novel, a
classic that asks us to examine our
humanity and our values.
Seriously, this book establishes so much
about the sci-fi genre that we're still
using today. If you only know the
"Frankenstein" story from movies,
trust me get the book, you're in for a
surprise go to audible.com/extracredits
for a free 30-day trial, link
down below in the description.
[OUTRO SONG]