And now we're live on YouTube. Hi.
Hello. Our apologies for the delay. It
turns out that updates continue to be
terrible. They're just want me to Well,
I have some pregame show for us today. I
I also have pregame show. So, by all
means, you we are late because somewhere
between my video calls yesterday when I
was using my camera and this morning, an
update got installed that disabled on
something else that disabled my camera
and made me have to go back and do a
full update on my camera, which turned
out also then had an update. So, I don't
know if they were supposed to like be
parallel updating and one thing did and
the other didn't, but Yep.
Uh, so I have I have uh two two
fascinating occurrences uh within the
past 24 hours for your consideration.
Would you like the design one first or
the notes design one first? Oo, and I'm
going to throw a gross one in the
middle. Oh, great. Okay. Uh but um let's
go with the non-design to get us started
on. All right. Uh here is your regular
schedule reminder. Dear friends of the
internet, check who you are friending on
Discord because through no fault of
mine, to the best of my knowledge, it is
now the case that I have been
impersonated upon Discord. So, yes, it
just came to light as I was preparing
for this stream. So, I posted a safety
ping in our Discord and elsewhere. But
yeah, um it turns out that uh the
um
the I have we have officially reached
the level of prominence where it is
worth someone's time to attempt to
impersonate me. So, some things about my
account that you should know. Um my join
date is in November 2016 and I have uh
Ruby soon to be uh Opal Nitro. The
impersonator account does not. It also
spells the username incorrectly and
doesn't have my previously known as
username badge. I have also linked my
new account to my blue sky. So, that's
another level of verification. But in
general, I will tell you in a Discord
server that we share that I am going to
friend you before I do
so. I'm very annoyed. I I got to tell
you, Jeeoff, I'm very annoyed. I hate
this cuz it's a bunch of very necessary
work because it's community safety,
right? But at the same time, I don't
want to do this. I don't want to go
through all these extra steps. So,
so because of the way Discord is set up,
here's the thing. I don't know. Mhm.
Because I've never actually There isn't
like a place on Discord where you can
say this user of yours is being bad, is
there? Uh there is.
Um, you can uh if you if you interact
with them, you can rightclick
on their name. Okay. And uh there is a
feedback mechanism of some sort. There's
a block and report. Yes. And we can also
if they made it into our Discord, we
could block and report them there.
Unfortunately, that's not
um a thing. Well, okay. So, here's the
problem. Here's the problem. mode. You
would think that it's a fresh account,
but it's not because this account is
older than my account or they spoofed
the join date. The the join date for
this account is February 2016 and mine's
November 2016. So, I don't know.
That is an old account. It's a very old
account, right? Um, and it doesn't have
a previously known as badge or has
chosen not to show it for obvious
reasons. Um, but it has the same almost
the same profile. Uh they've got some
punctuation errors in there likely on
purpose to weed out people who are too
smart to fall for a scam. So uh I've
posted on Blue Sky about it. I've posted
in the Discord about it. I'm telling all
of you about it. So now it's on camera
and anyone who watches this VOD will see
it. Um but please be safe out there. I'm
going to be dealing with this for a
while. I I bet uh with multiple accounts
cuz um uh friend of the channel and uh a
partner of mine, Alchemy, um is uh also
dealing with this. So we we have we have
seen somebody spoofing them, too. Yes.
So um we're not exactly sure how it's
how it's all going to go down, but it's
you know that's what it is. All right.
Uh and
now you had uh gross. Do we have to I
have this one one more reason that we
should pay our teachers more. Oh dear.
What what happened at at at child's
school?
So I have learned I I think I have
previously reported that um preschool is
a place children build up their
immunization or build up their um immune
system. My words are going immune
system. Thank you.
because they get exposed to all of these
things because kids have families. Lots
of families therefore track lots of
things. And when those kids catch them
and continue go in not knowing they're
sick yet, they vector spread it. Yep.
I have learned there is another thing
that gets vector spread. Oh dear. Which
is small bugs that live in your hair. Oh
no, not lice. Oh, that's awful.
and to the point where one kid had a
sister who got it who gave it to them
who's in and my wife is on a mom's chat
group and all the moms are freaking out
and so I'm getting like playby-play
reports. The poor kid actually the mom
of the kid who got it owned up
immediately. My kid got this from
somewhere and because of that most
likely headed off the entire school
getting it. Like this is one of those
things that can be very embarrassing to
report. My kid has this and I might have
exposed you. But if you don't report
that, right? I was talking to the
principal of the school yesterday
because she showed up to say hi to
parents walking into the class. She's
like, "Thank God someone did this
because last year someone didn't and we
had the lights continued to show up for
months." Yeah. Because because somebody
because the more kids get it, the more
likely it is that in getting rid of
them, someone misses enough to reinfect
everyone. Yeah. Yeah, it's right. And
so, but I I have learned a whole bunch
about that vector spread as well, but
the poor teachers in my son's classroom,
I saw came in this morning, they were
spraying everything, and we just got a
report that one of them had also got it.
Yeah. And so, young 20something teacher
with nice long hair has now been
infected as well as the poor children.
Oh, no. And I I mean, I feel bad enough
for the kids, but I feel really bad for
the teacher. Yeah, absolutely. Um, all
right. Okay. And then I have that is not
a thing you signed up for as a teacher.
No, it is not. Um and then I have one I
have one design idea for. Okay. Okay.
So, um this is this is not the show.
We'll we'll we're sort of warming up.
And also um chat uh I should mention one
of the reasons we're warming up is that
I have changed the audio settings again.
How do we sound? By all of my meters and
testing and everything else, we should
sound more even and roughly about the
same otherwise. Um there shouldn't be
any uh by the way, I'm testing this out
and getting the communal. Yeah. Yeah.
Yeah. Yeah. That's absolutely. Um so uh
mine is we've we've lauded patch notes
as a way that developers communicate
with a community, right? that they are a
tool that gives communities,
particularly communities of crunchy
games, right? As opposed to like a
gallery game, right? Journey probably
doesn't need as many patch notes other
than we fix some stuff, right? Versus um
League or Magic Arena or Hearthstone.
PvP games are notorious for doing
ongoing p balance patches. Actually,
excuse me. They are games as a service
do the most because as you continue to
add com content surprise surprise you
may need to tell people about it and as
you add things you may have to rebalance
other things. Correct. Okay. So all of
these things are true and we've lauded
them forever. What is your initial
reaction, your gut check reaction to a
developer of a PvP game saying that they
intentionally don't want to publish
patch notes to allow for discovery of
new things in the game?
I guess it depends. So, A sounds odd. B
maybe it's a game about discovery. Like
without knowing the game, if you were
telling me that was League, I would say
that's an awful idea. If it is
you know, Spelunker's secret PvP cave
exploration game maybe, or even some
rogike where they wanted to sneak new
events in if there was like a PvP
competitive rogike and they're like, "We
don't want to tell people about the
events because this is part of the
experience, right?" So, here, but
normally normally I would say, "Hey,
when you change a thing on a game people
play competitively, you should probably
tell them what you changed." Yep. The
Bizaar decided to do this uh yesterday.
In fact, they didn't announce that there
was going to be a balance patch. They
announced that there was going to be
maintenance and then hotfixed in a bunch
of balance changes and fundamentally
overhauled one of the characters who had
a unique starting setup to no longer
have that unique starting setup and
scored a ridiculous own goal because
they got dozens to hundreds of bug
reports immediately because they didn't
tell anyone that the character's unique
starting setup was changing, right? So
everyone reported it as a bug because
obviously this character's worked the
same since the beginning of the game and
you changed it without telling saying
anything. Therefore must be a bug,
right? Basic thing in software. If
something that was working stops
working, it's probably a bug. Correct.
And um I I think this is uh you know
this is also a really good one. Anti-che
or anti-bot. Yeah, that makes perfect
sense. Right. If you are if you're
patching in uh in things that help
prevent
um bad actors in your space, that also
makes sense, right? Um yeah. Uh like
actually even as far back as EverQuest,
a very long time ago, there were certain
parts of the patch we didn't mention
because people were continually trying
to hack our system and do packet
sniffing and other things to get
advantages about where certain spawns
were. Yep. There were certain things we
just changed in the background that no
normal player would notice that was
specifically done to mess with people
trying to parse our code or parse our
packets. Like we would rewrite things,
send extra strings, change some stuff
around just to mess with them. Yeah.
Because a normal player would never see
that. The other problem is that in
particular here, um, experienced players
of the bizaar don't read tool tips
because why would they? Because you
would tell them the items changed. So,
it's inefficient to read tool tips
because you know how the item works or
how it should work, but then they
changed it in a game that doesn't have
all the information constantly
displayed.
So, hm. So, uh, the community has been
having some pretty big push back on
that, but it is kind of interesting to
think about. Like I I definitely think
there is a world where it is possible
for a PvP game to not do complete patch
notes, right? I would say a PVP like a
competitive leaderboard game. Yes. I
would say there's what you wouldn't
necessarily because there everybody's
going in with the same correct thing and
it's not directly I bumped into a player
who suddenly has a whole different setup
than it used to. The the other problem
is of course that um as of right now
Bizaar doesn't have for hot fixes
doesn't have any in-game indication that
anything has changed. Oh man. So you
could literally have finished up a match
queued up for the next one and things
are different. Correct. or even in the
middle of the same match because when
hot fixes happen, current ongoing runs
are suspended, not terminated.
Oh wow. Yeah. So your entire build
league at least is very good about Yeah.
You get out of a thing before a thing
happens or it's just like server's
coming down for the patch, right? Yeah.
And they have uh no, they stop queuing a
period of time before the I believe it's
maintenance start an hour, hour and a
half. plenty of time to finish an entire
match, right? Yeah. They basically
figured out what's a really long match,
added a little bit on top of that. Yep.
And did it? Yep. Though they will still
let you cue bot games, so if you want to
just go like practice or stuff until the
servers come down, you can do it. Yeah.
Excellent. Excellent. Excellent. All
right. It's good. But yeah, that
seems that seems like a decision that um
is going to
have repercussions different than they
thought it was going to. It's an
excellent way of putting it. Yeah. The
uh the very vocal concerns of some parts
were being dismissed out of hand in the
discord and uh it escalated pretty fre
pretty uh pretty freely from there. Um,
imagine that people like knowing because
a reminder reminder the ability to go
into a ranked run in the bizaar
when we did the we did the ride along
has a cost. You can either earn a
ticket, you get one free one per day,
you can earn a ticket or if you are
really just desperate to play more
faster than you can earn them, you can
pay money for an in-game currency to buy
more ranked runs. Yeah. which means that
they're changing the formula for a game
that people are potentially paying real
money to play per run without telling
them, which is uh not great. Not great.
So, they've um yeah, th this is uh this
is kind of an an interesting
uh terrarium. I feel like The Bizarre
has been an interesting terrarium in
watching a studio publish their first
game and seeing like the community
reactions and their reactions and trying
things differently because they're
intentionally and unintentionally trying
to buck a bunch of other trends. Very
interesting. Um I think it definitely
makes for good conversation if nothing
else.
Um
so why oh let's see. Oh,
interesting. Interesting.
Can I tell you, Will, this is a minor
spoiler secret. Sure. But we have a new
series of shorts coming out on Extra
History. Uhhuh. that in a regular
universe we wouldn't have to do but
we're doing on this one which is a
series of shorts called recently deleted
history where we go back and cover
events that for some reason are getting
struck from governmental history. Yeah,
that seems um like an important thing to
do and I'm real bummed that we have to
do it. Yes, I am too. But you know what?
F that we're doing it right. No, I feel
like yeah, it's it's very important to
do. I
um yeah, I have I have complex feelings,
but let's let's not dive too deeply into
that or I will spend two hours
screaming. Um yeah, so
um yeah. Uh okay. Yeah. And um Twitch
chat, you now do have new tools with
which to um display your displeasure uh
about some things. You have uh old man
shaking cane at clouds. You have Zoe
pet, Zoe cheer, and um or pet uh cheer
old and clap are the new ones. Uh and
there will be more coming soon. And
YouTube, of course, we're going to be
getting you emotes as soon as the
membership gives us enough
uh slots to YouTube does it a very
interesting way
where they unlock the ability for us to
give the community emotes based on how
many people are members, which is you
pay like $2 or $4 or five. I I can't
remember. It's Yeah. But and doing that
when you hit enough unlocks more emotes
and then when more people know they
unlock more. They basically make members
pay for us to give you emotes. Yep.
That's how Twitch does it, too. That's
sort of the industry standard in
streaming, which is weird. I don't know
what to do with it. Uh okay. Um so, uh
today's I learned a thing. Yeah. Uh it
it's very strange. Today's topic is
going to be a ride along of a game
called Backpack Battles Chats Sound Off.
How many of you have heard of Backpack
Pedals? I know Twitch chat has cuz I've
played uh some of it more than I thought
of of it um on on
stream.
Um but I'm very interested to see if
anyone in YouTube has heard of it. Uh
because this is a very interesting game.
So um we're going to do our fade to
black. We're going to come back. I'm
going to introduce the game. Then we're
going to jump into it. Uh if you've
never been to one of these before, we'll
explain a little bit more after we come
back from our intro. But Jeff has not
played this game. I have and I love this
game. I'm going to be walking Jeff
through his first experience with it.
And Jeff's going to be doing systems
design commentary essentially. This is
if you haven't seen them, Will and I do
these like once every other month or so.
And yeah, he'll pick a game that he's
played at least a little, often a lot
and I will go in having not seen it at
all, but turning on designer brain and
do basically live design analysis while
Will is also showing off the game. Yep.
This as a secondary thing is a great way
to see if a game that Will thinks is
interesting is one that's interesting
for you. Yep. And get some initial look
at it. Yep. Okay. Uh we are going to go
to black and then we're going to play a
stinger and we're going to come back and
we're going to record for Nebula. All
right. Uh don't panic.
[Music]
Good time zone internet. Hello and
welcome to Design Club. The only game
design show on the internet that brings
you a thing we've done before but not
like this. Haha. I am your humble
design. Everything new is old again.
Yeah, that's right. Everything old is
new again. Both. Both. Yeah. I am your
humble design club. Well, joined as
always by my pal Jeff. Hi Jeff. Hey
everybody. I am Jeffrey Zigan. I am the
studio director of Extra Credits and I
am coming to you from the west coast
today where Will over here is coming to
you from the east coast and we are in
our amazing virtual Extra Credits coffee
shop that serves everywhere all at once
all the time only somewhat similar to
the movie. Does that mean that our our
coffee shop is like across the street
from the restaurant at the end of the
universe? because I feel like that's
what you're implying and I feel like I
like that idea a lot. Somewhat similar.
I mean, if you look out the window, it's
it's a nice day outside, which I'm not
sure it is on the very last day of the
universe because the restaurant at the
end of the universe is every day at the
end of the universe in a time bubble,
which lets them repeat this on a
consistent basis, which is
And don't don't think too hard about
anything presented in Hitchhiker's
Guide. You will give yourself a
headache. Just Oh, the cow, which freaks
our throat out in the restaurant. Is a
nice touch. Yeah, it's a great touch.
Um, so, uh, today for your today for
your viewing pleasure, we are bringing
you a ride along. So, we've done these
in the past, but never on YouTube. So,
we'll explain real quick. Uh,
occasionally, uh, once a month max. Um,
we'll do a every month or two. Yeah,
every month or two, we'll do a ride
along. So, um, today we're going to be
playing Backpack Battles. We're going to
show you Backpack Battles. I'm going to
explain the game and Jeff has never seen
it before. So Jeff is going to be doing
some designer brain analysis, talking
about his first impressions while I show
off the game uh and see um what what
comes out of it. I think this is a very
interesting game uh because it is one of
very few in this very niche subgenre. So
the I'm going to I'm going to pitch the
subg genre as inventory management auto
battler games.
It's not words 10 years ago I think I
would have ever heard together. Correct.
Because backpack battles is an auto
battler that whose fundamental
mechanic is inventory Tetris Diablo
style.
Um, and by the way, inventory Tetris
used to be considered a game feature
that we were trying
to I won't say learn how to get rid of,
but learn how to make better. Sure. And
it became a thing that people enjoyed
enough in a weird perverse kind of way
that it actually turned into its own
thing. That's correct.
Yeah. Which I mean is mind-blowing,
right? Like that that people would enjoy
creating
um bags full of loot set up in
particular ways enough that this has
become a reasonably popular game. Um
there is one other um that I'm aware of
Gabe in this which is the Bizaar but
that we've covered that before and um
it's still chugging along. Uh Backpack
Battles is almost out of early access.
It's in version
9.38B as of today. Um they're pretty
good about updating regularly. So um
Jeff, do you have any questions? Is
there always a B at the end for a
backpack? No. Oh, I was just curious.
Yeah, I I think it'd be kind of funny if
there was. I think B is hot fixes.
Okay. It could also stand for beta where
they may have appended things based on
where they feel they are in the
pipeline. There is surprisingly both a
lot of consistency and inconsistency on
how people name things. The only big one
that is almost universally agreed upon
is 1.0 is when you have gone to what you
consider your first
live version. Yep. And everything before
1.0 you know, if you are unfamiliar with
this system is we're still building it.
So, you said they're on version what?
Uh.9.38.
So, they feel like they're getting close
to release based on the number.9 being
close to 1.0. Yeah. And the it should be
noted that Backpack Battles has had a
long and very interesting history of
updating. Their initial release was
actually a demo. They used a demo that
they released as part of a Steam demo
festival. Steam does a lot of them.
They're great for finding new games, but
we've talked about the costs associated
with company making a demo. They chose
to take advantage of this. They released
their beta as a demo. So, they used the
demo feature on Steam to release an open
beta, which let everyone try the game
during one of these festivals and gave
them a bunch of information so they
could continue developing the game. Uh,
and then they've been updating it pretty
regularly since then. Yep.
Um,
so I think, uh, with all that having
been said, let's By the way, hold on.
Phil just pointed out um,
yeah, yeah, you can easily go to point.
This is technically correct, but very
very seldom used. One exception.
Minecraft. Minecraft is just its own
exception. Correct. The Minecraft
exception is there are lots of rules
that apply to lots of games and
Minecraft is doing its own thing in its
own special little bubble and we don't
worry about what they're doing because
they are doing their own thing. Um,
right. And the nice thing for Minecraft
is they never really feel boxed in. They
just go for it.
At least their programmers never suffer
from a case of brain block anyway.
Anyway, they're really bad at square
roots. Okay, we're going to dive into
this game before Jeff and I get into a
punoff that will never escape from. So,
this is Backpack Battles. There is I'm
drinking. There is some amount of sound,
but not enough that's relevant. It's
things plinking here and there, and I'm
cutting it out so that we can have a
talk without it uh being distracting in
the background. So, this is the landing
screen. Um there's some information
behind me that you can see. Jeff,
landing screen first thoughts.
So, landing screen, first thoughts.
Number one, they've chosen a very
interesting art style in that um it is
reminiscent of kind of an old medieval
style but done in a new digital format.
Like this is meant to evoke a certain
feel. Yes. This art style with color
scheme basically says medieval fantasy.
There is no time I have ever ever ever
seen anything in kind of this color
scheme and layout that was not medieval
fantasy. Just straight up. So they are
color coding this to let you know what
kind of the genre theme is going to be
from the beginning and they're playing
to a recognizable trope on it. Yep. Um,
the one downside to this is it's this
color palette is sometimes a little bit
muddy and that it can be hard to
differentiate basically foreground and
background. And to fix that or
compensate for that, they have minorly
animated the character. You'll notice
that is the only thing other than the
droppy things, which we'll get to in a
moment, that is moving on here. And that
kind of gives you a, oh, there's my
character. Because if she wasn't moving,
it would be very easy to overlook her
initially. Yep. Um I think they also
decided we needed some extra movement.
So we have random thing droppy and Boppy
from the sky. Correct. Um the other one
is Will. Is that usual? The little like
loading thing on the new unranked game.
There's a little swirly or is that where
your mouse is? Oh, that's another thing
that that is not that is that's an OBS
aberration. That is not that. Okay, let
me fix that. Just was checking to see
because that was a visual anomaly bit
otherwise based on it.
Yep, that's that. And now it's gone.
Haha, there's a transparent layer that
should have been disabled and wasn't.
Anyway, continue. But um they're on the,
you know, they're giving you the title
on the little bit of the left of that.
They're giving you a little bit of a
clue of what it's going to be. The most
important things that they think are
basically joining games. So that is the
interface that is middle center in big
bright colors. The new unranked, new
ranked game, new unranked game, other
game modes. They're doing an interesting
thing in they're exposing a lot more
interface than a lot of landing menus
do. If you look on the right, um, you've
got your wardrobe, your history, some
sort of score, items, recipes,
um, your streaming stuff. Those are
usually things that you see one layer
down on an interface or not initially
exposed. And you generally would have
like a a big splash screen with the
title that says start. Yeah. And here
they're looking, it looks like they're
trying to skip that level, so they're
just putting it all on one screen. Yep.
My guess is you're in the middle of a
run because I'm seeing a character on
the left. Either that or you have a
long-term persistent character that
you're continuing play with, but they're
showing your character stats. Correct.
There. These are the starting stats.
So the ranger starts with 12 gold, 25
health and five stamina. I am currently
ranked 50 platinum in ranked. Um but
that is the starting stats. Also
relevant is that the um above that above
the character stats that is the starting
backpack or one of the two starting
backpacks for the ranger. Um and I can
toggle between them here. So these are
the two different essentially loadout
options. Uh and they're Yeah. And there
are equally four classes that I can
toggle between.
Ah, okay. I would initially I'm very I
surmise something else. B and I was a
little confused on why there would be
both a character stat as well as choose
a class. Mhm. This is I'll honestly say
slightly different interface than I
would guess what it would have have
done. Mhm. But it also is not terribly
confusing once you click on a couple
things. Yep. So I wouldn't say it's bad,
but I also wouldn't say it's optimal.
Yeah. Uh okay. So um that is that's
that's a very good start. So um I think
the best way to get in is probably for
us to start a run. So I'm going I'm
going to suggest that we start with this
bag and the ranger because they're the
first this is the first set you really
use. Can I see real quick? Can you just
flip between the classes? So, we had
Ranger. This is Pyro. Pyromancer. Um,
who's hot? Uh, h this is the uh me
Reaper. Reaper. Uh, and that's her uh
default coffin. Oh, looks like a little
coffin. It It actually is. It's a
storage coffin. Um, and we have the
Berserker. And it's also worth noting
that if you hover over these, you can
get complete tool tips for what they do.
So, for instance, this is a bag. All it
does is add four slots. This is a duffel
bag. It adds uh and it's a unique
berserker bag. It adds six slots and
then it has some triggered effects that
occur.
Okay. Go back to the pyromancer a sec
for me. Sure.
Okay. I was just kind of curious and
then so yeah, start with whichever one
you think makes for a good first view.
Yeah. Uh and let's hop in. Yeah. All
right. Let's uh we'll start an unranked
game. Okay.
So, here is one of two screens in the
game. Okay, this is uh one of them. So,
uh we're going to go through a couple of
things that you can't see because of
where I am, and that's just sort of
unfortunate. We're in the first round.
I've won zero times and I have five
tries. Uh my goal is to get to 10 wins
at which point I will be given the
option to go for additional wins if I
would like to. Um, that's sort of a
riskreward mechanic in ranked. But in
unranked, it just lets you play with the
build longer if you'd like to. Or you
can tap out at 10 and say, "I'll take my
winnings here. Thanks." Similar to
Bellatro where you need to get to round
eight to win, but you can keep going if
you want after. Yes, absolutely. Okay.
Uh, all right. Let's take a look at an
item. We're going to look at the sword.
So, okay. Every item that we use has
stats. In this case, we have a damage
range of one to three, which averages
out to 1.4 per second. It has a cost
stamina cost of one. Wait,
wait, that's a
weird that is not the actual average
damage.
It's
not
uh correct because it's a 1.4 second
cool down. Ah, okay. And because I
they're are they also factoring in the
accuracy?
I believe they are. I don't remember. I
will be totally honest. Because normally
on a 1D3, the average is two. And the
way, by the way, if you ever need to
figure out on a base thing how to get
the average, you add the the least and
the most roll, add them together, and
divide by two. Yep. That is the average.
Yeah. So, uh yes, it's very strange,
right? Okay. Um, so we have uh a damage
range of 1 to three. And by the way, the
a the average damage per second matters
a
lot less in some cases. That number gets
very spiky um because of other effects.
Um so we've got a stamina cost of one.
So every 1.4 seconds it will consume one
of our five stamina.
And uh it has okay it has an accuracy
percent of 90. It also has um because it
is inside this bag is a 12% chance to
critically hit and gets an additional 3%
for each luck which is what we gain from
lucky clovers and several other other
things. Mhm. Um so, uh and it's also
worth noting that, um we can hover over
this, right? And this is uh you'll gain
gold every round, your health will
increase, and your stamina, right? We
currently regenerate one stamina per
second. So, we have additional um and
the sword takes one stamina per second.
The sword stamina takes one every 1.4
seconds. Really don't start you out with
a simple math example, unfortunately. I
really wish they did, but they don't.
And is the fourleaf clover taking up a
space? Yes. Okay. All items with one
convenient exception we'll we'll talk
about here in a second are either
bags that are sort of the background
layer of your backpack that indicate
what what spaces you have to put things
in or they're items that go in that and
each of them takes up a number of slots.
Um you can see as I hover over these
right that they have an outline. So this
one takes up two. This one takes up nice
four. This one takes up four in a line.
Um the
broom Oh, can you rotate objects? Could
you rotate your sword to the left and
therefore put the broom in? Okay, that's
what I Yep. Does that still count as
being in your backpack for being lucky?
Yes, it does. Okay. You have already
beginning to see correct. Dipping into
main backpack is an interesting
mechanic. Okay.
Yep.
Um, yeah, two average damage per hit
with a cool down of 1.4 is approximately
1.4, but it does include the point
multiplier. Yeah, that that makes sense.
Yeah, for those listening along but not
reading, chat is now trying to dissect
part of the math for this. Yeah, because
and that's one of the reasons I like
this is because right now, no time
pressure. And that also uh makes a game
um very uh easy to have these
conversations about, right? We saw a lot
of really great suggestions that I'm
gonna work on figuring out in the
future, but some of them were for like
action or racing games, and those are
cool and great and hard to have these
conversations about because I h uh have
a streamer debuff where my brain focuses
on the game and trying to read chat and
having a coherent conversation about
complex design analysis is very
difficult under those circumstances.
Will and I have done League and we've
done Deadlock and a couple of others
where we also realized only one of us
gets to play at a time because if we're
both trying to play and talk about it,
it is not as coherent a conversation.
Yeah. So, the one exception, by the way,
to the every item takes up a space is
gemstones. Gemstones go into sockets on
gear. So, as I've hovered a lump of
coal, which for our purposes right now
is gemstone. Um, you can see that
sockets appear in uh all of the relevant
gear. So, there's a there's a little
socket in the sword. There's one in the
frying pan. There's one in the shield.
Not every item has a socket, and not
every item with sockets only has one.
Some have up to three. There might be
one with four, but three is generally
the max.
Um, so, so basically I can see lump of
coal 70% chance to deal plus one damage.
So immediately my designer brain looking
at that says I want that on an item that
gets used often. So for example, I saw
the sword has a cool down of 1.4. If
there was a dagger that had a cool down
of.5. Yeah. 70%. And this because this
is flat damage. This isn't add 10%
damage. This is just add x damage. It
moves our range. Yeah. Yeah. Um, do they
have items that do add percent like add
20% damage or are they all flat fees or
flat that you Most of them are flat.
Okay. The percentage increases come in
the form of speed. So they change the
rate of attacks more frequently than
they change the flat.
Gotcha. Does that make sense? Yeah. That
just tells me also that basically low
cooldown is good with slottable based on
the one slottable I've seen. Yep. Uh I
did want to call this out. Uh link. No,
we have not. Uh we're going to we're
just doing uh I I know that they do some
amount of content. That was not a factor
in choosing to do this game. I just
think the game's neat. Will and I choose
games we're interested in checking out.
Um but if uh we we never pick games
we're gonna crap on. Correct. Yeah.
That's not fun, right? And and that's
generally the way I play games, too, is
if I'm not having fun with the game,
I'll stop playing it because that's not
the headsp space I'm live in. So, here's
another interesting thing. You'll note
that um so auto battler, we're going to
be buying and selling things with our
gold. Important to know that every item
uh sells for at least one gold. Okay.
Which means that because this is on sale
for one gold, I should always buy it.
Ah, okay. Actually, what is the resale
value?
Um, it varies. It's half a lot of the
time, but min one, but because you can't
go lower than one, you can always trade
that one back in for the amount you
bought it for, and it is therefore
equivalently free as soon as you find
something better. Correct. Okay. It also
lets us talk about the next core
mechanic of backpack battles, which is
combining. So, I have here this I could
slot it into this, but you'll also see
that there's a blue line that's
tethering these two items together. Mhm.
I can combine these two items and it
forms a yellow line and that will form a
torch. And so, uh I there are some items
which can't be purchased in the shop
which can only be created by combining
them. Mhm. So, uh, we have a whole
recipe book down here. Of all of the
different things you can make. So, torch
is up here. So, we can see that torch is
um two to three
damage for one stamina cost, 90%
accuracy, 1.4 second cool down, and on
hit, it has a 25% chance to gain one
damage.
We can also light the
torch, which gives us even better
stats. So, uh you'll uh lots of the lots
of auto battlers in general are about
crafting builds and combining items to
get the result that you want or like to
move towards an ultimate form. And this
is one of the early ones. Oh, that is
Oh, they did. Okay, great. Um and it's
also very nice even if you haven't made
one. So, I've never made a thorn bloom,
but I know how I can. This recipe page
is always available and shows you all of
the items that could show up in your run
that are available for you to make,
whether or not you've made them before.
Does an item tell you it has it is part
of a recipe, or is every item part of a
recipe? It will tell you it's part of a
recipe with an item that's currently
available in the shop. So, uh, for
instance, even though I don't own any of
these, if I hover over the shield,
because the shield and the walrus tusk
have a, uh, fusion, right? Have a have a
recipe, they will show that they have a
recipe with each other, and then I can
go look them up and figure out what Oh,
I see. Because there's a little blue
line connecting them when you hover
over. Correct. I missed that initially.
Yeah. Um, there's also So, this is all
telling me Oh, yeah. So broom and frying
pan makes a shovel.
H it they don't always make sense. Don't
don't hold your breath for it to make
the most sense. It is it is a fantasy
game. So sometimes
I mean stick plus scoopable thing for
shovel is isn't the worst. The broom the
broom is actually a core part of many
recipes. Uh the broom forms the basis of
uh every staff. So, we have the broom
and the wet stone make a shepherd's
crook. The broom, uh, sorry, the magic
staff, which we make by combining a
broom and a mana orb, makes several
things. Um, except for the spear. We
don't make a spear with a broom for some
reason. The spear is its own item. Don't
I don't really know why. Um, does the
game explain how fusion works? Uh, it
does kind of. um mostly through when you
put them next to each other um it'll do
this it'll do this behavior um and it
does show you that there's a recipe
thing and you can always click the
shopkeeper for you know a random tip. So
I have a question. Sure. The sword. So
okay you could you could put the coal
into the sword to socket it but you can
also can you not take it back out?
Cool. But you can
also combine them together to make a
torch. Yes. Okay. So, there's two
interactions here. Yes. There's socket
thing and there's also forge thing. Yes.
Okay.
Um Okay. Uh let's uh I'm going to I'm
going to get us moving on the idea that
we should probably go and do a do a
match. What did Shield do, by the way?
Shield is uh when we are attacked with a
melee attack, that's what that symbol
means, has a 30 three a 30% chance to
prevent seven damage and remove an
additional.3 stamina from the opponent.
Okay, so we can block slow them down.
Um, which I think is a good start. Um,
we're also going to take this walrus
tusk because they fuse into a spiked
shield which is kind of nice. Um, and
then I kind of wonder this
is another.7 per second. Where was your
gold? It's down here.
Did that start higher? Was that going
lower? It starts at 12. Uh, there we go.
Thank you. We get 12 starting gold. Um,
we could we could get a broom or we
could lock the broom and roll, right?
So, reserving an item is free and it
means that it won't reroll when I pull
the roll rope and it won't roll when the
shop automatically rerolls after each
battle. Okay. So, I can hold. So, you
can basically say a broom seems
important but don't want now. Correct.
Uh in this case, however, I think the
pan is
probably pan is much better, right? You
can see that it's it's slower, but it
does better average damage for slightly
more stamina cost and has a synergy with
food. The stars are important uh as
well. Stars are if there is an item of
the specified type in the specified
space around this, a benefit occurs
either to the item that's uh in the
space or to the item that's in the
middle. Either one. And to do that,
you'd have to move your sword into the
bottom, put your the pan on the left,
which would mean that the pan there's no
way to get the pan and the sword both
lucky. Right now there is I could move
this here and this here cuz this is only
three not four. So I can Oh, I thought
that was a square. Okay. I didn't
realize it was a So So we have every
shape imaginable. Okay. So uh that was
my assumption cuz you weren't mousing
over. Yeah, I will I will mouse over and
uh do that. But I think for right now,
unless we can get a food, it's probably
not worth it. So uh let's reroll even at
half price.
Um, it's worth it, and that's what I
don't know from having not played.
Right. It's probably worth it to buy.
There's an argument that I should buy it
and then roll. Um, the problem is that
at 0.9 stamina plus the.7 stamina for
from my uh sword, I'm at 1.6 and now I'm
at a stamina deficit. And I'm going to
run out of stamina and if things don't
go my way, potentially lose because of
that. where I might have done better
just whailing away with either the sword
or the pan. And if I get a food, then
the pan is much more efficient at um
whailing away than the sword is. If you
can sell for half of what you buy it
for, should you therefore buy it for the
two because you can always sell it back
for two and see if the roll gives you
food?
That's true. Uh you can also see here,
by the way, it'll warn you that the
stamina use is high.
Hold the cord. Okay, so we've got garlic
on sale, which is a thing that I think
we should get. Uh this is it's very good
on its own and also synergizes with the
uh with the the pan. Mhm. Um you also
now have high stamina use. Does that
mean you're going to get rid of your
sword? Does indeed. Now storage. Yeah,
there is a storage down here. There is
also um another lump of coal which I
could use or for right now I can put it
here. Note that it won't combine into
these
uh it won't combine in the storage. It
has to be on the field. So if I wanted
to combine these should take your coal
out then well it won't combine here
right? The
[Music]
um it has to be on the field. It can't
be like this won't combine. it won't
form the torch. So, if I'm not going to
use the torch synergy, then this makes
the pan better, right? Because now I get
that 70% chance. That's what I meant is
Oh, what? Had you already put it in the
pan? Did I miss that? Yeah. I I thought
you put it I thought you put the coal on
the sword into the storage. Yeah. Uh it
the order doesn't super matter. Uh and
then I'm
probably going to hedge my bets and push
this put this on sale shortbow on
reserve. Um because it we might we might
pivot.
So right now we have a pan with food. Do
we need to get the food into the lucky
part?
No, it doesn't. Um you can see which
effects are affecting it during the
mouseover. So I was pretty sure that
they hadn't introduced this. Um only
weapons can critical hit.
You can't critically heal unless you
have something that says otherwise. You
can't, right? So like this is I can't
like critically give block, right? I
also like that garlic not only gives us
block but could also remove vampirism
from our opponent is
interesting. And yeah, which is showing
that they have weird effects your
opponent might have. Correct. And
introducing you to that early. Correct.
Okay. So my guess is based on what
you've shown me, there are two phases.
There's the shopping phase, which is
basically your deck preparation.
Correct. If you were playing a CCG, your
hero load out for other things, and that
from this, you are now going to be going
to do some sort of battle based on the
gear you have been able to buy and the
combinations you've made. Correct. Okay.
So, in order to do that, hence the name
backpack battles. Correct. So, up here
at the top, we'll click the start
backpack battle and we'll look for an
opponent. No, we're not actually looking
for an opponent. We're looking for a
ghost. So,
uh, is this a real person who made a
loadout that's getting saved in and
randomly put against you? Correct. This
is asynchronous multiplayer. So,
normally we would see opponent's name. I
have names turned off for stream safety.
Um, but we get to see everything in our
opponent's bag. We get to see all of
their effects. Uh, and we have They too
have garlic. They too have garlic. And
we have a complete
um combat log that we can go through at
the end along with like what the sources
of damage dealt were and like a bunch of
other things. Why do they look like a
little snow panda? Uh because one of the
things that you get for playing a
excessive amount is um those trophies
that you're getting, those wins convert
are also a currency that you're earning
which unlocks cosmetic rewards for each
hero. Okay. And cosmetics are almost
always only really useful if you think
other people can see them. So, correct.
Hence showing on an asynchronous
battler. Gotcha.
Uh, and we can um pause and do full
like, you know, full control. Okay. So,
we've won the round. Uh, I can hide this
now and show this. So, we've got a
complete
They're really big into stats. So we
have the complete damage dealt by all
sources which in this case is uh spikes
and the pan, right? Okay. So per unit
time I can scroll all the way down here
and show what did how much damage when
um there are so the pan crit once which
was very nice. It dealt 12 damage. Um,
which means it high rolled. So, it high
rolled its damage and the coal went off
and it crit all at the same time.
Incredibly unlikely, right? Because it's
12% or sorry, 15% to crit, 70% chance
for the coal, 50/50 on the coin flip.
So basically they were the
um they were the warlock with the sword.
Yes.
Um com combined with paladin who also
decided to smite on the critical.
Correct. Exactly. So um and so you get
complete breakdowns of everything. What
healed us? What caused block? What you
know where we blocked? Where we I see
why you thought that shield was
interesting there too because removing
st now that I see it. Removing some
stamina too also lowers basically their
next attack or delays their next attack
at some point. It Yeah, it would if they
weren't breaking even. They are breaking
even here. So it it's un it would have
to trigger multiple times to get them to
if they're riding the line that could
push them back. Correct. If you're um if
you're going all of the way down to
close to zero and doing the one up one
down thing, then it matters, right? And
it's also worth noting we weren't
necessarily going to go against another
ranger. We could have gone against any
of the other three classes, some of whom
are more likely to have more
um weapons or slower weapons or have
higher stamina requirements and so on.
Um so yeah, I I love this. I think this
is one of the things that really makes
Backpack Battles stand out is you can
see exactly what did what where. We we
high rolled twice.
Yeah, I rolled twice. Okay, I feel bad
for them. Um, right. So, you get the
full damage graph and it will do
everything. It'll do heal. It'll do all
of your different um uh all your
different buffs, all of the different
effects everywhere for both sides.
I think one of the things that this also
tells you very much is they want you to
learn, but also this isn't a cheap
knockoff game. Like, yeah, putting in
stats with full review is both a
learning thing as well as a thing to
say, look, we have a well-developed game
that you should take us seriously
because and they add more stats all the
time. In the last update, they added a
stat to show I forget what it was, but
the last set of patch notes had had a
mention of another stat that they were
adding to stat tracking.
Cool. Because people had asked for it,
right? And that is a great thing about
development is they didn't have to go
make all of those at the first part.
Like their beta version might have
started with one and they're like,
"Cool, we know we can show it works.
We'll go add more of these later." Yep.
Exactly. So, okay. So, you won a round.
So, I won a round. That's the first 10
wins. We get nine gold. We come back
here. We've combined our um our shield
and our spike into a spiked shield. So,
now did you just do that or did it do it
automatically? It does it automatically.
So now we have when we're attacked by a
melee attack, we have a 30% chance to
prevent seven damage, remove three.3
stamina, and gain a spike. Now we don't
get spikes at the beginning anymore, but
we get the chance to create additional
spikes down the road. So quick question.
Did doing the battle is the result of
the battle that the thing that could
combine did combine?
Why did they combine? They combine. They
are guaranteed to combine when you
perform a battle in a situ in a
situation where they have that golden
thread between them in your bag. Always
they have that the pan and the food had
a different synergy. It was just for
each food pan gets stronger. Not these
can Okay. Just getting used to the
different kinds of mechanics.
Absolutely. Um we have uh another one
which is we can combine the shiny shell.
um with the sword. Um this also
introduces another kind. This is after 5
seconds means it heals once not every 5
seconds like Oh, so that is a single use
during battle. Correct. Okay. And it
will heal us versus the banana which is
every 5 seconds. The banana is also a
food. It's also worth noting that
foods speed each other up.
So there is a tight synergy package
that's available, right? There's sort of
an archetype of food and we'll see more
of the ways that you can play into or
out of that archetype. Um, or have like
what what I think of as like a package
of food, right? So I might have a bunch
of defensive items and I might also have
a pan that's most of my damage combined
with a bunch of food that's speeding
itself up and the pan up or and buffing
the pan's damage. And so it kind of
snowballs into that.
Um, and the banana is also so the
advantage of the other one is that it's
tiny. Like it is a one slot thing that
heals the 5-second thing where the like
that's the reason you'd go for that is
you have a little bit of space left in
your bag and you're looking to do an
optimization. It also combines with the
sword to form
where is it? Ah, yes, the shell totem
which is uh every 3.6 6 seconds. It
costs two stamina to give us one empower
uh if we are um above 70%. Yeah.
Otherwise, he Okay. Otherwise, heal. Um
it's a kind of a steep stamina cost. Um
but it's a powerful effect. And at the
same time, we have to play around with a
wooden sword and a shiny shell in our
backpack together in order to get that
fusion. Right. Right. So, there's a
bunch of uh thinking about how you set
up for a round that you're relatively
confident you can win with a sword going
off that's draining your stamina and not
necessarily contributing the most
towards your victory plan.
Um, oh, interesting. So
based it's the sufferer for it's um
actually Monster Train makes use of a
couple of those kinds of things where
they're like suffer through this for a
little while to get a better reward for
later rounds. Yes. Like the um there's
an white ember is a good example. Yeah.
There's an event that gives you a card
and if you use it, it's gone forever.
And if you don't use it, if you just
sandbag it, act like it's a curse, don't
play it. Then you get an upgraded
version, which is much better and sticks
around. Well, they give you an artifact
called hope for peace, which is a flower
that says cards that would be purged.
purges removed from deck permanently are
instead the effect that basically
removes it just for that match as
opposed to forever exhausted or whatever
their whatever their equivalent of
exhaust is. Um, oh, and by the way, it's
also worth noting that right from the
very beginning, we're not I promise
we're not going to look too much at
this. Okay, I'm going to I'm going to
I'm going to dial this down so we don't
get some
uh we don't get too much. Okay, so these
are the ranger class items. Ah, these
are items class specific items and
recipes. Correct. These will only show
up if I'm a ranger.
These are all the neutral items. Good.
Quite a bit more of them. And if I
remove all of it, there are 345
different items spread across four
classes and several
subclasses. And it gets a little hectic.
So, generally speaking, we're going to
we're going to pair down. This is kind
of like the CCG thing like a slay the
spire where every character has specific
cards as well as that one makes use of
mostly class specific with a small pool
of universals. Correct. This one has a
much larger pool of universals with some
class specific ones. And we can also see
like if you're wondering like what are
the melee weapons that could attack me
that I'm worried about with the shield,
right? They got a buster sword. There is
in fact a buster sword. It's called the
Impractically Large Great Sword, and it
can be very good, but it takes 5 seconds
to spin up, and there are definitely
cases where you're just dead before
that. So,
um, uh, yes. Yeah, there CIF is correct.
There are badges, um, which we'll find a
badge real quick. Actually, it's
interesting in a game like this. I can
see why they'd want to do the larger
universal pot because if you're having
to start remember remember and recognize
recipes and play towards them. Mhm. You
don't want to every single time a new
class comes out have to go memorize 80
new things. Yep. Now, or even just Yeah.
Yeah. So, you can get badges. There's
one badge for each class um that give
you the ability to find items crossass.
There is also the rainbow badge, which
is everything shows up in the shop. This
is kind of like Chaos and Isaac. Like,
it can be cool and it can be great, but
also you might never find the thing
you're looking for ever because now all
of the items show up in the shop. And
that means all of them, right? Are these
things you toggle off or on or
if you have them? They're items. So, if
you have them Okay. Oh, gotcha. Uh, and
then there's the So, it's the prismatic
shard from Slay the Spire where once you
pick up that artifact for the rest of
the run thing is unlocked. It is an
item. You could sell it. Okay. But, um,
and then there's the stone
badge, which turns off your starting
classes items
um, and gives you uh, a free item worth
of gold from the neutral pool and for
block every 3 seconds. Um, so it is like
not to get too complicated, there
there's a bunch of stuff going on. Um,
so let's get back to our build. Okay. I
think for right now what I like is this
banana. Like this banana because it
gives us Oh, the lucky doesn't have to
be in the main part of the bat. Wait,
it's just for each lucky you have, this
just gives you a lucky at the beginning
of the
um at the beginning of the fight. And
wait. And as long as lucky is anywhere
in the bag, anything with the lucky
property. For some reason, I thought it
had to be in the central part of the bag
to get that. Luck is a buff that goes on
you, the player. And then the effect of
the ranger bag is it has a 12% chance to
crit, plus 3% for each lucky that you,
the player, have at that time when the
weapon goes
off. Um, and the ranger bag is the
central six slot. Correct. It's um
Right.
So, what just happened there? Oh, we can
rearrange everything.
Oh.
Uhhuh. So, I could
do that. Interesting. If I wanted to,
and indeed I will need to at some point
because Oh, you can buy a bigger bag. Uh
you you don't buy a bigger bag, Jeff.
You buy all of the different little
components to make a hodge podge
patchwork nightmare bag.
Great. We're going to need So this isn't
We're going to need a bigger boat. This
is We're going to need a bigger bag.
That's correct. Um I think I'm going to
take a rroll here. I might take a short
bow if I can find a second clover. Um
Oh, speaking of which, not a clover. I
see more bag parts. Oh yes, bag parts.
So we've got a lot of um we've got a lot
of stuff going on here. So, we have a
rock. Like all one gold items. If we
have one gold left at the end of the
round, we're gonna buy it and use it
because it's one gold and it doesn't
cost us stamina and it's like two to
four damage and destroys four block. Why
would we not just huck a free rock at
them? Like, um, we have an additional
bag, which we're going to need. We have
a wet stone which gives adjacent uh
weapons one damage and also fuses with
the wooden sword to form a hero sword.
And we also have healing herbs which
give us two regeneration which heals us
for one every two seconds. We have some
healing. We also have some healing in
the form of the banana. So I'm a little
less inclined to worry about the healing
herbs. But I could. The healing herbs
importantly aren't food, are they? They
are not. and you're already checking for
tags, which is the major which is like
one of the major things here is how do
the all of these items synergize, right?
And one of the things that I think it's
really good at is letting you take your
time to figure it out. Like, okay, I
love the
idea the
idea of Hearthstone Battlegrounds and
Team Fight Tactics.
In practice, I find that the timer makes
me hate both of those games with a
burning passion to play because the
timer makes me feel like I'm making bad
decisions because I'm on the clock. I
play them I would play them about as
fast as I play this, but the lack of a
timer here means that I feel like I have
the freedom to take my time and make
choices. So even if I make the choices
faster or at the same speed, I'm not
under a time crunch mentally and that
feels like I get to explore and make
better choices. Like as a result, it
also almost by definition turns it into
a more casual game because it means you
could be stopping to go answer a work
Discord or reply to an email. And if
this was tablet version, you could be
playing it while you're brewing a coffee
and then stop and go do five things and
3 hours later turn it back on and pick
up where you were. Yeah. And I think
that that is a huge benefit of
asynchronous auto battlers as opposed to
synchronous auto battlers like Team
Fight Tactics and Battlegrounds. That's
not to say that there isn't a place for
those. There definitely are. Team Fight
Tactics Battlegrounds are much more
esports, right? There's much more high
octane like edge of your seat watch
people buy sell all day this now is the
time right like that right but yeah and
honestly like that's one of the things I
like about the monster train daily
challenge is I have 24 hours to complete
it I can play it on my tablet and if I'm
feeling like that for the day I can do
what would normally be a 45minut run
spread over 12 hours and get it done
amongst other parts. Mhm. So, there's
definitely a So, going back to this, it
looks like you have enough gold if you
wanted to buy the backpack extension and
the bow. That's
true. Um, I kind of think that's likely
the play. I like the bow. Um, we're also
going to be combining. Does a bow have a
crit? Uh, it does. It could. I need to
reorg here to make that happen. Um, I
also need to reorg out of this corner to
make the
this happen.
Um, I want to do this. Oh, I can do
[Music]
this. And eventually this will be here.
Um, so now both foods are adjacent to
each other and to the pan and the bow's
in the bag. Yep. Right. So, how much
stamina does the bow use? How are you?
The bow uses point4 per second. So, I'm
using on average 1.3 per second, but I'm
gaining
back
1.2 because this regenerates one stamina
every 5 seconds. So, on average, you get
02 back, and that's not So, you can go
for a while before you start basically
missing a thing. Yep, that's correct.
Um, wait, did your shield give you some
stamina back? It does not. It merely
takes stamina from my opponent. It
doesn't steal it. Okay, good question,
though. What's the gain up to? Oh, the
gain, the spike. Okay. Yeah. Gain one
spike up to five total. So if we get
attacked
15 times and the game and the battle
hasn't ended, right? Then the then on
odds we probably got it slightly more
than 15, like 16 17 times. Yeah. Um
cool. Uh actually Yeah. Oh, I was say
jumping in real quick. Yeah. Since this
is a thing where the first time on
YouTube, um, if you're joining us a
little late for it, a welcome in. That's
Will. I'm Jeff. Uh, Will is our
full-time streamer. I am a professional
g game designer and have been for more
than two decades now. Yeah. Yeah. Every
every time he says that, by the way, I
need you all to understand that I can
see like the dread and the wistful
nostalgia like in Jeff like all at the
same time at war and then I see one gray
hair. Just like one somewhere in that
perfectly like done hairdo. Just one
gray hair. Just one. Oh, I appreciate
the perfectly done hairdo. Thank you.
Yeah, it's good. But um and every once
in a while Will will pick a game that I
have never seen or you know I may have
seen a trailer but I've never played
that he is familiar with and we will pop
on and I will come in blind and Will
will show off the game for an hour or
two, walk through it and I'll basically
do a live design look blind, ask some
questions, make some observations, happy
to be right or wrong but basically call
out what my designer brain sees and Will
will also have fun talking about a game
that he enjoys in some
Yep. Uh so let's hit round two and see
whether or not we win. All right. Um
it's also worth noting, by the way, that
we can speed this up. We can slow it
down. We can get more stats later. All
of these are options. So I'm assuming
this is a pyromancer since I see some
flame. That is correct. This is a
pyromancer. Wow. Our shield uh won us
the match. So that's cool. All right. So
this is a pyromancer. Uh I'll explain.
Are they cooking a pig in their
backpack?
No. Yes. But no, I'll explain what each
class does as we run into it. So, the
pyromancer's Why are you like this? The
pyromancer um has a fire pit as their
starting bag. So, that's uh nine uh
backpack slots to R six, and they
automatically spend one of their gold
every time they go back to the shop to
generate a flame, and they get five
maximum health for each fire item inside
um when the battle starts. So, they have
52 max health to
R35. Um, and fire gives them a heat, and
this is what we were talking about,
percentage increases. Heat for each
stack of heat that they have, and they
have four because of their um load out
gives all of their items 2% haste.
So when we're talking about percentage
increases to effectiveness or to other
things, it's generally in the form of
speed, not in the form of a flat
increase or a percentage increase to
damage. Sometimes I think there are a
couple, but not terribly many. Um, and
then they have a burning coal. This is
the upgraded version of
coal. Um, and they have a hero sword.
Um, which gives them additional damage.
Uh, and they've got gloves speeding up
the hero sword. So, they're kind of all
in on making this hero sword work.
Unfortunately for them, they have two
melee weapons and we have a spike
shield. So, if we look at the log,
uh, we blocked 14 of their damage with
spike shield. Uh, and we gained four
spikes.
So, they were increasingly doing damage
to themselves as they were attacking us
uh because all they had were melee
weapons and that ended up being their
downfall. Right. You were both um we
used to call that a damage shield where
they were taking damage and you were
taking less. Correct. They were taking
damage as the damage shield. You were
taking less is just the blocking. Yeah.
the shield or um so your build was well
suited to combating this build, correct?
Exactly. So, uh Okay. And then we'll
we'll show this and we're two of 10 done
and we'll we'll keep going. Back to the
shop. You got some gold. Okay. Yeah, you
can unh you do have undo and redo with
control Z and control Y. Um if you uh I
think I'm definitely going to buy
another lump of coal uh because it's
real good on every weapon. Um it's als
it's also worth noting that it has
different effects. So, if I put it on a
weapon, it's got a 70% chance to deal
one extra damage. If I put it on an
armor or a shield or another socket of
some kind, it'll give eight block at the
start of the fight and will resist the
first debuff that comes at us. Um, and
then if we put it in the backpack
itself, if we let it take up a spot as
opposed to putting it on a socket, we'll
get a random um buff and we'll inflict a
debuff. Um, and that debuff can be
anything. Uh, which is really funny
because sometimes it's poison and your
opponent doesn't have a way to and then
they just die to poison which is kind of
funny. Um, that coal is poison.
Uh, so we have um so some things change
rules, right? So the bag of stones is a
three gold item that says uh stones
above can be thrown repeatedly. This is
worth noting that this is one of the
items that is rotationally sensitive. If
we turn it on its side, because it says
above, it'll only be the one spot
directly above. It won't be the two
spots that are now to the side. Right.
Because which only matters based on
where your stones are. Correct. Um and
then and let's see. The stone was it's
two to four damage. No stamina. Uh 1.2
damage a second. Uh correct. Uh and
normally can only be thrown once per
battle. But if we combine these that we
could just huck rocks all day,
which is not a terrible idea, right?
Mhm. Um, so I think for right now that
gives us a the theme music. We can play
the for those about to rock. Yeah, we we
we salute you. Okay. And then I'm going
to roll here.
Rewarded. Discounted bag. Never
punished. Never once punished. Always
rewarded. I will of course buy the
discounted bag. And now put my Oh, I
need to change some things. Um, how am I
going to do this? So, what do you need
to change? What are we looking to do?
So, what I'm looking to do is get the
rock into this bag. Ah, okay. So, if I
do this, we only have one rock. So, now
the rock can crit. So now all of my
damaging effects are inside, right? And
this, because I turned it sideways, I
only need to get one rock to throw more
than once. I can throw the rock.
Uh, yeah. All right, cool. If your sword
sold for two, would it be worth trying
to get the another garlic to get in
there or That's a very good question.
And the answer is probably yes. Um,
because it's going to increase the
damage of our pan. We haven't found
anything that like really makes me want
to keep using the sword. So, we can get
rid of it. Let's Let's do that. And
we'll go all in on food. So, we're going
to move this and then
And I'm starting to see the adjacency
thing. So food adjacent to each other
gives food the buff where the food
adjacent to the pan gives the pan the
buff. That's correct. It's also worth
noting that it's for each food of a
different type. So aka not garlic. So if
I put these right here, nothing happens.
They don't and they show by not showing
the star that nothing happens there.
Mhm.
Um So it's not as important
is probably a way to do this better. And
there like this is one of the
interesting things, right? Is that at
some point you kind of have to accept
that you could analysis paralysis
yourself for forever trying to optimize
each round. Mhm. Or you could just say
that it's good enough and move on. Um
and like that's a
uh that's always a tension, right? But
but again, because it's asynchronous,
you have the freedom to decide, right?
You can spend forever. And in later
rounds, it's much more likely that we
will um when we start scaling up and get
our subclass, our badges, other things.
It's about to get more complicated. Um
so I think this is probably Do you want
a quick thing to try or should we just
Actually, you could probably just go in.
Yeah. Um I'm down to accept uh thoughts
on reorg, but let's do it after this
one.
There is, by the way,
we're facing a
berserker. Uh, so worth noting that the
Berserker is uh one of those classes
that uses a bunch of melee. Um, they
also have a unique mechanic which is now
on display. They're that glowing yellow
is their battle rage. When they reach
50% HP, they enter a battle rage for
several seconds. Um, and they take less
damage and other things happen during
battle rage.
Um I saw your rocks really going off
there. It looked like rocks free damage
is free. So um we enter battle rage for
they enter battle rage for 5 seconds and
during battle rage all of the items
inside the bag trigger 30% faster and we
take 22% reduced damage. Now, I will say
my opponent didn't optimize their bag
terribly well because this uh garlic is
not in this bag. And these two could
have there are many ways they could have
moved this to put the banana such that
only the tail end of the banana was in
here and the garlic took up these two
spots so that all of these items
benefited. Um the pig, by the way, uh
gives us an extra gold every time we
enter the shop. And we gain they gain
some extra health for every um item
either above or below it. Above or below
relative to the pig. Um that triggers at
the start of um battle. Uh so I imagine
if if we look at the log, we'll once
again see that Yeah, we blocked a bunch
of damage from the shield. Yeah, the
shield blocked
a bunch of damage. Oh, we also made it
to fatigue. If the battle goes on long
enough, we'll enter fatigue, which does
escalating damage to both players until
one of them an ending mechanic to keep
things from going forever. Correct.
There are fatigue builds, by the way,
because of course there are. Um, that's
it. So, that's the Magic the Gathering
Millstone deck in a weird kind of way.
It Yes, it's it's kind of like
Millstone. It's weirdly in a lot of ways
more like lantern control because what
you end up doing is trying to stop your
opponent from doing anything. Not
milling them out, just like you can't do
anything to hurt me and I'm going to sit
here. There are items that give
invulnerability temporarily. Is that
frozen or winter orb? Uh that's stacks.
Yes. Um so yeah. Oh, we'll keep going
for a sec while you go back to the shop.
I will be right back. Excellent.
Excellent. Chat, how we doing? Uh how we
feeling? How are you all enjoying this?
I know this is a little different than
the other design club episodes. Um, we
will be uh we only do this once every
couple months. Um, when Jeff and I have
an itch to like just dive into a game
because I I find that and I don't know
how many how true this is um for you and
your fields of work and study, it can be
really easy to get caught up in theory
and lose sight of the practical. Right?
So, for me, the thing that I really like
doing is returning to the to the
practical sort of like, okay, great.
We've talked a lot about the idea of
action economy, whatever. Roll up your
sleeves, get into a game that uses
action economy, and let's talk about it,
right? Um, and I think that that's uh a
really great um way to uh to like spend
some time talking about game design.
Um, and I really like when we get to do
these because Jeff is um really good at
picking out picking out these individual
like weird facets or like particularly
interesting mechanics or uh interesting
systems dynamics and calling them out.
And I think that that is really good.
What do we got in the shop? In the shop,
we've
got a different thing. So, here we have
a skill. So, at the uh this a skill at
the end of um round three, aka the
beginning of round four, we will always
be offered a skill. We're given five
extra gold to buy it. Um we could spend
one of that gold to pass on it by
r-rolling away these skills. We don't
have to buy one. We probably
should. Um,
so we have some,
uh, we'll go through them. Uh, number
one, just stats. We gain 10% additional
maximum health and 10% stamina
regeneration. This one always shows up.
This is an all class skill. It always
shows up. You can always just have more
stats. Um, super spacious. Bags appear
more often and have an additional chance
to be on sale. It also has this very
interesting mechanic. Items
uh
to items in the corners right diagonal
from the center square trigger faster
for each orthogonally adjacent square
that's
empty. So there are reasons that you
might not want to fill the whole bag.
There's sort of this tension in this
one. Um, smithing for dummies, uh, gives
us a free wet stone. And at the start of
our battle, um, any weapon which is
crafted, so that's any weapon that we've
made by combining two other weapons, um,
or two other items, uh, gains an
additional damage for the fight and uses
less stamina. And we have
Googlings.
Um, I'm I'm not even gonna I'm not even
going to try and remember what Googlings
do. I'm going to be totally honest.
uh googling. It looks like they're made
of goo. They are. Uh so every time
adjacent items activate a total of three
times, the heal for four. And then
there's a big version called Gooert who
has two adjacent uh has four adjacencies
and every time those activate for a
total of five times, you heal for nine.
And you have also now seen the various
incundary subspecies of gooert. We have
carrot gooert. Uh, poison goobert. Chili
goobert. Steel gooert. Blood gooert.
Light gooert. Wait, wait. What does
blood gooert do? A blood goobert gives
you vampirism. Okay. Um, cheese gooert.
Cheese goobert. Um, and then there are
different rainbow versions of Goober
that give you additional effects, but my
favorite is obviously King Goobert. King
Goobert. Um, who is Gubert but wearing a
crown. You have to make the crown and
then you put the crown on Gert and then
you get King Goo Gert. Um and he uh Wow,
there's a lot. Yeah, he heals you for
35, protects some of your buffs and uses
mana to become invulnerable for 1.5
seconds up to three times. So, it's a
total of 4.5 seconds of invulnerability.
And all gemstones that are socketed um
are 50% again as effective. Uh King
Goobert's great. I love him.
Uh, so plus you could say goobert.
That's correct. So this is um this is
kind of
a an example. Don't really care what
activates near Gubert as long as things
activate near Gert. So there's sort of
an idea that we might take items that go
more quickly
um that don't necessarily do the most
just to power Uber. Right. Right. as an
example, he becomes his own little
engine or it becomes it own little
engine game. So, this by the way is one
of the things I love when games do that
isn't immediately
apparent.
So, if you were playing World of
Warcraft and they're like, "Hey, there's
a whole miniame for gather we've added
in gathering components in the
wilderness." They didn't need to do
that. that, you know, you could have
bought all your crafting components in a
shop or got them all from monster drops
or something, right? But they decided
that was a part of the game they wanted
to introduce and it introduces a new
mode of gameplay and new things you're
looking for. It's not the best one to
watch. Goos are they could have left
them out and it would have been a
perfectly fine game. By adding them in,
they're adding in a new kind of miniame
within the game of here is a thing that
changes how you do builds andor the
kinds of things you want. It's a
subsystem. It is the goo subsystem.
Yeah. In this case, a linked version of
things. Yes. That can evolve in
different ways. It looks like the same
with their crafting in other words. And
the more of these you put in a game, the
more complex it gets. So you have to
ride the line as a designer or design
team between looking at who your
audience is, looking at the complexity
and looking at how much you're expecting
people to learn before they can play the
game within some degree of mastery. And
I think one of the things that's really
important to note is that
um oh uh is that um this recipe tab is
always available. So we can see which
gooerts are available to us and how we
would make them and what they do, right?
And so because of that, it feels like
again they're leveraging the
asynchronicity
to allow players to make informed
choices that are more complicated,
right? Because it's not a spur-of-the-
moment decision, right? You don't need
to know that you have to like
Yu-Gi-Oh would be very different if you
had to like do a dexterity miniame to
slam all p five pieces of Exodia versus
just drawing all five pieces of Exodia,
right? Um and I think that that's that's
an important part. Um so after all of
that, how can I not take goolings? You
don't have to. Oh no, I'm definitely
taking goolings. Okay. Okay. So, uh
wait, were there two slimes? Uh so this
is the bad this is the skill and this is
the gobling. Ah okay. Oh so it okay so
you have to have slime skill before you
are allowed to buy slime. Uh yes before
they will appear in the shop. Correct.
Gotcha. Can you now put slime skill into
your storage and still have slime? I
believe so. I mean like here yes because
it's already in the shop. I don't
remember whether or not it's continually
active. We also do want it because it I
know I was just curious on Yeah. Yeah.
Yeah. systems. Um Okay. I think for
right now what's probably going to
happen is we're going to buy this
Googling.
We're going to buy a second lucky clover
for reasons we'll discuss momentarily.
And I think that's it for now. So I'm
going to re reroll this and hope for a
bag. A bag. We got a bag. Oh, and
goobert's on sale. All right. Well,
we'll just hold that for next time.
Um, oh yo, they just turn into a
gooert. That's dangerous. Um, I got to
think about that. Do I want to just turn
them into a gooert? I
don't don't know that I do. Don't know
that I don't. I also don't know that I
do. Um, so here we've got this gooert
wedge between these two, by the way.
Interesting. It doesn't um it only cares
when the item activates, which means I
can have a gooert or a Googling trigger
off the shield because it activates
when it goes off. That's an item
activation. So there is I've definitely
seen builds in the past where people
have just built like this is part of
that that idea of a fatigue build,
right? where your opponent like hits you
with a bunch of stuff and you just block
with a bunch of shields and all the
shields power gooerts which heal all the
damage that the shields didn't block and
then you're right back where you started
and your opponent's just tired. It's
great. I love it. So, mouse over again.
What does goobert do right now? So, this
Googling Mhm. heals for Okay. Every
three activations heals for four. And
it's important to note that the skill
itself will advance all Gooberts and
Goolings by one activation every 1.9
seconds. Okay.
And then you have the other one next to
the rock. So it's basically every time
the rock and the bow goes off. Every
time the rock and the um this goes off.
Uh actually I can do this which is
probably better because this goes off
every 4 seconds and this goes off every
1.7. Math. Math is hard. Make it stop.
So this is a total
of two activations every four three
activations every four seconds. If I did
it this way, it would be less. So this
is correct.
Wait, well I'm missing something on the
facing as you're rotating the gooert.
Oh. Uh cuz it can it's it's to the sides
relative to gooert, not relative to the
so I can turn it so it's either east,
west, or north, south. Okay.
Couldn't you could turn it one more so
it's um east west and then you could
rotate your garlic up to be standing
correct. The difference is that this
goes off more quickly than this.
So this is every 1.7 and this is every
2.5. In an ideal world, actually, hold
on, hold on, hold on. In an ideal world,
there you go. We do something
like this.
where now it's getting it's going off on
the rock and the bow and the bow is
still turning into Fortuna's hope and
now all of our food is adjacent to it.
So the reason you bought the second
um lucky is that is a recipe for the bow
to turn into a better bow. That's
correct. Okay. Turns into Fortuna's hope
which on hit gives us a 75% chance to
gain an additional luck and is 100%
accurate.
But now Rock doesn't crit. That's true.
You're correct, Richard. Now Rock does
not crit and that's a sacrifice that we
kind of have to make. There's a lot of
um you kind of have to pick where you
want to fight your battles on those,
right? Like it it are rock crits in this
one fight likely to matter? Not as much
as the healing from Gubert and getting
the short bow set up, right? So like it
it it depends what matters the most to
you um at any given time.
Once the bow transforms, does it count
as a food for the frying pan? No.
Really? No. The I would think with a
name like O for tuna that it would count
as Okay.
I'm gonna fish. If you're new here, Jeff
is a master of puns. Unfortunate for
everyone. All right. So, our opponent
has poison. Uh, poison builds up and
does damage every second, and it's uh a
rather oppressive win condition. Um,
you, on the other hand, have stamina
that's bouncing around and correct. I
also have gooberts that are helping u
meate, right? Yeah, cuz poison's great,
but I heal for a bunch, right? And
again, we can I'm uh I'm going to just
go to the end here and look at healing.
Yeah, we healed for a total of 17 out of
our 61 health. What was she doing damage
with? Just the pan. Uh the pan and the
poison. The fly guard gives and it gives
a poison and then the back the
um the storage coffin. Every time an
item inside of it activates, there is a
25% chance to inflict one poison. She
also has spikes from the walrus tusk.
with my first necromancer. So, yeah.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Um necromancers
focus a lot on poison. Uh okay. Um let's
keep moving because we are as as also
tradition for this running a little
long. Okay. So, I just saw your bow
transform. So, correct your you now have
the better bow and correspondently more
inventory slots because
bow has transformed. That is correct.
Um, I kind of want a second
rock. I want a second rock. Oh, wow.
Yeah. So, now I got two
rocks. All right. Uh, and here we have
our first different bag. This is a fanny
pack. Everything inside is 10% faster.
Just flat. It's just
faster. So, um, I have a question. If
you put that say for the moment for easy
math
above the frying pan
to and one to the right. Oh, sorry. Keep
the frying pan there. I'm just This is a
theoretical. So, right there. And if you
move the rocks up the moment, both of
them to the top, they would still be
above your bag of rocks. Directly above
is different. Oh, directly. Okay. Yeah.
I was just curious how far the above the
thing went. Yeah. Um,
okay. So, your frying pan because it has
one thing in is now 10% faster. Correct.
It note, it would not be 20% faster if
there were two in. It's It checks
whether or not it's in the bag. Yeah.
And you But you have to now rotate your
banana. Correct. To keep it adjacent.
I'm going to do this and
this. And then we're going to
do this because that can be anywhere.
That actually this over here and this
over here and this right here and this
right here. There is by the way a yeet
everything out of your um
and start over. Yeah, there's a yeet
command um which you can use.
Um, don't know where I want. Oh, I can
put this anywhere.
[Music]
Haha. Put that
there. And then I can make it. So,
you're hypercharging your bow, correct?
My bow is going Excuse me. You're making
your bow, which goes quickly, proc all
of the the It's not the most efficient,
um, but it'll do for now. Um,
This is one of those ones where we're
getting complex enough that on my first
play through, I am able to provide less
and less help on optimization. Yep. Oh,
what's the knife do? Uh, is a free
attack. It's a zero stamina cost two to
five damage attack every 3.5 seconds.
And if we stun them somehow, and there's
a bunch of ways we can stun, get an
extra attack.
So, for the moment, you're picking it up
because we don't have stun just to add a
little bit of DPS. It's free. It's free
damage, right? Uh, free damage. Good.
Free damage. Good. You heard it here.
You actually have a lot of free damage
right now. Yeah, you heard it here
first, folks. Free damage. Good.
Controversial, but true. Uh, actually,
hold on. How's Yeah. Okay. And we're
going to go Oh, does unspent gold carry
over? Yes. Great question. All right.
So, our opponent is doing gems. Uh they
were lucky enough to find a box of
riches which gives uh in the same way
that our our slime offers us uh
Googlings. Um their uh box of riches
gives them gems. Um
uh so that was a quick battle. Like you
have a pretty good system set up of
blocking, healing, actually a lot of
healing. It looks like healing,
blocking. Yes. All of that. Mhm. Um
actually how much Yeah. killed the fair.
I overhealed a bunch. I healed a bunch,
I think. O Oh, yeah. I healed for 40.
So, that seems like it did well. Um,
okay. Continue on. Um,
bigger bag if you want it. Bigger bag if
I want it. And what's the juice in the
bottom right? The juice in the bottom
right is a health potion. Oh, when our
It's a triggered item. When our health
drops below 50%, we consume it and heal
for 12 and cleanse for poison. So, it's
anti poison consume. So, is it gone then
forever or once per battle? Once per
battle. Okay. Um, it's also worth noting
that potions work best when stacked
vertically because it when it consumes
itself, it applies the effect of the
potion above it without consuming it.
So, we could have a potion that says,
um, do 200 damage, and then we could
wait until, uh, do 200 damage activates
when you are at one HP, and we could
instead put the health potion directly
below it and wait to be at 50% HP, and
then it would apply the effect of the do
200 damage potion as well. So you can
sort of change the triggers around and
it's one it's another subsystem of you
don't have to use potions at all but if
you do here's a package of ideas and you
need to know how to manipulate it.
There's also a bag that affects potions
a whole bunch of stuff. Um I am going to
take
the oil lamp however um for it says at
the start of the battle gain what is
that two haste. So everything will be 4%
faster and every 3.4 4 seconds. The
weapon directly next to it gains one
damage and five accur 5% accuracy.
Importantly, is that for the rest of the
fight? So, it's cumulative. Okay.
Importantly, as well, it's a fire item.
So, now it will light this coal on fire.
Note that this is a green tether instead
of a gold tether. I wish it was
something besides just color, but it it
is what it is. And what does green mean?
The green means it will light the coal,
but will not consume the lamp. So, it
will transform the coal into the burning
coal without consuming the lamp in the
process. Um, yeah. Uh, oh yeah, we're
going to have to look at tarot builds.
Yeah. Um, I think we're probably going
to I think this might be our last round.
Chat, what round are we getting subasses
on? I genuinely don't remember. I just
kind of roll with it until uh You seem
to have a very good build at this point.
I do. I do. I have a very synergistic
build. Um, and the shield is keeping me
safe and I've got a lot of healing. Lots
of people have melee right now. Um, also
it helps that this is unranked and my
opponents don't necessarily have the
best builds. So, for
instance, this is their skill. It's
currently not actually doing
anything because the pan doesn't have an
attack effect
um really. Uh, so the enchanted weapon
skill isn't doing anything for them and
my skill is doing something for me,
right? Right. Um, so yeah. Uh,
okay. So now I've lit the coal and now
this coal will light that coal without
me needing to move anything. And it's
gotten much better on hit. It's a 12%
chance to deal plus six damage and gain
an additional haste. Wow. Yeah. Much
more powerful. Um, six is a lot. Six is
a lot when your weapons do four to five
base or two to three base. Yeah. Yes,
it's quite a lot.
Um, I think I'm going to roll. I'm going
to grab a stamina bag, which adds three
backpack slots and gives us one
additional maximum stamina.
Oh, maximum, not per turn. Okay. This is
not an adjacent. Yeah, it's not
adjacent. Um,
what's the little box in the bottom
right? This is the box of riches. It
grants us access to gemstones. So, we'll
we'll just go with that for now. So,
another subsystem of
Correct. This is all the gems.
So, that's a thing I'm actually not used
to on a lot of games
is subsystem unlocked by buying item
that can then show up in future Mhm.
Future shop encounters. Correct.
Um, what opens that
box? Oh, yeah, the mani neco. All right.
Well, that's not going to happen this
stream. Um, all right. I'm just going to
send it because like we could, but I'm
just going to send it because we are
running a little short on time and I
wanted to look at one last thing and
then call it good. Our opponent here
might win. They have a very strong
setup. This is a very fast molten spear.
Um, which is doing a lot of damage. And
the whip is doing a lot of damage. Uh,
and really Oh, close one. Very close.
What happened? Oh, they ran out of
stamina. I blocked them too many times.
Haha. Um, cuz they are well over
stamina, right? They don't have a
banana. So, they're
not a phrase I thought I was going to
hear someone say today. They don't have
a banana. Look, it's just they don't
have the banana. Look, look, look, chat,
tell me I'm wrong. If they had a banana,
this would be way scarier because the
banana could go like right here or right
here and be adjacent to three items and
would be giving them stamina back, but
they don't have a banana. So, I block
them a couple of times and they're using
1.7 per second and they're out of
stamina and they can't attack me
anymore. And then I beat them to death
with my rocks. Boom. Banana. Uh, and
this is this sort of one of the things
that I really love about this is there's
so many different ways to build and
things to take advantage of. You can
build a fast you can have a fast build
that tries to kill quickly. You can have
a slow build that grinds people out to
fatigue. You can have a build that does
poison or melee damage or range damage
or crits or animal companions or on and
on and on out of those 345 items, right?
Um, A cause of death. Missing banana.
Correct. Correct. If they had a banana,
I'm pretty sure we would have lost.
Okay, great. I can really see the appeal
of this game, Will. Okay. All right. And
here we get to the last system. So,
we'll talk about this and then we'll
we'll do some uh we'll answer any more
questions from you or chat and then
we'll call it uh there. This is the last
one. So, everything I've shown you so
far has been ranger base. Mhm. There are
five subasses for each class. Oh my
goodness. And they are radically
different from one another. So for
instance, the beast master
lets you have friends of the forest in
the shop, which is little woodland
critters, squirrels, rats, hedgehogs,
each of which can be combined with other
items to form special versions of them.
And so wait, so basically you've told
the shopkeeper it's okay to trap and
sell you animals.
Mhm. Okay, we're not Don't look too
Don't look into it. Don't look too
closely. Don't look too closely. Um, so
this is all of your pets have a 20%
chance to go twice. You gain two random
buffs and make the food trigger faster
um if you use this, right? Or the
hunter, which is a unique accessory that
buffs adjacent weapons. or the
Pathfinder, which does um resists
debuffs
uh
and lets you poison your opponent when
you gain
spikes. And so when your opponent
reaches enough poison, they just
permanently take more damage. Um you
have the lifebinder, which is healing.
Uh gives you a bunch of upfront mana and
healing and um every time you use mana,
you get additional benefits. So this is
like you want to be Nature Wizard. Yep.
And there's a star pattern. Uh Yep.
There's a there's a sideways star
pattern for
Pathfinder. Um and then Grovekeeper is
the lucky the lucky build, right? So you
have a greater chance for things to be
on sale. You have more chance to find
unique items. You get extra lucky
clovers. When you get to 15 luck, you
get 25 random other buffs. Good luck.
Have fun. Roll the dice.
25 seems like a lot. It is a great many,
right? Because it's each of them is one
stack of a different buff and you can
roll through all the buffs. Um, and
so sorry, Demon Works, you're trying.
You're trying, buddy. Um, and so it's
really it's really great that there is
this much variety, right? Once you get
through the beginning, right, once you
get to round eight, whether or not, by
the way, it's not seven wins, it's round
eight. So, as long as you've made it to
round eight, you'll get this. And again,
we're given four classes, five classes,
four classes, five subasses each. Yes.
Okay. So, there are basically 20
variants. Uhhuh. Currently in the game.
Do subasses introduce their own unique
items as well? Not all of them, but some
of them. Okay. So, for instance, um Oh,
it's okay. We don't have to go look. I
was just That was just a curiosity
design question. Yeah. So, for instance,
we've got like all of the different
puppies and stuff. This, by the
way, there it is complex enough that the
devs have kind of put a self imposed
thing on themselves that if they ever
want to add a fifth class. They've set
the scope of work, which is new class
concept, new class, new class recipes,
and five new subasses that fit class and
in some way interact with the class's
mechanic. Correct. To set up the
experience. Yes. And and that is
probably why we're not going to I don't
think we're getting a fifth class when
we hit 1.0. It is worth noting that when
it launched, there were two classes and
no subasses. And all of this has been
added over the course of doing
consistent testing and feedback. And
there are balance updates like every
week. Things get up uh minus one damage,
plus one damage, minus half a stamina,
plus half a stamina, like all over the
place to buff and nerf and try and keep
things in line. They're very attentive
to this and it's very interesting. Oh
yeah. I was just like having set up in
my early days MMOs and in later days
other complex systems. It's kind of fun
watching this because occasionally you
walk yourself into a trap where you look
at the thing you were thinking you were
going to add and you suddenly realize
the scope of work based on all this
other stuff you've done. Yep. Yep.
Absolutely. It's uh why Final Fantasy 14
stopped doing individual job classes for
each expansion because it was fine when
there were nine classes and then 13
classes and then now we're at over 20
combat classes and they can't write that
many job stories for each expansion. So
they condensed it down and said every
role gets one. Figure out which class
you're going to do it on. Seems fine,
right? it they actually work really well
because they're all um the advantage to
that is that they can all be written
together. They're all they're all part
of one cohesive story and it's very hard
to do that with 20 disparate job classes
and at a certain point my guess is not
every player plays every subclass. So
you are
introducing you're not making people
slog through things that they don't
actually want to do just to see story. I
forgot Cubert
existed. Anyway, um it's a cubic gooert,
Jeff. It's your best friend, Cubert.
Uh final thoughts on backpack battles,
Jeff? Um I have not seen anything quite
like this before. Like I've seen a lot
of elements of this. And one of the most
interesting parts of game design to me
is that
people get inspired. Yes. Like
inspiration is what led to Slay the
Spire. It wasn't that any unique
mechanic, any thing in there was
horribly unique. It was the combination
of them when they put together that made
a new and unique thing. Mhm. For it. And
that's some of the best. Actually,
Portal was another game somewhat like
that where they looked at a couple of
mechanics, mush them together, were
like, "Hey, check this out." and it led
to an entirely new experience. Even
something like um the original Dota
which then became excuse me Defense of
the Ancients which became Dota and
League were same kind of things. So some
of the mashups are my favorites where
you look at the inspiration that came
from things that were before and
resulted in a whole unique new fun
ecosystem. Yeah. Uh thank you. And so
yeah, this is beyond hilarious to me.
They had a crossover with a Japanese
gacha game and it made people ignore the
gacha game to play backpack battles.
Love that. I love that so much as just
like a I I think Backpack Battles is one
of the things that flies under the radar
a lot especially because it's not
flashy, right? There's plenty of other
games in this like it's not as flashy as
any of the other auto battlers. It looks
quite plain, right? And actually part of
that I think comes back to the art
style. Yeah. This isn't cute little
chibi art with bright animated icons and
a whole bunch of other things. I think
there's a lot of people who would enjoy
this
game who because it's a small dev team
doing the art. The art is amazing, but
the art is also in some cases both an
advantage and a disadvantage. Yep. My
guess is this same game with a different
art treatment might have a
broader audience appeal to it, but it
also wouldn't have the feel of this
game. Yeah, I I very much agree. And
that that is not dissing the art style.
I think the art style is good, but there
are just from a marketing perspective,
there are certain things that are easier
to get people to click on.
Uh here's my favorite here. One of my
favorite things. This is Jimbo crossover
from Bellatro. Oh yeah. That depends on
you making poker hands out of a playing
card. And there's only one way to get
playing cards and it's in the
necromancer. There's like a whole
there's a whole poker mechanic that if
you don't play the necromancer and you
don't get this item, you'll never see.
Fascinating. Absolutely fascinating.
I am. So, what you're telling me is 5
years from now, this is going to be the
dwarf fortress of
um this kind of game and that it will be
so deep with so many weird interactions
maybe. But all of them are in the game.
I also want to point that out as like a
big deal, right? That one of the things
they've done is you don't need to go
anywhere else. It's all in the game. All
the items are there. All the recipes are
there. You just look around in the game.
Doesn't require a third party lookup
site. And that's one of the reasons I
love it. There's a lot. We could talk
for a really long time about wiki games,
but I personally love when a game that
has this many interactions and this many
items goes out of its way to do this. I
think that's really great. Um, but yeah,
that's that's going to do it for our
episode today. Thank you all so much for
joining us for this game ride along.
Jeff, thank you so much for indulging my
uh my my love and admiration of Backpack
Battles. Well, real quick, um, is
Backpack Battles one of the games that
we can throw in the shop? I will look
into it. I will I look if so there is a
way um what's the name of that system we
use sometimes nexus.gg I'll uh I'll put
it down in Nexus.gg lets people who
stream throw up to 10 games that they
have streamed into that and if you buy
it through them it's the same price a
little bit of money goes to the streamer
to support the stream and so if indeed
that game can go into that we'll throw a
link in the description. Yep. Um
absolutely and if not you can find it on
Steam. Yep, you can find it on Steam.
Uh, thank you all so very much for
joining us. Jeff, thank you for joining
me for this. Uh, we will see you all
next week for We're not sure yet. We're
working on that. Stay tuned. We had a
thing. We're changing the thing around.
We have changed the thing. Pray we do
not change the thing further. Um, until
then, I've been Will. That's been Jeff.
We'll see you all next time. Say bye to
the people, Jeff. Bye to the people,
Jeff.
[Music]
Okay. Cool, cool, cool. And we could all
use a little change.
All right. Cool. Cool. Cool. Cool. I
don't know if that was a song reference.
Um Yeah. Team Worm, but if it was, I
appreciate it. Yeah.
Um Oh, like I haven't seen that one
before. or it's been I've heard of it. I
just haven't seen it. I just I just real
quick I just left. I also wanted to um
do one more thing. I think
what we're doing when you suspend your
run and come back. Mhm. It shows you
your build. Oh, cool. That's just a cool
thing. And you can cons continue or
concede. Anyway, uh Chad, thank you so
much for joining us. Sorry again for the
late start. We had a fight with a
camera. I hope you all have enjoyed this
stream. Um, we'll be back tomorrow with
South of Midnight. If you haven't been
uh paying attention, South of Midnight
is currently all over the place. I
absolutely love it. I think for me, uh,
it's got potential in like the this
should get awards territory. Um, it's
got a great story. It's got great
visuals. Uh, the writing is immaculate.
The structure of the game is fantastic.
Please join me tomorrow, 11:00 a.m.
Eastern, 8 a.m. Pacific, as I continue
my playthrough of South of Midnight.
We'll also be playing it all next week.
Um, you can come over here to the Twitch
channel and find uh that. I'm just
checking. So, no Matt stream today. No
Matt stream today. Matt is otherwise uh
unavoidably detained by events of the
world. Um, and uh yeah, it happens. It
It does indeed. Uh, everybody say bye,
Janet.