Hi Janet. But enough about Blitz Ball.
That's right. Enough about Blitz Ball.
Time for other things, I guess. Good
morning, Janet. Good morning. Good
morning, Brad. And good morning, Rocky.
Not yet. Not yet. No, they'll they'll
never see this. Yeah, it's true. They'll
never They'll never see this. They'll
never know. And there's the hype train.
That's actually Now that I've got all
the camera stuff fixed, I think my goal
for next week is to get the hype train
stuff working for the bottom of the
screen. Cool. I think that's my plan
because I can host it on I can fix all
the problems we were having with it
pretty easily now. Love it. Love to see
it.
Let's keep it up. Yeah.
Um, we haven't done breakfast in two
weeks. We our last Yeah. Our last
breakfast was Yeah. the 26th.
Wow. A whole Yeah. theoretical month
ago. I mean, not not a actual month ago,
but uh a calendar month ago. A a
different name of the month we were in.
That's Yeah, that's right. I am Brad
Rocky. So Rocky says, "Hi." Correct.
Yeah. Oh, just breaking all the rules. I
like it. That's right. That's right.
Um friends, how how was your weekends? I
hope that you all had a splendiferous
time doing whatever it was that you're
doing.
Um, and I hope that you were safe doing
whatever it is that you were doing this
weekend, especially if you're in the
United States, particularly the West
Coast, major cities. Um, good job.
Cheers. Yeah, I was going to say, um,
BK, what will we all be enjoying for
breakfast today?
Well, too much stuff. The lovely taste
of the void. Consume the void. you were
talking about. I mean, obviously coffee
andor andor void. Uh, but for the for
the show, oh boy oh boy, do we have too
many stories uh due to the insane amount
of gaming news that happened over the
course of uh six days. I have a theory.
Okay, are you ready? And this is a
pre-show theory. This isn't going to
make it to Rocky. Wow. My theory is that
Jeff Keley wants to relive his glory
days of being in college, okay? And he
wants everyone to have the same
experience that he had when at frat
parties he used to shotgun beers. I have
no evidence that Jeff Key shotgun beers
are frat parties. I just go with me on
this. And that's why he condenses all of
the news into a format that feels like
you're trying to shotgun a beer. But but
but that's just one show. No, but all of
the shows are because Summer GameFest is
this weekend. They're all literally in
its orbit. It's all because they're in
its orbit, but that's not Jeff wanting
to shotgun all the information. That's
that's that's everyone doing that's
everyone latching on. I I feel No, I
feel like that's that's sort of like
always been his goal is to like create
the nexus, not the torment nexus, the
regular nexus. Um, and and have that be
like the center of I think I think Jeff
I think not even just Jeff, the
producers of of Summer Games Fest would
rather that no other no other fests are
going on this week because it it takes
away from the news from their fest. They
have to know that that's impossible.
There are of course going to be things
that are in the same weekend because
otherwise they're like of course there
are but like when GDC and packs are at
the same time but five five of them if
not more. Well so we actually we
actually skipped one. We skipped uh Day
of the Devs. We skipped Day of the Devs
is it's the Summer GameFest post show.
Um we'll talk more about it when we go
live.
Uh Janet Brad tell us about your
weekends. What were you up
to? This should be near at hand. Um
isn't this No one who wears those sorts
of shoes ever drank beer in a normal
manner. Wait, what kind of shoes does he
wear? He was wearing golden shoes. He
had like a suit and like gold or like
bright yellow colored shoes for Summer
Games Fest. Oh, that's just fun. It was.
but also like it didn't match the suit
or anything else. They were just there,
right? And it was
Listen, I'm I have not seen the shoes.
Uh but I'm for it. I think uh go go Jeff
Fashion Choice Go. I agree. Uh and for
the record, I don't know if I've ever
drank beer in a normal manner, so maybe
that is accurate. I can't drink beer, so
you know, it's fine. So that also works
for you, right? Yeah. Correct. So we
could all wear golden shoes.
I did
once film for a senior sketch a
theoretical not actual okay a skit about
a threetory tall beer bong
wasn't wasn't an actual thing we just
made up story yeah no I mean like the
physics works right but like
been fan pre-release yeah we're going to
talk about that uh finally sentient pest
night lord Nice, nice, nice, nice, nice.
Oh, hell yeah. Watch Gamef Fest and made
bread. Nice, Annie. Nice. Yeah, I think
uh I haven't beaten any new night lords
since Will and I's Thursday stream with
Jay. Um that was Wednesday, my dude.
Yeah, that one. That was the one. Um Oh,
that's not true. Red and I over on uh
Well, we not a new one. Uh, Red and
I, this is inappropriate to say, but I I
need to. Okay, so you know in Night
Rain, right, when you're you're g you're
you're gearing up. Oh, monstrous
gluten-free alcohol beer. Doesn't make
any sense, but trust me. There you go.
Um, so you know in Night Rain when you
select your characters and they do the
dramatic walk to the Eagles. Yeah. And
you see them from behind and the vistas
over the thing. So Red and I were in a
group. Um, Will, you were busy at the
time, so it was just me and Red. And you
get a third random uh uh person to to
play with you. And it said like Red's
dramatic name, Zoe's dad, my name. And
the third name that broke just broke any
sense of awe
was Gawk Cobbler.
And I love a good summer cobbler. Summer
cobbler. The cobbler. The
cobbler was excellent. And if you're out
there, cobbler, thank you for being a
good teammate. It just it was so funny
when we're like drama drama. Gawk
cobbler.
It was It just It really made it tied
the night together, right? Yeah. It just
It just makes sense. It just makes
sense. Yeah. Oh, and Thunder Thunders
got it. The person was clear and that's
what we're talking about. Their shoes
were made of Gawk. G O C K, right? Yeah,
obviously. Yeah, 100%. Um, all right.
We've we've we've tangented too much.
Well, I mean, well, we got 10 seconds.
We got 10 seconds. 10 seconds left on
the train, so no one do anything else on
the N.
[Music]
Yeah. Oh. Oh, see. And Miss Ink, the the
gut cobbler, the one who cobbled those
yellow key shoes. This is all That's
right. Everything's coming together.
Everything's coming up. Milhouse. All
right, let's start thanking people. I
got to thank Zariah for 73 months of
Prime. Wow. I've known Zariah for Okay.
Anyway, uh Shinger's Cat 4 for 13 months
at tier 1. NX Supper for 73 months. Zar
for 61 months. Uh Cameron for 54 months.
Louis Chang for 73 months. Proxy for 58
months at tier 2. Book dragon for the
community gift sub. Sean and 3D for 43
months at tier three. Gladius for 63
months. Proxj for gifting us up to
Kestrel. Kerrion forbiddes. Demetra for
51 months. Odin here for making a bunch
of emotes big and silly. Synchronous for
44 months. Brasser for 58 months.
Raymond for giving us up to that guy.
Jimmy Cohuff for making a giant crab
appear on our skin. F America for 62
months. And as Fox for 59 months. Thank
you everybody.
All right. Hey Will, did you load up the
graphic yet? I did when I started. Yeah.
Heck. I I have the OBS is conveniently
doing this thing where it starts on a
black screen on the black screen. So
every time I move to this screen to
start doing stuff, it plays it for the
first time so I don't have to worry
about forgetting. Uh small correction.
Small correction, Will. That's true.
Yeah, that's true. I've known you for
longer. That ch Wow. All right. Anyway,
all right. I'm going to go uh do my best
impression of the Crypt Keeper um while
we get started.
Right. Is that how he sounds like? Yeah,
that's totally it. So, what is this
emote? Hold
on. That's pretty good. I like that one.
Um, okay. So, we are gonna go to black.
We're gonna come back. We're going to do
a show. We have a lot to talk about. We
have many, many a thing to talk about.
So, please look forward to that. Hey,
it's going to happen right now. Uh, when
will we get you two on Mario Kart World?
I'm gonna be playing Mario Kart World
later today. Matt has meetings and work,
but we'll join if possible. And then
we'll we'll we'll see when uh we'll see
how long you're going. Especially
because Matt, I don't know if you
noticed this, but co-op
uh cups now count. Co-op. Oh, do they?
Co-op Grand Prix. I I played I played
the co-op Grand Prix and I got the
trophy and it counted on my single
player. That's great. Okay, cool. So, uh
and the other I I just want to make sure
that we can uh team up to do 24s.
Yeah. to do to do the to do the world
one because that is by far we'll talk
about it. We'll talk about it. All
right, cool. We're going to go to black.
We're going to do the
thing. Chat, will you miss us? Probably.
That's
okay. Hey, I'm working too. I'm working
hard to bring you the entertainment that
you crave. Um All right, cool. Uh BRB
[Applause]
[Music]
Good morning,
Matt.
Matt. Matt.
Oh, I'm sorry. Good morning, Will. And
good morning to all of you. Welcome to
Games for Breakfast, the only show on
the internet where we talk about this
week's gaming and tech
news. And I got lacatu. I got lacatu.
It's all fine. Is it fine?
You can stop whenever you want to. I'm
so I can stop whenever I want to. I
haven't been playing Mario Kart for the
past 72 hours. You have. You know what?
Every accusation is an admittance. And
uh that doesn't count when I say it.
I've learned that from watching the
news. Um everybody, hello, good morning.
Welcome to the show where we have too
much to talk about the whole it's a lot.
Yeah. So, uh we're going to start with a
preface at the top. Normally, we do like
a blend of like the gaming news that's
happened this week and like tech and
gaming and there's no time for that.
There there is no time for that. So,
we're gonna we're going to tell you a
little bit about
uh what happened this weekend. We're
going to talk a little bit about um some
stuff uh in our in our lives and then
we're going to start doing recap stuff
because um this weekend there were five
major press conference style trailer
release things for all of the games that
you could possibly be interested until
mid 2026 if not later, right? Uh and
then also a little thing called the
speech too um came out uh and we both
managed to get it and that's an
interesting story in and of itself but
uh yeah so there we will get there. Uh
but first and most
importantly
Matt Matt I got to play Final Fantasy
Magic. How was it Will? How was the new
set? It was so good. It was you played
in a at a physical place like I found I
found a store near me that was doing a
physical pre-release. it still had room.
I uh they do online pre-registration. So
when I figured out that I had time, I
pre-registered at like midnight online.
Nice. And then I just showed up the next
day. It was great. Um and I placed third
out of like 20 people. That's awesome
because it turns out that uh if you're
familiar with FF9, Vivv or Nitier,
little little black mage friendo is it
is silly levels of broken in the new
magic set. Uh, and the number uh, it's
really funny. There's a spell called
self-destruct, and most most things can
cast self-destruct once, but because of
the way the rules work, Vive can
self-destruct twice. And the number of
games that I won on the back of Vive
blowing up twice is very
high. Um, all right. So, yeah. Uh, it
was it was a lot of fun. I had a blast.
I'm definitely going to be going back.
But and and importantly later on, if you
are a fan,
I have this and we're going to open some
packs later on stream so that Give it to
me. No, it's fine. You can't. Nope.
They're all mine. Mine. Mine. They set
up this this force field in our kitchen.
I liked it. See, it's mine. Um uh we'll
be opening those later on stream uh if
you want to come hang out and talk about
the set uh in more detail when we have
time because we don't have time right
now. There we go.
Also, side note, uh, Munition Man, we're
not going to be talking about the War
Thunder stuff this week. Uh, we're going
to wait and see how that develops. Uh,
and we just have so much so so much so
much. Also, Bearer of Truth, yes, the
Swiss 2 will also be mentioned
eventually. Yeah. Um, yeah. Yeah. It's
uh, it's pretty cool. Also, this coming
week, God, I hate doing announcements
that aren't announcements. Um, yeah, but
this one we kind of don't really have a
choice. Okay. So, so
either Friday or Saturday, right, Will
and I are going to be interviewing cool
people about a cool thing. And that cool
people that we're interviewing is
definitely not Hatsune Miku. No,
absolutely not. We actually resent the
implication. Uh we've told you many
times that we are not interviewing them
and yet persistently
and consistently you have you have done
you've gone online in throngs and just
kept saying when when will they
interview? It's not happening. It's
going to be something else. Yeah. Okay.
No hats name. No. So just just keep that
keep your expectations in check as a
result. There is nothing uh firmly
posted on the schedule for Friday. If
the cool people doing cool things
interview is not Friday, then we'll
probably do something here uh to just
hang out and chill. If it is, then we'll
do that. Yeah, there we go. Yep. Um,
cool, cool, cool, cool, cool, cool. I
think that's all the news before we get
into all the news. Yeah.
Um, I mean, so we're going to talk about
all the
showcases. And uh it's sort of we wanted
to have a meta discussion about this
before we get into actually talking
about it because it's it's kind of
important from a programming perspective
from like some from the person who preps
all the notes and chooses the stories
everything every week. This episode
takes more than twice as long as a
regular episode to prep. Well, yeah. And
even even on my end, I do less on on the
on the prep side of these things, but
like since it's showcases, we basically
break it down on what we're both excited
about. And oftent times the things that
Will and I are excited about are not
necessarily the same thing. I believe I
don't know if you noticed, Will,
whenever I hit one of yours, cuz yours
were in before mine, uh I just italicize
mine because it's just going to be like
same. Yeah. You know, yep. Yep. Um uh
Yeah.
But that's because in a very short span
of time, everything comes
out. Everything. So, like, let's ignore
the Switch to you for a
second and just It's right there. It's I
I could be playing Mario Kart right now.
Oh, you Uhhuh. Yeah. Yeah. No, no, go
on. It's fine. No. Um, this episode
where Will and I just don't listen to
each other. That's right. Yeah.
Um, there
were pretty much constant new trailers
or new announcements coming from
Saturday into Sunday earlier. Oh, yeah.
There were there were some on Friday.
Yeah. So, the ones we're going to cover
today, just Friday night. Yeah. Yeah.
So, just so we're clear, is June 4th was
the PlayStation State of Play. June 6th
was Summer Games Fest. June 7th was
Wholesome Games. June 7th was also
Future Game Show and Xbox Game Showcase
was June
8th. That's a lot. That's a lot of
games. And please note, not complaining
about all of the hype and cool stuff
that everyone got to see a piece of. And
we have a couple friends who are devs.
We're going to talk about that in a
little bit, too, where some of their
games got announced. And that's awesome.
It's just it as a fan of
of as professionals in this space, it is
difficult to keep track. I can't imagine
like I was on two different trains just
watching these like trying to just cram
them in wherever I could. Um maybe I'm
not as plugged in as as the youths are
these days. If there's any youths in the
audience, please let us know how
connected and plugged in you are. Um but
uh I found it I found it daunting. um to
the point where I I don't know if this
happened to you, Will, when I was
watching like the third one or
something. I was just like um it was
starting to just like wash over me. Like
I I stopped paying attention and had to
rewind a couple times because I was
like, "No, I I I have to I have to pay
attention to this."
Um, I I it's just there's so
much also from an editing perspective
based on the type of the genre that the
game that you're seeing and what they're
trying to showcase, there's really like
two to I don't know maybe like three to
four different styles of trailer uh from
a pacing perspective that is generally
I'm sure there's some outliers, but like
it just does when you've watched when
you're on the the sixth hour of Showcase
Mhm. you're kind of like, "What's
happening? Where am I?" The one of the
best was
uh during the Xbox showcase, they did a
uh uh that, you know, they had the guy
who's like world premiere, right? And
then there was one that it was world
bleep premiere and it was just uh it was
for some I don't even remember it was
for because that bit was better than the
trailer sticking in my brain, right? But
like even the world premiere guys had it
with this at this point. So it it it was
kind of an issue, right? And I think
like I cannot stress this enough. My day
yesterday was I like woke up, did some
video game dailies and then started
watching
stuff and I stopped watching stuff like
six or seven hours
later to just try and get a handle on
all of this. Right. and and I didn't
watch watch all of it. I skipped around
some.
Also, uh I see some people in chat and
both uh Janet and Rocky on YouTube or
Janet and uh Brad on Twitch and YouTube
respectively. Rocky, please uh message
us. Where can where can Rocky message
us, Will? I believe there's a place
where they can send us what they think
about stuff and then we can answer them
from there. I believe it's there. It's
there.
Um, as we're going through these
showcases, please, if there's something
that you're hyped about or that we like
that that we didn't hit, uh, you can
mess up some Blue Sky Rocky or in the
moment Brad and Janet, like shout it out
in chat because what I would like to do,
cuz again, like I said, after watching
so many of these, I I guarantee you I
missed stuff and if there's something
that you're hyped about, I want to know
about it because uh I want to be hyped
about it. Yeah. Um uh that guy Jimmy
brings up that um that he might have
watched they might have watched more if
it was during the workday. Um I'm going
to I'm going to disagree that that's
common, but I also do want to point out
that one of the big things is all of
these are on YouTube. All of them are on
YouTube because none of these are on TV
anymore. They're all streamed. So you
can just go watch them at your own pace.
even uh so some of them have chapterized
and by the way if you're watching later
on YouTube down in the doobly-doo
they'll be in our show notes there are
links to all of these showcases like the
ones that we're referencing some of them
have chapterized the thing so you can
jump around to exactly what you want
some of them have long uh playlists that
accompany them so like summer gamefest
itself did the um did the playlist of
all the individual trailers But
Wholesome Games did chapters. I don't
know what everyone was saying. Uh yeah,
I'll say that. Uh I think what they're
banking on Jimmy 2 is the fact that they
are all VODs like and and shows like
ours will just talk through the stuff as
well on Monday and so the fault like
they're expecting everyone who couldn't
watch over the weekend to watch during
the week. It's just I almost feel like
the fact that there were so many
showcases is actually damaging that
algorithm like that f I'm sure Summer
Games Fest did the most work at this
point as far as views. I don't know that
off the top of my head. Um, but stuff
like Wholesome or even PlayStation
Direct or Xbox Showcase, like if you're
not in those ecosystems, that's just not
what you're what you're vibing. Yep. Um,
agree. But anyway, I guess we should
start because we're already 20 20
minutes inish to the show. Um, and we
got to we got to chat about all this
stuff. Yep. All right, let's talk State
of Play. So, um, there were other things
that were announced.
The big
one, the big one for me and for a lot of
people is they did announce that there's
going to be a Final Fantasy Tactics
remaster. Um, which with like improved
quality of life and upgraded graphics
and they're actually going to voice the
it and like like not a small thing, not
quite to the level of the FF7 remakes
where like they're not the same game
anymore, right? It's a combo remake
remaster. It's a remakester. Yeah.
um coining that I need a nickel every
time someone says it. Um I am not a
Final Fantasy Tactics kid. However, uh
many of my friends are and I've tried
it. It's just not my it's not my jam. Uh
however, I loved the way that this game
looked like the way that it the how it
was implemented is basically it seems as
though you can switch between both
versions of the game like frame accurate
version of the original and everything
that they've done new. almost at the
drop of a hat. I hope that's not just in
the editing of the trailer. It felt like
you could just switch it. I I I think
that that's correct. It feels a lot like
the same treatment the Halo series got
when they did the updated graphics for
the Master Chief Collection.
So, I I'm I'm very excited about this.
Will did you play Did you Were you just
like super deep into Tactics? Uh so,
okay. So, there's a long story about
this. I remember Tactics. I didn't have
a PlayStation, but I remember playing
Tactics over at a friend's house. I
tried to replay Tactics years ago here
on the channel, but the problem is the
only legal current version of Tactics
that's available, and I kind of wanted
to make this
point is on Android. So, I hooked up a
tablet and tried to play the port on
Android, and it sucks. The port is
terrible. So, now I'm morally obligated
to give it a second shot because of the
remaster. Also, because like less than 3
days before they announced the remaster,
I said on stream, "You know what,
Thunder? If that it gets a if it gets a
remake or remaster, I'll play it on
stream again." And then it did, thus
proving that my hubris is the fastest
way to get something to happen in the
world. Um, so yeah, uh, people are
people are also bringing up that, uh,
I'm sorry, I'm just sort of catching up
here. I believe uh uh Joansson just said
the only thing that really stuck with me
from the main show was the Wuang themed
game presented by Ghostface Killer. I I
did not catch this one for whatever
reason. Maybe I got up at that moment,
but I just looked at it right now. It's
called Wuang Rise of the Deceiver. Uh
and it looks pretty dope. It looks real
good. It looks really good. Um it
is Yes, it's going to be real good. Um,
okay. So, uh, Matt, what what were your
overall thoughts on State of Play? Uh, I
mean, overall, uh, the first thing I
clocked, and I I didn't really clock
this into the other ones, was at least
the first three trailers were like, and
again, this isn't a problem. It's just
something I clocked crazy violent.
Like the first three trailers, I was
like, "Oh, oh, oh." or I I kind of
normally I guess they space them out
more. I have no idea. This time I was
just like, "Oh, is this the theme?" I I
was watching the first bit on the
subway. I had downloaded the the thing.
I watched these all not quite live and I
had to like keep pulling my phone closer
to me cuz there was like kids around. I
don't know. It just felt weird. I'm
like, "Oh, and someone's face is being
ripped apart." And I was like, "Whoa."
Okay. Uh, but listen, they're going for
their they're going for their uh their
target demographic, though. They did
start, I believe, with one of your
favorites, Will, at the beginning of the
showcase. It was kind of part of their
like initial trailer and it went right
in. Um,
do you know what I'm talking about? The
the Lumines thing. Yes. Yeah. Um, I it
was it was kind of cool because it's a
VR game and I really for the makers of
Tetris Effect. Yeah. And I thought that
one of the really cool things about
State of Play was that they were they
could have done a State of Play for VR,
which is like what a lot it feels like a
lot of companies who are still like
kicking around in the VR space are
doing. They're like, "Yeah, VR is its
own thing. We're going to put it
somewhere else so that only the people
who already have VR headsets watch it,
and that means that no one will care
about it." Right. But Sony was like,
"Hey, there's a cool VR game. It's in
the main show. It's the It's the first
one we're talking about in the main
show." Yeah. which was nice to see. I uh
I've I don't own Tetris Effect, but I
have played it.
Um and it is in VR. It is super fun.
Yeah. Is if anybody is into that,
apparently uh Lumid's Rise will be kind
of like a rec combobulation of your
brain in a puzzle space. Um I I am very
much Johnson. Yeah. Right.
Recombobulation. Yeah. Um, yeah, new
guy. Same. I did not expect that to be
the leadoff, but yet here we were. Yeah.
Um, the other one that got me, honestly,
uh, that I didn't know was coming was
the new Suda 51 joint, uh, Romeo is a
Dead Man. Did you catch that at all,
Will? Basically, it's like,
uh, again, it's super violent. Sure. It
starts and you're you're a guy you're a
guy named Romeo who becomes like a
superhero named Dead Man, but like
through a incredibly violent means and
you have it's like a sci-fi action
nonsense thing that only Suda could kind
of come up with. Okay. Right. So, you've
told me it's a pseudo 51 game, right?
Got it. Uh I don't know. The art style
and the vibe of it just felt immaculate.
I really wanted to like I I was
instantly like can I play this right
now? I don't quite understand what is
going on, but I would like to learn.
Please teach me.
Um I I I really really wanted to to
learn more about that. So I'm going to
be doing some deep dives into that
because I I anything Suda does I will it
will get my eyeballs instantly. Also,
hey Carter. Hi. Hello. Hi. Hello. Um
well I mean like
there's it wasn't just Suda, right? They
they also had more information on Silent
Hill F, a game that we've talked about
before because it might get AODed,
right, which uh it would be an adult
game, right? Which is like the higher
rating than M. Yes, there is one of
those and you you'd be forgiven for
forgetting because they don't happen.
They just companies would rather alter
their game than have it get an AO
rating. And it looks like they might not
be backing down. And Silent Hill might
might be going full boore at getting an
AO, which would be wild, right? Hey, go
for it. Tell the story you want to tell.
Yeah. You know, it's it's not and it's
not an easier road. It's kind of
difficult to do, but if you believe in
it, you believe in it. How's
What What's that? Oh, you were excited
for the Digimon story Time Stranger
game. That's crazy. I have never been
interested in Digimon in my
life. Gota say
um I saw that trailer and was
like, "Okay, I don't know what about
it." Did anyone else catch that? It It
felt It felt like an elevated version of
whatever that game usually is. I I I
don't know if it was the story or
something. I just Whatever that game
usually whatever that game is. Okay, I
dig Uh, and I was like, are they what
did did they sneak into my brain and
find all of the different like uh uh,
you know, dopamine points that would get
me interested in a Digimon game? I mean,
why just play an isekai game? Like, it's
just an isekai game. It's fine. I like
this one. Zoe came on and said, "My
people." Yeah.
Uh, oh, that actually could dark. That
could actually be very true.
It did feel persona-esque. Also, Indie,
hello. There there's been a bunch of
Persona in the
like, for lack of a better word, the
zeitgeist lately. Um, especially with
Persona 4 getting its own remake
announcement. Whatever the new name for
Persona 4, I don't I don't get it, man.
Atlas keeps doing this where they're
like, "Persona 4 Golden Remix part
three." And you're like, "Uh, okay,
sure. How does this relate to the
original? Is this Persona 4 but in a new
format, or is it a spin-off game for
Persona 4?" And they're like, "Play it
and find out." And you're like, "I think
I'm good. Thanks."
Yeah. I don't I have nothing against
Persona, by the way. It's just like not
my bag. I I think I think that's really
hitting the nail on the head for me. the
the thing that got me about it because I
think the
core art direction of this game feels
very
um I don't know cell-shaded anime etc.
But then it clicks in and out of like a
Persona vibe in it and it just got me. I
was like is this the one that's going to
get me? I'm going to be confused as hell
if I actually try this game because I'm
sure it is. You need to know a lot of
Digimon lore. Uh, but I thought it was
I'm always impressed when a franchise
hits something in a showcase that I am
normally not I will just glaze over and
and and wait. And when I saw this, I was
like, "Oh, there's something else here."
And so, I'm curious to
discover what that something is. I uh
watching the trailer right now, I also
think the facial animation is a bit more
um precise than games of this art style
or maybe the games of this art style
that I have
uh experienced. So like it it connected
me with these characters whom I know
nothing about a little more. I I thought
this was an excellent trailer and if
they're if they're if the trailer's job
is to get people excited outside of
their wheelhouse, congratulations Bando
Namkai. you or you know mine is mine
mine for that is later on. Uh but I had
one of those. Yeah. Um let's see. Oh
yeah, there was that um Karen was also a
thing that that you were interested in
that I forgot exist. Like Okay, this is
going to happen a lot. Okay, I'm going
to warn all of you. We were taking notes
as we were watching way too much of
this. And there will absolutely be
moments where we put something down and
forget what it was and have to look it
up or put something down uh that the
other person like saw and then we
remember that we thought it was dope. So
that's just get brace for that, right?
So yeah, uh Karen is basically a
mountain climbing game, like a
pre-climbing game. Um and I'm super
curious about the way that it actually
plays. If you look at the trailer, it
seems like it might be one of those like
buttons control limbs kind of thing or
or at least the animation lends itself
to that. Yeah. As a fan of another PSVR
2 game, Call the Mountain, um I loved I
think my favorite parts of that game was
the climbing. The combat is fine. Uh,
and I love Horizon, but like I just
there's something about free climbing
that
is it's a it's a thing that is realistic
that humans can do, but you can set it
in so many interesting locations like
beyond the interesting ones that the
Earth can provide. Uh, and I don't know.
I don't know. I just I found this game
really breathtaking in that sense.
Like it just seems cool as hell. Yeah.
Um, it seems both
like lonely and like you run into
people. There's a part of it where I'm
wondering if it's a mechanic where
you're like in your hanging tent cuz you
like tap a tent into the side of a
mountain basically. And uh the character
I'm covered in cat hair. The character
uh is like wrapping their like cut up
hands and I'm wondering if there's like
an injury mechanic and all that stuff.
Uh so I'm very much looking forward to
learning more about it. Uh it looks like
just the right amount of I do any of you
get the feelings when you're when you're
playing games.
something that you're really vibing with
and I I I think a lot of us do that like
I get the same feeling oftent times if
I'm into a game enough like where like
if I'm actually physically in meat space
standing on the edge of something tall
like if I'm doing that in a video game
and I run to the edge of it like in
Elden Ring or something and I stop I'll
get a like a minor version of like that
like real life like Yeah.
Uh, and I love that. I I love that
feeling. Uh, when on the safety of my
couch. Yeah. Yeah. Do it from Yes. Yeah.
Absolutely. Um, Digital Vertigo.
Precisely. Exactly. Uh, we both had
Tides of Tomorrow down as another one.
Tides of Tomorrow is
a
online
persistentishworld
multiplayer mystery adventure kind of
game thing. It looks real weird and real
good. It looks like what if Waterorld
mixed with Borderlands
uh but had a progressive
uh online heist universe. Yeah. Yeah.
And you're like, it seems like it's hard
to sort of tell exactly what's going on,
but there's the art style seems
immaculate. Uh, it's like that
post-apocalyptic but everything's still
neon kind of vibe. It there there was a
there was a shooter that tried real hard
to exist for a while like in the late
2000s that had this very very much the
same vibe except it was trying to occupy
the same space as Team Fortress 2 and
Overwatch. uh which is not a place that
most games can exist because those are
very two very large animals in a not
very big room. Um but what the thing
that I I think is is cool about this
from what I can tell and again please
note that all of our reactions are not
due to deep dives. It's due to what the
trailers are telling us. The whole thing
is supposed to be you're following other
players who have played it. Yeah. So
you're seeing their basically bits and
pieces of their ghost information as
they're trying to heist something. And
you can follow or not follow what they
do depending on if you sort of believe
that they were successful or not. And
what they did is still like in your run,
what they did previously will have
consequences in your run that will
change things, right? So the example
that they did was if they lied to
someone or caused a gunfight or
whatever, there may be local resistance
to your very presence there because
they've been predisposed to dislike you
because the person before you was a
jerk. My question is how deep does this
go? Do you know what I mean? Like
because it can't be forever. How many
levels or how many Brad played it and
then Janet played it and then Rocky
played it and then Will played it and
then Matt played it then Zoe played it.
At what point does the world have to
like how many cycles does it happen? I
imagine there's a limit. Yeah. Uh and
then it would restart. Um but I don't
know. I I haven't seen something like
that before. And I I love the idea of
making ghost data kind of matter in a
gameplay mechanic sense. So I don't
know. I I thought that was very very
cool.
Uh you should do one. What's up? Oh,
let's see. Uh well, this one's an easy
one to do. Um because I've been you ever
want to buy something
um and you know it's a huge waste of
money. Like you you know you know you
shouldn't do it. You don't have space
for it. It's too expensive. Do you
really would have no idea what I'm
talking about. Click that. That was
lovely.
Uh, but the uh for me it has always been
uh an original Mortal Kombat 2 arcade
cabinet. I don't think I'm ever going to
get one. It doesn't make any sense for
any sort of lifestyle that I live. Um uh
other than the extreme one. Uh, but the
announcement that got me really pumped
here was there's a Mortal Kombat Legacy
Collection coming out, which is
basically every mainstream and portable
title of Mortal Kombat uh up to four, I
think, and everything in between.
There's a couple surprises, but like
it's apparently as they're what they're
saying is frame accurate to all of the
originals and they've updated net code
so you can so you can play with people.
So, they kept the frames the same, but
they put roll back in MK1 and 2, I
guess. I have no idea. Uh, but also, I'm
wondering how far it goes. They showed
the old Game Boy Mortal Kombat, the
original Game Boy Mortal Kombat, and I
don't know if you played that. I think
it had five characters and two of them
were Scorpion Subzero cuz they're pallet
swaps. Um, it runs it
runs awful. Uh, it runs the it's it's
probably the worst running game I've
ever seen. But I saw it in the trailer
and I was like, if that's not just as
awful as I don't want it sped up. I
don't want it fixed. I don't want
anything. I have hours sitting in the
back of my parents' car trying to play
Mortal Kombat and failing miserably.
Amazing. Uh, I don't know. Uh, yeah.
They implied that all the games are
online. Yeah. Yeah. Right. Role play.
Uh, role playing. Good girl. Exactly. It
was It was I cannot stress how
unplayable it was. And yet we did,
right? I played the Return of the Jedi
game on OG Game Boy. That was pretty
bad, too. Like there are
definitable gaming. Also, a lot of the
games that came out on it, absolute
crap. Yeah. Absolute crap. I just love I
love a collection like this because I I
love when it's easy for multiple
multiplayer games to be around. I've
thrown parties before where I basically
threw like a Mario Kart party where I
had every system of every Mario Kart on
different TVs and I threw like
tournaments based on them up through
eight. Um, and I don't know, this is now
another way I can kind of do that but
with Mortal Kombat in a in a in a sense
and have it feel correct without like
digging up a mim cabinet or a Game Boy
or anything like that. So, I don't know.
I love this. I love I love that. Um I
liked that um Tobias and Boon, I
believe, like at the end of it just
showed them like walking up to the
cabinet. I don't think that they
actually I don't know what their
relationship is right now, but I know uh
Boon is kind of the uh the face of
Netherrealm at this point. So, it was
just nice to see everybody. Anyway,
yeah. Um I dug it. Okay. Also, oh,
sorry. I was going to say also, I don't
have much to say about this, but another
PSVR 2 game that I I love that is sort
of like coming back is Thief Legacy of
Shadows. Uh Thief is a franchise that I
I loved the first one. I I don't even
know how many more they did, but I kind
of fell
off. This is the kind of thing that VR
should I I think VR should be far less
actiony games because uh it's harder to
pull off that thing for an extended
period of time. Even I think Halflife
Alex learned that like you go long
spanses between action, right? Um
because just non-stop abarting action
will will will drain on you. There's a
reason that pistol whip tracks are as
long as they are and then you get like a
break in between. Yeah. Uh the sneaking
through a place and trying to steal
something feels like a really great use
of VR. Yeah. And so I don't have much
else to say about it uh currently other
than I just I was glad to see it and I
look forward to checking that out. Okay.
Awesome. Awesome. Uh another one that we
were both on was Sword of the Sea.
So, okay. So, it's from Giant Squid,
which is not the same studio that made
Journey. It's the same artist that did
Journey. So, it's So, the So, the same
artist did or artists did Journey and
Abzu. Um, both of which are absolutely
in my uh category of uh games that are
art and should be put in a gallery. like
they're they're an experience that's
very approachable, that's obviously very
beautiful, that is easy to like have
anyone experience in a moving and
beautiful way, and they also get that
thing where like any individual
screenshot is probably our like like a
thing that you would frame and put on
your wall, right? Okay, great. Um,
there's another game with the same
artist, so I desire to know nothing
else. Shut up and take my money. Shut up
and take my money. They were like, "Hey,
we have another per we have another game
by the same person who made two of the
most beautiful games you've ever seen."
Great. Here's my money. That's it.
That's all. That's you. You could save
the money on advertising. Show me 10
seconds of the game. Tell me that piece
of information. Take my money. Done.
Problem solved. Uh, also, uh, a thing
again just for me, just for just for
specials for Matt, uh, Astrobot
announced that there was a bunch of
other new stuff. They went kind of did a
victory lap basically. Uh just more free
levels. Just feels like a super class
act for that game. I think you got
there's like I think there's a total of
96 planets now once it's all said and
done including like the Christmas
special and a couple other things they
did. So like it's just really nice to
see a regular I think it was $60 game
just keep getting updates and keep
seeing success. I have not finished
Astrobot yet. I will 100% that game. I
love that game so much. Um, but it's
just nice that
um it's just nice that that exists. You
don't get a lot of that on the
PlayStation side of things. So, it was
really nice to see uh them sort of
showcase that. Um, I'm trying to pull up
the other one here, but it's it's it's
messing with me. Uh, the another one I
was uh psyched about, but it's one of
those things because we bled through all
of these so quickly was uh Sea
Reminants. And I have in my show notes
there's a Sea Reminance art style. And
I'm trying to remember exactly what it
was. Oh, right. This is like basically I
thought Sea Reminance was going to be uh
Oh, Sea of Remnants, pardon me. I
thought it was going to be um a Monkey
Island. Like I thought it was going to
be something like Monkey Island or or
anything like that because the art style
from like when you pull back looked like
Guy like the character design and
everything, but everyone looks almost
like um almost like marionets. I don't
think they're supposed to be, but their
faces are like angular and and sort of
shaded in certain ways. And it seems
uh I don't know. It seems super fun and
like kind of like a fun adventure. Uh
oh, actually, no. I take it back. They
all are marionets. Everyone is a wooden
marionette. I'm seeing like them on
hooks and their bodies have joints. Um
I I think that this
game would be something that I could
easily get lost in. Also, I really
appreciated that every song they had in
the game, uh, in the trailer, they had
the lyrics on screen. I just liked that
a lot. And there's a giant, uh, I think
there's a giant ship battle where an
octopus, a giant kraken is using other
ships as weapons, sick.
Which I was like, okay. Yeah, I'm very
much looking forward to that. I think it
is
um, it is a bit strange, though. It is.
I think it's a it's a free-to-play RPG
pirate theme game
uh that doesn't seem to have gotcha
elements. So, I don't
know how it's going to I I'm curious
about its actual functionality. I will
also investigate this that that Yeah, I
am very interested in more ways that we
can make free-to-play games that are
like nonpredatory. Great. Yeah.
Uh, and then the last one I think uh if
I'm not mistaken at the PlayStation uh
at the PlayStation showcase and please
everyone call out yours if there's
anything in PlayStation that you you
want us to chat about or look at in the
live right now uh in the grand scheme of
fighting things along with a PlayStation
uh branded fighting stick which if I was
still into the scene I would pick up at
a heartbeat. I thought that was actually
a really big thing was that like cuz
most fight sticks are not first party.
No, they're like third party. Like you
buy them on Etsy. Like a hit box or a
fight stick you're buying on Etsy. It's
custom made. Like but PlayStation
releasing one seems really cool. Yeah.
Uh Marvel uh Toon Fighting Souls, a 4v4
uh fighting game with Marvel characters
that looks at this point immaculate. Uh
I I actually watched a lot of the the
dev talks about this one and they were
saying like when they were like three
different companies came together to do
this with Marvel and uh I I wasn't
familiar with the team who did who does
a bunch of other fighting games more
Japanese focused fighting games but when
I basically when they presented their
designs to Marvel Marvel actually
rejected them all and said no no no no
we want you to make your version of this
game not what you think we want us to
see. And so that's when they came back
and like there's a redesign of Iron Man
that looks very Gundam. There's like
there's like a lot of really cool
choices in the way that the characters
are portrayed. Even down to the Kirby
balls of energy uh like with Dr. Doom's
blasts and things like it just I am so
pumped for this. I love Marvel vs.
Capcom 2. I know there's a lot
of who who would have thought discourse
out there about like well this kind of
means Marvel vs. Capcom is sort of dead.
Um, and I could see that maybe, but also
like I don't know. I'm just psyched to
get a different feeling, right? A
different feeling Marvel fighter. 4v4 is
also crazy. Four 4v4 was wild. That's so
many permutations, right? Like every
time like so,
so the math of different combinatorics
for different teams you can fight
against other different teams is wild.
That's a lot of strategic density in
addition to a lot of like the on the-fly
tactical density that like learning four
characters is. Like you don't have a
main, you have four characters you have
to learn. So here's the thing. They talk
about this. They're like, "We know that
some people will love that. We know that
some people will hate that." So there
are two ways you can play this game. You
can just have a main and have different
uh basically friends come in to do
attacks and do different things like
like you're not learning the character,
you're learning the cameo system from
combat. Yeah.
Or you can main four characters and you
could you could tag in and out which is
I think really really really smart. Um
also tac I completely agree. I wanted
infinite to be so good uh and it was not
and I did not buy it. Um, so anyway, I
I'm really looking forward to seeing how
this shapes up between this and between
uh 2x
KO and I'm guessing Injustice 3 will
probably be Netherrealm's next fighter.
That seems right. Uh I feel like 2026,
2027 or whatever is going to be for
fighting games will be very very very
good. Um, I think and also the fact that
PlayStation was was really hawking the
the fight stick says that they're
actually double or tripling down on on
this. Yep. All right. Before we move on
from
PlayStation, uh Brad and Janet, is there
anything that we missed that you were
excited about? Um, for PlayStation, for
State of Play directly, because I'm
seeing a lot of people like, "Did you
see X?" Probably yes, but it's in a
later part. We're trying to keep this by
show cuz otherwise we're going to ping
pong around like someone gave a pixie
stick to a gerbil and then covered in
monster energy drink and let it loose,
right? Like it's not going to be pretty.
Um yeah. Yeah. Uh,
the Wuang Clan game is not going to be a
is going to be an action brawler, but
won't be a fighting game in the
traditional like
2D digital chess sense of fighting game,
but it will be a brawler. Um, Neo3.
Yeah, the invincible game we'll talk
about uh in Xbox.
Yep. Joseph Yote did look pretty cool.
Good coughing. Yeah, I uh I I would
never I wasn't like into that series, so
I I didn't I didn't uh clock it, but it
looks gorgeous. Yeah, I think I think
and that's that's the thing. We're not
saying that things we didn't talk about
are bad. We're saying that the things we
didn't talk about didn't meet the bar
for being high enough on our list to
dedicate time during this precious 2
hours to or or stuff that we didn't
already know. For instance, on Musha,
I've already said I'm going to be
psyched for Way of the Sword. I think
it's called Way of the Sword. Trailer
looked cool. Looked exactly like kind of
the last thing that I saw. So, I was
like, great.
I got to keep moving. Uh,
cool. Cool. I think my surprise, if I
had to pick my surprise from this
honestly,
uh, was either Romeo's a dead man or me
being actually interested in Digimon
game.
Yeah. Yep. Yep. Totally agree. Uh Um,
all right. Should we move on to Summer
Games Fest on June 6th? Yeah. So, there
Yes.
[Music]
Um, okay. Uh, there's like there's a
very interesting pairing that we should
probably bring up at about this point,
which is that Steam is deeply embedded
in this weekend as well. Next Fest is
coming up, and so a lot of these games
are going to have demos. Um, there's
also with the future games show, and
we'll talk more about this then, there's
a a special section for these games. So,
a lot of these, if you're interested in
them, you can wishlist on Steam. And
that that really I started noticing
because PlayStation doesn't care about
Steam because it's PlayStation. Um with
Summer GameFest, it started ramping up
more like the wish list on Steam. Yeah.
Remember to get this in your ecosystem
sort of language started ramping up
there. So that's where I'll mention
that. Um
uh okay. First up, felt that
boxing. What if? What? What if? What if?
Punch out. But hear me out. Muppets
and like muppets. Like not not like
digital muppets like muppets. Muppets.
Muppets.
If you haven't if you have and also
great alliteration in word play like
perfect. No notes. Felt that boxing.
Come on. I like I like uh beat a muppet.
I like it. Beat a muppet. Yeah. I like
it. It's good. Uh, yeah. I I cannot wait
to see how this turns out. Mhm.
Um, Waldolf Waldorf versus Statatler.
Yes, exactly. Um, I don't know. I
I This is one of those games. And
there's uh What's the What's the 1930s
cartoon shooter? They had a bit of it in
one of these showcases. Cuphead. It's
not Cuphead. It's It's a first person
shooter. Oh, I know. the one that you're
talking about, I can't remember its
name, but it falls in the category with
felt felt uh felt that boxing
where I'm curious of the technical
aspect of how the game functions. It
looks so like I just I I I'm amazed that
you can make art styles do what they're
doing, and it's really cool to see the
boxes being uh stretched and broken in
in so many fun ways. Yeah. Yeah. Yes.
Chat, the Rat Rubber Hose 1930sesque uh
cartoon shooter. Mouse PI. Yeah. Yeah.
Mouse PI for hire. Yeah. The one that
came out after people uh after uh there
was definitely a legal ground for Disney
to not sue them into oblivion because
Steamboat Willie entered public domain.
Yeah. Um so yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Um
okay. Uh next up, Killer In. Killer In.
I'm not a huge fan of social deduction
games that give me anxiety because I I'm
already anxious that my friends are
lying to me. So, why would I play a game
where I know some of my friends are
lying to me? Doesn't do great things. I
don't understand how why you'd even
think that. I I I just want you to know
as I'm drinking this nice tall glass of
orange juice that uh I would never lie
to you. Yeah. Right. Um recreational
anxiety not fun for me. But I do want to
say that Killer In felt like it feels
like a huge step up in the social
deduction, murder mystery sort of um
genre that got rekicksticked by um Among
Us and then later advanced into a bunch
of the other like 3D spaces. It's
evolved quite a bit very quickly. Killer
In feels very much like the murder
mystery thriller clue version of that
with like weapons and classes and
upgrades and levels and clues and like
um you know uh more sort of who done
ites elements. I think it looks really
clean. I think it looks really good. I
think we're going to see a bunch of
streamers playing it hopefully in a fun
good way when it comes out. Um even if
it's not necessarily for me. I bet you I
feel like from what I know about your
your gaming proclivities, I feel like
this is a it's a it's a chunk of a thing
that you're interested but you're not
always comfortable with, but they've
tacked on enough things where they're
like, "Come on, Will. Yeah. Why don't
you you want to just for come on, we're
moving it a little bit more into your
ven diagram." And we'll see if it's
enough of that. Right. I mean, like,
it's going to be hard because I just
want to play Repo, right? Because Repo
is what if idiots together, but also
monsters. Great. Awesome. Amazing. No
notes. Um, so,
uh, yeah. Uh, let's keep
moving. You want to talk about mixtape,
Matt?
Mixtape.
Mixtape. It's It basically looks like a
friend road trip game between three
characters all done. I know I'm like the
art style guy at this point, but this
it's like uh it looks like the frame
skipping from uh Into the Spider-Verse
kind of style. Uh, but it's 90s and it's
it's um it's very skater and as someone
who was uh goth and definitely not a
skate kid. Uh I am not good on a
skateboard.
Uh I always am a bit like I want to live
this life. I wanted to like when I was a
kid I thought these these kids were
cool. And uh the soundtrack in this
game, I want to see if I could find
where they actually have it in. Yeah. So
it it goes, let's see. So there is in
this game they have Joy Division, DVO,
Smashing Pumpkins, Iggy Pop, Portis
Head, Roxy Music, Silver Chair, Lush,
The Cure, uh Sous Song and the Banshees,
Stan Bush, uh the Jesus and Mary's uh I
forget what that last one was. Hold on.
Jesus and Mary's what? Uh and Mary
chains. Uh it is just like immaculate
vibes of this time period through and
through. And uh I think a great thing
about video games and sometimes cinema
depending on what you're uh depending on
what is done is it lets you experience
different parts of life that you may
have looked at uh longingly in a space.
I was not. So you said see you later
boy. That's fair song. So I get it. Uh,
no. It's just nice to I just wanted to
highlight the fact that she typed that
out. What is that? I'm surprised all of
our brains are still functioning both
songs and uh Yeah. Right. Yeah. But uh
no, I just think there's something
really special because you get to
experience parts of life that you in in
a smaller way that you never got to and
uh time as we all know marches on. So,
it was just very cool to see. It
scratched an itch of something that I
wanted to try very much. Cool. Uh next
up, we have Arc Raiders. Um, so, okay,
people keep talking about Arc Raiders
like it's going to be the next big
thing, and I either forget it every time
it comes up or have never heard about
it, right? But they're like, "It's the
most anticipated game of 2020." And what
is this? So, it looks real interesting.
It looks like it might not just be a AAA
Brown shooter,
but also maybe it is. But also, maybe it
is. We don't know. It's definitely a
thing to keep an eye on. It'll probably
make a kind of a flashbang entrance when
it comes in and then probably fade out
is my guess based on the fact that
they're trying to make it a thing.
There's a lot of trying to make Milhouse
a meme, right, that's going on right
now. I think with
studios sort of having committed to a
course long enough ago that the industry
has moved off of that course and now
they're like, "No, you have to come
back. We made you a thing that would
have been hot two years ago. No, come
come back. Enjoy our
game. Right. That So, yeah, it's an
extraction shooter kind of. Um, so that
that was just my uh my interesting note.
Um, I'm going to go through some of I'm
going to I was going to say was one real
quick that I thought of. Uh, uh, uh,
Mac, our audio editor for extra history
and extra credits, uh, has been working
on a video game for a while and it was
announced at Summer Games Fest. Uh, and
that is Marvel's Deadpool VR. He was
doing audio work for that. And, uh, I'm
so happy that that got announced and now
is sort of out there in the open. Uh, I
am looking forward to, uh, hearing all
of Mac's work. Uh well actually um to be
I'll I'll have to hear it vicariously
because it is that is only I believe
being released out of meta. Uh I will
buy it instantly if it ever gets
released to something else. But I I
won't give uh Zuck any money. But I was
proud I was proud that that got
announced because it it looked very fun.
Yep.
Um Chrono Odyssey was the next one that
caught my eye. It's a ne in their own
words a next generation action MMO RPG.
Okay, great. Let's see what you got. Uh,
it looks the visuals look okay. How do I
put
this? They look really clean. They look
really good. They look reminiscent of so
many things that we've also had recently
that it feels like it's a little hard to
differentiate it from a lot of the dark
fantasy, Elden Rings, Dark Souls, Millu
that's sort of risen in the industry.
So, I don't know that it has a great
visual identity, but the concept seems
good and I'm willing to give it a shot.
I'm definitely going to pay attention to
it.
Right. Um, yeah. Yeah. Uh, next up, out
of words.
I think I missed this one. I'm going to
look it up. I I Yeah, I I have uh a lot
of these. I If you If you not Oh, yeah.
Yeah. If you notice me looking over
here, um that's cuz I have uh these like
brought up somewhere. Out of words is a
very interesting uh co-op platformer,
baby. Co-op platformer uh about two
characters who lose the ability to speak
and it's all done in stop motion.
Great. Cool. That's all I need to know.
Like a and a lot of these I think it's
very important to remember and this is
kind of where I'm coming at this from.
Right now we're being pitched a high
concept. If you dig the idea of a
oneline high concept pitch for this,
throw it on a wish list. See if it's any
good later, right? But like don't don't
think too deeply or too hard about this,
right? Because this is a lot of this is
high concept pitches. some of them like
um Outer Worlds 2 uh or Outer Wilds 2,
which whichever Outer it is. Um uh that
got pitched for the 2hour or for the
hour after the Xbox thing that is like a
deeper dive and like a more like you
should pay attention to this game
deeply. But for a lot of things like uh
Out of Words, just throw it on a wish
list, see where it ends up. Um,
out of words also I believe is uh actual
stop motion.
Yes. Which again?
Huh? Insane. I love it. Outer Worlds 2
is the anti capitalism in space game by
Obsidian that reminds you of Fallout New
Vegas. Okay, great. Awesome. Thank you.
Yes, correct. Um, all right. Uh, Lego
Voyagers. What if you played as an
singular Lego brick that was sentient
and had to go on an adventure? Yeah,
that was pretty nice. That was a nice
surprise. Great. You roll around, you
click into stuff, you have to build
things in order to go on your journey.
Sometimes you and your friend who you
are co-oping with will both be
controlling parts of a larger construct
and roll around together. It seems
really solid. It seems kind of
um it seems much more like focusing on
Lego as Lego and less focusing on Lego
as a delivery mechanism for other IP,
right? Because like we've had a lot of
like Lego Star Wars, Lego Indiana Jones,
Lego Lord of the Rings, Lego Marvel
Heroes, Lego Batman, Lego Movie, right?
Whatever. Right? This feels very much
like Lego the little bricks, not the
mini figs. Lego for its own sake, which
I think is really cool. Um,
uh, there's gonna be a new Scott Pilgrim
game. Yeah. So, I would be less excited
about this if it wasn't from, uh, I
believe it's Tribute. Yeah. Uh, who made
Shredders Revenge and the upcoming
Marvel comic or Marvel Cosmic Invasion,
which looks very cool. They seem to
understand the assignment. I when I was
watching the trailer for the Scott
Pilgrim EX, I was like, don't wait,
doesn't this already exist? I know it's
hard to get. I know that. I mean, and
maybe my time is warped enough where I'm
like, oh, it was just on the 360. It
re-released. I know. We got it on the
Switch. We played it, but the
um I was like, how is I was trying to
figure out how this was different. And I
don't know if it actually is. I mean,
I'm sure it's a new game. And uh I think
the thing that probably makes me uh want
to check this one out is the fact that
Tribute is involved. Like uh everything
else kind of looked similar to me. I'm
going to go out on a limb and I'm going
to say I don't care about the game or
its gameplay quality at
all. I care about the fact that they got
the original composers together to do
the soundtrack because that album is
going to slap incredibly hard because
the Scott Pilgrim the Game soundtrack is
phenomenal. Uh, and it's the same crew
doing the soundtrack again. So, I
actually don't care about the game. Just
give me the soundtrack.
Pick up the final. Uh, yeah. I don't
know. I It does look And you know,
seeing screenshots weirdly makes it look
more different than the other one uh
than In Motion did, but um I I will
check it out. I I'm always down for more
Scott Pilgrim. Yep. Um Yeah. The And
then finally, I think Oh, no. You had
one more Lego game, Will, right? Yeah.
So, so there's a Lego party game. It
looks like uh and I will I will engage
in a fair amount of like X but Y. Um it
looks like somebody stuck an entire
bucket of Lego in a Mario Party blender
and mashed liquefy and then poured it
out into a Fall Guys mold. Yeah. Which
that's not a bad idea actually. Right.
That the you build your own minifigure.
You get different parts to customize
your minifigure as you play. Like there
are all kinds of Lego themed mini
games. Great. Like I don't know that we
need anything else, but I do think that
we need more party games that aren't on
the Switch, right? Like like a game like
Mario Party with mini games like Mario
Party that isn't Mario Party and isn't
on the Switch. So, I think for that this
is great, right? Um, and then and then
last, and we'll see if we can get
through this just in time for our our
regular scheduled ad break,
is they did the sickest fake out for
Resident Evil. That was really good. So,
about halfway through the show, they had
a thing that was like, "Hey, this is a
message from the voice actress who plays
Lady Deatrescue.
message from the producer of the
Resident Evil series thanking everyone
for their support and to please wait
just a little longer for the
announcement of the next Resident Evil
game. They promise it'll be worth the
wait. And then the show ends or the show
gets to the end and they're like, "All
right, last
thing." And you look at it and you're
like,
"Wait, wait." I thought at first it was
Paras I thought it was Parasite Eve. I
thought I thought it was something else,
too. I thought it might might have been
a new IP and then all of a sudden they
splash Resident Evil 9 and you're like
you
also those kudos to the way to the
titling of all the latest Resident Evils
cuz uh eight was village right uh and
you could put the Roman numeral of eight
in there seven uh had something clever
with the with the numbering as well.
This one is called Resident Evil
Reququum, but RE EQ or it kept flipping
to RE9. And I was like, they're just
they're just playing with words now.
It's it's just fun. Uh what a great that
made me want to go back and finish four
in VR and replay eight again. They also
said that they're evolving it, that it
will be much
more it will be less horror focused and
more like actiony based, which I think
is is potentially good. It's more
actiony or less actiony. I thought they
had said more actiony. I thought they
said less, but maybe maybe. Listen, I'm
wrong. Side note, new guy, same more.
Ashcrooft is apparently one of the re
spin-off games. When I heard the name
Ashcroft, I did. Was that That wasn't
Code Veronica, was it?
I like Richard. Richard Resident Evil
relocated.
Relocated. Apparently,
Resident Evil Outbreak. Yeah.
Okay. So, we have successfully made it
through the I was two of them two the
two biggest. Is there any Is there any
of Summer Games Fest that we left out
that you all were excited about?
Um I like Resident Evil X. Going to give
it to you. Going to give it to you.
What?
[Music]
Um
yeah, I I I think that this these two
were sort of the biggest. I will confess
I did watch part of Summer Gamef Fested
Double Speed just
because some of the stuff like didn't
like land with me. I w the the side
effect of that was
uh when the Sonic trailer came out for
the Sonic Racing game, I was like,
"Cool, great. It's a Sonic game and it
it's a Sonic game at double speed. So,
I'm watching it very fast, right? And
it's Sonic racing hot meu." And I was
like, "Wait, what? I had to go back and
watch the whole thing again cuz my brain
just shut off when I was like, "Sonic,
okay, I know what's happening."
Miku, what? It was great. Um, okay. Uh,
now it is time for a regularly scheduled
three minutes of fake ads while you get
some real ads here on Twitch. Don't
worry, we're not going to talk about any
other uh trailers or game stuff or
whatever. We're going to do some fake
ads for everybody while Twitch gets real
ads. And then we'll come back and we'll
do the other three showcases and our
Switch 2 thoughts. It's going to be a
speedrun. Please look forward to it.
That's right. Would you start us off?
Sure. With uh with an advertisement for
something that you can't spend money on.
That's right. Hi everyone, Matt from
Extra Credits here. Say, would you like
something that you can't spend money on,
and would you like me to sell it to you?
Well, then allow me to tell you what you
can't buy, and that is all your time
back after watching all of these damn
showcases. There was a weekend. I
promise you there was. Perhaps you'd
like that time back. Not because you
didn't enjoy the shows, but because
there was just too much information. You
can even see two semi-professionals
here, your internet dads, kind of having
to go back and triple check their work
as they talk about all the things
because our brains are so loaded full of
games and hype that we can't actually
correspond and give you enough
correspondence to have it actually make
sense. I'm breaking up right now. I
haven't taken a breath in over 30
seconds. So, please just try to buy your
time back because you
can't. Did I blacked out? What happened?
Uh, you're good. Oh, sweet. You're
right. Yeah. Um, apparently ads may have
shown early for some people. Uh, if they
did, they're lying to us because the
Twitch API that controls when ads fire
says that there weren't ads firing. So,
you know, well, I think I think we
should be very careful because obviously
Twitch and its parent company,
Amazon.com,
uh, would would never lie or have or
have a faulty system that governs how
many ads fire and when. No. No, no,
definitely not. That That's definitely
not part of the thing. Can I buy someone
else's time? No, but you can rent it.
Isn't that love?
I I don't Listen, I don't know what you
do on the weekends. I got nothing. Okay.
Anyway, I was thinking about um uh Rent,
actually. Oh, nice. Well, you watch Rent
on the weekends. Yeah, obviously. And
then cry a lot. Uh yeah. Uh all right.
Are you ready, Will?
Yes. All right, here we go. 3 2 1 Let's
jam. Hi everyone. Will from Extra
Credits here. Here to sell you the
concept of turning off the screen.
That's right. After you have clockwork
or orangeed yourself into an entire uh
viewing marathon of all of these things,
remember to look away from the screen.
That's go outside, pet a cat, and do
another thing. I had to fully unplug for
like an hour after I finished
shotgunning five of these in a row. Uh,
so I just curled up with a book.
Consider like we love gaming. Just
consider less of it, right? Like you
could you could do something else after
you've ingested all of it. Like if you
know just consider
dumping. That's good. That's good
advice. I have one more piggybacking off
that real quick. Yeah. Hi everyone. Matt
Credits here again. I just heard Will's
non-advertisement for you to stop and to
get away from the screen. And it really
got me interested cuz you're absolutely
right. Like there's a screen here.
There's a screen here. I should leave
and go do something
else on another screen. I'll go
somewhere else. Wait, hold on. Why not?
Why not just take all the screens
everywhere? You You don't have to be
here. You have screens. I'm going to put
another screen in my pocket. I'll go
everywhere we have to with all these
screens and then I'll never have to I I
can stop looking at the screens I'm
looking at right now. I bet you there's
a screen in the other room. I'm gonna go
check. Give me a
[Music]
[Laughter]
second.
Uh yeah. Uh yeah, chat, there are um
five screens on my desk right now as
well. Four? No, no, more because I have
a screen on the camera and a screen on
the camera. So many screens. Yeah. So,
so many screens. Okay, cool. That is
that is the end of uh the end of ads.
I hope I hope you learned to never buy
another thing again. Yeah. Uh
okay, we're going to roll right back
into some of these. Now, two, one of
these, just one. I'm gonna take solo
because Matt didn't have time to watch
wholesome games and I'm gonna do it
pretty fast. Uh because it's less fun to
just listen to me talk when Matt doesn't
have input. Um Wholesome Games is if
you're going to watch one of these and
you want to watch one that isn't like
the others, I highly encourage you to
watch wholesome games direct. Again, the
link will be in the docu uh down in the
description if you're watching later on
YouTube. Uh Will, I have a pitch for you
about how you talk about these games
that you saw at Wholesome Games. Yes. I
want you to pitch them to me. Okay.
Great. To get excited about. All right.
Excellent. Okay. So,
uh, first up, there's a game called
Let's Build a Dungeon. Let's Build a
Dungeon is a um a game where you build a
game with your friends. So, you can
build an MMO with dungeons and towns and
an economy and set adventurers out and
sort of like it's an MMO fish tank, but
you can build it with your friends and
there can be moments where like you and
your friends decide what direction you
want to take the fake MMO that you're
running. And it looks like a lot of fun,
especially for our audience that's very
into game design. I think it would be a
really cool way to just hang out and
like sort of get that game design itch
out of your brain without needing to go
through a whole jam, right? You just sit
down with some friends and you're like,
"All right, we're going to poke this
fish tank, right?" Cuz I kind of I love
fish tank games, right? I There's a game
coming up on future game show that
sounds similar to this. Um but I that's
cool. I like it. All right. Uh next up,
let's uh not Let's Build the Dungeon.
Tales of the Shire. Matt, do you want a
cozy life sim but in Bag End? Yeah,
that's it. That's the pitch. It's a cozy
life sim where you're a hobbit. It's
probably my favorite take on like hey,
you know, Lord of the Rings is
like the most actiony part of life in
Middle Earth, right? Like this is it.
This is like the big turning point, but
like life goes on. And I like that
they're sort of embracing the sort of
shire as part of it. I think it's a
Yeah. Um Okay, cool. Uh I I feel like
just on that note, if you were if you
were going to try to get me to play a
cozy sort
of anything outside of Stardew Valley, I
feel like doing it in the Shire is
probably the way to to get me in in the
door.
Yep.
Uh linked to Battle of the Spark. So
linked is a uh co-op.
L Y N K D. Because when you say link or
linked, yeah, that brings a lot of
different um it's a co-op rogike town
management sort of solar punkish game
where like there's a lot of very clean
tech. It's very like solar punky tech
that's like helping grow better crops
and stuff like
that. And you uh it's got a lot of
rogike elements.
It it sort of has it it is it has earned
my interest and is beginning to earn my
eyeire for being the game that shows up
at the most of these without any
substantial new news. Right? Linked
showed up last year at all of this and
I'm like okay great you're on my wish
list and it didn't feel like it had
progressed a lot. It may have progressed
significantly but it didn't feel that
way delivered to me. The presentation
didn't give you the new the new new info
smell. Correct. Yeah. And so I really
just want them to come out with the game
already. Please and thank you.
Um, All Will Rise is a very interesting
game. The entire game is card-based
social interaction. You're managing a a
team to uh solve uh mysteries or to do
social interactions in a larger like
city and you've got the um Kaiser So
board, right, with the red string and
the pins and the everything.
Um, and it looks very interesting and I
am always a big sucker for different
ways to do social interactions. He has
game mechanics, right? One of my biggest
criticisms of D and D historically has
been that there aren't enough mechanics
to handle doing social interactions that
you don't come up with off the top of
your head. Your character only has so
many ways to contribute to social
interactions. And I like this. I liked
um Grift Lands for it as well that
there's a complex mechanic for
navigating social situations as a
character who is different than you. Um
and I think that it's worth looking at
for that. Nice. Uh and then the last
one. Last one. I'm so normal about this
game, Matt. I'm so normal about this
game. This game is called
Discounty.
Matt, imagine if you were playing
Stardew Valley. Okay. Except instead of
running a farm, you were a shopkeeper.
Okay. And the shop you were running was
Joja Mart.
Okay.
And then everything started going just a
little bit wrong. Right. And it turns
into a I am very much looking forward to
it because it looks like it has a
complete shopkeeper game experience,
which is a thing that I've been looking
for, right? I've never had that itch
scratched. Like it's been a interest of
mine for a long time. Um, and also it's
got a lot of subversion in it, right?
Like it it starts out with all of the
advertisements do a really great job of
telling you that there's going to be a
turn, right? They're like, "Hey, here's
the thing. You got to do this." Why is
that thing not the way it should be?
Don't worry. Okay.
It does look like I'm just looking at
right now. That looks very cool. I think
it might be a PlayStation exclusive for
now. It should be August 21st on Steam.
Is it? It says PS5, PS4 in the trailer.
Maybe there's a different trailer.
Yeah, this feels like a game that
wouldn't just be correct. Yeah,
Discounty has a page on Steam demo
available now. Okay, great, great,
great, great, great. Yeah. Uh, there it
is. Okay, different one. For whatever
reason, the trailer I saw just had
PlayStation. I was like, this does not
feel like an exclusive. So, if you're
looking forward to that based on my
pitch for uh Capitalism but Gone Wrong,
uh August 21st it releases. It's going
to be on stream. I will play it on
stream. I'm super looking forward to it.
I think it's going to be great. Uh I'm
I'm so hyped. Uh for like this weird
little fun shopkeeper game that also is
a biting critique of capitalism. Imagine
Imagine that when they make my blurbos
kiss, I get excited. Like Yeah. No, I
think uh I think it looks very cool.
Very up your alley. Yeah. Uh, okay.
Cool. So, uh, I'm sorry I didn't get to
see Wholesome Games. Uh, yeah. The other
Did anyone Brad or or Janet anything in
Wholesome Games that uh that that really
got you excited? The other thing I
really love about Wholesome Games is
that it's not hosted by one person. It's
hosted by Wholesome Cozy Streamers,
which I think is a really great way to
to uplift them. And they've also got um
fundraising for different um charitable
causes every year. I again if you're
gonna watch one and you don't want to
watch a big stage production direct,
watch wholesome games direct. I really
think that it is it is the one of these
that stands out to me as significantly
different than the industry norm in a
good way. Yeah. Uh then we become I
guess unless is there anything uh more
Little Kitty in the City? Uh Richard
says, "Did that happen in Cozy Will?" Uh
yes, you can design your cat now. Oh,
hell yeah. Is that just an update? I
believe so. Also, I think your Discord
bings are coming through. Are they?
That's probably correct. I'll just mute
everything over here. Uh yeah, Kitty in
the City, but now it can be New York
City. Yeah. Oh, yeah. That's right. I
knew we'd forgotten one. Ly, I will tell
you, um I didn't have time for LAM and
uh Sea showcases. Uh those existed and
those are other things you should check
out and I we I ran out of time on this
um and Brain Space unfortunately. So,
uh, yeah, you should, everyone should
also check those out, and I probably
will after this. Um, all
right, Future Game Show. So, real quick
about Future Game Show.
Um, I love that they had Matt and Laura
host it. I think that's
great. I
wish it
was like I don't know. I would have
rather they shot that at like the
Critical Role studios on a silly
backdrop than the big green screen thing
the whatever the I can't remember. It
felt like the kind of tech they use for
Mandalorian to like make it but only
this time it's like a a stage space like
when it pulled to the wide of it you saw
like silhouettes of audience and I don't
like that. It's not Matt and Laura's
fault of course. I just I would rather
if you're going to get some of the two
most charismatic people in gaming on
your show, don't don't limit them to the
format that you have to lean on for when
your hosts aren't as charismatic as
them. Correct. Does that make sense?
Yeah. Don't make it the PC gamer show.
Let them let them borrow the weird kids
set from Talison and Ashley and let them
just sit there and talk to you about
these video games. Like it I would have
been so much more engrossed.
Um I I don't know. I I really like I
really wish that that that happened.
Matt Mercer known for that one role in
Final Fantasy and nothing else. Nothing
else. Just as Vincent and Final
Fantasies have re let's talk let's talk
about this for a second. So perhaps
the they wanted to talk specifically
about like their largest video game like
because if you don't know if you don't
watch Critical Role, maybe you don't
know who these people are. Um, and
they're maybe trying to get outside of
the critter community for that. Um,
anyway, I just I I was like, I wish that
this was produced differently. But with
all that said, lots of really really
cool games uh announced here. My first
one is Whispers in the Fog. Uh, solo
gamedev. Uh, it's basically a mystery
horror game. Uh, first person. Uh, and
it's just like the most immaculate
spooky woods vibes. It felt like roaming
uh you know the New England woods at
night, which I used to do. Uh and you
find uh sometimes scarier things than uh
you should talk about on morning
breakfast shows about video games. Uh
and it it just gave me a lot of that
feeling. I'm also so I'm impressed with
any video game, but when something I I
know you guys have talked about this in
design club, Will, but like
the game dev right now is in such a
different spot than even when we started
here. Like it is possible.
Say words. Check. Check. Check. Okay.
What? What happened? Clean feed changed
my audio output for you for no reason.
Fun. So, could no one hear me? Uh, yeah,
correct. just just for like a hot
second. No one could I could hear you,
but they couldn't. So, back up back up
to the start of that thought. Try again.
Where uh Whisper in the Fog. Did you
hear me mention the name of the game
that I was excited about? Whispers in
the Fog. Yes. And spooky New England
vibes and wandering around and finding
darker things than you think you is
possible. Yeah, because I used to roam
around the New England uh woods. Uh and
I won't talk about the things that I
found while I was there. Anyway, I'm
just very impressed. I know that in um
uh you've talked about this on design
club, but the the ability for a solo dev
to make something that looks and feels
like uh Whispers in the Fog today is
phenomenal. Like the fact that that can
be done is is fascinating to me. And I
know like there's different asset things
you can buy and why why buy a save
system or something when you could just
if you want to not build your own why
why build your own you could buy it,
etc. So, uh I don't know. I was very
very excited for this. If you haven't
checked out the the trailer yet, I urge
you to. I'm sorry that my audio went
away. I'm sorry the woods tried to
silence me. That's fine. Uh my big uh
one was The Expanse Osiris Reborn. I'm
not a big expanse person. I don't I feel
like I'm I'm good on cyberpunk um
colonialist politics uh for reasons
which escape me entirely. Uh, just as a
reminder, if you watch this later, this
this is being shot the 9th of June,
2025, just for no particular reason. Um,
so it's never really grabbed me, but
God, if that trailer didn't sell me on
the whole concept of The Expanse and the
game in moments, that trailer was
immaculate for The Expanse Osiris
Reborn. I think it does a phenomenal job
of selling it as different than other
sci-fi. Like expanse is a very specific
and unique sci-fi aesthetic and genre
and it sells it all the way through to
the hilt immediately.
Yeah. In the trailer and I loved it. I
thought that was one of the better
trailers I saw all weekend and Yeah. No,
agreed. Yeah. Uh one that we both had on
our list uh coming up after this was
Sleep Awake. Yeah. I'm not gonna play it
because I like sleeping, but Oh, I'll
play this I'll play this on stream in a
heartbeat. Sure. Right. Uh psychological
horror game from Bloomhouse, uh the
produ the film production company
traditionally. Uh and it's craft it's
created by uh Corey Davis from Spec Ops
the Line and 9in Nails Robin uh Finnick.
So, it has all of the right people
working on it, right? It looks like
fire. Uh it looks like what if
What if uh the Stanley Parable
uh grabbed the hand from talk to me?
Mhm. That seems right. And I am here for
there's a sonic institute. There's it's
basically about the point between sleep
and death.
Yep. I'll take it. Yeah. It's uh it
looks phenomenally like if you would
like to experience surreality whether or
not you want
to. It looks like the right game. And
again, it looks like it's got the right
people on it, right? Anyone who was a
major force in Spec Ops: The Line. Yeah,
cool. You're allowed to mess with my
brain. Just go for it. Just rubbage
around. My only complaint, and this is
not a real one, is that it will be
coming in 2026. I was really hoping this
would be out in time for Halloween. I
don't want them to rush. I want them to
have it be done when it is done. I was
just like, "Ooh, Halloween." I was like,
"Loom house is pretty good about that,
too." Yeah. Um, all right. Uh, next up,
uh, sleep, uh, not sleep awake.
Constants. Um, okay. The pitch for
Constants is very simple. What if Hollow
Night and Celeste had a baby? Yeah,
that's the pitch. Like, I know it
doesn't look like it, but I promise you
that's the pitch for for Constants. It's
a uh inner it's a Metroid vania that
takes place in your inner world. Use a
paintbrush and art to like process your
feelings, but it has very Hollow Knight
style combat. Like they show the main
character doing the Hollow Knight Pogo
thing to solve puzzles. Very Hollow
Knight combat. Also has very big Celeste
vibes. I desire to know no more. Shut
up. Take my money. Yeah. Uh-huh. Uh,
next up for me was uh the one that
sounded a lot like your game from Let's
Build the Dungeon, but from the opposite
angle. Yeah. Uh, and that is the Bureau
of Fantastical and Arcane Affairs. Where
where you play essentially someone who's
going to inspect Yes. the evil doers
dungeons to make sure it's up to code
for adventurers to come to. Uh-huh.
That's correct. It's not to make sure
it's safe or deadly. It's to make sure
that the story is good. Yes.
What a
cool sideways vibe for a video game.
Like what? Take bureaucracy and make it
fun and silly. Yeah. Um I I cannot wait
to play that game. It sounds again it
sounds like like a dungeon master's kind
of dream. Like it just feels joyful to
be able to to to do something like that.
Yeah. Hi Jamie. Hey. What's up? Nothing.
Oh, you coming to Oh, wait. Do you want
this? Is that what you got to reach into
the screen to get it though?
I'm No, you can have the rest actually
if you want. Yeah. Yeah. I'm done. Take
the rest. It will.
All right. Uh, and last up, but by no
means least, a very uh special shout out
uh to uh to to a game that got its uh it
that got its its big announcement here
on on Future Game Show. I knew this was
coming for a little bit uh just because
I was talking with this person at PAX.
Um, I didn't know any real details, just
that uh they had they had dove from
their tabletop origins into into video
game design and writing. Uh, and our our
friend uh Jasmine Bular aka that bronze
girl uh is releasing a game uh who she
is working on called Fading Echo. And if
you have not looked at Fading Echo, I
believe as far as voice talent, I think
she might be in it too. Also, the
actress for Carlac and uh Matt and Laura
are also in it. I I believe if if the
trailer is to be believed, um it looks I
wrote down what if Prince of
Persia/Splatoon and Hades had a baby.
Yeah, it looks so cool. Uh I I love the
look of this. I love the like the
serious tone mixed into you're basically
play this like badass woman in like uh I
she has a sort of like staff or glaive
but like she can also turn into a little
blurb of liquid and like you can do
things with that liquid as you move
around. Uh it just it looks there's also
like I think like a negative worlder
zone sort of in it because it glitches
at sometimes and it becomes a negative
representation of what I don't know. I
cannot wait to uh uh to play this to
pick Jasmine's brain about it more. I
think we should have her on breakfast at
some point to talk about it when it's
coming out when it's uh when it's
hitting in the near future because you
know what, Ian, you know, maybe Alex
Mack there. Maybe there's a little Alex
Mack in there. Um it it looked so
flipping fun. Uh so so happy that this
got announced this weekend and uh
congratulations Jasmine. That's awesome.
Um yeah, excellent. Uh, I think that's
everything on future game show.
Excellent. Which means that we are on to
the last showcase, the Xbox game
showcase. Uh, first up and most
importantly,
um, Matt was correct. Uh, Matt was
correct. They debuted uh, the ROG Xbox
ally.
Great name, by the way. Like like it you
get you understand exactly what it is.
This is not a produced by Xbox piece of
hardware. However, it works seamlessly
with Xbox and has an Xbox button. Yeah,
it has an Xbox button. So, um, that's
really cool. Uh, it looks like it's a
really solid piece of hardware. It looks
like in the same category as the Steam
Deck. No comments on the hardware. I
would now like a soapbox to air a
grievance. I would like to air a griev
Matt. Matt, Matt, they used like 2
minutes of new Silkong footage to show
off games on the Ally, which by the way
is a terrible choice cuz you don't need
to. Silkong will run on like a a coffee
maker by the time it's out, right? Okay.
So, they use like 2 minutes of brand new
Silkong footage and they had pictures of
Silkong in the background. They didn't
give us a release date, man. They told
us it'd be out when the ally was out,
but they didn't give us a release date.
There's there's a there's a shot that I
knew Will would be losing his goddamn
mind about where cuz like the the the
trailer for the Ally looks cool, right?
Like it's someone holding a clear piece
of plastic and then they like mold it
into the shape of the thing and the
buttons come out and you know you can
only show off 3D renderings of a piece
of plastic in so many different ways and
I thought this was a creative way to go
about doing it again. Um, but there's a
spot where they're like, we've seen Silk
Sonic a couple times on it already, but
there's a shot where basically if this
is the the thing where the camera like
zooms across it like and so there's a
long shot of Silk Song, but it's it's
like on the plane of your eye and I was
like, Will hates this. I do. I hate it.
No. And and um and and yes, Chad's
correct. They did further confirm that
uh Silkong will be out this year, but
that's the only info we got on Silkong
despite the amount of um and the only
reason Silkong is coming up is because
they put it there, right?
Um it is confirmed that it will be out
this year and it will be out when the
ROG Ally releases. It will be a launch
title available when the Ally releases.
It's not launching with it, but it will
be available by the time that comes out.
So when we get a release date for that,
we'll know before when
is out of the box, this can do both Game
Pass, Xboxy stuff, and Steam is
basically what it's what it's pitching.
Mhm.
I mean,
hardware notwithstanding, this seems
like the the direction that Xbox was
headed. I mean, again, I I've we've been
kind of calling this for a bit. Um I
don't know, everyone. Brad, Janet,
Rocky, are you
particularly excited for this for for
the direction that Xbox goes? Are there
dedicated Xbox players actually here
either through Game Pass on your PC or
that own the actual hardware? Like, is
there a world where you'd get something
like this? Again, assuming that the
hardware is on par with the Steam Deck,
right?
like Yazeriah. Apparently it does steam.
Uh, okay. Zip says the Alli S, the Steam
version is more exciting. Coffee has a
Series
X. It is an Xbox flavored ally with it
built in, right? like it it it you can
either stream your games via the cloud
or download them and play them natively.
Yep.
Uh Braen, uh Windows game mode. We'll
see how much Windows cruffed over
overhead. It shuts down.
Yeah. Wow.
Ja, come on. People like it. There are
Xbox fans. Yeah. I don't know any. Yep.
Uh uh soong is before Christmas.
Oh, interesting. Joseph, it gives me a
reason to sell my PS5. So, like
is what I I would like what about it?
Like I'm curious. Yeah, because a PS5
for me outside of the Portal, which I I
can't believe I still really like.
Um like I do you just do you feel like
this could be your like one-stop gaming
shop basically? Like is that
the Yeah. Yeah. Um, while chat's chiming
in, uh, Matt, that was as much of the
Xbox showcase as you got to
essentially not. I watched I didn't get
to see Outer Wilds 2. I ran out of time.
Yeah. Um, I know that there was a Call
of Duty thing, but like there's one
every year, so I didn't care. It was the
last trailer and it stunk. It was the
last trailer. Was not clear. Was a Call
of Duty trailer. Was something
completely different, and they were
like, "And it's blop 7." And then we
were like, "Uh, okay. I hate you." Um,
cuz they had teased Fable and they led
with a
butterfly. They had a red butterfly fly
in and we were like, "Is this Fable?
What is this?" And then they were like,
"Ah, it's blops." And we were like, "I
hate you." Yeah. The internet was not
happy about that one. Okay. All right,
Joseph, that makes sense. It's It's all
user case. I was just curious. That does
clarify a little bit. Yeah. Um, so, uh,
I I'll go through a couple of ones that
I thought were good, then we'll get to
our switch to thoughts. Um, Clockwork
Revolution is what if time what if
Bioshock Infinite had a sequel kind of.
It's got a lot of that um very Clockwork
Punk sort of um not quite steampunk but
like clockwork punk aesthetic. It's also
got time travel in it. It's got a lot of
It's It's one of those but there are no
politics in my video games games in that
like it's about changing time to change
people's minds about like kings and
empires and it looks really good and I'm
really excited for it. Uh there are no
ghosts at the Grand. If you have ever
played Powerwash Simulator ah but wish
it was also a mystery. There are no
ghosts at the Grand seems like the right
thing. You you are in charge of
revitalizing a hotel in a small British
village it looks like and the uh you
have a variety of very powerful tools to
do so quasi magically and there is also
a mystery and so it
looks really good. Nice. It looks really
good. Hell yeah. Uh Yuri just said
something. Uh I I want to jump in.
Unless this was one of yours, Will, I
don't see it on here. I did not have at
fates. I just watched it in the
background at Fates End does look dope.
It's from the people who made Spirit
Farer, but it's a more like sort of
[ __ ] thing. Yes. Yeah, it did look
dope. I have no idea why it didn't make
the list. Probably because my brain shut
off at some point and I stopped typing.
Thank you, Yuri. Yeah, I'm like I was
like, "Okay."
Yeah, that looks awesome. Yep.
Um, Beast of Reincarnation. Uh, looks
like I I and and I mean this in the best
way possible. Someone slapped Princess
Monoke and the themes of Princess Monoke
into Unreal Engine and said go. And I
mean that in the best possible way,
right? I think a lot of people forget
that Gibli is like has a deep abiding
stance on like the relationship between
humans and nature and technological
overreach and overindustrialization and
war and like they have a deep stance on
that and I think a lot of people forget
it because they're like ah it's cute.
No, no, it's really it's so I think it's
going to be really good. I it's it gives
me those vibes in a very positive way.
Um nice. Yeah. Uh, and then last but
certainly not least is uh Outer Wilds 2,
which I will watch the full thing on
because I am excited for it. It it it
it's the same, hey, do you hate
capitalism and love space? Play Outer
Wilds. Like, that's the pitch. If you
hate capitalism and love space, play
Outer Wilds. It looks like they've done
a really good job. They also the the
direct had the best we know this is a
sequel. We're going to make fun of
people overhyping sequels while we
overhype our sequel bit in
it. It like they're very self-aware.
It's very good. It was very well done.
It was the only I said Outer Wilds, not
Outer Worlds as people are correcting
me. It's been a long list. Yeah. Listen,
also that they they totally have the
illusionist prestige thing going on
where like they're two games with
similar themes with very similar
names. All right. Anyway, uh, okay,
cool. That's it for showcases, and we
did it all in only 90 minutes. Oh my
god. Yay.
Matt, we got switch twos.
Dab. We got switch
twos. Dab. Yeah. Uh, we worked Will and
I worked really hard uh to
to nail ours down. Uh, and by that I
mean on the day of launch, which I tried
getting
pre-orders for far too long from too
many places. And then I woke up and I
was like, you know what? I have a Costco
membership. I'll just see if they have
them on sale on the website. And they
did. And then I called up my parents and
I was like, "Hey, you you guys have a
Costco membership. Can you order me this
thing?" And then they just delivered. I
was I was shocked especially with I mean
there's tons of scalper stuff going on
right now and I hope that that I hope
that the fact that it seems as though in
in like side places where you don't
expect to buy video game consoles there
seems to be an okay supply. Yep. Uh and
I'm hoping that scalpers uh get their
lunch eaten out from under them because
f them. Um I hope they have to sell them
under street price to actually make
their money back. I don't know. Yeah. Uh
yeah, I did. Yeah, exactly. I got the
Kirkland. Both Will and I did get the
Kirkland switch twos. That's right. Um
yeah. So, so uh Thunder asking the real
questions. There were two big piece uh
two big uh pieces of um news in in the
the Switch to launch day news. Number
one, I'm sorry to anyone who got a
Switch from GameStop, at least the one
in Staten Island. So, the Switch box is
not very robust. It's brutal. I I and
and and and in order to I don't really
fully agree with the rationale here, but
I guess I can kind of understand. In
order to make sure that every Switch 2
that made it out the door of a GameStop
had been purchased, they stapled the
receipts to the box. But the problem is
that the box is very thin and the the
topmost item under the like the lid of
the box is the unprotected main body of
the Switch 2, which means that everyone
who got their receipt stapled to their
box had a staple in their screen which
dinged up their screen. They still
worked. I didn't see any spider webbing,
but like there were you have holes in
your screen, definite obvious holes in
the screen of your brand new Switch 2
because a GameStop employee is stable to
receipt to it. That
was not great. No, that was it was not
It was not great. Look,
I Okay, to be fair, because so many
people, you shouldn't staple anything to
a box like of an electronic that just
seems insane. You don't know how it's
packaged. Um, every piece of major tech
right now, an iPhone, there's a couple
other stuff. Granted, I think there's a
little more space, but the screen is
always up. Companies are looking for
that like you see the thing when you
open the box. The problem is for the in
the Switch's case, the cardboard is just
one thin layer of cardboard. There's not
like a plastic thing where it's lower.
There's not like there's no it's just
flat against that one piece of
cardboard. You have your plastic bag
that switches in. Do you have it? Keep
talking. Yeah. Like it's it's a little
bit crazy. Like you could easily lower
it. Yeah, I have my box. Hold on.
Yeah, because I I couldn't believe like
I I get what you're going for. Uh, and
also Crown they are giving I believe
they're giving replacements. Hopefully
there's enough to do that because that's
insane. So So like Yeah. So you open it
and then it's right there. Obviously it
wouldn't be on, but like it's right
there. Look how it's right to the top.
It's right and like it's just in a
plastic bag. It's not in anything else.
Yeah. Uh insane. Uh I I feel so bad for
those people, but I know that it's
getting taken care of, but still that's
a real that's a real bummer move. On the
other
hand. Walmart of all places did
something kind of classy. And again, I
know there's probably a deep-seated
corporate reasoning why it happened, but
I like it. Yeah, they did. And that is
with every Switch pre-order that they
got sent, they also sent out a uh can of
Pringles and a Coca-Cola of various
varieties
just for funsies. Yeah. And it it it
turns out the price of the Coke and the
Pringles wholesale is way cheaper than
the good marketing they received. Like
other companies should take notes on
this. The amount like Walmart is not a
good company. Walmart is owned by a very
wealthy family and does a lot of really
scummy things to hurt the economies of
small towns throughout the United
States, particularly in very poor
communities in the Midwest and the West.
Right? Let me be very clear. Walmart is
a terrible
company and the amount of free positive
publicity they got out of well free the
amount of positive free to their bottom
line truly that they got out of
including two items with every uh thing
that grand total cost like under
$2 is incredible. Right. Other companies
should take notes from this. Captain
Captain got a sprite. Yeah, that's
great. Yeah. Right. Like it is right.
So, it is uh you know, fascinating uh
that th those two stories have been like
the major dominating thing. Um Okay,
cool. I hate praising Walmart and it's
funny because because it's not in a way,
let's get mad about the good thing. Um
they could learn the lesson here and
obuscate more of their BS with more
small acts of good good marketing,
right? I kind of hope they don't realize
it. I love that it happened.
Yeah. Or
or there's a miscalculation and and due
to tariffs, Pringles are now 200 things
of Canada that bankrupts Walmart. Either
way, I'll take either one. Yeah. E
either one of those would be fine with
me. Uh it would take a lot more than a
$200 can of Pringles on every Switch
thing to bankrupt Walmart. But you get
my drift. Yeah. I'm so Okay. So, uh we
both got our switches. I got mine
Friday. Mac, you got yours yesterday?
Yesterday. Uh it sucked. I was out of
town and then uh basically
I I it my my buzzer to my apartment
doesn't always
work
and they rang and then they went away
even though Jamie was home and then it
got locked up. Basically there's a drop
off point at like a bodega nearby. And
so I got home on Saturday night and I
was like, "Oh, they're open till 8.
Great." And I went, it was 6:00 and the
shutters are down and I was like, "No."
So, I went in the morning. It was fine.
But yeah, um we both had pretty similar
setup experiences. You do have to
connect it to Wi-Fi and let it patch
before you do anything else. Yeah. Don't
know what that is. Have that Has that
been confirmed what that actually does?
That is the day one software update
which lets it function.
So, you have to do that before the
switch is really functional,
which isn't great. It's not great. It's
not great. Um, let's do let's do
we can also stipulate that that's not
great and we have deeper thoughts on it
and I'm going to talk about it with Jeff
on Thursday in design club because like
I have complicated feelings about that
and I don't want to spend the rest of
our time like going through the way I
feel about that maybe. Yeah, it's it's I
I mean I want to talk about for a
second. I
don't I do not like the functionality as
it exists to be able to tell a piece of
hardware that you are buying that it
should work or not
work. This is not new to technology.
This is new to consoles. I think
particularly though the ability to do
so probably isn't either. Like as soon
as you were able to patch a systems
firmware, a company could choose to
brick whatever they want to brick. Yes.
Um I
understand the drive to not have people
run their switches if it breaks street
date. At the same
time, that feels like a move of someone
who is unsure of their product.
Especially because they didn't release
review copies. Yeah, there were no there
were no reviews before people began
getting the switches they'd ordered.
Nintendo sent out zero, to the best of
my knowledge, pre-order uh uh
pre-release copies to review outlets.
So, like I
don't I understand you want to have a
tight-knit media package and like and
you want the dates to be the dates and
all that stuff,
but if press is if if you're confident
in your product and it's the difference
of like the delivery between a store
selling it or not, like someone could
get a scoop, sure, but all that scoop
would do is generate more hype and buzz
for your product that you believe in.
And again, we're going to get into it.
I'm fairly happy. Spoiler alert. I'll go
into the pros and cons of it so far. Um,
but I don't know. It felt like
a an unnecessary move. Yeah. Even if it
had the ability to do it, like because
it had been rumors that they needed to
do it or they could break it whenever
they want or blah blah blah blah. That's
not new. Yeah.
Um, it just feels like you're kind of
drawing attention to the part that
doesn't need attention drawn to it for
any reason. Yeah. Again, we are assuming
that the we assuming that the day one
patch is what this did. I I it feels
like it would be. It could also have
stability adjustments and things that
they wanted to get in before they
shipped the cuz cuz you think about it.
These machines were
packaged months
ago, right, before they get to us and
they might have noticed something in
their internal testing, right? And and
people are suggesting correctly that
later versions of this will potentially
ship with a different built-in version
of the OS to pro to so that they don't
need this. And that's true, but now
you're going to have to check the box
and see which batch it's from and blah.
It's unnecessary, right? So like that is
if if inability to connect to Wi-Fi is a
deal breakaker for you then the Switch 2
is not a product which is currently
viable for your purchase. Right? That
that is a true thing.
Um also uh and and and so so open it
update it system transfer. I ran into a
weird thing. This is really weird. Both
consoles, both the Switch and the Switch
2, are incredibly picky about what
charger you use. Yeah. while you're
doing system transfer. If you're not
using the charger that came in the box,
there is a decent chance that it just
won't call it a charger and won't
recognize it, which is really weird and
kind of frustrating because I have USBC
chargers that charge that charge the
Switch plenty well, but it wouldn't
recognize that it was a charger until I
plugged in the one that came in the box.
Even though the voltage was fine, right?
Even though the specs on the actual plug
were fine, it wouldn't recognize it was
really it until I plugged in the
included charger. So, that's weird.
Um, I think that's just a safety
precaution to make sure that you don't
run out of juice and eventually
partially brick your system. Yeah. Like
during an update or something like that,
especially because you only get one
chance to system transfer. There is no
way to go back to system transfer after
you have declined it or done a partial
one. You if you were doing a system
transfer from one, you only get one
shot.
Yeah. One. And then after that, you can
transfer individual things, but you
don't get to do the full system transfer
wizard like you got like you did at the
beginning without factory resetting your
switch too, which is bad. That's another
not great thing.
Um, so,
uh, that took about 30 minutesish for
me. Little little more, a little less,
somewhere in there.
Um, and then,
uh, all of your old Switch accessories
work. I paired my Switch Pro uh, my
Switch One Pro controller pretty easily,
but you do plug it in. You plug it Yeah.
You can't you can't wirelessly pair it,
which is weird, right? You have to plug
it in mercifully. At that point, you're
done with the charger, so you just plug
it into the same port that you charged
out of and it works. But that was weird.
Um, but, uh, pairing my old JoyCons
worked fine. Um, and I paired up, uh, my
old Pro and my old JoyCons and I used
the new JoyCons and my roommates and I
sat down and played some couch um, Mario
Kart World. Uh, and that was about 30 45
minutes of setup modes and stuff. Yeah.
like uh you know with the with the with
going back to the AC adapter thing. It's
just specifically for the transfers.
Correct. Like
uh I um I have yet to try it, but the
reports are you can use any camera
peripheral you want. I believe you can
use any mouse you want uh with the
Switch with the Switch 2. Yes. Um
yeah, going back a little bit
to the I someone said something I was I
was a little bit distracted. Who said
it? Was it Zariah?
Where did it go? Where did it go? Oh,
here we go. I feel like we bullied
Microsoft for less when they announced
awful features for the Xbox One and they
removed the terrible ideas.
Um,
the It's funny. I think I'm trying to
remember, Zariah, say more about that
because like
the the that was like the not game
sharing stuff, I believe, right? Like
everything was locked. Yeah. And the the
the thing about Nintendo that's so crazy
is they it seems like they either make
something front and center that other
companies obuscate or they try to make
whatever the bad thing seem like a
feature publicly that other companies
try to obuscate. Yep.
Um and I don't
understand either methodology there. It
seems very silly. Uh, the majority I
mean, this is what sucks because there's
a lot of anti-consumer stuff going on in
that department. The majority of people
who get this thing won't care. Yep. It's
it's kind of a a backwards slide into
like knowing what you're paying for,
knowing your rights, knowing what you
can and can't do, etc. Um, but
companies, you know, Yeah. I just I
never understand Nintendo's publicity
and methodology behind it. Yeah. You
know, and I want to be clear. I'm not
giving Nintendo a pass for this, right?
Like part of part of our job, right, and
part of my thinking in getting this was
people had questions. I am a person who
understands how to get answers to those
questions and I'm in a position to
acquire Switch 2 and answer your
questions about it. We're going to do a
Mario Kart stream later that's going to
be 50% Mario Kart and 50% me answering
your questions about the Switch 2,
right? So, like, do keep that in mind.
I'm not giving Nintendo like a free pass
on some really terrible things like it
not functioning out of the box. That's a
problem. It should function out of the
box, right? I want to be very clear
about that. Yes, today. Today after this
um because we're already running along
in this. Uh but that's I got an
extension. I I slipped I slipped some
meetings so we can keep chatting for a
little bit. Yeah. Uh, oh, one thing that
they are doing that they did on the
Switch 2 or on the Switch one for a
while, but I noticed on the Switch 2
because it helped the setup experience
was there is a QR code setup method
where you can um scan a QR code that it
displays on the screen to do all of your
uh input of username, password stuff
from your phone and then do a
confirmation code back to the Switch um
to make sure that you're all on the up
and up And I thought that that was a
pretty slick way to do it um for for
setup and things like that. I thought
that was good. Um um from a from a
hardware
perspective after holding it and knowing
sort of how it functions. Yeah, the
JoyCons on
this are infinitely better and feel more
connected to the actual device. There's
a button. I I'm sure you might have seen
it in the promo stuff, but there's a
button like right here and you push that
in and a little pin. I don't know if you
can kind of see it pop in and out. The
blue is hard. Yeah. And that pushes the
magnet off, but the second that Yeah.
the second that uh it actually has like
weight to it and it feels like it I
don't know if you like on the original
Switch, which my other one's in the
other room, it always felt like the the
slide rail kind of like hiccuped up like
a 16th of an inch and there's absolutely
none of that here. I also thought that
the kickstand looked flimsy as hell. It
doesn't seem to be. It has good
resistance. I can pull from the middle
and it doesn't actually it's it is a
piece of it feels like a piece of
metal and it actually can sit about that
big if you want to have it down like
that. Yep. Um it also covers where your
um what's it called?
Your memory card if you want. That's not
new. They they've used that uh they used
that trick last time as well. Also,
someone mentioned that micro SDs don't
work. Correct. Micro SD Express or
nothing. Mine is coming in the mail in a
bit. Um uh I want to talk a little bit
real quick about this stupid thing.
Why does that thing exist? Oh, to
prevent them from getting sued for
people winging their wees at tele. Well,
okay, there's two reasons. It's two
reasons. One for the mouse. And you do
actually put it uh you know the right
direction. Either one works. You snap it
in sort of a similar way, right? And
that way you have a thing to to scroll
with a like to be on a mouse.
Um, this feels too long.
I mean, not getting my screen, but it's
coming close. Um, like every other
attachment for a VR thing or something
like that, it does keep the controller
like I think a little bit closer to
here.
Uh when I saw the length of the cord, I
was like, I guess
I don't know.
Yep.
Uh oh, the dock. Dock also needs more
power than usual. So again, you need to
use the included USB charger, but you
can swap out the cable in a lot of
cases. I have mine swapped out for a
much longer one so I can stay on my
desk. Bad thing about the dock. Um the
well it's not a I'm talking about cables
and using specific cables that the the
flap on the back. Well kind of so the ca
I don't have my dock in here but the
case of the it pops off kind of like the
switch OLED did and actually I think the
original Switch does too but the each
one felt a little different where the
plugs are on the back. The HDMI I
believe is above the power so it's in
the middle but the hole out where the
cables run is lower. Yeah. So, your HDMI
cable kind of does
that. Now, I had another cable with a
stronger neck between the the actual
connector of the cable and the cable
that ran to my receiver. When I plugged
it in, I could already feel it putting
like too much pressure on the on the
actual connector cuz the cable wouldn't
bend. So, I took that off my receiver
and I used the one that came with the
switch, which does have more of a
wiggle. like they planned for it, but if
you're going to be using a specific kind
of higherend HDMI cable, I could see
that being a bit of a problem if you're
going to have the plate of the Switch 2
on the back of it. That was just like a
small I was like, why didn't they just
put that thing in the middle? Yeah. It
also doesn't stay on terribly well,
right? It's It's like Oh, you have it.
Yeah. Raise it up a little bit cuz it's
blocked. If you're Yeah. So, it doesn't
It doesn't stay on terrible. One more
high. Sorry. I'm working. It's tight.
Yeah. I wanted to show where the actual
export for the cables was. Yeah. So, so
this it it it's pretty flimsy. Like it
doesn't it doesn't really stay on all of
that. Well, right. Yeah. Um so I I I I'm
kind of ambivalent on whether or not I
care about having the the back plate on,
but it is kind of weird that that bit in
particular feels crap. Also, um you kind
of it takes a bit of work to get it back
in because you have to route the cables
first and then put the plate in above
them and that's annoying. No, the dock.
Not impressed. Um, so far not impressed.
I don't know. Uh, apparently there's a
fan in it. There is It's very quiet.
Okay, that's good because I I never
heard it go on. Um, cuz it does get
warm. Like it does get warm whether
you're using it uh in handheld or um
when I was reddownloading all of the
games. Uh, oh boy did that thing cook.
Yeah. So, the fan was I think
appreciated in there. Yep. Anything else
hardware side? Uh, no. I think that's
that's most of it. Yeah. And and I know
that you're going to play Mario Kart uh
this this right after the show. I will
say from my first impressions of it, I
thought it was super fun. I am You know
what I'm really liking about it is it
feels just similar enough to Mario Kart
where I'm good at it, but now there's
new ways to get better at it. I think
the rail grinding and the wall riding
are two ways of boosting that
uh really do elevate what you can do in
the system. And all of the courses seem
like there's so many different ways you
can kind of go about using those
elements far more than Mario Kart 8. It
feels like exploration is a is a larger
design component. And it feels like the
weight of items is the penalty for
getting hit seems like it is less and
boosting items seem more
prevalent. So like it's almost like more
speed and winning. It it or getting you
back in the game faster I think is kind
of the name of the game. The pack is
also much tighter. The what is the pack
behind the lead is much tighter for the
AI this time. At least it was. I I've
been tooling around on 50 cc because I
don't feel like actually thinking about
the game right now. Yeah, I I've only
been doing 50 ccc outside of the um the
the knockout uh online stuff, which
we'll get to to a second, but like cuz I
want to learn the courses. Yep. Um
something I'm disappointed uh in
uh is the open world itself. I don't
know. I haven't spent a ton of time in
it, but it's it's almost like they knew
it wasn't terribly interesting and they
kind of hide it. Like there's one small
button on the It's not like in the main
like Grand Prix, multiplayer, whatever.
Like there's no open world, there's like
a small thing that you can either look
at the map or hit the plus button to go
into the open world. I haven't explored
it enough to really give it a a solid
um thing. There's like little challenges
you can do, little secret uh coin boxes
and a bunch of other stuff, but
like
it it seemed odd that the presentation
of it was not like front and center. I
Yeah, I like cuz it feels different. If
you do a Grand Prix, the Grand Prix work
differently now where you do three laps
or however many laps on the first track
of the Grand Prix and then you drive to
the next track as part of the race two
and you do one lap around that track
when you get
there. And I actually really like it. I
know some people have uh not enjoyed it
because they're like, "Well, I just want
to play the tracks. This feels like long
open roads of like whatever." But like I
think with 24 characters in a race that
does really help. Like I feel like in
those moments that's where the 24 really
shines because it gives everyone a
chance to sort of catch up and be in a
pack. So I did I did really like that.
Yep. Yeah. Um it also uh have you done
special cup yet?
Uh no. Okay. Then I will save my
thoughts on it for later. Cool. Helio
says wait open world part isn't really a
huge part of the general game flow.
It it is a consistent background
element. Yeah. You see a map like when
you're doing a Grand Prix or you're
doing any of the versions and it will
draw street lines between where you're
going. Um,
but it does not outside of the knockout
game, at least that I found. Like you'll
still pause between races and then
you'll start with you're already rolling
down the street and it'll countd down
with you already going. You still do the
boost and whatever at the end, but like
there's still stop down between. Whereas
I think knockout mode, the 24 player, I
think it's called
knockout. That was the thing where it
really clicked for me. Did you play
that, Will? I have not. Yep.
chaos. It's everything you loved about
something like
um Jamie called that out. She's like,
"Oh, it's got Fall Guys energy." Sure.
But but Fall Guys energy in a sense
because basically it's five tracks with
no stopping. You do a lap around one,
then you drive, then you do a lap around
one, then you drive. Like you kind of
just go on whatever path it randomly
picks for you with 23 other people
online. And at every checkpoint of the
five checkpoints, you lose the last four
people in the race. They're just
out. It's so much fun. And it's funny
cuz you play the Grand Prix with 24 23
other computers and you're like, "Oh,
neat. This feels calculated and right
and whatever." You put 24 humans on a
Mario Kart
course. It's beautiful chaos. I have
never been like more like hooked in and
engaged on on the game. Yeah. Than I
think in that thing. I I think that's
going to be my I still haven't gotten to
first place yet, but I think once I have
my handle on on the courses and what
they do, that is where I'm going to be
living. Yeah. Um um uh to Richard's
worried about the whole driving between
tracks thing means you only do one
round. Um and that means first doesn't
get healed or
hazarded. Sort of. A lot of them there
are hazards that you can put down as you
enter the course that the you drive onto
the course and then to the starting line
and then do the lap. So that space
between where you enter the course and
the starting line is a good spot for
hazards. The other thing to keep in mind
is that they have also sign with 24
people more people in the back have blue
shells in their
pool, right? And there's only one way to
dodge a blue shell in this game and it's
the speaker box. That's it. I've I've
tried doing it different ways. I've
tried with a bunch of other ways. So,
you can You know what my favorite thing
is, though? You can jump red shells.
There's a there's a um a feather item
now, and if you can time the sound of it
right, you can jump the red shell and it
will go past you. Yeah. Um so, uh the
[Music]
um that part feels like I get blue
shelled a lot more, right, as as first
place, right? because I'm playing on 50
CC against computers, right? Yeah.
Dogird says, "I found the open world
drives kind of boring because they're
mostly straight roads." I think there's
two or three that are pretty boring, but
I also think I I think it's a roughly a
50/50 kind of
um a 50/50 vibe of of good and bad
because there's one where you go over
what is essentially like the Golden Gate
Bridge and you can rail grind or fly all
around it and it made it so engaging to
do. Uh
yeah, I don't know. I I think I'm pro
and con of it.
Yeah. Yeah. Um chat, we know we're in
ads, but we're going to keep going
because we are uh we're almost finished.
We're almost finished. We're we're
kicking down. Uh Will, did you get any
other game uh other than Mario Kart? Not
a new one, but I did install the Breath
of the Wild update pack. Yep, I did.
Tears. And um the first place I went was
the Koro Forest cuz the Cororo Forest
used to make the Switch One die a
thousand tiny deaths. Uh and there was
Naria frame pitch. Um combat was uh
sorry I know I'm I'm muting I'm trying
to mute my thing so apologies for that.
I s I heard people go in but now it
shouldn't do it again. Okay. Um, uh,
the the frame rate and combat seemed
very fast and very fluid. Um, it it
launched pretty quickly. So, I think for
older games, if you if some of the
performance was a sticking point, you're
going to be able to play the older
games. They're still there. They just
getting the facelift update.
I think it is [ __ ] that there's my
swear for the day that it is a $10
upgrade. I agree. Um, I think that is
some real feel bad nonsense when Walmart
is doing it better than you. Uh, maybe
look in the mirror. Um, that having been
said like there I think one or two of
the games actually gave you more things
with it. Like I think Bowser's Fury
might actually give you more levels or
something. I I don't remember exactly.
And the Zeldas come for free with your
Nintendo Switch Plus plus plus expansion
pack, which I refuse to buy. Um,
however, if you bought the
bundle, or at least when I bought my
bundle, it came with a code for a year.
So, but you can't use it if you're an
existing Nintendo subscriber. You can't
you can't as a non plus member sign up
for expansion pass. No, I used it. It
was fine. I used it. Claim the free
game immediately.
It says on the thing,
I'll have to read it again. Uh, did
anyone else have that? Did anyone else I
read it as, "Oh, you're already a
Nintendo online member. You can't do
this." I It was You're a Nintendo Online
member. We're not going to refund you
for the difference between this and the
year of the expansion pass, but like
it's 20 bucks for a year of Nintendo
Online. I'll That's fine. Um, and then I
just did it and then I got the free
stuff. Well, I'll look into it, but uh I
I I just don't like the I don't like the
way that their online I don't like it
either. I I I I think that it is a major
hamperage to uh I feel like they have
really missed the point of giving away
free stuff to encourage people to get
into the ecosystem and explore it fully.
Right. The tech demo should have been
free on every system. All Astros
Playroom. Uh like um sorry to the devs
of that experience. I bet you it's
really fun, but I hope it I hope it just
rots in the in the e store and no one
does it. I I I think that there were a
lot of fumbles with the pricing. Not
because $80 isn't a price that people
that like the industry is going to go to
$80. Whether or not the industry should
go to $80 is a different question that
we're not talking about now, but the
industry is going to $80. So that's not
what I'm talking about. I'm talking
about like all of the things that they
could have done that would have been
easy costs to eat to in to encourage
people to move. Like my best one of my
best friends asked me, should I get a
Switch 2? And I said, "No, not unless
you're going to buy Mario Kart World.
Don't get a Switch 2." Wait. Right.
Because there's It doesn't offer
anything. Unless you really want to
replace your Switch One with a slightly
better Switch One. The UI is nice and
snappy, but your Switch works totally
fine. Yeah, it's not I don't I I think
my my my review is if you absolutely
must be on the bleeding edge of
everything, you're not listening to me
wanting reasons to buy it or not because
if you're already on the bleeding edge,
you've already got one, right? And if
you're on the fence, don't. Right.
There's nothing to push you off the
fence and the decide of buy it, right?
Yeah. Yeah. You have to love like it's
funny because Mario Kart is a huge game
like the franchise, etc. But it's also a
game that like I know people also don't
like. Like there's gamers out there that
just don't like Mario Kart. Yeah.
There's not a lot else for you unless
you haven't played a bunch of other
games before. Yep. Um although I this
will bring me into my last thing. Uh I
did want to reward with my dollars uh
people putting physical games on
physical cards.
So I got Cyberpunk for it. And I ran
some I ran some tests both docked and um
handheld.
It runs great. Yeah. I don't know how it
does.
So, it's very easy to forget this
because we play on them all the time.
A 4K screen is four times the pixels of
a 1080 screen. Sure. Yeah, I know that.
Right. Okay.
And I know that intellectually, but it
also means that it's four times the
processing power to do that. Yeah. And
so for optimizing for a tiny thing, it
becomes a lot easier to like do a lot of
these things. I guess I'm I'm less I'm
less impressed now, I guess, than I was
forever ago about like what is what is
the Switch 2 screen resolution? I think
it's 1080 on the screen and it'll do
1440 dock. It's 1080p and it does 4K uh
60 Hz when when docked or it it can
support up to that. I have not hooked up
this is the one thing I didn't have time
to do. I have not hooked it up to a 4K
screen. I did it on my 1080 projector
just to see how it did. Um it runs super
smooth. I and I ran it with all the
different control styles. I tried the
the gimmicky whatever. It's fun. It's
not for me. I could see someone starting
out. Uh, it could also be used for an
accessibility uh thing which I really
really liked. I also tried doing it with
the mouse. You can play and use a mouse
like you would on a PC to look around
and do all the things. That was really
fun.
Um, the the Oh, and this is the last
thing I think I'll say. I did notice a
lot both in Mario Kart and Cyberpunk,
the speakers on the system from a like
mimicked surround sound perspective
really hit. You know exactly when a Red
Shell is coming from the back left. You
know if a character's talking to you
from the right side, like I was so
impressed with the directional audio
capabilities far more than any other
handheld I'd ever se. I think the
speakers might be one of the most
impressive things about this thing. Yep.
I agree. Um, so I'm looking forward to
hopefully there's more use of that.
Yeah, I like I like JS. It runs that it
runs that good due to ancient Slavic
blood magic. Yeah, sure. That seems
right. All right, friends. I think that
is going to do it. So, if you're still
here and you're in the comments after
this giant thing, info dumps. Yeah.
Reminder, you should tell us about what
was your favorite trailer, what you
liked or didn't like, did you get a
Switch 2, what did you get on the Switch
2, what do you think of the Switch 2?
Um, all of that in the comments below or
you can hit us up on Blue Sky to let us
know your thoughts, feelings, opinions
for next week. Um, I know this has been
a long one. I'm sorry. This is probably
the longest episode we'll do this year
because most years Summer Gamefest isn't
the same weekend as the Switch 2
release. Yeah. Also, Grass, I have not
texted the mic yet on it. Um, I think I
will do that. Uh, maybe later tonight.
I'll let folks know when we game
Thursday how it goes. Um, yeah, they
made it sound like magic. I doubt it is.
Yeah, I super doubt it is too.
Especially because when I game on my
thing because I have the projector, all
the hardware is on the right. So, I'm
not going to be talking directly at
where my switch is. I'm real curious how
it handles that.
Yeah. Okay. I think Matt, that's going
to do it for today. So, all that remains
is for you to do our patented sign off
after this uh epic episode uh to send us
on our way until we meet again for
breakfast next week. That's right. It's
the same It's the same outro we do every
week. It's real important that we keep
doing it even on these longer ones
because we want to make sure the sense
of community and camaraderie and
everything is still there. So, if you'll
please join
me in
all
remember why.
[Applause]
[Music]
You faked me out. I was going to grab my
Switch. Uh, no. I Oh, just to do it
again. Yeah, I was debating it. Uh,
okay. Cool. Chat, everybody, thank you
so much for for joining us for this. Uh,
I know we ran that was a lot. That was
and and we a lot. I felt like I I
probably should have cut Xbox. I
probably should have cut Xbox and we
should have just done the four that were
before Sunday, but or cut something, but
I I felt like all of this was important.
And then switch two launch thoughts were
very important because I know people
were looking forward to those. So yeah,
uh chat hang out. Um we're gonna crack
open some dopamine. Uh and then we'll
play some Switch games. Uh so please
hang out for that. Uh we'll be doing a
whole bunch of stuff this week. We got
Rogue Review and Final Fantasy 6 and
Design Club and me and Matt. And don't
forget that either this Friday or this
Saturday, and we don't know yet which
Matt and I are going to interview some
cool people about a thing that is also
cool. That's all you get to know, but
you should be looking forward to it. Um,
yeah.
Uh, I think that's it. Neo Whiz Master,
you have a lot to catch up on because we
went long. Also, thank you for the 20
gifted for showing up at the end of the
show. That's very kind. Thank you, chat.
If you got a gift sub from Neo
Whizmaster, uh, please say thank you.
Uh, this is the part where we say bye to
Janet. Fairly well, Janet. We will see
you all Thursday for design club. Until
then, leave comments down there.
Bye bye.