Have you ever accidentally stepped on a
board game piece? You know, especially
one of those really pointy ones like a
Monopoly hotel or a miniature holding a
sword? Well, that same surprise and pain
seems to be hitting physical game
publishers around the globe these days.
Thanks 4D chess. Seriously though, as
much as the tariffs are to blame this
time around, it does seem like every few
years we hear about a different problem
that rocks the world of board games and
tabletop RPGs. Which got us thinking, if
someone were to make a new game, you
know, right now, how in our current
world would that work? Why are these
games and the companies that make them
so susceptible to these kinds of intense
market forces? Well, good news everyone.
Our buddy, board game and tabletop RPG
designer Eddie Webb, has agreed to break
it all down for us. You know, as soon as
he's done screaming into that pillow.
It's okay, Eddie. Take your time.
[Music]
Seriously, I can relate to your pain
because we are currently kickstarting
our new Extra History 2026 calendar.
We're doing it again after last year's
success with new art, new historical
surprises, and as much of a tariff plan
in place as possible. But more on this
beauty after the episode. 3 years ago,
Eddie told us about how the pandemic was
killing board game companies. You can
find that episode right here. But these
days, we're hearing the same thing about
the Trump administration's
pandemic-sized everchanging tariffs.
Eddie's been working on physical games
for nearly 25 years, so he's close to
the problem right now. And shockingly,
he says the overall big issue is modern
capitalism. Though, we did want to break
that down a little more because that
seems to be the catch all these days.
Specifically, this goes back to
consolidation. In 1998, two of the
biggest game distributors in the United
States merged to form Alliance game
distributors, and they handled the lion
share of tabletop game distribution
within the US. Alliance was in turn
bought by comic distribution giant
Diamond, which held a virtual monopoly
over comic distribution and wanted to
extend that to tabletop games. Then
COVID started. DC and Marvel pulled out
of Diamond and in January 2025, Diamond
filed for bankruptcy, which included the
entire Alliance game catalog. Now, the
drama around the Diamond bankruptcy is
just so juicy and fascinating, and I
wish we had time to get into it right
now. Actually, you know what? I can't
leave this on the table. I'm just going
to tell you all about it real quick with
a treat. And I mean like super quick.
Going to channel my inner micro machines
guy. Here we go.
Diamond went into bankruptcy auction and
the winning bid went to a different
company also called Alliance, Alliance
Entertainment specifically. But the
debtors declared they had chosen a
backup bid from Universal Distribution
and Adopulum instead. But Alliance
claimed they won the bid. So they went
back to the bankruptcy court and were
awarded the right to the winning bid.
But then Alliance terminated that bid
and sued Diamond for fraud, claiming
they misrepresented themselves. So the
bid went back to Universal and Adopulum.
But now it turns out the reason Alliance
wanted Diamond in the first place is
because of their Wizards of the Coast
distribution deal. What? Hasbro told
Diamond they were ending their
distribution deal with Alliance when the
contract ran out in April. But last one,
I promise Diamond never mentioned it in
the bankruptcy proceedings. And Hasbro
never mentioned their intent until after
Alliance sued for the winning bid. And
now Universal and Adopulum owned
Diamond. And in the midst of all that,
Penguin Random House pulled most of
their comics distribution out of
Diamond, except maybe not in the UK. And
oh my god, it is such a mess, folks.
Fascinating corporate tangents aside,
the point is that the distribution chain
was in trouble before the tariffs were
even a concern because so much of
tabletop game distribution in the US had
been consolidated into one company. That
is our first point of fragility. And
what's the second point you ask? Hyper
specialization. Of course, this isn't
exclusive to tabletop games and it's due
to how production chains have evolved
over time. Over the past several
decades, the world has pushed countries
into being highly specialized as part of
a global manufacturing economy. All the
pieces of an iPhone, for example, aren't
just made in China. Various parts are
also made in South Korea, Japan, India,
and even the US. Similarly, board games
often require manufacturing pieces in
different parts of the world before
they're put together and packaged at a
distributor like Alliance and sent off
to retailers. As a side note, books for
TTRPGs aren't immune to this either.
Eddie told us a story of how one project
he worked on required the interior pages
to be made at one printer, the slipcase
at a second, and all the parts were
shipped to a third printer who made the
covers and assembled the final book.
Now, multiply that by how many parts
board games can have. Actually, let's
use a hypothetical to illustrate this.
If we at Extra Credits wanted to make,
say, a board game out of our longtime
apocryphal franchise Hecnommancer, how
would this hyper specialization
fragility affect us? Well, since it is,
of course, a big and again hypothetical
epic fantasy campaign, we're going to
need tons of stuff, like some nice
cards, stock boards, player mats,
well-made cards in a separate little
card box. Ooh, and some of those plastic
miniatures that look super cool and that
I will totally paint one day. I swear,
do not look at the pile of shame behind
me. We also want it to go into a lot of
stores. So, we need to focus on
manufacturers that will work in large
quantities. Well, cards usually are made
by specialized card manufacturers. So,
let's say we found one in Germany. China
is our go-to place for boards and boxes,
so we'll get those made there. Finally,
neither of them handle plastic. So, for
dice, deluxe counters, and those sweet,
sweet plastic minis that I am in no way
addicted to, we have to go with a
different Chinese printer. Ideally, this
heavy specialization would actually
reduce the fragility of production.
Like, if you can't get your plastic
meeples made at one Chinese printer,
maybe you could get wooden ones made in
Poland while the rest of your game
components get produced. But over time,
this evolved into companies
manufacturing only what was needed when
it was needed instead of stockpiling in
case of failure. When it all works well,
these so-called quote just in time
supply chains are great. Less warehouse
costs for the manufacturer and supplier
and less need to pay in bulk for the
purchaser, which means less of your
company's money tied up in stock.
However, it doesn't take much to break
such a chain and cause all kinds of
manufacturing problems. The UK actually
learned this since Brexit, particularly
with medications and water treatment
chemicals. Both became too expensive if
they were shipped across the UK border.
So in the case of medication, it has led
to certain things like wart removal no
longer being covered by the National
Health Service. And in the case of water
treatment chemicals, that led to water
companies dumping sewage rather than
paying for treatment because the fines
for dumping are less than the costs of
treating the water. Ew. Eddie, I really
hope you're not making tea with that
sewage water across the pond. Though, I
do appreciate how much of it you are
spilling right now. And all these new
tariffs could lead to similar
consequences. A tariff might get added
to a product crossing a country's
border, which must be paid by the
company who purchased the manufacturer
of the product, not by the company that
made it. However, it also might be added
to a part of a product if it's being
shipped somewhere to be assembled. So if
Hecknommancer the board game was
hypothetically assembled and distributed
by say Alliance, all of the parts would
have to be shipped to the United States.
And since the US has tariffs against
China and Germany, each part would have
a separate tariff added to it. These
little charges can add up quickly. And
that cost will be passed on to the
consumer no matter how much the
executive branch tries to bully
retailers. And that is because of the
third point of fragility. The margins
for these games are extremely small
because not all of the money made from a
game goes to the game's publisher.
There's a bit of standard wisdom in
tabletop games that you multiply the
costs of making something to find your
actual retail cost. That number can
vary. Some people say five times, others
eight, and even more people go higher.
But the reason is that the money has to
be spread around. Once a game is
printed, all of those units are then
sold to the distributor. Of course, the
distributor wants to buy those at a
price that's low enough where they'll
make a profit, but the publisher wants
to make as much cash as they can. Then
retailers buy the units from the
distributor. And the same dance is done
once more. The retailer wants to make
that cost as low as possible while the
distributor wants it as high as
possible. And then third verse, same as
the first, the retailer then sells it to
the consumer at the final retail price,
which is hopefully high enough to give
the retailer some profit, but low enough
to be attractive for a customer to, you
know, actually buy. Let's use another
hypothetical example from our
increasingly hypothetical game. I
promise you all, we are not making this
thing. I do not want to get your hopes
up. Please believe me when I say that.
Assume for the moment we can sell
Hecnommancer the board game for let's
say 50 bucks at a $50 price point. Our
distributor will purchase the game from
us for say $20 a unit. So, our goal is
to have our manufacturing costs, making
all of the parts of the game and
shipping them out to our distributor, be
$10 a unit or under, which would give us
enough money to recoup all of our
development costs, which include paying
the people who made the thing, writers,
artists, editors, graphic designers,
producers, you know the drill. And in
this hypothetical, we luck out. Even
though US printers are quoting it around
$18 a unit to print and ship it, we find
a Chinese printer that can get it done
for $8 a unit. Cha-ching. So, this all
looks doable, right? We'll get
everything made for the $20 our
distributor will pay us. And then
they'll probably sell Hecnommancer to
retailers for something around $30. So,
they make around $10 a unit. And then
the retailer will put it in their stores
and try to sell it, making about $20 a
unit. Everybody gets paid. But now
tariffs enter the picture. Dun dun dun.
A 10% tariff on that would bump our
costs to $8.80, which means we won't
make as much money, but we can also
probably absorb it because we're still
under that $10 per unit safety threshold
that we set before. Though, a 50% tariff
means we're at $12 a unit. And now we're
losing money unless we can get
distribution and retail to adjust their
prices as well and make less money along
the way, which probably isn't going to
happen. But then if the tariffs keep
fluctuating randomly, which is sadly not
a hypothetical, something like a 110%
tariff means that the physical part of
our board games now cost $16.80
a unit, which means we are losing nearly
$7 per game. You multiply that by
hundreds of thousands of units and that
is a lot of cash burned and a lot of
small businesses crippled. But some
people might be asking why not just
increase the price. Well, that's because
of the last point of fragility, which is
we as consumers are really resistant to
game prices increasing. If you want an
example of this, just check out one of
the gazillion YouTube videos talking
about the price point for Switch 2
games. Yes, video games and tabletop
games are apples to oranges. And there
are many other factors why in that
specific example, people are pissed, but
it still is a good illustration of the
overall point. We as consumers do not
like it when our entertainment costs go
up. I know I don't. To use a less
hypothetical example, let's talk about
Eddie's Realm of Pugm TTRPG rule book.
As of the time of this video's
publication, he's selling it for $60
USD. That is for a fullcolor 224 page
book with lots of art. For some
contrast, the art of World of Warcraft
book, which was published nearly 10
years ago, sells for around $100. And
college textbooks of a similar size can
go for $150 or even higher. And yet,
even a couple of years ago, the average
price of a hardcover tabletop RPG was
closer to $50 because it is hard to
convince people to pay more for a thing
they've bought in the past. It also, of
course, doesn't help that the prices of
everything else is also going up.
There's plenty of videos on why that is,
but that means that most folks don't
have as much to spend on entertainment
as they once did, meaning right now
there's a ton of validity for not liking
price increases in your entertainment.
And currently, there's really not a good
answer to this problem. That's what
makes all of this so scary. Things have
shifted to either the price going up
astronomically or the publishers taking
staggering losses or both. It's no
exaggeration to say that some companies
are looking to lose hundreds of
thousands of dollars with a couple
citing potential losses of over a
million like Sephilopair, the people who
make the Gloom Haven games. And some
companies have already shut down because
this was just one economic push too
many. In truth, to solve this, a lot of
how games are made, distributed, and
sold has to change on a fundamental
level. That change, of course, will not
come quickly, and it's far more
complicated than simply saying print in
the US instead. Heck, even if there was
a multi-year plan to relocate more
production within the US, and let's be
real, the current administration doesn't
even have a concept of a plan on that
front. This would be a staggeringly
complex process that still might result
in elevated prices when all is said and
done because corporations are going to
corporation. in addition to it being
crippling to publishers and consumers in
the short term. So, for now, the advice
we gave back in 2022 holds true today.
If you love games and you are
financially able to, pre-ordering or
backing a crowdfunder campaign is a huge
help to show publishers they still have
an audience and to give them an infusion
of muchneeded capital upfront to help
offset the rising costs. Also, you can
and should write your congressional
representative about the damage this
tariff roller coaster is doing.
Actually, some states have already sued
the US government over them.
Specifically, Oregon, Arizona, Colorado,
Connecticut, Delaware, Illinois, Maine,
Minnesota, Nevada, New Mexico, New York,
and Vermont. Just wanted to give them
all a shout out. Also, using a website
like fivecalls.org has made it easier
than ever to help you get set up and add
your voices behind lawsuits like these
that could help the industry. Because
truly, as gamers who love board games
and tabletop RPGs, we really do have to
stick together on this. We all love
games, and now really isn't the time to
tear publishers down or claim they're
being greedy. A lot of this is out of
all of our collective hands, and we're
all frustrated. So, there is no time
like the present to make your voice
heard. Then afterward, you could reward
yourself by, I don't know, kicking back
and pretending to play Hecnommancer, the
most anticipated board game that I
cannot stress enough will never come
out. though. You know what is coming
out? Our brand new 2026 History Happens
Everyday calendar featuring phenomenal
art from Extra Credits artist Davido
like luminaries right here on the cover.
Then you have our kick-ass end of the
samurai homage. And finally, my personal
favorite, Zoe Noir. I'm sure you can
guess as to why. You can snag all of
these plus nine more historical
reimaginings right now over on
Kickstarter because last year's 2025
calendar was so successful, we're doing
it again. That is right. All of the
things you loved about our 2025 calendar
are back. And you know, if we look at
this list of Kickstarter backers here on
the back, a lot of uses of the word back
here. I think there's a lot of stuff you
loved. But now we are updating it with
brand new jaw-dropping art, new daily
historical happenings that regular
calendars usually omit, and new
scannable QR codes that link to extra
history videos we've done about events
that happened on those specific days.
Plus, we've got cool new stuff in our
deluxe tier for you to check out. I am
particularly partial to the coasters
that I pushed for very hard, by the way.
And for all of you international extra
historians, we heard you and got better
rates on international shipping. Hell
yeah. So, what are you waiting for,
friendos? a formal invitation. Okay.
Well, you know what? Please consider
this your save the date and check out
the new calendar tiers and exclusive
perks for yourself at the link below or
the QR code I hope is right next to
where I'm pointing here because the only
way we can guarantee that you'll get
your calendar before 2026 is if you back
this campaign. So, to snag your 2026
historical calendar, click or scan here.
And then, you know what? I'm not even
going to pitch the next video because
this campaign is too cool. I want to
make this calendar. Please go back it.
You will not be disappointed. Once upon
a time, Angelo Valenciana, Dominic
Valenciana, Hunter Z, Joseph Bla, Kuya
Ko, Lotus Wolf, and Zelad's
architectures were phenomenal legendary
patrons. And that's no myth.