[Music]
All right. So, in a previous episode, we
mentioned that this year, James has
ended up working on a lot of competitive
games. But in the course of that, he's
also ended up working on a lot of
collectible games. And let me tell you,
collectible games are something James
loves. In fact, working on collectible
card games was one of the first gaming
gigs James ever got. But almost every
time he consults on one of these things,
somebody in a suit inevitably brings up
Rage of Bahamut. I don't do this very
often, but look, Rage of Bahamut is not
a good game. It's not what we should be
modeling all of our future collectible
games on. All it really does is show the
power of collectibility as a
monetization model. In terms of actual
game design, it's little more than a
giant Skinner box. Rather than showing
us why collectibility can be used to
make a more engaging game, Rage of
Bahamut just points us to a very
insidious path that freeto-play could
take. a path that without a doubt would
do a lot of damage to the emerging
free-to-play market and the industry as
a whole just for some short-term gains.
So, today and next week, we want to talk
about the collectible method of
monetization, why it's becoming ever
more popular, and how it can be used
well. So, first off, how do we define a
game that uses collectible monetization?
Well, for our purposes, it's any game
where you purchase game objects not in
distinct increments, but in randomized
lots that are a subset of a larger pool
whose members have each been assigned a
predetermined likelihood of appearance.
That's a pretty formal definition. Let
me try that again in human Speak. It's
any game where you buy characters or
gear in randomized packs where the
characters and gear come from some
larger pool of characters and gear and
certain characters or pieces of gear are
less likely to appear than others. For
example, things sold in boosters like
Magic the Gathering. Okay, so why do we
care? What does monetizing through these
random packs do for developers that just
standard freetoplay doesn't? Well, first
off, it solves two huge problems with
your standard free-to-play monetization
model. The first of these is that not
every player will want everything you
have to sell. Very often as a
free-to-play game creator, you'll either
just make a bad item that no one wants
to buy, or you'll make an item that only
part of your market is interested in.
This means that you've spent all the
money to create the asset, but you can
only sell it to a part of your market,
unless they don't know what they're
getting. Imagine an RPG in which you're
playing as a mage, and the developers
come out with some really cool ranger
bow. Well, you don't care. You simply
aren't a customer for that item. But in
a collectible game, surprise, that bow
is the rare item in the pack you bought.
Now you're a customer and you can't
really complain because hey, that's the
luck of the draw. But I mean, it is a
pretty cool bow and it is purple and
all. Who knows, maybe you'll end up
rolling a ranger now and getting that
much deeper into the game just to use
that awesome item you got. So there's
the first problem collectible
monetization solves for developers. 100%
of your audience are now customers for
100% of what you have to sell. The
second thing collectible monetization
does is to get players to buy
non-consumable items multiple times. As
a developer on a standard free-to-play
game, when you create a new item to
sell, unless it's a consumable, you can
usually only sell it to each player
once. I mean, how many times are you
going to buy Niti or the Rucks voice
pack? Once will probably do the trick.
But not so with a collectible model.
Anyone who plays Magic knows how many
spare commons they have lying around,
how many piles of unused and unwanted
chimney imps they have stowed somewhere
in a closet or a binder. Many Magic
players who spend a fair amount on the
game don't even look at the commons they
buy anymore, and yet they are buying
them. Wizards would have a hard time
charging $5 a piece for boosters if all
those boosters contained was one card.
And yet, for most players, functionally,
they might as well. In collectible
games, the developers can sell players
the objects they've made over and over
again, regardless of whether those
players actually want those things
specifically. This is a huge benefit in
terms of monetizing a game. What's more,
in the digital age, we've eliminated one
of the biggest problems with this part
of collectible design. You see, in the
physical realm, with every pack of cards
you opened, there was a greater chance
for disappointment. The more packs you
opened, the more cards you had, so the
less cards you needed. Thus, more packs
were increasingly likely to have nothing
you needed in them and thus be
disappointing. And that's clearly the
opposite engagement curve you want the
player to have. As a player gets more
invested in the game, you want them to
simply get more excited to put in more
money. So, today, any digital
collectible game worth its salt lets you
crunch your excess cards and turn them
into fuel to power up the cards you
want, or currency to buy more cards or
parts to get unique cards that you can't
even get from the packs. All of a
sudden, voila. One of the main issues
with a collectible model in the paper
realm disappears, or if not disappears,
at least becomes much less pronounced.
There are other ways the collectible
model benefits the free-to-play
developer, too, as well as a number of
ways the model can risk turning
exploitive, and we'll talk about those
next week. See you then.
[Music]
[Music]