When we originally did our series on
collectible games, we mostly focused on
the dangers of that form of design. And
truth be told, it was a shot across the
bow from James to some of his industry
colleagues, as he's seen this form of
design just abused time and again this
year. But that's still not to say that
he hasn't worked on games that use this
format in an amazing way. So today we
are going to do what we were remiss in
not doing last year and cover the
incredible richness and depth of design
that collectibility provides and why
that can be an incredible benefit to all
of us as players. So to begin, let's
talk about the evolving nature of
collectible play. One of the most
exciting things about collectible games
is that they naturally change as you get
more cards. Every time you open a new
booster or trade for a new piece, all of
a sudden you have to rethink your
strategies and integrate those new
elements into how you play. This means
that a player isn't just stuck with one
play style and is actually encouraged to
explore all the different tactics that
are buried within the game mechanics.
You may start out with a rush deck,
eventually move to something a little
more balanced, and then later end up
with a strategy based around direct
damage as your collection grows and the
new tools you have access to as a player
change what you can do and how you can
play. That's an exciting thing. It means
the game itself continuously presents
you with new and interesting puzzles to
solve simply by asking you to make the
most effective deck you can. This is way
more dynamic and compelling than mini
games where you either quickly settle
into a strategy you like or find that
there's only a limited number of optimal
ways to play the game. In a collectible
game, the quote unquote optimal deck for
any given player changes all the time.
It's an incredible thing from a design
perspective that the best possible deck
for you and the best possible deck for
me can be radically different depending
on what we've both acquired to this
point. Which leads us to the second
point, information management. Many
collectible games get away with being
vastly more complex than non-collectible
ones. Magic the Gathering presents the
player with a staggering amount of data
to try to hold in their brain and an
incredibly complex rule set. And yet, it
works because of the traditional player
experience in a collectible game. Most
players start with a very small subset
of the total possible collection out
there. And so, initially, they only have
to think around that tiny part of the
much larger game. They are then
introduced to new pieces in limited
numbers as they play games against those
cards or acquire them in packs, which
makes presenting what would otherwise be
a completely unmanageable amount of data
totally approachable. I mean, imagine if
you taught a new player magic and then
gave them four of every card that's ever
been printed. They would stare at it in
silence for a while, get overwhelmed,
and say, "I'm out." And then leave. And
yet, for all of that, those of us who
have played Magic for a while can enjoy
all the depth that comes with having
that huge sea of pieces because the
learning curve on collectible games is
naturally smoother than in many other
types of design. Collectible games also
lend themselves to incomparables. This
is one of the key parts of collectible
design that so many of the terrible
digital collectible games seem to miss.
If one card has cost X with power Y and
a rarer card has cost X with power Y +
5, you've screwed up. There are no
interesting decisions to be made there.
And so you've undercut a lot of the
benefit of the evolving nature of play.
You've also somewhat shot yourself in
the foot as a designer as new packs
become a disappointment if the only
question the player has to ask
themselves when they open it is, "Are
the numbers bigger than what I already
have?" Especially if the answer is no.
With incomparables, so long as the
player doesn't have the whole set, each
pack allows for more versatility, which
creates more interesting problems for
the player to think around, and thus, at
least initially, promises the exciting
possibility of new and more powerful
combinations. Lastly, collectible
structure allows for all sorts of
interesting play that rolls out of the
monetization method itself. Types of
games like Sealed or Draft, where you
get a small number of packs to construct
a deck, mean that the challenges you can
present to the player are functionally
infinite, even if they already have all
the cards by saying, "Today, your
challenge is to make the best possible
deck out of whatever you find in these
five boosters. You will inevitably make
them solve a problem they've never
solved before." It gives new life and a
fresh experience to the game, even to
the most veteran of players. This is
something so few games can do, and those
that do manage it outside of the
collectible realm often require a
massive and expensive injection of
content in order to keep players at the
top end interested. For example, look at
World of Warcraft. Almost all 100% of
the content in its expansions have been
focused on high-end players, players
near or at the end of the game. Over all
of their expansions, they barely
provided anything for new players or
players on their way up. And for the
folks building WoW, this was the right
choice. But compare that to something
like Magic. In Magic, all players can
enjoy the new content in every
expansion, regardless of how long
they've been playing. High-end players
use that content differently, and they
use it for sealed and draft. They use it
in combination with things that already
existed to figure out new and powerful
combinations for tournament play. But in
the end, the content they use isn't
exclusively for them. It's for the
entire player base, which from a design
perspective is a pretty incredible
thing. So, all said, there are a lot of
reasons why collectible games can be
awesome and a positive part of our
gaming palette. And truth be told, we
never meant to imply otherwise with the
previous episodes. It's just something
that for all of its positives can be
very dangerous if used simply as a tool
for separating players from their money.
And that's the last we say on
collectible games for a very long time.
Promise. See you next week.
[Music]
[Music]
Beep beep beep beep
beep beep beep
beep beep beep.
[Music]