[Music]
Community managers are heroes. They're
the people who are on the front line
making sure that our games are
experiences we love rather than cess
pits of misery and misdirected rage.
They're the people who have to deal with
all of our problems and our complaints.
They're the people who have to take to
the forums when something goes wrong and
try to keep us calm while the devs are
desperately trying to get servers back
online. They don't get a lot of love or
recognition in this industry, but in the
end, they're out there dealing with the
worst we as players have to offer and
still spending every day trying to make
our games a better experience for us.
And their role is only going to get more
important. You've heard us talk before
about how as AAA budgets keep expanding
and internet connectivity is becoming
something that's starting to be assumed,
more and more games are going to be
moving to what I call the perpetual game
model. These are games like Destiny
where is it an MMO is a semantic point
that we could debate all day, but you
can be sure that it's a game that's not
going to be done the day it's released.
It's a game that's intended to be an
evolving experience, one that grows with
the community and changes with them. And
as we see more and more of these
perpetual games, games that depend on an
ongoing revenue model, the role of our
community managers will become more and
more important. So, we decided today to
talk about how the industry approaches
community management. Because
unfortunately, while good community
managers make games a joy to play, bad
community management staff can let a
great experience go to waste or simply
fail to set up an environment everyone
feels safe to play in. The first truth
about community management in our
industry is that it's one of the lowest
paid positions we have. Second, in the
social hierarchy of game companies,
community management is often considered
one of the lowest positions, frequently
regarded as lower than QA. This is in my
opinion because of something somewhat
systemic to the games industry.
Undervaluing of what we call soft
skills. While programmers can program
and artists can do their art magic and
designers are filled with mystical
systems arcana, community management
doesn't have a clear and distinct skill
set. It's just about working with people
and understanding their needs, which
obviously is a skill set, but it's not
one that our industry seems to really
recognize. And this unfortunately leads
to bad community management hires. There
are a lot of great people working in
this field, but so many companies tend
to hire for these positions
half-hazardly because they're not
considered skilled positions. This leads
to companies grabbing whoever they can
to fill these roles, giving preference
only to community management experience.
And because of this, we too often end up
with unqualified people taken on as
community managers. And now with social
and mobile markets grabbing up community
management people even faster than the
AAA world, we cannot afford this. In
fact, in his years working in the
industry, James has never seen a formal
community management test. You don't
even get to the first round of
interviews for a position as an artist
or a designer or a programmer at a major
studio without being able to show you're
qualified. So, why isn't this a common
practice with the people who have to
spend the most time with the people who
actually play our games? A test wouldn't
be hard to put together. It could just
be scenarios that often come up in a
community manager's job. For example, a
player has deleted one of their items by
accident and is asking for a refund.
What do you do? You notice a player
using offensive language in a play
session. How do you respond? You're
looking at the forums and you notice a
thread where several players are
harassing another player and making
sexual or racial comments. What action
do you take? You find out that two of
the harassing players are also some of
the biggest spenders in the game and
popular with a community. How do you
proceed? On the flip side, we could also
test the awesome part of being a
community manager with just as little
difficulty. You can have questions like,
"You have the opportunity to run an
in-game event. You don't get to add any
new assets to the game or have any
special coding done, but you are given
two other junior community managers to
help you with the event. The event lasts
a single day and starts in 2 weeks. What
do you do? So, creating the test isn't
hard, and validating it wouldn't be
either. You just calibrate it by trying
it out on the community managers in your
company who are already doing a
fantastic job. If they fail the test,
you're probably asking the wrong
questions. If they pass it without
thinking, then maybe it's not hard
enough. Beyond that, we need more on the
job training and exploration of
community management issues earlier in
the production cycle. Community
management doesn't start when the beta
goes live. Most of all though, we have
to understand that community managers
add value to the game in the same way
that an artist or a programmer does.
Whether they're running events, standing
on the front line when things go wrong,
or just making the game community feel
like a safe and welcoming place for
everyone, it makes the game more
enjoyable just as much as another gun or
a fancy hat in the game would. And this
isn't to say that we should all start
paying our community management people
more. It'd be great if we could, but
tough times, I know. But even without
much monetary investment, there are ways
that we can be more careful about how we
address this role. Both in hiring and
giving the people we entrust with our
communities the tools they need to do
their jobs. It'll create better game
experiences and safer spaces. If you're
going to spend $100 million on a
project, we should respect the people
who buy it enough to at least do that.
See you next
week. Heat. Heat.
[Music]