[Music]
Hey everybody. Today is going to be a
fun episode for us. It's one of those
times where we get to talk about
emerging trends in the game industry.
Things on the bleeding edge of design.
They're the kind of thing that may
amount to nothing or they may become an
integral part of how we play. But either
way, it gives us an excuse to talk about
the future of gaming. You might have
noticed, but we kind of enjoy that here.
While it may not seem like it while
we're in the middle of our daily
routine, games are experiencing a sea
change. It's incredible to think about
how much things have changed in the last
few years. Tablet games, smartphone
games, major flash portals, motion
gaming, voice controls, touchcreens,
free-to-play games, Twitter games, the
casual revolution. In 2005, if you had
told us that the Wii would vastly
outsell the PS3, or that the most
profitable games out there would include
a farming game on Facebook and a 2D bird
tossing simulator that you played on
your phone, we would have all called you
insane. But here we are, and the changes
just keep on coming. So, what's today's
topic? Well, many of you have heard of
Dust 541. It's a firstperson shooter
being made by CCP. Now, we love CCP and
would really, really love for them to
get another product out, but we probably
wouldn't be talking about Dust 541 if it
was just another sci-fi shooter. So,
what's the twist? The hook in Dust 541
is that it's connected to Eve Online,
not just as a spin-off or a tie-in, but
actually connected. Actions in Dust will
affect Eve. Win a first-person shooter
battle in Dust. Help define who controls
a sector in Eve, or what resources are
available to Eve players. Now, this
isn't a new concept in the game
industry. We've been banding it about
for years, but for the first time, it
looks like companies are beginning to
experiment with these interconnected
experiences as they realize that it
helps broaden the audience for their
games and increases player retention.
Moreover, it's a great way to make sure
your microtransaction goods seem
substantially more valuable, but it also
potentially has a lot of value to the
player. But before we get to that, let's
take a little trip into the history of
the industry. For years now, companies
have speculated on creating what we call
trans media worlds, games which the
player could access through other media.
The most famous example of this is
Pokémon. As many of you are aware,
Pokémon's actually a fairly complex
game, but it's intended to be accessible
to a very young audience. So, how do
they manage that? Television. I'm not
kidding. Watch the Pokemon TV show
carefully. It's practically an extended
tutorial for people under 8 years old.
Think of young children's TV watching
habit. They'll watch the same show 20
times. They'll watch it over and over
until they've memorized it. Nintendo
understood this and decided to take
advantage of it when making Pokémon.
Now, some of you might say, "Well,
obviously it was a show about the game."
But think back to the Super Mario
Brothers show or the Sonic shows. This
wasn't the way shows about games were
done. All the Pokémon in the TV show
function just like the Pokémon in the
game. They're strong against the same
monsters. They need the same items to
evolve. The show basically teaches you
how to play. At least it definitely did
for the first few years. I I haven't
really kept up with it, so I don't know
what they're doing with it now. But it's
not limited to things like the Pokemon
TV show. It could be the Skylanders
toys, the World of Warcraft cards that
can give you in-game equipment, or that
show on the Sci-Fi channel that
theoretically will be affected by events
in Defiance by Trion. The underlying
theory behind these trans media worlds
is to keep the player engaged with the
product for as much of their time as
possible. To give them ways to interact
with the game world, even when they're
away from the game. But until recently,
no one asked the question, "How can we
get you to interact with our game when
you feel like playing something else?"
You see, while all these ways to
interact with a game increase brand
value and help you sell more merchandise
and even probably do acquire you new
customers, the one thing they don't let
you do is reach past the audience who
find your fundamental mechanics
engaging. But this new form of trans
gaming allows us to do just that. Okay,
so great. So it might help some people
make some more dollars. Why should we as
consumers or as designers care? Because
it finally lets people share the
experience they love with the people
closest to them without asking anyone to
play something they don't enjoy. Dust
541 not only lets you share the Eve
universe with your first person shooter
friends, it lets you experience the Eve
universe together. If you've ever had
that deep desire to share something
meaningful of yours with someone close
to you, but you simply couldn't
communicate why this thing you loved so
much was something they might enjoy, or
if you've ever had somebody close to you
play a game with you just so you could
have fun together, and you could tell
throughout the experience that they
weren't really enjoying the game that
much. They they just wanted to spend
time with you. These multiaceted
interconnected worlds could solve that.
And the truth is, while I am excited for
the possibility to play Eve with my
Battlefield and Call of Duty friends,
there's something I see in the not too
distant future which I'm much more
excited for. I believe we may have just
found a way to close that gulf between
the hardcore and casual community. If my
mom could harvest your farm to give me
crafting regions in my MMO. If your
girlfriend or boyfriend could play
Bejeweled to repair your armor or
perhaps even maintain a shield around
you while you went adventuring. If I
could play my grand strategy game to
bring back resources that my friends
needed to construct their towns, which
in turn helps me recruit more units to
field in my total war experience. I I
mean, honestly, if I could capture
foreign monuments for my friends to
erect in their Sim City or Cesaria
towns, how cool would that be, man?
Well, here's to hoping that there's a
future out there where we can all play
together, even if we're playing
different games. See you next week.
[Music]
[Applause]
Heat.
Heat.
[Music]
[Applause]