[Music]
Hello there, ladies and gentlemen.
Allison's still recovering from a pretty
major shoulder surgery and settling into
a new job at Relic Entertainment. So,
we're going to have a few guest artists
help us out over the next few weeks.
Today, allow me to introduce Shannon
Meisner, who has been kind enough to
step in and provide the pretty pictures
while we talk about cutscenes. Cutcenes
are a contentious subject these days.
Some people love them, some people hate
them almost excessively. Every site
about gaming has at least one forum
thread about the place of cutscenes in
gaming at any given time. And you really
can't even bring them up amongst a crowd
of designers or hardcore gamers without
starting a debate going. Now, we've
stated our basic thoughts on this
before. Games are really about gameplay,
not about watching movies. Let's be
honest, films will always be better at
being films than games are. But that
said, we often see a very strange
argument come up when this debate
starts. We keep hearing people say how
cutscenes should be done away with
entirely, how everything in a game must
be done through gameplay. How cutscenes
have absolutely no place in games at
all. I don't think that argument's been
completely thought through. You see,
there's nothing inherently wrong with
cutscenes. The fault lies in how we've
been using them. The cutscene is a tool.
Asking games to forever abandon the cut
scene is like asking the carpenter to
give up his square or the painter to
never use gray or brown, or the game to
never use gray or brown for that matter.
You may not like how a lot of people are
using these tools, but why would you
limit yourself by forbidding them? I
know this sort of hyperbolic leap to
completely embrace or completely ban
things is pretty common practice on the
internet, but I think it's worth
examining this issue a bit more
thoroughly. So, let's look at what harm
cuts scenes are actually doing and then
examine what the proper use of a
cutscene might be. First, the harm,
because I think we can all agree there's
been some. As developers have had more
and more disc space to work with, and
game development budgets have ballooned,
we've seen some developers focus more
and more of their money on cutscenes and
progressively less on the very core of
our medium, interaction. The Metal Gears
and Final Fantasies out there have you
spending more time watching than
playing. And even games like Heavy Rain
seemed to miss the fact that they were
much more effective outside the cut
scenes than in them. So, why does this
trend happen? Well, first, cutscenes
make for great marketing. In-game
visuals are looking pretty darn good
these days, but a pre-rendered cut scene
is still going to look a heck of a lot
better than anything we can render in
real time. And that pre-rendered stuff
makes for some fantastic TV spots and
promotional material. So, there's often
a lot of pressure to develop these sorts
of easily marketable moments. Second,
for a CG artist, cutscenes are the fun
work. In a real-time rendering
environment, artists are constantly
forced to compromise the fidelity of
their vision based on what the hardware
can actually handle. But in a
pre-rendered or carefully crafted
real-time sequence, the sky is the
limit. Over time, we've seen a tendency
for art heavy studios to slowly drift
more and more towards being cutscene
heavy studios. Not because of any
concerted effort on their part, but just
because those studios are filled with
people who like cutscenes and genuinely
love doing cutscene work. Third, there
are a lot of creative directors in the
world of games that wish they were film
directors. Unfortunately, James has run
into a lot of designers and creative
directors out there in the industry who
are essentially frustrated filmmakers.
they still envision narrative in terms
of film. So when the option to deliver
something more like a film comes up,
they leap at the chance, often thinking
of it as delivering a better narrative
rather than losing focus on gameplay.
Fourth, cutscenes are often thought of
as rewards for the player. Within the
industry, due to all the reasons I just
listed, we've justified making cutscenes
to ourselves by thinking of them as
player rewards, something the designer
can give the player for completing a
level or surviving a tough encounter.
And I guess they kind of were once back
in the days where cutcenes were a pretty
new thing and there was some novelty to
them. Even today, there's reasonably
strong user test data showing that this
is effective, that some players do grind
to get from cutscene to cutscene. But I
think we might be misinterpreting that
data. I don't think players are that
desperate for the novelty of the next
pretty pre-rendered shot. I think that
in these cases, players are grinding not
from cutscene to cutscene, but from
story moment to story moment. This is
not how the questions usually framed, so
that's just my own hypothesis, but I
think it might be a hypothesis worth
testing. Tragically, as cut scenes have
become ever more intricate and detailed,
they pull more and more art resources
away from the production of the actual
runtime game, leading to worse games
despite their bigger budgets. The
tendency towards cutscenes has also
pushed the focus toward narrative, but
not in a good way. Now, if you watch
this show at all, you know that we here
at Extra Credits love us some narrative.
But in a game, narrative, as a general
rule, the fewer words you use to tell
the story, the better. You've got the
gameplay, the audio, the environment,
even the character design to tell your
narrative with. So, you better make sure
that every word you use is top-notch and
has a reason for being there. Sadly,
cutscenriven narrative lends itself to a
lot of ham-handed exposition, or in even
worse scenarios, a heavy movie style
script that's far beyond the scope of
what the development team can deliver,
which then gets cut down to an
unintelligible mess later in the
development cycle. And then there's all
the other downsides to cut scenes that
you guys are probably well aware of, the
way they tend to break the flow of play.
and the fourth wall shattering
disconnect they cause when they
contradict the rules of the gameplay.
How come that one bullet fatally wounded
my character in this cut scene after he
just finished soaking up bullets like a
sponge in that last boss fight? How come
my character can do all those awesome
things in cutscenes, but I can't do them
in the actual game? Uh why are we using
Phoenix Downs on Earth right now? But
despite all the problems that cutscenes
cause and the danger they pose by
threatening to shift the emphasis within
the industry toward delivering cinematic
games rather than solid gameplay
experiences, yes, it would be a bad idea
to get rid of them entirely. Why?
Because sometimes, despite all that,
they're the right tool for the job. And
when used properly, they can turn a good
gaming experience into a transcendent
one. Looking at it from a designer's
perspective, there are exactly two
reasons for using a cutscene. The lesser
of these two reasons is when you want to
reinforce the powerlessness of the
player. Sometimes you want to create a
moment where the player's character
doesn't have the nearly limitless free
will that games can provide. And in that
case, having a lack of gameplay mirror
this lack of free will expresses that
powerlessness in a way only this medium
can. The return of Arthus or the big
encounter with Andrew Ryan are pretty
good examples of this. It's a technique
best used sparingly, but it's an example
of where a cut scene can be useful. But
the true strength of cutscenes lies in
their ability to contextualize play.
Often as a player, we're totally unaware
of how important context is to our
experience of a game. But as a designer,
you're always working to put your player
in the right frame of mind to enjoy the
experience you're delivering. A game's
theme is the most primitive form of
this. If you've ever played a game with
a theme you're not that into, say orcs
and elves, and found it pretty boring,
but then really enjoyed another game
with very similar mechanics, but a
different theme, let's say Space Marines
and Aliens, it's usually because the
theme gave you context for how to
experience the play. But creating
context extends far beyond the overall
subject matter. Any of a game's elements
can be used to establish context. In
most Final Fantasy games, right from the
opening screen, the music creates the
context for the experience. It sets the
emotional tenor for the piece and
prepares you for the slower turn-based
RPG pace of the game. And this is a
place where cutscenes can shine. Think
about the opening cut scene from the
first Fallout and that haunting
narration. War never changes. Now, try
to imagine what the game would have been
like without that context. If they just
dropped you right into the vault as soon
as you clicked new game, the experience
wouldn't have been the same. Without
that context, the game as a whole would
have suffered. and there's no way they
could have delivered that same context
as effectively through play. The same is
true of games like Zenogarss or Silent
Hill. Both of these games use cutscenes
to draw you into the mystery of their
world. Or take the opening to Suicen 3.
The in-game graphics couldn't possibly
deliver on the vibrant living world the
developers had in mind. So, they used
the game's intro cutscene to establish
that context instead. They presented
moments of future gameplay in an art
style they couldn't possibly use in game
in order to help the players lose
themselves in a world that might
otherwise have seemed artificial and
gamey. Every time the player played
through a moment they remembered seeing
in that opening, they were reminded that
the world they were experiencing was
more than just the mash of polygons in
front of them. The cutscene added
additional meaning and weight to those
gameplay moments. So, even though
cutcenes aren't about play, I wouldn't
toss them out entirely. After all, if we
didn't occasionally reach outside our
medium for tools, we'd still be playing
Space War. But remember, cutcenes aren't
there to deliver narrative. They're
better used for creating context. And if
they're not doing that, well, they may
be more trouble than they're worth. See
you next week.
[Music]
[Music]
treasure. 100 points.
[Music]