us in the cool shades before I take them
off because I can't see any. And and now
it's YouTube. So now now everyone now
everyone's all here. Hello everyone.
Welcome into this uh I I don't even know
if I have words to describe how uh happy
and excited I am to do this. Uh hello
everyone. Welcome to uh I don't know
that we came up with an official name
for it, but this uh this cyberpunk
legends sort of debut interview. I'm
your humble host, Will, joined as always
by my pal Matt. And today in addition,
we have some esteem guests uh who you
may or may
Yeah. No. Yeah. Right. I I think I think
you're required to admit that you're
esteemed at this point. Uh we have James
Powell and Mike Ponmith here to talk to
us about Cyberpunk Legends. Uh friends,
come on in. Uh pull up pull up a chair
cuz we're going to be here for a little
while. Uh we have a whole bunch of
questions uh that the folks over on the
Night Crew Games Discord have sent in.
Uh Matt and I have a bunch of questions
and we have some time. So Matt, what
what what do we want to know? What what
do we First of all, first of all,
gentlemen, how are you on this fine
Monday evening? Are you doing all right?
You just you had an announcement and now
there's must be much to do. I'm just
going to put these shades back on. Maybe
go to sleep over here. Yeah. Um I don't
know. It has been hectic as can be. We
are a small and scrappy shop on the
night crew side. So, you know, we've
been up 24 hours a day making sure that
everything's in place and I am tired.
But this is going to be amazing. This is
the moment I've waited for. We haven't
talked about gameplay yet. I'm hoping we
had a chance to do that today. Uh but
yeah, uh we'll see if I make it through
these two hours. How are you doing,
Mike? I'm doing fine considering the
fact that for the last three and a half
four weeks I've been in Poland hanging
out with the guys at CD Proekek uh who
also do the cyber punk stuff with us and
in addition they all came out here
yesterday and hung out with us. Uh, one
of the more amusing things is that at
some point James actually ran them in
this game. And it got so bad that
eventually one of the producers had to
come over to the team and say, "Guys, we
have a game to do. Get back to work." It
is actually true. like they kept asking
more sessions and at some point we had a
new CC on the emails being like yeah uh
we have to maintain a schedule so no
more game nights guys amazing that's
what you want though right like from
that's that's a a huge uh a feather in
the cap right yeah your game mastering
is so good you derailed an entire video
game good job yep yep only that but it's
satisfying because originally they did
not understand what we wanted to do with
this when James and I were first
pitching it around. And then once we got
him playing it, they understood it and
they loved it, but they were also at the
upper levels a little like you guys,
you're throwing things off here. Okay.
Right. Well, and the great thing about
it actually was honestly like the CDPR
people are awesome. Um, they were really
kind, right? Like we're tiny shop to a
small part of this IP and they were
like, "Yeah, sure. We'll throw you on
our socials. We love the game. let's
like let's just put you up there. So
that was just entirely voluntary on
their part and that was that was
phenomenal when they said they would do
that. Yeah. Awesome guys. We tal been
working with I realized the other day
we've been doing stuff with them on the
cyber punk projects for about nine 10
years
and you know gotten down to where we get
together and we all go out drinking and
hanging out. And Polish vodka is awesome
by the way. It is it is can confirm. Uh,
well, as people are trickling in, before
we get to sort of some of the the meat
and potatoes of the gameplay of
Cyberpunk Legends, Mike, quick, I'm sure
you get this question all the time, but
I wanted to softball this as as we
started. Uh, sort of what's the story of
of how andor when you first came up with
this phenomenal world of cyberpunk?
Like, where where did this all stem
from? Oh, geez. Well, it it originally
started with my favorite movie is
Bladeunner. So, you know, I have every
bloody type of copy of Bladeunner out
there, a script, a bunch, you know, I
mean, you name it, I probably got it.
Um, I probably have a stuffed roid baddy
somewhere in the closet. Nice. But, uh,
basically, at some point or another, um,
I ran across a book that was written by
a friend of mine named Walter John
Williams called Hardwired. Oh, yeah. And
Walter was at the time actually a play
tester and in a game of Mechon, which is
another game I wrote years ago. And so
when one of my friends who was going to
be one of the play testers on this basic
concept came up, he said, "Yeah, you
should get Walter." And I said, "I'm
reading his book." Okay, we're good. So
that actually worked really well for us
because the thing is is that what Walter
had written in Hardwire was much more of
a wild and rocky roll kind of story
where, you know, the heroes, they're
they're not everyday heroes, but they
still win. And that was great. And I
looked at that and said, "Okay, we
should do something more." And from
there, it just kind of grew into what
was natural for the time and so forth. I
mean, we're talking Miami Vice type
time. We're talking about, you know,
style and substance being blended
together. And it just kind of evolved
like that. But I would say Walter was
kind of the main kickoff on it. And the
nice part was, you know, as we we became
friends, we knew each other. He's
written stuff for Cyberpunk as well. And
it gave me somebody else. And then over
time, you know, we've met and talked to
a lot of other people like George
Alagappinger and so forth, people who
have also done classic cyberpunk work.
So, I got to say that it grew and there
was no real intent other than this sense
of Yeah. You know, this would be really
awesome to play. Yeah. You know, and
almost everything we do at TAL is pretty
much that we write what is awesome to
play. Yeah. You know, it's what we would
do and that's always been our hallmark.
Hell yeah. That's awesome. Yep. That's
how we get started. Uh years later, I'm
standing around going, "Oh my god, look
at all this merch." I have no idea.
There is a shrine to Cyber. The shrine
is impressive. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And
then and then James, uh when when did
you in your uh not only game design
background, but it's just history
playing RPGs and all that. When did you
first come to find Cyberpunk for
yourself and what sort of grabbed you
about it? So, I was in high school
reading through, as one does, all of
William Gibson's work, and like you just
said, I was like, "Man, I wish I could
play this." And there really wasn't a
lot out at the time, and my friendly
local game store happened to have uh
some cyberpunk. Um, and so I picked up
all the books and proceeded to not
really be able to convince my friends to
stray away from D and D for a while, but
then I got them and we were hooked from
there. You know, the more things change,
the more they stay the same. Yeah. Yeah.
It's always It's always a bit hard to
pull them and then once they're gone,
they never ask. Yeah. Once once you've
disentangled them, right? They're
they're on to Yeah. Yeah. Exactly. And
the amusing part was that years later,
James and I started working together at
a couple different gigs and we kind of
hit it off right there. So, this game
actually evolved out of a crazed idea
that James brought to me and I said, "We
want to publish that." You know, that
would be cool if we did that, but there
weren't enough of us to do it. So, he
had to invent a company. Well, it was
actually awesome because so was early
pandemic. I was working on a game idea,
right? Like I had a basic design that I
was like, "Okay, I want a narrative card
game that's co-op, I can play with my
friends, that's really easy to set up
because I was playing things like Arkham
and I had friends who were bouncing off
because the rules were too hard to learn
or it was just took too long to set up."
So I was like, "Okay, when this pandemic
is done, I want to be able to get
together with everybody like sit down at
a diner, play this game wherever." Uh,
and the entire time in the back of my
mind, I was thinking about Cyberpunk.
Um, and then I show it to Mike and Mike
was like, "Ah, this like this core
design's awesome. Why don't we do it
with Cyberpunk?" And I was like, "Why
don't we do it?" Yeah. Oh, no, man. So
good. Yeah. Twist my arm just a little
bit harder. Oh, okay. I give I give
by this time he's had years to con me in
almost anything. It's Yeah, it's a
little bit true. You know, I normally
don't play poker with him, but I will
play this with him. There we go. because
there we go. Yeah. I mean, we there
could be Okay, so so Yeah. Well, you
know, remembers a license.
Speaking speaking of playing, um just
just to kind of get a a sense of um how
you both relate to like the world of of
Cyber Punk and everything else, what are
your roles like? Like I know I know you
two have like designed all of this and
talked about this. What are your roles
when you're playing?
Do we have the same role? This will be
interesting. Okay. Okay. So, what do you
play primarily? I actually almost always
play nomads. Really? I love nomads. I
play rockers. I Which makes sense,
right? The hair. It's It's required,
right? Once your hair hits a certain why
my hair this length specifically so I
can fit the part when we're doing some
uh some cyber punk. And we never did put
rappers into the game. So, you know, I
had nothing to do except
Oh, man. Maximum mic wraps. I I want
this so bad.
a new career. Uh, you know, there's
always there's always time for a new
career. I like it. Oh my god. Perfect.
Yes, I will beat box for you. No
problem. Let's James and go.
Um, so, so, um, I guess like we talked a
little bit about this uh, in the, uh,
short that you wrote, James, for I think
uh, Extra History, Mike. I think you've
seen it that uh recounted the the the
the Reagan era of all this stuff and
basically how it felt like cyberpunk was
the what happens if this goes to like
the the natural extreme of of oh no,
right? Um how is there going Yeah.
Right. Yeah. Exactly. Like is there
anything like especially like um the
real world like it's sort of mirroring
cyberpunk or diverging from it. We don't
like for instance have the near the
level of prosthetics that like in
cyberpunk but of course we're all glued
you know to our phones. We're all kind
of our own little uh cybernetic beings
in that way. Are there things that like
have fascinated or like that you are
surprised how right you got it or like
something that um you would have said
like oh I would have never predicted
that like in this world. Uh actually
what's been terrifying and I used to get
teased by people, family, friends and so
forth is how accurate we were on a lot
of this. Um things that I'll give you an
example. Um we at some point had South
American wars and things going on and we
literally were talking about things like
taking over the Pan Panama Canal or drug
dealers blowing things up or any number
of things. that all kind of came around
and then the technology began to explode
as well. So um for example, we invented
a thing for for cyber punk. It was in
the V3 level called the agent. And the
agent was a large what we would call a
smartphone now, but in those days
everybody went, "No, cell phones are
never going to be that big again." And
this the agent was essentially a kind of
super phone and you bought programs to
put in it called micrors
and you could program the phone to do
things like remind you to go buy uh new
bullets for your gun. Yeah. Or any
number of things. And my fun my son
likes to tease me. He says, "You know,
you you realize, Dad, that years ago you
invented the smartphone?" And I said,
"Yeah, and I didn't get paid for it."
But basically,
people always think that I pull it out
of nowhere, but if you do the research,
you can get a pretty good idea of where
we're going. And there are sort of
trends that both historically and
technologically just build on
themselves. And you can look at it and
go, "Yeah, I can see how these two
things will come together." For example,
3D printing. you get 3D printing and
then all of a sudden I have um a couple
people we work with who have 3D printed
limbs that they've had built and now
they are in turn working with kids who
have had you know ths no arms legs
whatever 3D printed limbs um that's a
natural it goes together and people are
going to go as they say this you know as
Gibson says the street funds are used
for things Um, for example, you know, I
wear these glasses. Most people don't
know I wear them because at a point in
time, uh, I had cataracts, runs in my
family, and bright light really hurt my
eyes. So, I went in eventually and my
doctor said, "Well, you're in pretty
good shape, but you're going to have to
get your eyes done. You're going blind."
And so, they went in and they did it on
a machine and it was like being in a
ripper dos. They sat me down. They
plugged me into some drugs that wiped
out my short-term memory. And they said,
"Open your eyes." I opened my eyes and
didn't remember I did it. And the
machine got lowered into my face. And
about 15 minutes later, my ripper dock,
as it were, said, "Okay, uh, you're
going to have to wear a patch for like a
couple days, but you know, come back in
two weeks and you'll be set." And I
said, "Wait, you didn't have to like cut
open my eyeball and do you know?" And
she said, "Oh, well, we did that." Wait,
you did? Yeah, the machine does that.
Yeah. And I went, "This is ripperdoc
technology." Yeah.
So, I think it's
Go ahead, James. Sorry. I was just going
to ask, do do you want to tell uh the
world how lucky your particular doctor
is in the swag that they got for doing
this? Yeah. Yeah, I actually have to. Uh
my doctor turned out to be a bit of a
cyber punk fan. Oh, hell yeah. So when
she did this to me, I said, "Okay, so
you're now my ripper do." Well, as it
turned out, as you can see from the wall
back there, the CD guys send us stuff
all the time. Tons of stuff. It's
amazing. There are bottles of champagne
we still have not opened up. So we had
this great neon sign that they gave me
for Kroshi Opticals and it was just you
could see it from space. It was so
bright and I looked at it. I said, "I
have no place to put this sitting in my
office. I can't even plug it in, you
know, now that being got my eyes fixed,
I still can't look at it. So, I gave it
to her. So, I I gave it to her and said,
"Okay, so you're my ripper doc and now
you're on you're actually a karaoke
optics um I guess uh surgeon." Yeah. I I
pray I pray that is in uh her office and
because because like it's so funny
because if if and when cyberpunk fans
come in there like even nervous I even
feel like that would be an incredible
way to be like oh no this is fine like I
don't know it would I don't know it
would instill confidence in me. Yeah,
absolutely.
Well, she's good. She's really good. The
machine's really good, too. But yeah,
it's fascinating because all of this
stuff just evolves and a lot of it is a
natural outgrowth of the technologies
that are coming along. So, a large part
of what we do, and when I mean we, I
mean, you know, the entire Talorian team
for years and years and years, we've all
kind of, you know, been throwing our
brains together at this to figure out
how it all works. Um, it's it's a
natural outgrowth. You know, we don't
like come up with weapons and ideas
totally out of nowhere. We do a lot of
research and unbelie My my library back
in my office about 30 ft that way is
just wallto-wall reference books. Yeah.
Yeah. Well, I mean, and the product I
mean, you don't need me to tell you
this. It absolutely shows. Uh, and it is
so I love it when when worlds in the
games that I play are so deep and you
can tell are uh researched to a level
that makes even the fantastical things
in them feel as though they can occur.
Like and and as we've just discussed,
some of the stuff's moving in in various
directions that way. And I feel like
that's fascinating is that for example
with CD, the fact we did that much
research meant it that their job was so
much easier because they didn't have to
guess how was it done. I could say,
"Okay, read this. Take a look at that."
Well, and the thing that's fascinating,
so for us, we're working much earlier in
the timeline, but because you guys do so
much research, it's very easy to
extrapolate up and down the timeline for
Cyberpunk because all the all the
background is there, right? And since
wherever there's gaps, the research is
still there. So, it's very easy to say,
okay, this is what this piece of the
world would look like taken back or
forward 30 years. And that's actually
very important to how both we and CD
have basically worked on the franchise
and concept is uh the deal is right now
we take everything up to the 2060s and
they take everything from then on.
Gotcha. But the trick has been that we
work with each other constantly. There's
a feedback loop all the time so that if
somebody for example over in Warsaw
says, "Gee, can we have a company that
does this?" I'll go, "How old is it?"
and they'll go, "Well, we'd like to have
it start in 2046." And we'll go, "Okay,
so let's figure out where we want to put
it and let's go figure out where it
would be and what would have happened in
the intervening 20 years." And it's all
tied together. Yeah. And it all works
because it's not like they picked it up
and they went off on their own on it.
you know, I was there for a lot of it
and worked on it, but also they respect
the core as they bring it forward and I
respect what they're doing because I
know how much work they're putting into
it. Yeah. And that's that's sort of like
you you want that in any good
partnership, right? Like that's how all
this stuff works and and sort of
pivoting to that uh the partnership
between uh between you two and uh your
respective companies. Uh, do James, do
you want to give us the sort of
Cyberpunk Legends elevator pitch? Like
we you've you've announced the game.
It's up for pre-order now. There the
whole thing sort of started.
Can you tell us if we were if we walked
into an elevator? Oh, the glasses are
coming off. Glasses are coming off for
this one. Yeah. Tell us give us give us
that elevator back here. Uh, not in this
neon light that we've got going on in
this room. I'm going to lose them soon.
That's why I'm still wearing these. I
smart. Um, so, uh, the elevator pitch
for Cyberpunk Legends is sort of what
we've already talked about a little bit.
I wanted a co-op adventure card game
that was really narrative focused, that
would give you a campaign that you could
play time and time again with your
friends. I really wanted a sort of uh,
portal into this world that was a little
bit more uh, approachable than, you
know, having to read. As much as I love
the RPG books, I know lots of people
it's a hard place to start, right? Um,
and so what we wanted to do was make
something that was really easy to set
up, uh, easy to start playing, and gave
you that feel of an RPG,
uh, but with just cards. Uh, so that's
sort of Cyberpunk Legends.
Well, I I I believe uh, at this point, I
mean, that is a good elevator pitch.
However, uh, I know Will and I were
talking before the stream. We would love
to sort of like because you haven't
showed it actually played yet, right?
Like that has not happened. No, in fact,
I believe we discussed this being the
place that we debut for the world. There
we go. There we go. Uh so without
further ado, I mean, do you guys want to
just uh ship the card back, bring a
couple more team members in, and show us
how this thing functions? It's funny
because while you do that, I I'll just
sort of say this. Will and I are lucky
enough to have uh play test this in the
past and uh I am so flipping excited
that we get to actually see this uh with
everybody else here for the first time.
Uh awesome. And you're all going to have
to forgive because this is my phenomenal
uh you know play test bucket, but I said
it could be set up in five minutes or
less. Deck.
Deck. Deck. Uh Aiden, have a deck. Here
you go. And
scenario deck. And that's it. Uh, we're
gonna call these shades my leader token.
And that's the whole thing. That's all
you need. We're actually totally set up.
Um, so you could totally like take this
to Denny's at like two in the morning
and just play, right? Like I have so
many fond memories uh of my college
years where we would go and we'd grab
whatever was in the bargain bin uh and
just crack it open at a diner at like
midnight and play till dawn trying to
figure out this thing. And so, yeah, I
wanted to make sure there was a game
that, as you saw, it takes like 30
seconds to set up. You're ready to go.
Uh, and I mean, I can slip in my pocket
and just play anywhere. And it honors
the basic roots of Cyber Fund because a
lot of what we ended up writing in the
world was done at 3 in the morning in
Denny's. Oh, yeah.
I feel like Denny's at 3:00 a.m. is peak
cyberpunk. Like, vape Denny's 3:00 a.m.
That's just cyberpunk. That's it.
Feeling
If you have ever sat in a small town,
Denny's, especially one that's like
along a trucking line, and just
witnessed the interactions that happen
at 3:00 a.m., boy, is it cyberpunk.
And it gets even wilder when you're
doing that in San Francisco at 2 in the
morning. Oh, I'm sure. Uh, dang. You'd
be amazed at the weird people we saw.
I I mean, it's, you know, sometimes you
write what you know. Yeah, you do. You
do. Uh, well, uh, two gentlemen who just
joined us. Uh would you please also
introduce yourselves and what you're
doing on this project? Oh yes, come
squeeze in a little bit. Hello everyone.
Uh I'm Brett. I've been here the whole
time.
I haven't been on the Extra Credit
Switch channel since 2013. Well, that's
true with Emmens. Yeah,
24 hours streams of death. Nice. Which
I'm not doing again.
The curses almost almost got it. So
close. I think we did a like live
reading of uh Kentucky Route Zero at one
point. The game wasn't finished at that
point, right? Um and yet it was still so
good. Uh hi, I'm Aiden. I'm a designer
on the card game here with James and uh
with Night Crew and we've worked on a
bunch of projects the past few years. I
wrote one episode of Extra Credits a
couple years ago. Nice. Uh, so yeah,
that's uh and I've dragged them here
because, you know, it's one to four
player co-op. Uh, you can there's a
single player mode. Um, but I think it's
most fun to watch, uh, a team of four
people play it. I think it would be less
fun to watch me do the solo mode by
myself. Um, and so, uh, also easy to
learn, right? I said that. Uh, so put my
mind where my mouth is. I'm going to
teach you all the basics of this game.
Um, if you had gotten the rule book, the
rule book is kind of written in a
narrative style. you and your crew have
just shown up in Night City. You've come
to a pawn shop to sort of tool up, get
ready for uh you know, life in the city
and basically the pawn broker's there.
As you're looking through stuff, he's
explained to you the rules of Night
City. And he gets right to the end and
he goes, "There's one more thing, super
important." And then he stops and he
listens and he goes, "Wait, what's
that?" And then it tells you to open the
first scenario deck. And these scenario
decks are all like basically old D and D
modules. You can think of them as a
single run, right? And they're connected
in campaign often, but that's what they
are. So, you open up this first scenario
deck, and the rules are very simple.
First rule, uh, whoever has the leader
token, which I'm going to call these
cool cool shades, uh, because I left my
leader token at home. um is going to
flip the top card, read whatever it says
on it, follow any instructions on it,
and when you're done, flip the next card
until you get to an obstacle. And once
you get to an obstacle, after you've
overcome that obstacle, your leader
token moves. So, everybody gets a chance
to, you know, narrate the story and do
all these things. And that's it. That is
sum total of the meta rules. And then
we'll get into how to overcome an
obstacle in a minute. So, all right. Uh,
pawn broker has just stopped, looked
around. You've opened up this deck and
boom, bullets thud into dermiplast
walls. You walt over the counter looking
for a way out. Nothing. Glass shatters.
Displays erupt as two nomads spray the
shops with ancient automatics. You check
once more for a back exit. Dead end. The
only way out is through. And since there
was no that wasn't an obstacle, there
was no instructions. It's just a
narrative card. We flip the next card.
And here we've got bike raiders. And
this is where we get to obstacles and
the core interaction of the game. So
everybody want to draw five?
So uh just real quick, what are you
draw? So you each have your own roll
decks. Is that how this is functioning?
Perfect. Uh yes. Unfortunately, you're
not getting to see the cool sleeves with
the actual backs for each deck. Um but
for example, I am playing the Netrunner
deck. Uh you are playing the Nomad. Uh,
who's got what else? Oh, I got the
rocker, baby. Oh, you're a netr runner.
You're a rocker. Oh, you're right. I'm
solo. I didn't actually even look at my
cards. Um, you want to be the rocker?
I'll trade you. You want to make it
worth my while? Let's do this.
My hand's terrible,
man. This is the great thing about, you
know, working working with people you're
you're friends with. You know, they're
going to make you look good on stream.
Um Oh, I you're going to shuffle in my
hand. I see how it is. I see how it is.
Um, awesome. So, you got this card that
Will's got on screen. Um, you can see in
the upper right corner that two, that's
how much damage it's going to do to us.
Uh, if it survives the round, we have 20
health. We live or die as a team because
I don't like games where, you know, one
person can get out and then has to wait
a half an hour for everybody else to
slowly die off. It's it's Night City,
right? You live or die as a crew. Um, so
this is gonna do two damage to us if it
survives around.
You uh you have eight health as the next
number on it. That's how much damage we
have to do to this thing to overcome
this obstacle. And then the big bit, the
important bit right in the center, right
under the name bike raiders. Uh you're
going to see this thing that's a little
weird. And that's the to hit target. To
hit this thing, we are going to make a
cooperative poker hand. And this uh
there's a whole little sheet telling you
what all these symbols mean, but
basically this is saying we either need
to make a pair uh with a body symbol in
it or we have to make a straight or
better to hit this thing. Uh any damage
we do, any damage that we put into the
plan, which we're going to establish in
a minute, uh if we don't do if it
doesn't have one of these two
requirements fulfilled, counts as
nothing. We just miss. Um, and lastly,
how would you make a plan? Well, each
player, we're going to go around the
table, and each player on their turn
gets to lay down one card from their
hand. Um, the interesting thing about
this is there are table talk rules. Uh,
the table talk rules are basically you
can't say the name of cards, you can't
say suits or numbers. So, you have to
figure out how to talk around it. We
highly encourage people to, you know,
this is Night City. Bend the rules as
much as you can. Don't break them
because table talk table talk rules are
fun. But uh any way that you can think
to talk around these things, absolutely
do it. Um
I
as our fearless leader in this case am
not the most uh
punchy.
Anyone have uh any any thoughts, any
directions? I'm guessing our solo will
have an answer to our body problem. Uh
got some friends. Excellent. Yeah, I
know some people. Perfect. If you know
if you know some people then uh I am
going to do my you know weak pathetic
rocker kick them in the face. Uh so I'm
going to kick the bike raiders. You'll
see uh I don't know if you guys have the
card sparring. Um but this card, you
can't really see it. Uh it it has a four
body symbol and plus one damage. So
basically, uh, this has the symbol we
require, but now we're going to need
another four if we want to make that
pair. Uh, and it deals one damage if we
hit. So with that, Mike, to you. Okay.
Well, I am a bit more punchy because,
you know, I have to get off in a
motorcycle and beat people to death. So
I am going to be playing in the new
Bushidto. Nice. Okay. Okay, the new
bashidito plus three damage if used to
make a three of a kind or better which
since you need to bit more of these
guys. It's true. We'd have to make a
three of a kind. Although that also has
body cells though Brett,
you guys aren't cooperating. You know
number
game, but you know there's Well, I mean
I call my friend the razor girl an eight
and a six. Ah, I I unfortunately thought
you were bringing in a much larger posy
to this because this is where the table
talk rules get fun, especially as you
start knowing the game. Um, I completely
misinterpreted what Brett said. So, I
was doing something very specific. A
much worse play because no plan as soon
as you contact the enemy, right,
continues. And one of the fun thing
about this is sort of working around
those moments and trying to as a crew
hectically assemble a plan on the fly.
So your plan your plan consists of five
cards and then it's done. Correct.
Unless there's a modifier of some kind,
right? So this is a good point. Speaking
of that, I was hoping
our rocker rocker is kind of like the
cleric or druid of the party. uh if
you're familiar with D and D terms
because you have a lot of support there.
You're the rocker. Oh, you're right. Uh
and so whereas the uh the netrunner,
there we go. Um is basically one of the
people who can really help manipulate
the plan. So what are you going to do?
So I'm going to hack the planet. You
can't really see this card, but it's a
seven with a tech symbol and it gives
plan size plus one. So, what's
fascinating here is so being the leader,
whoever has the leader token is going to
end up, if you're in a four-player game,
get to getting to play twice, whereas
everybody else only gets to go once
unless you have plan size plus one. So,
Mike's going to get to go again. But
looking at our cards, right, my sparring
has a four. Uh Brett's razor girl has an
eight and six. Your hack the planet, all
it did was provide us a seven and a tech
symbol, but we've got a four 867.
the city moves. I'm going to play the
city moves. It has a five. So now I've
got a four, five, six, seven, eight.
We've got a straight which these guys to
hit number as you can see on your screen
either requires that we make a pair with
body symbol. Okay, we failed to do that.
But we made the straight. So now if you
just want to dump any damage that you
got, we should just be smashing these
guys as hard as we can. Okay. Well, I'm
going to drop in some more damage. All
right. So, we can extend the hand. So,
we've got one, two, three damage. Uh, we
didn't end up making uh three of a kind
or better with this queen,
unfortunately. But, it would have been
good if we had. It would have been
amazing if we had. So, we didn't meet
the special conditions for that. So,
we're only dealing three damage. We take
two damage as a party. We go down to 18
health. We put three damage on these
bike raiders. And then we clean up the
plan. So, everybody grab your cards from
the plan. Um, and we are going to
continue. The person with the leader
token remains the leader until they are
uh until we've cleared out this
obstacle. I'm keeping score of both of
your health uh your health right now.
And if you if you all lose to the bike
raiders, I'm going to be very upset. I'm
just saying. If we on stream lose to the
first obstacle, I'm I
just just peace. So, I want to ask a a
couple of questions real quick as we're
as as y'all are redrawing and looking at
your at your next plan here. Um, so, uh,
first off, it sounds like these decks
are not, while they have numbers and
symbols that might be associated with
like a standard deck of playing cards,
they're different and they're different
per role. So, each of you each of your
ro decks is full of different things
that really tell the story of being a
rocker, a nomad, a netrunner, a solo.
Yes. And as we can talk about a little
bit more, the design impetus behind
these is also uh there's a lot more I
like the back in the day. I really love
the creativity of building a deck. Uh
before we did a lot of net decking and
one of the really interesting things
about these is there are so many more
vectors when you're think of a poker
hand as a designer that I can put down,
especially when I can make a card with,
you know, three or four numbers on it or
a bunch of symbols. And so there's so
many more vectors I can play with.
It is very difficult to actually find an
optimal deck. Optimal deck will be
different depending on who you're
playing with, what how people think, and
just like there's a lot we've had a lot
of back and forth between very similar
cards. Um, and so basically, uh, these
are poker cards that can get wild,
right? Uh, style, we've got, you know,
whatever. Uh you can make you can make
two fours of a kind in a hand if uh it
once you've leveled up enough and are
really kitted out. Right. Because they
don't it's not just one number and a
suit. Right. Yeah. Right. Sometimes
there are things like uh like our razor
girl which I don't know. Can you pull up
uh Razor Girl on your end? I I I don't
have those unfortunately. We only had
the three elements from the actual
scenario. We only have the scenario deck
cards. after after this uh maybe we'll
send you on Discord uh some images that
you can pull up and we can talk about
the design behind them. Um but like this
Razor girl that Brett had played uh and
has uh was basically an eight, a six, a
body symbol and one damage, right? So as
a designer, I can change any of those
vectors and is let's say is 9 seven or
86 better? Well, it really depends on a
lot of what else is in your deck, right?
because it's context, right? It's not
because you're because you're going for
a a a hand, a pair, a straight, a
whatever. It's all about the people that
you're playing with.
There's also an element that I like
which reminds me of bridge in a weird
way. And that is normally you cannot
tell people exactly what you're doing,
right? But there is a chronological
element of if I saw what Brett brought
down and he saw what I did when I look
at my next hand I go
he probably is going to have something
along this line right so I'm going to
then know what I want to play. So if I
had for example the ability to ditch a
card and change I know where I want to
go. I know I what to get so I can back
up whatever Brett's going to throw down.
After a while, what happens is you get
to know the play style of the other
people in your team just like you would
in a real cyber bumper. Right. Right.
And it's funny because when testing,
right, we have some teams that are
really good at like making flushes
versus other teams which try really good
at making straights. And sometimes teams
like literally won't see like the
straight in front of them. And so cards
that are good at straits are actually
way worse for those teams. There is a
card that was very similar to Brett's
Razer Girl, uh, but instead of dealing
one damage, uh, it basically deals two
damage if you've made a straight. Is
that better or worse than the Razer
Girl? Really depends on who you're
playing with and how you built your
decks. That was one of the things that
really got me in the play testing that I
was lucky enough to do was the fact like
every time we played with a few
different groups, like Aiden, you were
there, I think 95 to 100% of the time,
but then we'd rotate through if James
could make it, someone else, someone
else. And every time we played it, the
team like what it felt like what we were
going for. Like the mindmeld worked
differently based on the group, which is
exactly what you want. Like that feels
like an RPG to me. That feels like a
group of people playing like a much more
complex thing. You get the emotional
investment in it. It's awesome. Real
quick.
Yeah, exactly. Someone just asked in
chat, just another point of uh uh of
question. Okami Okami, sorry I'm
butchering that. asked um uh so if if
there were three people playing like
would then say um would Brett have
gotten a second turn as well? Yeah.
Right. Like it would go it would change.
Right. Excellent thinking. Yes. That's
exactly how it works. So if you're
playing with three people, uh how we've
balanced it is actually it's a little
bit easier if you have can take multiple
turns, right? Because you have a little
bit more control of the plan. But on the
other side, if you're down a roll, you
know, if you don't have your netrunner
and you have to hack some cameras or
whatever, that's going to be a harder
challenge. And so, it sort of naturally
balances out. So, good. Yeah. And then
uh for those of you wondering about
solo, basically you're going to be
playing two decks, but because you know
you got a hired gun there who's not
totally under your control, they start
every obstacle by flipping the top card
of their library and that goes straight
into the plan. And now you have to
figure out how to make the plan work
with this one totally random card in it.
That's actually the best way to play.
It's so good. It's basically this scary
NPC who shows up who might be worthwhile
or might be a disaster. And sometimes
Leroy Jenkins it right into the middle.
You just go I don't know what to play.
So I'm going to put a card down. Let you
guys deal with it. Speaking of, let's go
for the next round. Um so I
This is the other thing as a um as the
leader. One of the really interesting
moments is trying to communicate to your
team what you're thinking by the card
you play. So in this case, I'm going to
I'm going to have some electric dreams.
Uh, I've got I It's an eight, a six, a
four, and has a tech symbol on it, but
only counts towards a straight or a
straight flush. So, we can't make any
pairs with this. And when he plays that,
I'm just going to go ahead and tell the
rest of the table, just do damage.
Excellent. We're going to hit. Don't
worry about it. Nice. Got this. All
right. Don't worry about it.
Um, so we have to deal five damage to
this thing if we don't want to take any
more damage to it. So, that's the other
side. like right even when you know that
you're going to hit the question then
becomes like the strategy then becomes
okay how do we optimize damage if if we
have a a very diverse set of skills that
we're going to throw in this I can um I
can certainly help with us with this
I I think uh one of the very interesting
things uh as folks are playing is all of
this is contained in that card like this
entire encounter is contained in this
very simple
straightforward obstacle, right? That
creates this because it's it's
presenting an interesting challenge that
your decks must solve together, right?
That's one of the really interesting
things that I love like the how small
the amount of information to present a
cool challenge is, right? And as you can
tell, right, that also allows us a lot
of room for complexity, right? like the
bike raiders. I didn't read, but like
you know, it says they aren't here to
talk. So, there's some flavor text, but
that whole box can contain other rules
text. Uh, this is what I mean by really
easy to learn. You've already learned
everything in the game, right? Like, you
know, leader flips over these cards till
we get to an obstacle. Uh, and you know,
how to set up a plan. That's the whole
game. Anybody watching the stream has
already learned it. Yes, there are some
small interactions that like if you're
really hardcore and want to know like
the Arata, we got it for you. But you
could play the entire game just learning
what you've learned here on stream. Um,
and
this space on the bike raiders allows us
to create very interesting or complex
uh, wrenches to throw into how you're
trying to solve these problems. Uh, but
I've talked for too long, Mike. Okay.
Well, we're looking at things that can
bring up that damage. So, I am going to
actually play guns. Lots of guns. All
right. plus one damage for each fist or
fighting card as it were when the plan
is executed which gives us one already.
Right. So now we've got a lot of
different vectors, right? We we've got
the opportunity to throw in every time
that now somebody else throws in one of
those punch symbols, uh we're going to
deal extra damage for it because of this
card that Mike played. So now maybe that
changes the plan uh of people after.
Well, we solo. Yeah, normally I go solo,
but if you brought enough to share, I'm
going to call in the local
reinforcements. I love this. So, local
reinforcements, you guys can't see it.
Local reinforcements is a card that has
no text, no numbers, and just three of
those punch symbols. So, it's dealing
three damage here, right? So, we've
already done three and then four. Yep.
And we are one away from a flush now
because we have one flushes and straits
are are five card runs basically or five
symbols whatever in the case. Um five
numbers or five symbols. So we've got
the one from the ace. We've got the
three from local reinforcements. We're
almost hitting this thing. So my
question now to the team is do you think
it's better for me to make sure we hit
right now or do you think you can make
sure we hit now that we're one away from
a flush? Pretty sure I got this. Okay.
because then I can add some more damage
actually and tell you without giving
anything away by him just leaning back
and looking badass is so we know
probably something there that he's got
you know what I'm I want to do the cool
thing so actually I'm going to make us
hit and do one more damage because I
don't have any more uh any more body
symbols but so James started out with
the card with four six and eight on it.
I'm gonna add a five and a seven with
one card. Quite serendipitously, we uh
have a straight with two cards. Yeah.
So, I played my electric dreams, he
plays his ghost in the mist and in two
cards, we made a straight, right? So,
that's the sort of like ways that as you
start figuring out how to work as a team
and as you start building up these
things and it allows opportunities to do
other things. This is, you know, since
we're not going to do more than just
this card, I'm going to throw down my
the setup plus one damage for each
different suit in the plan. Well, we got
one, two, three, four because now we got
this, right? I didn't see. So, we got
the whole gamut. So, I'm dealing four,
five, six, seven, eight, nine because of
Mike's play. If we had done this as our
first round, we would have just
obliterated this thing in one round and
taken no damage. Um, so that's like the
variance, right? And as you start
learning how this works, as you start
learning how to work together as a team,
uh, you know, this is these scenario
decks are going to get harder and
harder. Oh, yeah. And you're gonna have
to figure out okay now. Well, right now
this we only needed a pair or straight
and you know we need to deal eight
damage but it goes pretty far. Yeah. Um
so with that we'll clean up our plan.
Vikers dead. Y are down.
And um I So now this is the obstacle
goes in the discord. Uh the leader token
moves. Uh, Mike, do do you want to do
some reading or should I pass this on to
somebody else? Uh, I'm gonna read. All
right. Grab the top card. We'll read it
to the to everybody. Okay. Let's get
some pain out here. Wreckage.
Okay. The bikers try to flee. One makes
it, one doesn't.
Something's wrong here.
You're new in Night City, but even you
know that this is expensive tech for a
couple of nomads just in from the
wastes.
It's time to ask the pawn broker some
questions.
Remember, set aside your blue clue
cards. You can fur them at any point.
Now, clue cards are things that you can
run that will give you more information
about a situation. So, it's not an
obstacle as much as a way to help you
push through an obstacle if you don't
know enough. And later on, there are
puzzles. Uh there are choices you have
to make as we go through. And you can
refer back to these clue cards and
you're just going to set these aside.
And as you get to these other moments,
you may find an encounter where you
don't know exactly what to do or how to
solve the thing you're facing, but it's
always going to be there somewhere in
some of the cards in front of you. Uh,
and so these clue cards you can look
back at for how you overcome the things
in the future. And you also find
yourself having to remember what you
have found in way of clues. They don't
just pass. For example, in another run
that we did earlier, uh we discovered
that there was a clue we were given by
the pawn broker to not give too much
away. But what we found was three or
four obstacles later that was an
important thing, right? And we're going,
"Thank God we and we were all running
around. How do we do this? How do we
figure out where we're supposed to go?"
Oh, crud. That's right. The pawn broker
said that. And it's funny because right
this is it says to set it aside. sitting
there on the table, but you're looking
at this thing. You're looking at things
and then I think it was Mike in that
case who was like, "Oh, right. Remember
the pawn broker. This is what he said to
us. We should do this thing here because
otherwise we went and did the wrong
thing at first and we almost got
ourselves trashed."
Yeah. And uh Yeah. So that's bad. You've
basically learned everything. Like the
only other things is you refill your
hand after each round and after each
obstacle. You can toss as many cards as
you want and draw back up to five. And
that's it. That's the whole game. You
can play everything with the amount that
we've discussed in these in these few
minutes. So, yeah, welcome to Cyberpunk
Legends. Yeah. Excellent. Excellent. Uh,
as as we uh as we clean up our little uh
example here, I did have a question from
chat that I thought uh could use a small
bit of clarification. So, that scenario
deck that that's not something you have
to shuffle or anything else. That is
that is a preset run essentially. It's a
story in the form of a deck. And you
just put that down on the table. You
don't have to rate it ahead of time. You
don't have to shuffle it. You don't have
to do anything. You take it out of its
package. You put it down and no one has
to prep. No one has to like you. It gets
to be an experience that the four of you
share. No one has to be in charge of
learning it ahead of time or doing any
work, right? And nobody has to GM and
sit out or whatever. Yeah, this is all
and the really interesting thing is from
a design perspective, there are two
elements to cards, right? There's the
randomization element to the cards. So
for the example, the player decks,
right? I shuffle them and it allows
scenarios things to change, right? It
gives me randomized, but there's also
the data retention properties of a deck
of cards. This can function like a stack
of memory in a computer. Uh, and so in
this case, right, because it's all
there, not only can you immediately jump
in, but as a designer, I can do stuff
like you encounter somebody and I can
say, well, do you say thing A to them or
thing B, right? If you say thing A,
discard the next card without looking at
it. If you say thing B, draw the next
card, right? And this allows for us to
build in some of those RPG feeling
choices and puzzles and other things
into this style of deck. Yeah, there's
another thing about that deck which is
really great is that a lot of times when
you're running a game, you have a
problem of you're going to get
interrupted. You know, your kid comes
running in and goes, "Hey, I drowned a
cat." Or whatever. Oh god, that's
happened. I I'm not going to ask. But
you can at that point say, "Okay, we're
this far in the deck. Give me a rubber
band." Well, it keeps going. You can
pick it up two weeks later if you want
it. It's actually you don't even need to
rubber band your cards and destroy them
because the way we're building the box,
there's actually a place to separate out
the part you played, the part you
haven't played. Um, and a place to put
all your clues and the other pieces that
I'm not going to ruin the surprise on
that you might want to separate.
Exactly. Yes. Uh Atron Nusnox just said,
and this is a sentiment that I a
thousand% the first time I played this
uh game, I truly believed, which is
basically, I love my friends, but not
when they take 45 minutes to try to
teach me a game. This is a game that
literally you can be taught in 5 minutes
and actually be playing and enjoying and
not going back and opening a a rule book
and like trying to figure out all this
stuff like it's just there. Well, when I
There's no rule book. I can teach my
parents how to play this game. Yeah, my
my dad likes poker, so he's already got
half the rules already. You know, the
institutional memory of like basically
the functionality of what you're trying
to do, the rest is is cool rapper. Yeah,
right. You'd be surprised. You put four
game designers together, uh it still
takes half an hour to read the rules
because everybody reads a little bit and
says, "I understand how this works." And
they're completely wrong. So it's really
funny because we've obviously play
tested this with a lot of people uh and
many of them are just you know people
who are outside the industry but when we
when we play test it with uh you know
really highle groups of designers it is
really funny sometimes uh testing the
rules and being like you know most
people are actually better at reading
the rules than you guys. Yeah. And part
of that is because as a designer, you're
used to figuring out where the
manipulation can happen in the world.
And there's not a lot of manipulation
happening here. And as a designer,
sometimes we like know so many games
that there's a shortorthhand that we But
oh yeah, there aren't many cooperative
poker games out there, right? There
aren't many games that use a scenario
deck in this fashion. And so it's really
funny seeing people sometimes uh
shortcut over things in ways that um are
not correct. But like honestly uh I
would say we certainly we've run enough
play tests that it takes about 5 minutes
to teach any group that at least one
person knows poker and probably about 10
minutes to teach people who don't know
poker because we've had a little handy
uh like poker hands card that comes with
your deck that you can put next to uh
yeah even even in the uh the play tests
I've done where I take four people
who've never played before and never
seen the rules and I just give them the
rule book and say figure it out usually
Usually one person that's the most, you
know, experienced with these types of
games reads the rule book and then is
able to teach everybody pretty fast. And
I think with the way the scenario decks
work, too, it's really easy to just jump
in and kind of learn as you hit. Oh, I
hit an obstacle. How do I do an
obstacle? Let's check the rule book
really quick. Oh, okay. Understand.
Also, also, we have a I I I feel like
all four of you will absolutely love
this. We have a wonderful question from
chat, which is, "Hey, um, hey y'all.
What? Why is that biker got an aerosa
arm? And and to that I say, great
question. Next question. Huh. So, huh,
we saw something in the art. I wonder if
that's going to help you figure out
something later on on the clue card.
It was on a clue card. the level the
level of detail in even the the the the
pre-est decks that I have seen and the
way that you the ways that you can
disseminate information in this game and
the way the story is told is so fun and
like I'm a very visual person so I clock
these things too but like I might not
maybe get like that narrative hook or
like a clue in a written word where
someone else does. There's so many
different ways for different types of
players to not only contribute through
the use of their cards, but also the way
that they deduct and and process the
information. This has been one of my
favorite things. So, sometimes we'll get
groups where, you know, uh to use the
term I don't super love, but like we'll
get like three or four people who have
different levels of gaming skill. A
couple of them will be like hardcore
gamers, right? And uh they'll be super
into the combat and like have really
deep thoughts on that. And we'll have
some people who are maybe not as big of
game players. Uh,
and then it's amazing because they will
get their moment to shine almost
universally will hit a puzzle or an an
obstacle that requires you look at the
clues or whatever and while everybody
else is beating their head against it,
that person who may not be as big on
like card combat goes, "Oh, I got it,
guys." And they feel great because they
get to participate in a way that
sometimes they don't in games. gets into
the different types of gaming that you
can encounter. Um, one of the things I
really like about it is that, and you'll
see this as you play your way through
the scenario decks. Um, scenario deck
cards don't necessarily have to be just
one axis. There can be, for example, one
of them that I was enga engaged with,
there were three different ways to play
that, but you needed to remember stuff
that had happened earlier. So what
happens is that you're no longer looking
at the cards and the art and going, "Oo,
shiny art." You're looking at and going,
"Does this mean something? Is it really
a clue?" It you know, and so what
happens is people pay attention to
what's going out in front of them even
as they're counting on what's going on
in combat or the current problem. And
one of one of my favorite things that I
got to Yeah. Uh, one of my favorite
things that I got to see in the play
test, um, and I will give nothing away,
is how many different ways you can use
the idea of cards as a discrete packet
of information given to the player that
has a known side and an unknown side.
And the number of different ways uh,
that this game has explored that
concept, like that very fundamental
idea, right? There's a card, you get to
see one side and not the other, and
it'll tell you a piece of information,
and that's it. And maybe you make a
choice and do something based on that.
And there are so many different ways to
explore that in a game that has
fundamentally very simple rules that
lets you do new interesting things each
time you run into a different part of
the scenario deck, which I just found
absolutely fascinating. Yeah. And
different ways in which you can use that
scenario pack as well. Yeah. And this is
this is one of the things that we were
really trying to achieve as we were
building out this game, right? Like the
idea of cyberpunk like we were going to
the RPG and you don't want just
linearity, right? You don't want to just
look at things because cyberpunk is
layers, right? Like Night City is so
many layers and we wanted to get that in
the feel in the way that you're playing
the cards. Um, and so
I'm trying not to spoil things. It is so
hard. That's the thing. I I I like I
have so many elements of this that I
kind of have and I've only scratched the
surface, mind you, with with the the
play test that I've done, but like
there's so many things that like we all
have to kind of dance around like the
cool like there's so many different ways
that you interact with the adventure in
this that is so much better if you don't
know them beforehand. You don't want to
give anything away either because what
happens is I can think of three or four
things cuz we've played through an
entire deck at once. And you'll find
that there was a way something was
presented that you didn't expect and it
totally changed what you were doing in
relationship to everything that
followed. Yeah. Yeah.
Well, maybe see you want your fingers.
Tyler will take your fingers
through our social media. uh will
kill me brave. So, what I will say is
maybe maybe we'll come back on. I do
also don't want to spoil any event for
the audience because I do actually think
there are really fun reveals. Like we've
had moments where people go, "Oh." And I
don't want to ruin that for anybody, but
uh you know, maybe later on when we've
revealed some more cards, we'll come
back on the show and uh and talk about
some of the ideas behind some of this
other stuff. Now, if you play test with
us and you hit a puzzle, uh you're on
your own because Right. Right. Right.
Well, yeah. Something we could
eventually talk about in when we uh in a
future stream or something like that
could also be like going through the
different um ro decks, too, because
those aren't necessarily secrets after
you've revealed cards in those ro decks.
And so I was I missed the uh someone in
in chat wanted to go over sort of um
this was a bit ago so I apologize for
not remembering their name but they were
talking about like uh is so the roles
that you sort of played obviously they
have different cards in them to give you
the feeling of that role. Um as far as
sort of the suits are they're not
classic poker suits. What are the actual
suits overall and then like you'd kind
of just sort of plug them into the right
roles. Correct. Overall yes. So, I have
been avoiding this a little bit because
I apologize Drake. When we were doing
our play testing, we're not using I
wanted to use cool. Instead, we're using
charisma because we want to reach people
be who I may never have played cyberpunk
before. And when we were play testing
and we said cool like there were a lot
of people who were like, "Oh, what's
that? I don't fully get like this
concept or an icon for that was really
hard." So, anyone who is a big cyberpunk
afficionado, please don't don't don't
get super upset that we're not using the
the cyberpunk stats. Kids, face it, it's
worth the changes.
Trust me on this. Okay. It's an
interesting it's an interesting um uh
sort of it's it's moving uh uh the RPG
from one sort of format to another. and
the also the institutional memory of
what those two words mean across those
two genre not genres sort of like
delivery methods of gameplay, right?
Like delivery methods, right? I can
totally see it getting confusing for
both people that are super familiar and
people that are not familiar at all. So
that seems like uh a change that I do
understand. Makes me a little sad, but
I'll I'll get over it because of how
freaking awesome the rest of this thing
is. And it feels like there's there's
harmony there between the the these
these brand this brand new crew, right,
that just rolled into Night City and
people who might not be familiar with
Cyberpunk and this is a way to get them
in. And one of um I play a lot of
different games from a lot of different
series here on the channel. Uh and one
of the biggest things, one of the
biggest obstacles to existing big
monolithic franchises, ideas, worlds
like cyberpunk is how do I get in? It's
intimidating, right? And so something
like this,
while while it may not be what folks are
used to, this does I I am not very
knowledgeable about cyberpunk. Um, and
when I did my play test, I felt like it
was easing me right into the world of
Night City and like that I was that I
was learning everything I needed to
learn as I played the game. And I think
that really is important. Yeah, if you
don't mind me stepping in on this one.
Uh I just came back from Poland and I
did a conference called Digital Dragons
where the talk I did actually was how
you have to adapt franchises to
different modalities. How you can take
something that isn't just well for
example Cyberpunk right now exist video
game it exists in books it exists in
comics it exists in TTRPG it exists in
board games. All of those things are
part of an enormous franchise as you can
see from all the stuff back there behind
me. And yet you cannot deliver it the
same way for each one of those uses. You
have to look at the best place to
deliver it and yet still keep the feel.
And what I talked about in my uh TED
talk,
every time you talk, it's a TED talk.
Oh, no. It's mic. It's a mic talk.
So yeah, the important part on that is
that this respects that change in
modalities and what we did discover as
we deal more with the cyberpunk
franchise is that people pick up and
transfer things that are important to
them into the other modalities. Uh, one
of my personal favorite is Edgunners,
for example. And Edggerunners, uh, the
trigger guys and the team that put that
together were very, very intent on
getting across the feel of Night City
and what was going to be there. And you
can literally go through and I love
wandering nice city, by the way. I will
get in my car and drive all over the
place. Yeah, same. My city, man. Yeah,
my older time there. But um seriously,
what I loved was that they did edge
runners and they really reproduced stuff
and people went out in the actual video
game and when you could have boyfriends
and girlfriends or whatever, they went
on dates to the places that David and
Lucy went to. Now, that's pretty wild.
But what it means is that they found
pieces that weren't even part of the
play modality, you know, and they picked
it up and said, "This is still important
to me. I want to know what it would have
been like to do this." When you have a
franchise that can do that, when you
have a property that has something that
can reach out to everybody, you have
something that everybody can find their
specific hook to, and that means they
don't end up feeling like they're left
out. They're in there because they found
your door or their door into that world.
Yeah. Yeah. Uh I That's an excellent
Yeah, that's I'm That's the best I've
ever heard that. Yeah. Mini mini mic
talk. Thank you. Yeah, that's they
recorded it, but it's in Polish. But now
it's in English. Yeah. Polish. Uh what
Polish? I can order beer, which is the
important part. It's like step one.
Yeah, I'm I'm good. All right. So, uh,
as as we move into the the second half
of our of our time together, uh, shall
we shall we ask, uh, James and Mike some
some more questions about this about
this game. We've got we've got some that
are burning uh burning away. We're just
dying to ask. Uh, and some from uh some
of the VIPs over in the Night Crew Games
Discord. Uh, we can we can dive right on
into that. You guys think that's good?
Let's do it. Yeah, that sounds great.
Okay, let's do this. Want me to zoom the
camera back in? Oh, yeah. Yes, please.
Probably. Aiden, Brett, thank you. Thank
you so much for all your your play test
so I can play. We got to get you one
soon. You're absolutely right. Uh, I
want to take this my poker game. We have
a regular poker game and I want to take
this this
throw it down.
Uh, no. relatively soon at least deck
one cuz we're putting together all the
demo decks for um for Gen Con.
There was a question in chat. Someone
was like, "I'm going to Gen Con. Will
this be at Gen Con?"
So,
yes, but the demo is sold out in
literally like two two actual IRL
minutes. Um that said, uh come up to us
uh if you say you were on the stream. If
you're a VIP in our Discord, what have
you, like you're an early adopter, we
love you guys. Come up to us and we'll
try and figure out some way to get you a
seat at one of these things. Uh, we'll
play it in the hallway. Right. Like you
said, Denny's at 3:00 a.m. Let's go.
Yeah. Right. And over at Artell, we have
plenty of people who really enjoy this
as well. So, you know, if you look at
them nice and you slip a tenor under the
table, they might walk with you.
This is the Night City way after all.
Yeah, it is. Geez.
Um, I was going to say, so so kind of
swinging back to the the the genesis of
all of this, Mike, when when James and
Nightcrew came to you with just this
sort of like super fast-paced gameplay
that anyone could learn in 5 minutes.
Like, what was your initial reaction to
this just right off the bat? Um, my
initial was, "Wow, this is really
great." My second was, oh my god, we
don't have enough people right now.
Because I looked at all the stuff we're
currently doing because we also did
Witcher. We're doing our new game,
Shadow Scar. We're doing all the back
stuff for hundreds and hundreds, it
seems like, cyberpunk projects. You
know, I went, I don't want this to go
away. I want to do this. We just have to
find a way to pull it off. And James and
I are very good at sneaking around the
edges and finding ways to do stuff that
we want to get away with anyway, which
has almost gotten us fired at least
once, I think. I mean, but that's how
you get stuff done, right? You got to
walk on my line, right? Yeah. Yeah. The
uh James, I I I will say having worked
with you for so long, you are the
perfect partner for something like this
because you will take a great idea and
no matter what just just run a 10K with
it. Like even if you have to do it on
the back burners of everything, like
it's it it this partnership seems like a
match made in heaven is what I Well, it
is cuz we've been for years talking
about we want to do something. I've been
literally wanting to do a game with you
forever. We've been like talking about
this like we've got to find something we
can do together at some point. That
World War II game, like we're going to
actually do it. Um but uh yeah, no,
we're called Night Crew for a reason. Uh
you know, a we are a small company. I
like there's a lot of other stuff we
have to do to keep the the place afloat,
but we've been doing this for a bunch of
years and you know I cracked out my life
savings to make sure that we had real
artists, right? Rather than just doing
the AI stuff that you see on Kickstarter
all the time. Um there's always a way,
right? And uh it's taken a long time.
We've it's been a long path, but like
Mike's been super supportive the entire
time. It's been great and it's been
amazing watching just like the franchise
grow and grow as we're working on. Yeah.
Um Oh man. Yeah. Uh I want to make sure
I know we've got like 40 50 minutes
left. I want to make sure we get to the
questions that were thrown at us on the
Discord. Yeah. Yeah. Well, do you want
to take one of those? Sure. Uh so so we
we've been talking a lot about the how
to play the game and the and sort of the
world and the concepts. I have like a
really a really like cut and dry
question that I think it it's really
good to get answered. Um, so when people
buy this, how and also like what's
what's the format going to be? So
obviously there's the the four character
decks and some number of scenario decks
and how is that going to work? And you
mentioned a boxing. Can you tell us a
little bit more about that part? And
then that general question comes from
someone on your VIP discord uh named
that one guy. Yeah. Oh, okay. That guy,
right? Hey guy. Uh, no. I
So, uh, basically one of the things we
wanted to do was make it a little bit
lighter on your wallet than a CCG,
right? Um, the core set that you're
going to buy is going to come with all
the player decks you need, all of the
like scenario decks to get into the
campaign, um, and hopefully give you
like, you know, a bunch to do. And then
on top of that, give you the upgrade
packs, which we didn't even cover here.
Um, but to grow and level your
character, which I'm sure maybe on
another stream we're going to talk
about. Um, and then after that, we're
going to be selling expansions to finish
out the campaign, to give you new
scenarios to do, to uh put in other
roles, things of that nature. Uh, and so
that's really the model we're planning
right now. We've gotten it down to
about, you know, we think we can get out
a scenario every about four months and
on top of doing one big campaign a year.
So, we're trying to continuously add
content to it. So, it's a living world.
So, you can use your deck not only in
this product that you bought now, but
hopefully for years to come, the things
that you're buying now will like an RPG,
like cyberpunk like will be relevant,
right? Will level up, right? Okay. So,
sleeve your ro deck. Got it. Okay, cool.
Great. Awesome.
Well, and that's a cool part, too.
That's part of the during some of the
play test that kind of blew my mind when
we finished like a section of a
scenario, even a scenario moving into a
second scenario. The way and we won't go
into how it does it, but it's really
nice cuz even throughout multiple play
tests across I think it was like a
couple months, it did feel like the
character that I was playing uh I I
believe I did the Nomad as well. Uh no,
I did. Yes. No, I did do the Nomad. um
that it felt like based on what I chose
around how well we did versus what stuff
you get that like I'm actually building
something that is um honestly
mechanically different than it was
before and with sort of like the idea
that you could with new scenarios that
obviously would come with sort of like
you know new ways that could change in
the future as well of what you get and
how you level up and like obviously it's
not going to be as deep or complex as
like the RPG But uh we did really work
hard to make sure that there was uh the
option to choose whatever life path you
wanted. Sure, I may be starting by
playing the rocker deck, but I could go
hard and commit to being like, you know,
Carrie Urodine or whatever. Or uh I
could go the other direction and start
making my character a generalist who got
interested in tech or, you know, decided
he liked big guns as well as guitar. Um,
and as you start to upgrade your decks,
you'll have those options to craft the
path for sort of your your character and
how you want to play. Yeah. You won't
have a deck, you'll have a character.
Yeah. Yeah. which is something that I
find incredibly incredibly interesting.
Um the way sort of speaking of
characters obviously when you're playing
with a group of four friends etc. Uh and
you both had mentioned this in the past
and Mike I know you you sort of baked
this into Cyberpunk as well like that
feeling of teamwork. No one survives
alone in Night City after all. Um that
always has felt like a core tenant of of
of the world of cyberpunk. Um I guess
how this is sort of a question for both
of you but like um cooperative poker
games as you have said are few and far
between. I've played two or three of
them um but not they are not all over
the place. How did how did poker or you
poker hands as a format in con in
conjunction with making sure that you
actually felt like a cohesive unit in a
team. How did that sort of come
together? How did did that happen
instantly? Was that an iteration thing?
How did that go? So I I mean I tell all
these guys and these the the poor people
you saw on the stream just a moment ago
uh who are sitting just off camera. Uh I
throw out 80% of my work. We throw out
as a company 80% of our work because I
do believe games are an iterative
process and that's how you get to the
best of it. It's just you keep saving
that top 20%. I went through about six I
think core mechanics for this game
before we hit on pover. It was a very
mathheavy version of this game, all
these sort of things. But what I
realized was it actually drew
inspiration from the the TTRPG because
Life in Night City is all about risk and
reward, right? And combat is hectic. You
don't always know what's like and it's
always a gamble, right? Um it's not like
some of these games where you're playing
a like invincible superhero. there's
always a risk once like bullets start
flying or even when you're trying to
like hack a security system or whatever.
And so I started thinking about well
where do I feel like what other game
systems do I feel like give me that same
sense and all of a sudden one day I was
like oh poker that um risk and reward
right and so it comes from the the
gameplay that is baked into the TTRPG
from way back from Mike and yeah going
along with what James said earlier is
you know I have a filing cabinet
actually it's four levels now of just
game design concepts I've tossed out
over the years, including about five
different versions of Cyberpunk. Um,
what we had to bake into the original
was a sense that there really was
realistic risk. Um, or to put another
way, people say, "How comes so deadly?"
And I go, "Because one of my play
testers was an Army Corps uh, Ranger
paramedic who'd been out there in a
sandbox and knew what happened when a
bullet hit you." Yeah. And he told me
that in exhaustive tale. I kind of went,
"Okay, I'm glad it was you, not me." But
we wanted to make you feel when you were
there that there was something that you
were risking. But if you made it, it's
kind of like a really good heist movie.
It wasn't you went to jail, you made it,
you got a great score, you kept moving.
If you screwed up, you were dead. And
that's important because it puts all the
cards up on the table. Yeah. No, that
and it gives it that actual sense of
meaning, right? Like, you know, after a
while, I love Marvel movies as much as
the next person, but after a while, like
there's just no stakes. You're just
like, these characters are invincible.
Like, even if they die, I know they're
coming back. Like, you'd think a Sky
Beam would do something, but turns out
not really. Yeah. You know, what's a
little sky beam now and then? And so, to
get that sense of stakes, you need that
sense of risk, right? So, actually we
have a question from chat that I think
perfectly mirrors that um uh from
Bobberation over in Twitch chat. Uh
what's the fail state if the party hits
zero? Is there a penalty and you
continue? Do you have to resort? Do you
have to reset the scenario deck and or
you just dead and that's the end of it?
Like what is for your campaign? What
does that mean? I will say you don't
have to reset the deck, but there is a
there's a single line in the rule book
which says if your health reaches zero,
open the trauma team pack. Mhm. And
that's all I'm going to say about it.
Hell yeah. I'm about it. That's That's
And everybody loves dim trauma team. I
want to make a scenario deck for Trauma
Team. We've been talking about that for
weeks. I love trauma team. I want to
make loves trauma team. And the stupid
part was traumat
clerics in a realistic cyberpunk
situation. Cleric. Oh yeah. Flying
clerics. Oh yeah. Clerics in really big
helicopters. clerics backed up by
paladins who just happen to have two
giant guns. Yes. I I I think that of all
of the things that um resonate as like
symbolic of what it means for something
to be cyberpunk, trauma team is like
very close to the top of the list of
just like the oh yeah, that makes
perfect sense for the world of
cyberpunk. And also I don't know how to
feel about this. That's kind of it's
just a lot of feelings. It's very cool.
Yeah. Well, and there's just so so many
cool stories there, right? Like what I
love about getting to work in this
franchise is Mike has built this place
where like there are so many stories in
Night City and very often we see these
like big highlevel like corp CEO or like
edge runners who are legend stuff, but
like I love the idea of a trauma team
story about people who are just going
through their lives like employed by
trauma team and what that would mean,
right? And how that would feel. Yeah.
The comic book. Oh yeah. for example.
Yeah, I got that comic. You You look at
the comic, you kind of went, "Whoa, I
didn't even think that was going to
happen." Yeah. I also want to get a
trauma team jacket from my my own doctor
because I think she deserves it. Yeah.
Um, another question from your VIP
Discord. Uh, Captain Whizfizz asked,
"What excites you most about this
iteration of the franchise, and what
kind of stories are you excited to tell
with it?" that you might have to dance
around that slightly considering. But is
there any uh nuggets you could drop on
that one? Uh I guess you want to go
first? Should I go first? What how do
you want to do this? Uh I'm excited with
the idea that you can tell smaller
encapsulated stories. Usually the
biggest problem you have with anyone
trying to do cyberpunk from the outside
is I think of it as we're saving the
world. Yep. Right. No, you save
yourself. You save your friends. You are
not making the big score just because
you want to become rich. You're making a
big score because there's a reason,
whether it's desperate or revenge driven
or whatever. And one of the things I
really liked about the decks is that
they essentially present stories that
lead to some places that are very
personal. And that's really neat because
that's the feel you should have in a
good cyber punk story. Well, and on my
side, right, uh, one of the coolest
things to me is
most of the things that exist in this
franchise are monolithic endeavors,
right? Whether it be the video games or
you guys getting out a book, right? That
takes a really long time and a ton of
work. And it's not that these aren't a
ton of work. Doing each of these
scenario decks is a ton of work, but we
can get them out faster, which means we
like we're starting in 2012, right?
We're starting at the very sort of
beginning of what you would understand
as cyberpunk. Yeah. And we're going to
get to explore a lot of places in the
timeline. And so if you're a cyberpunk
fan, we're going to at least get to
touch on all these places that we
usually don't get to see because uh it's
just you can't really do that if you
know like making a new core book is a
multi-year endeavor, right? And so you
have to do the big stuff. And here we
can touch on places that like, you know,
you may not have gotten to ever go to or
a top period in time that you might not
have seen a lot. Um, so yeah, that's
what I'm excited about. Awesome. Nice.
Awesome. Awesome. Um, uh, and I guess
that kind of touches on this question
that Charlotte asked also from the
Discord. Uh, is there any like um, so so
this is all going to be new lore that's
introduced? These are new stories that
you're telling and this is going to be
sort of um, canon to the series. This
isn't like a like an off in the boonies
sort of thing. This is all deeply
integrated into the I guess what I think
what I'm thinking of in my mind is like
the master cyberpunk timeline.
Okay. Uh there's things I can tell and
things I can't. That's the only thing I
can say. But understand that everything
that is done in the timeline inside the
franchise is in a master timeline that
has been just hammered to death so that
we all know exactly where we want to be.
And in fact, I had a conversation uh
last night at 2 in the morning because
Poland's nine hours ahead where we were
working out something where it was,
okay, the writer wants to do this, but
it affects things that happened 30 years
earlier. So, we need to figure out how
we get there because we don't want to
shut it off, but we want to make sure it
all goes together. Um, the last time I
dealt with anything that extensive was
years ago working on uh Star Wars
projects at West End and so forth where
you had to make it all kind of work out
or you know George was going to shoot it
down anyway. Right. Right. So you have a
responsibility to make that world work.
And when you have it working the cool
part is you don't have to tell the big
stuff that changes everything. You just
need to tell what's happening that
concerns the players. Yeah. And what
they're doing. For example, um one of
the earliest and the ones I typically do
um is one called the apartment. And the
apartment is essentially a very simple
scenario. All of the players live in an
apartment building that right now is
relatively rent controlf free and is it
actually in a combat zone and is now
they all get comfortable. they like it
and then somebody in a corporation sides
are going to knock it down and they're
going to put a radio tower up there. How
do you stop that? That's not a huge
thing. It's my house. Our home is about
to be flattened by some enormous
corporation somewhere and I'm not going
to go up to that corporation and blow up
the corporation. No, I've got to find a
way at the ground level to deal with
this. And that's personal. And when it's
personal, people care. Yeah. And Oh,
please. No, no, go for it. Yeah. I was
gonna say those are the kind of stories
that really resonate with me.
Earthshattering, world saving things.
Sure, that's great. But like I feel
like, and this is just me on a soap box,
but I feel like media in general has
gotten to the point where like that is
now what is expected. But because that
is expected and that's what we get so
much, it just becomes boring. It becomes
mundane when it should be incredibly
special. What feels special to me right
now, Mike, is a story like you just
said. What this is a this is a personal
thing about your home and a group of
individuals. And you can get that story
across and it can be incredibly
resonant. You don't need world shaking
events like as far as a global
perspective because your world is very
personal and cyberpunk is a perfect sort
of uh uh I guess venue for stories like
that. And I'm psyched that we'll get
more of them in in in all the different
variations of of where you're putting
this world, but this card game in
particular. Yeah. One of the interesting
things is, you know, um Edgarunners,
which is our uh anime. Yeah. Uh
Edgunners works because at core it's a
story about a guy, a girl, maybe a
triangle going on, a found family, and
the dangers that go with it. Everything
that David, for example, goes through
all the way to the end is for those
people he cares about and he puts it on
the line for those people. He doesn't do
it because he's going to get rich. He
doesn't do it because he's going to go,
you know, up a corporate ladder
somewhere. He does it because he cares
about those people. Yeah. Which is why
when, you know, almost every time I've
watched people watching edge runners,
they come out of it balling their eyes
out. Yeah. It's Yeah. Guilty. I hope to
God no one ever hits us with therapy
bills on this. Right. Right. Right. But
yeah, basically it's because it is
personal and you want to see those
people come out of that because after a
while you realize it isn't some abstract
thing like we have to stop this, you
know, enormous threat from space that
will destroy us. It becomes this
enormous threat is about to step on my
kid's school. Yeah. And it feels like
that's really um
The distilled purpose of sci-fi, right,
in general is to do that, tell very
human stories in a different place, in a
different time in a way that lets you
magnify the humanity and the
similarities of those stories to your
experiences, right? That like um the the
the whole idea of humanity be of sci-fi
having the darkened mirror effect,
right? You get to you get to tell this
cool story that's fundamentally right a
guy, a girl, a love triangle, a struggle
in a different world that magnifies that
in a way that resonates with the viewer
is, I think, one of the the best parts
of that whole genre. And the way that um
you're doing it here, what James talked
about with small stories, right, is
feels so important to that, right?
Because I I'm with Matt. I think that
it's very easy to have giant stories,
but small stories that get billet welded
together to make a world are my absolute
favorite. Yeah. Same here. Um, speaking
of sort of um things that can con I'm
going to co-op this. I'm going to take a
a question I wanted to ask. Uh, I first
and foremost, uh, James, you brought
this up very briefly, but the art for
this game is phenomenal for all the
cards that I've seen. Uh, and also, uh,
I think you've got some phenomenal
artists on this. I love that you're it's
it's you know, as you said, real human
artists doing real human work and I I
love that to death. Uh what were some of
sort of the the musthaves that uh both
of you really like felt you really
needed in this game to not only convey
the feeling of what you're trying to get
across from a narrative perspective, but
also like to ensure that various
gameplay elements may or may not be tied
into those uh said pieces of art. Are
you talking about must have on the art
side specifically? Yes. Yes. Um well, so
from my side and then I'll hand this
off, but like uh from our side, one uh
was obviously working closely with the
artists on all the puzzle and clue cards
so we could make sure that the game
design and the art was actually
integrated, right? And that art was part
of the game design rather than these two
things just being separate.
And then it
was
more varied.
Also look a little sy. Like if you lay
them out in front of you, you kind of
can't tell what's what at a glance. And
we felt like Cyber Punk has so many
different feelings in it, right? that
like the the like the triumphant rocker
moment should visually look and feel
different than like the CD Noir moment,
right? Um and so we tried to capture
different styles for each of those
things and sort of present Night City as
not just monotone but rather like having
this vibrance and this very different
forms of life throughout it. Um,
actually, uh, courtesy of Aiden, I have
I have a couple of examples. You were
talking earlier about Razor Girl. Um, so
I I thought we could we could show that
off and like talk like this. This is the
kind of art that you're you're seeing. I
absolutely love this art. I just want to
show it off cuz it's it's so like it's
such a unique style, right? And Aiden,
can you clear with Irene, our art
director, uh, another piece to show that
is of like a different style? Yeah. To
show the variations. Yeah. Um because
sorry, I just want to make sure like our
art director has done a lot of work and
has been very patient with me when I'm
like, "Oh, for game design reasons, it
actually has to be this way." Um and so
I just want to make sure that we're not
showing off artwork that uh they want to
save for later on.
But yeah, Mike, what are what are your
thoughts? What do you feel like? Well,
first of all, Talsorian does not use AI
art. Yeah. And there are a number of
reasons including the fact that my art
director on my side uh winter will
basically beat us with a stick if we do
it. And we hell yeah we kind of look at
it as it's something that doesn't have
the soul you need. But the other thing
which I think is very true in this card
game is you can't afford to have
extraneous nonsense. For example, if you
have AI generates something and it
generates the wrong number of fingers,
that number of fingers may be important
as a clue later on. That scene that
you've generated where there are 50
people and it would be easy to have AI
just generate 50 people. You may have to
have specific people in specific poses
and places just to set that scene. So it
would a little bit like trying to do a
movie and having something outside
generate that movie, right? And it's
like, you know, Night City is is such a
like living place. Mhm. An AI can never
generate Playland by the sea, right?
Like it doesn't know what that is. And
so if we want to put something there
like a human, a human can represent that
in a lot of ways, but they they will
represent that place unlike, you know, a
machine which might just give you a
ferris wheel on someone's head, right?
No, absolutely. Yeah. Uh Will, do you
want to take the next uh VIP question?
Oh, I I'm gonna I'm gonna I'm Or you
going to co-opt it, too? Well, I was
going to snipe the last one because I
think that's a great question. Go for
it. Uh, Diamond Jack wants to know a
very important question that I think is
burning on all of our minds. Um, and and
we just got to know. Mike, what's your
order in afterlife?
What's my order in afterlife? Yeah, fans
really want to know. Mike, that's they
had all this room to ask about the card
game. Someone used their shot to ask you
about that order. My my order in the
afterlife is a drink that I actually
have made in the past called the Darth
Vader. Nice. And it begins it begins
with dark rum, peppermint schnops, vodka
as far as you can fill it. And usually
if you can get it some kind of um well
in Night City probably radioactive, but
some kind of glowing swizzle stick.
Somebody described it when I made the
first one. I said, "This is like choking
an entire uh pine tree down my throat,
but then I'm happy about it."
So, yeah, that's and way I look at it
is, you know, Darth Vader is dead now,
but he was a legend and if he was around
if he was around in Night City, he'd be
the baddest ass solo ever.
That's correct.
Folks, yeah, that's no I I
have angered me.
Now that is a fight. That's the fight on
plan. Someday I feel like the there are
other universes which we must get
licenses to just so we can set up some
of these. Yeah.
Um let's see. I'm trying to go through
some of the other things here. Oh yeah.
Like just great. Oh here's okay. Here's
another lore question and then I promise
we will get back to actual game design
thing. But null asked on the VIP
Discord, "At what point in the cyberpunk
uh universe timeline do you foresee
humanity becoming space fairing?"
Speaking of Star Wars, of course. Uh I
mean, we do have a lot of orbitals.
Yeah, we we have the orbitals. We have a
failed colony on Mars, last I heard.
Yeah, we sent them out there. I don't
know whether CD decided to let them stay
or not. Sure. Um, but there was a
cyclinger that went out there that we
mentioned in deep space, which is one of
our earlier books. Um, and there are
there's at least two colonies, I
believe, on moon right now. Uh, one of
them which is actually running the Tao
mass drive, right? Um, going beyond
there has been a really interesting
question because to get into really deep
space to, you know, kind of go the
bladeunner, you're on another world sort
of thing. That's a lot of time. Yeah.
And it also requires a lot of people,
you know, it's the thing you never
really think about when you look at, you
know, Alien or, you know, Blade Run or
whatever is how many people are out
there, how how long did it take for them
to get to those places, right? And
that's something that because
we've gone out of our way to make this
all work and to make this a reasonable
foreseeable future, Interstellar is not
something we're really going for until
somebody in real life pops up and says,
"We figured out how to make the
Albuquery drive work." Well, yeah. And
what's really interesting to me also is
you have this like hyper capitalist
realm, right? like you have this hyper
capitalist space in cyberpunk.
There's not really at least with the
like modern super corpo like capitalism,
it's not really a good argument for
doing interstellar travel, right? Like
right quarterly returns on an
interstellar spaceship are not very
good. Five centuries later, you get to
find out if there's something
worthwhile, right? Yeah. And you know,
exploiting it is very difficult, right?
And your time scale doesn't fit with it,
right? Because if you're not going to do
like super FTL, you're talking about,
right, we're talking about 2012, 2066,
right? We're talking about like very
narrow windows of time when people are
going to be a like I assume we're going
to go like cryosleep close to light,
they're going to be asleep for hundreds
of years. So even if it hap even if it
launched today in the cyberpunk world,
you know, we're we're way down the
timeline. Okay, that's that's awesome.
Yeah. AdrienChaikovski
uh who's a science fiction writer I
really love his work and he does a
series called children of children of
time children etc etc and he tackles it
that way he says okay these people have
extended lifespans anyway but they are
sleeping cold sleep for centuries he has
one where literally you know the people
involved are in a much better spaceship
than we could ever make and they're
still knocked out for close to a
thousand years. Yep. And that's a
realistic time frame for what we can do
to get there. I'll Okay. Things that I
do within the world and now we
extrapolate are based on what exists,
okay? Or what could exist. So I want you
to think about something. If you can get
together the level of power that's
required to get an interstellar
spaceship up to even a reasonably high
fraction of light, let's say 10%.
That's more power than we've put
together most of all human history in
one place in one year gone. If you can
do that,
you don't have to worry about anything
else. You have at that point you have
anti-gravity, you have eternal life, you
I mean, you know, right? If if you look
at the uh the power curve of that trying
to think of the No, I mean you're right
like it's very hard to there's a term
for for power curves. Yes. Yeah. Uh and
like you know the different
civilizations. Exactly. But right like
you can't really have it's difficult to
even have a cyberpunk universe in a
space where that level of power exists.
Right. Um
but no it's it's interesting. I'm glad
people like are
don't on the other hand you know if
you're home brewing don't know
well that yeah I mean when when I think
bladeunner you know I don't think of the
off-world colonies as being off system I
think of them as okay some are out there
around Titan they're building colonies
and that's the off-world colonies you
know but I am never thinking about yeah
they're out there with space marines you
flying out there. No, you know, and part
of that is again cyberpunk works because
it is around the corner for where you
live. Well, and a little bit of the
stuff at Bladeunner, we get hints that
it's part of the reason for replicants
are so we can send them out into space
because, you know, they don't die like
human beings and whatever. Sure. If you
want to do a thousand-year investment,
okay, we put together this ship, we have
it go at 0.1% of light speed, and then,
okay, you've got manned by 500
replicants, and who cares? Or you send
them out there, and when you get there
500 years later, you say, okay, decant
all the Roy baddies, right? Right. Yeah.
Then you then we start getting into into
into trouble. Yeah. I did warn everyone
on the Discord that Mike and I are prone
to tangent, so feel free to veer us
back. It back. I'm going to veer it
back. So, speaking of speaking of let's
see if I can do this correctly.
Consolidating power towards a very cool
end goal.
Can you talk about what is sort of uh
what the pre-order system is live now or
what a possible crowdfunding thing is
going forward? Can you can you give us
any hints on how this will be how power
will be gained toward this project
moving forward? Um, so this is really
funny. I appreciate that was quite quite
the pitch. I love it. May I have
practice? That's an idiot to do this,
not me. So, uh, from our side, okay, uh,
right now we've got our pre-sale page
up. If you drop a dollar on the thing,
basically, you're reserving access to,
uh, the Kickstarter before everybody
else. Uh, you're going to get, uh, the
biggest discount that we're going to
offer. Um, you're going to get a shiny,
uh, foil silver hand when you buy the
base game and the Kickstarter or ship
with it. Uh, and you're gonna get VIP
access to the Discord. Uh, and as you've
seen, like we've got a bunch of
questions from VIPs in the Discord. Uh,
and like that's where they come from.
Um, and so yeah, if you're at all
interested, I believe it's
pre-sale.nightgames.com.
Uh, and yeah, you can you can sign up
for this thing. Um, and then you know,
when it goes live, you're just you're
going to have access to it first. And
that's basically where we're at. Uh I
was not expecting to be softball to to
make a sales pitch, but I really
appreciate it, Max.
Good job there. Phenomenal. Well, thank
you. I know that is also part Will and
Mai's job right now, but the it is such
a I don't want to I don't want to, you
know, blow smoke or any of that jazz. It
is such a pleasure to talk to both of
you and James sort of even learn as
you've been going on with this project
like this game. Pardon. Uh, I'll do my
one swear word for the day. [ __ ]
rocks. Like, I have such a good time
when I've play tested this game. And it
is something that I have a real belief
that uh people are going to experience
this at places like Gen Con and like as
you guys slowly roll out like more and
more stuff like I know it's it we're
doing the drip feed right now, but this
thing this thing rocks and it is going
to be big. And uh I I I am happy to do
the roll into sales pitch because I will
be there front and center day one. Uh
let's flip and go. I I'll I'll let you
know that I uh I I passed the link
around to our moderators uh and I was
like, "Hey, just so you know, if
anyone's asking, here's the link to
pre-sale." And several of them went,
"Right, other other people." Um hold on
a second. I gota I got to do something
before we start. Yeah. Okay, cool. Now
Now I'm ready to start the stream. Don't
Don't worry about what I It's fine. If
you if you are somebody who moderated
this Discord and bought this thing,
anytime you see me at a convention, just
come up and we'll figure out something.
I will find something. I will maybe grab
this man and grab and get him a pen
because I I I appreciate you all.
Too much hype. Too much hype crashing.
Wait, hold on. Oh god. No. Are we fine?
We're fine. We're fine. They're not.
We're We're Okay, everybody. Mike.
Everybody. Yeah. Arisaka got him. Oh,
they're gone. Gone. Yeah. A Arisaka got
a hold of of James and Mike. Do not
worry. The mega corpse they they hit.
Yeah, that's right. Um I wanted to ask I
wanted to ask Mike what his favorite cut
of Bladeunner was. And now I'll never
know. Uh I feel like you'll know. I feel
like he'll be right back. See, like
they're they're coming back in right
now. There he is. I'd like to any
netrunners nearby, we apologize. Right.
Yeah. Chad's guess was that Arasaka
finally caught up. Um what's that
burning? Oh, netrunners. Exactly. You
know, at some point we're going to get
like uh there will be enough dollars.
We're both running scrappy institutions.
His much like, you know, more
established than ours, but I'm waiting
for the moment where we can end one of
these streams by actually shattering a
window and having someone swing through.
Um I volunteered to be the person
swinging through the window. You can
swing through broken glass. Yeah. Yeah.
That fits our new game that we're
working on now. Uh Shadow Scar, where we
have ninjas leaping in from everywhere.
Perfect. Do you want to just like give
them the one line on Shadow Scar? Shadow
Scar. Um, jeez, this has been something
my my son Cody, who also uh developed
and did the Witcher TRPG as well. Um,
this has been something he's been
working on for I don't know how long,
but essentially the way I look at it is
Shadow Scar is sort of like ninjas and
Ghostbusters
using the technology level of um what's
that? Remember that old show where they
jump through the
Are you thinking? Because uh Quantum
Leap Quantum Leap. Uh what are we
talking about? No, not Quantum Leap. Um
Jeez, it just Stargate. Stargate. Yes.
Yes. Stargate meets Ghostbusters meets
ninjas. Okay. I I I love the Star
Stargate is just ras up there with one
of my favorites cuz the the pitch for
Stargate is your gods are dead. Take
these guns. We're starting a rebellion.
And I'm just here. I love that. Well, in
this one, it's okay. You You like
ninjas. Well, we're going to give you
all of uh the horrible side of Japanese
mythology, and we're going to spread it
out across the universe to destroy
everything. Good luck. Nice. Nice. I'm
pumped for that. Yeah. Yeah. It's it's a
it's a hoot. Nice. Uh I think we
probably have time for two or three more
qu We got like 14 minutes left. Yeah.
Uh, and Will, do you have one queued up?
I have another one from the VIP. If you
don't, I I was going to I was going to
ask this this one that was last on our
list because I think that that's sort of
like a good place. Um, sure. So, uh,
we're getting hitching. Waiting for No
more hitching. Waiting for the frames. I
can hear you guys. Is this still
working? Yes, we can hear you. All
right. Okay. Um, can I can you see me
move? Uh, oh, no. I'm definitely seven
frames a second. Yeah. You know, I'm
going to I'm going to go with we were
lucky it lasted this long given that
it's gotten this bad. Um it's fine.
Yeah. No, it's okay. It's it's clearing
up. It'll clear up in a second. So, um
All right. So, let's let's you know,
you're big on imagining the the near
future. Let's imagine the near future.
You get the the the Kickstarter. You get
all of this out. You get this in
people's hands. You're doing like the
the you know, a scenario every four
months, a big campaign every year.
What's your big vision for this? Is it
is it to do that until you know you have
like a whole series of small stories? Is
it to escalate? Where are like what's
what's your big overall vision for this
look like? So, I mean that's that's very
complicated. I don't want to say
anything, you know, at the very very
beginning because whatever I say now is
going to prove untrue. But on the
broadest level, legally some of it you
can't. Right. Exactly. On the broadest
level though, um we want to make this a
a game that you know you can take with
you in the same way that like cyberpunk
there are people who have been playing
cyberpunk for 20 or more years, right?
Whose characters like it's what they get
together with their friends to do on the
weekends and the stories they tell have
changed a lot since they were like 14
and first cracked this out, but it's
still this universe. It's still this
place. Um, and that's kind of what we
want to do. Uh, for me, I love card
games of all types. Um, but there's only
a handful of really strong narrative
card games, and I wanted more of that. I
wanted that experience that I could play
with my friends, that I could do co-op,
that didn't have some of the, you know,
barrier of competitive or like just when
we wanted to do something together as as
a crew. Um, and it's my hope that this
lasts for a lot of years, right? My
long-term hope is that honestly I can
hand it off. Like that's my real hope
where five years from now I've trained
up enough people who are like really
good designers on how this all works
that we can be turning out a lot more
adventures and that like different teams
can explore different aspects and have
different visions of these parts of
Night City. The other part I throw into
that is that something he hasn't thought
of yet, but we have learned um in in
amazing detail is going to be foreign
licensing and foreign versions of it. We
have Cyberpoint now in I think 10
different languages. Well, let me tell
you, this is going to be fun when I see
Well, I don't even know how we're going
to get the Japanese cards to get
everything on there, but you know, I'm
looking forward to seeing the art from
Japanese cards. Dang. Um, well, I mean,
you know, I do hear localizing in Polish
worked out okay for you many, many years
ago. Yeah. Yeah, that's a story in and
of itself. Um, but so from on our side,
uh, I know I've said this a lot, mostly
because, you know, forgive us when we
make mistakes. We are a a small team of
actual human beings. Um, but one of the
things that I want to set as a stretch
goal is to localize it for around the
world because we've already had lots of
people reach out to us and be like, "Is
this going to be in my language?" And I
would like to make it native in a lot of
languages. Um, it's a little bit of a
challenge compared to a lot of games
because just by its nature as a card
game, there's a lot more words than, you
know, uh, many just board games. And
then because so many of the cards, the
words, the order of the words, the
specific things said are mechanically
relevant, it becomes a little bit of a
challenge. But that's something that we
really really want to do. Mechanically
re relevant and also
vibes relevant. like the way the way
Night City flows like you have to make
sure that not only is the mechanical
element of the game but you want to make
sure like correct you want to make sure
that like the vibe of what you're trying
to get across in the scenario in the
action in the story is also still the
same incredibly difficult feature but
the big part of that is that we've
already done that worldwide with cyber
punk and we've done it for dang near 30
odd years uh as he was mentioning you
know polish working out all right that's
how we got into the video game was
original CD Pro guys played cyberpunk
when they were in high school which
makes me feel really old and basically
what we realized was it could be adapted
to all kinds of languages and the other
thing we discovered was that as it got
adapted we'd see other forms of the some
of the art we'd see some of the ways
things were described um I read at least
you know one other language which is
German and I was fascinated to go
through the German edition and go, "Oh,
yeah. It's it the idea is there. It
works." Yeah. But I wouldn't have said
it quite like that, but it works because
Germans differ. The the difference
between um localization and translation
is a huge and fascinating one. And so,
yeah. Oh, yeah. Definitely. Um Matt, you
had another question from the VIPs over
on the on the Discord. I believe I did.
Let me scroll back up to we can rapid
fire. I think we probably have time for
like two to at most three more
questions, but yeah, there you want to
grab off the Discord. Uh if there's
anything in chat that uh you guys think
uh I mean I know there's been more
questions in chat than we can possibly
get to, but if there's anything you want
to grab, fire off to ask. I'm I have a
final question I'll end with, but I got
a couple more from the Discords. Uh uh
Darkwing Drunk asks uh are there any
groups or corpse that haven't been
highlighted yet that you uh are excited
uh or you want to expand on? We we kind
of mused a little bit about Trauma Team,
but like uh is there anything else that
you've sort of like that's kind of a
hard question to answer considering you
don't want to spoil anything, but I'll
leave it to the two of you to sort of
walk that minefield. So from our side,
obviously I talked about trauma team. I
want to do that. I would love to do a
adventure from a corpo perspective just
because uh we rarely see that. But one
of the things that is very interesting
to me uh the bozos. Oh yes, there is
there is the bozo. We have bozo plans.
That is absolutely true. We there may be
a clown mode that we've talked about,
but also I want to do media, right?
Yeah. Um, I want to make sure that
because I think that's a really
interesting space in Night City. Yeah.
Actually, what always makes me a little
weirded out is the fact that the Bozos
were created by my lovely wife, Lisa. I
would have never suspected that, but she
came up one day and said, "Can I do one
of the gangs?" And I said, "Yes." She
said, "Boozos are very clever."
And that was the beginning of the night.
Amazing. Yeah. Yeah. I'm going, "I
always thought you were so serious." No.
No, I'm not always. No. Okay. So, who
did Philarmonic Vampires? Lisa. That
tracks so well.
That's some of the best gangs in
Cyberpunk were my wife Lisa coming up
with those. Nice. That's fantastic.
Well, long-term gamers do very strange
things. Yeah, I agreed. Just statement
of fact. Yeah. Will, what do you got?
Um, I got one from uh the Bush Chicken.
Uh, do you have a favorite Night City
legend? That's for both of you.
I'm gonna let you lead off on this room,
I think. Oh, yeah. No, my favorite is
still Morgan, which is one reason why
the way we have things organized, we
still are basically following the Morgan
tale even through into the60s to the
2070s, but I can't tell you what we're
doing yet. Dude, I was going to go with
Morgan. Um, I would love at some point
when there's not a camera, you and I got
to coordinate. Uh, because I want to do
something in parallel with whatever you
guys are doing, like a scenario or
something like that cuz Bart Moss, I
mean, that was the next like Bart Moss.
Uh, we've got a couple of We've got a
shout from Aiden in the background about
Bart Moss. I data crash. I'm so excited
to do data crash. Oh, yeah. That's going
to be I mean I think the deck alone is
just going to be insane. So I Okay, this
is a little bit of spoiler for a deck
that probably won't exist for a year and
a half. So you're all going to forget,
but I am very excited. It's going to
come just as a normal totally standard
like deck scenario. You don't like
you're just playing through and then in
the middle of a run the data crash
happens and things start to go haywire,
right? But you're not told that at all
when you begin this thing. And I'm
really excited for that moment for
players because I love the idea of the
data crash for like other people trying
to get stuff done in their life. Yeah. I
love the idea that, you know, what we've
kicked around is the idea that as you do
the scenario and it starts to change, it
will change also the effects of the
cards you have in your hand. So you
think it works like this, but then it
says if you're playing this now, it does
this. Oh, crud. Yeah. Yeah. Um, I think
I I will I will Let's see. What do we
got? Uh,
we already did the space fairing one.
You said you had a a final question. You
So, my final question is a little bit.
It's just for me. It's just for me,
Mike. I I I need to know. Uh, what cut
of Bladeunner is your cut of Bladeunner?
Nice. Oh, jeez.
Let's just start with voiceovers or no
voiceovers. No voiceovers. Okay. The
problem Yeah. The problem with
voiceovers is why I love some of it. Um
it tells too much. It gives too much
away. Yeah. And I love I I had not seen
it. Okay. When I first saw Blade Runner
years ago, I remember walking out and
saying to my girlfriend at the time, I
either love this movie or I hate it. And
then I went back the next night. Yeah.
I've been there. Oh, yeah. Yeah. And so,
but the thing is is that when I finally
saw the, you know, not the director's
cut, but the first u nonvo cut and I
went, "Okay, this is a different movie
now." Because I have to be inside the
heads of the characters and I don't have
everything explained to me and sometimes
it's overexplained. Yeah. So, yeah, it
would be uh there's a nonvoice version
that was post director's cut if I
remember right. I believe I think I
might be butchering this. It I think
it's the 2007 the final cut is the one
that doesn't have the voice over if I'm
remembering correctly. Chad, don't don't
uh or correct me when I'm wrong. I think
I think that's the last one. And yeah,
the thing is is that that's the one that
I love because, you know, if I'm
basically when when I'm barreling
through San Francisco, for example, you
know, in the fog and all that, that's my
Blade Runner moment. Yeah. And it's it's
also what I do when, you know, I
actually we have a huge monitor and
super powerful machine that we run 2077
on. And half my fun is getting there,
you know, in the evening, no one else is
around in the office, firing that thing
up, getting in my car, and just driving
to the sunset and, you know, running
Bladeunner soundtrack, which
unfortunately you cannot buy. uh you the
new American uh orchestra cut which is
not really the original Ben Jealous but
yeah that's just perfect and so yeah I
would say that that you know the 2000's
cut works nice and and the the and the
other part is if I remember right one of
the differences is also it doesn't have
the happy ever after ending the the door
slams and you just go I don't know what
happened And I'm not sure I want to, but
I like to believe. Well, and I love I
love the opportunity that gives you to
think about it, right? Oh, yeah. Um, but
man, I could do this. We could do this
for like ever. We will wrap it up. Thank
you for indulging my Bladeunner question
as the final one. Absolutely. Um, and if
anybody has any more questions, feel
free. Uh, there's a ask a dev section in
our Discord. Just come in, bug us. We
are around pretty often. I've got like a
two-hour drive home after this, so I
won't be around for a little bit, but
like tomorrow I'll be hopping on. Uh
yeah. So, come bug us. Like, we're very
open. Yeah. Uh and thank you all so much
for drink. There you go. I bet you
literally just had that under the table.
Perfect. Perfect. Big glass. Let's go.
And we're out. Um thank you all so very
much for joining us. Thank you all to
everyone who slapped follows. We saw
them as people came in. Thank you all
for joining us here again. I've been
Will. That's Matt, James, Mike. If
you're interested in getting a hold of
uh the most information you can and
supporting this, you can go to
pre-sale.netgames.com.
It's over in chat. Um you can click
there, you can put down a dollar, you'll
sign up for pre-sales, uh and you'll get
as much information as is available as
soon as it is. So, uh I think that's
going to do it for us. Thank you once
again so much for joining us and we will
see you all next time. Bye everybody.