Okay, friendos, Nerf gun to your head.
What would you say is the core
experience FromSoft wants you to take
away from the majority of their games?
Brutal difficulty, death as a gameplay
loop, deep lore dives, one to yeet
patches off a cliff. Look, all of these
things have helped solidify the genre in
the hearts and minds of players
worldwide. But I actually think that in
our everpresent quest to, you know, get
goodter, the discourse might have been
looking in the wrong place for the
actual secret sauce that keeps us coming
back for more. And all it took to
realize this was a rainy night. So
fellow Souls Dgens, today I present to
you a treatise on what very well could
be the real X factor of Soulsorn titles.
That they have always secretly been a
warm and cuddly social experience. You
know, even if a Melania cuddle can end a
good run real quick.
[music]
Want to support our shows, but like in
the most capitalist way possible? Then
why not snag a shirt, mug, puzzle, or
plushy from our merch store. Though,
full disclosure, Zoe plushy might
privatize nap production. Before we
leave this sight of grace, please
welcome longtime friend of the channel,
sister-in- arms against the encroaching
nightlords, and my favorite 3:00 a.m.
hotel lobby gaming buddy at every pax,
Jasmine, that bronze girl, Bular, who
guest wrote this episode. Thank you,
Jasmine. From Bloodborne to Saro, Elden
Ring to Dark Souls, FromSoft's flagship
games are often set in oppressive
forlororn landscapes in decline. With
many forces, both in-game and out,
pushing you, the player, to feel like
this is an experience meant to be taken
on by yourself, that it's you and you
alone wandering and outnumbered through
a dark and crumbling realm. So, it's no
surprise that at first, these countless
hours I've spent in these worlds has
always come with a quiet solitude.
Because although playing a complete run
of these games with friends is
technically possible, they do not make
it easy. Summoning folks to play with is
inconvenient at best or incredibly
frustrating at worst. Jasmine still
remembers the first time her companion
in Bloodborne was unsummoned upon
defeating an area boss, as well as the
ensuing surprise when she realized she
could not reummon them in that
particular area. And that is a pain I
very much feel. Add in the external
factor that the vocal minority of
naysayers posit that these pain points
are proof that one should simply get
good instead of relying on help from
others. A very hollow take indeed if you
ask me because the desire that these
games foster to connect with others
despite the difficulties across all of
the titles in the genre by accident or
by design feels like it in fact has
fostered a different kind of online
community playing these games together.
Okay, but let's back up a bit. Whilst
multiplayer elements are rarely at the
forefront of the mainstream Soulsbor
conversation, one does have to admit
that messages left by other players,
ranging from helpful tips to evil tricks
to juvenile but memorable jokes are as
core to the Dark Souls experience as oh,
I don't know, endless invasions while
dodging arrows in an Orlando. Seriously,
do you not have anything better to do?
It's 2025. Sorry. [clears throat] Adding
to these community staples are all of
these specters of other IRL players
wandering and dying in the same grand
but empty halls as you, giving just the
slightest peak that beyond the veil of
loneliness the game shrouds you in,
others are there with you. Then with
each moment of micro multiplayer fueling
a desire to connect with another person,
you may naturally summon another player
before a difficult boss. But then once
met with a quiet stranger to help you
even the odds against Ornstein and Smog,
it always ends the same way. Them
disappearing quietly and thanklessly
into the ether with nothing more than a
praise the sun emote, making the world
feel a little bit more empty via a
newfound absence of the connection you
just made. Heck, sometimes these
experiences across players create
legends and lore in their own right.
It's such a fascinating facet of a sort
of you don't know what you got till it's
gone outlook on forming a multiplayer
community. In a similar vein, I don't
think it's just the in-game or
mechanical multiplayer aspects of Souls
games that makes them inherently
communal. The reality is that outside of
the games themselves, Souls likes have
always been a nexus of social
interaction. We fans are always checking
wiks, comparing notes, sharing builds,
watching lore dumps on YouTube, and
witnessing our friends on Discord throw
themselves at a boss we ran past two
hours ago. In a game where no two
playthroughs are exactly alike, players
sitting around the old online bonfire or
lantern light or sight of grace and
regailing each other with differing
tales of adventures is kind of a
time-honored tradition. Then of course
there are the many people who engage in
the Soulsorn's community by watching
others stream the game because
witnessing someone play these games very
very poorly is arguably just as
entertaining as watching someone play
them well. And we maiden lists clearly
do like to watch with Soulslike games
being incredibly popular on Twitch as
evidenced by Kai Senate Elden Ring
stream peaking at over 285,000 viewers.
Not to mention, the community also
rallies for tons of feats of prowess,
like no hitr runs or the most difficult
boss being downed with a Dance Dance
Revolution pad or something. Conversely,
the popularity of on-screen death
counters and live heart rate monitor
feeds tells us that even if you aren't
breaking any records with your run, the
community will still be there to cheer
you on as you fail Margaret on your 40th
attempt. I mean, they certainly did back
in the day when I created my own two
challenge runs. We ran Dark Souls and
Elden Ringfit on our Twitch channel a
while ago, wherein I combined the mental
challenge of beating both Dark Souls 3II
and Elden Ring with the physical
challenge of having to exercise every
time I died. And I'm still waiting on
that Bloodborne remaster so I can get
back in shape. There's really no other
WAY TO DO IT. [screaming] WHAT? Go to
the gym? [laughter]
Good one, Zoe. But while we were waiting
on that, Fromoft at the 2024 Game Awards
said, "Hold my flask." When the clouds
parted, the heavenly envoy sang and a
new souls was given onto the world, but
in a very different kind of game, Elden
Ring Night Reign, a both entirely new
and not so entirely new rogike
installation of the Elden Ring
franchise, where playing cooperatively
with others is the constant focus as
opposed to subconscious vibe. Whereas
the original Elden Ring is a nonlinear
game in which slow exploration,
experimentation, and lore discovery for
the individual are front and center,
Night Rain's gameplay loop is quick and
snappy and encourages switching up
characters and builds for every boss as
a team. It requires adaptability, speed,
and good objective callouts, none of
which are necessarily required to thrive
in the original game. This kind of
shakeup isn't necessarily new as far as
video game sequels go, but there still
wasn't any guarantee it would work. In
fact, just for a quick tangent, for a
little contrast, let's take a look at
another game that came out around the
same time at a similar price point. FBC
Fire Break. I promise you this is all
going somewhere. On the surface, these
two games may look as though they have
little in common, especially if Steam
reviews and audience reception are
anything to go by, but they both come
from studios that take enough successful
swings that a pure multiplayer project
from either is an exciting prospect.
However, where Night Re seems to have
found its wings both literally and
spectrally, Firebreak fell flat. And I
would posit that while Night Rain's
macro gameplay and even core gameplay
loop may be very different from Elden
Ring, the fact that its micro gameplay
and amazing combat system is still
basically identical is what gives the
originals multiplayer undercurrent full
permission to shine in Night. However,
Firebreak fails to deliver on the best
aspects of Control or any other game in
the Remedyiverse, which is an
exceedingly executed story-driven
experience. Sure, combat-wise, Control
is a fun game, but it really is the
music, amazing character performances,
and world building that are far greater
pulls, none of which, sadly are present
in any meaningful way in Firebreak. And
look, perhaps FromSoft's experience in
implementing the multiplayer so deeply
in the subconscious of its past games
set them up for success when they took
the dive and released a fully co-op
forward experience. On the flip side,
perhaps it was Remedy's lack of
experience in that same regard that led
to its spin-off amounting to a generally
weak entry into an already bustling
horde game market. To be clear, that is
not to say that Revity is a weak
developer by any stretch of the
imagination, but rather even the best
studios can sometimes fumble on their
first try nailing the fabled multiplayer
sequel if multiplayer elements are not
already baked into the games that the
studio has done in the past. I mean, I
know this is opening a different can of
worms, but Rock Steady Games made Arkham
Asylum City and Night all certified
bangers, but failed to stick the landing
with the multiplayer looter shooter
Suicide Squad: Kill the Justice League.
Of course, I could put on my tinfoil hat
to explain that as well, but let's not
go there. And by this point, you're
probably screaming at your phone or
whatever BEING LIKE, "MATT, NIGHT RAIN
IS NOT A PERFECT EXPERIENCE. WHAT ARE
YOU TALKING ABOUT?" AND I agree. As much
as its sales numbers may differ from
Firebreaks, it does share one glaring
flaw with it. An absolutely abysmal
tutorial. And I know I'm breaking from
topic again, but let me just vent here
for a second. Night Rain's tutorial
teaches you a few basics about combat.
Sure, but it never actually teaches you
about the Night Rain. Like the only way
you learn it will kill you is if you
veer away from where the tutorial tells
you to go and you die a wet wet death.
Plus, the tutorial completely ignores a
core element you need to know to survive
in this game that the night rain circle
constricts over time. Now, for veterans
of battle royale, this is old hat, of
course, but it just irks me that the
major deviation to the core loop
actually isn't taught in the tutorial.
You only learn that info during an
actual game with actual people counting
on you, which all I'm saying feels a bit
silly. But come to think of it, during
my first uninitiated foibless was where
my faith in this game being the natural
evolution of FromSoft's core multiplayer
experience was rewarded. Because when I
died and braced myself for the
inevitable deluge of disappointment and
disconnects, it never came. And I think
that's because Night Rain's core loop of
only succeeding as a team instills a
general feeling that we're all in this
dizzying experience together. Sure, you
can run off on your own and do your own
things and ping your own locations,
etc., but it's pretty clear from the
jump the safest way to move through the
game is as a unit. Oftent times the
general public views the Soulslike
community as a toxic and unfriendly
place to new or casual players. My
experience with Night Rain, however, has
shown me something a little different.
In short, look, there are bad actors and
people that don't take enough time or
just slam that ping button over and over
and over again. But more often than not,
whether I'm playing with friends or a
rando wilder named dumbster, they're
going to throw themselves into the jaws
of the equilibrious beast's madness to
revive me when I'm down because that's
the best chance of us all getting out of
this alive. And if you are watching
this, thanks buddy. Though this culture
of paying things forward and helping
each other out is fostered by other
design elements as well. For instance,
the many consumables and signature
character abilities that benefit the
rest of the party more than the
individual, signaling again that
cooperation is key here. And even when
players do drift to different parts of
the map, the game's very nature of the
rain coming pushes us all back to a
single spot at the end of the day,
reminding us that we all have to stand
together against the night. And while
that live together, die together design
intent does make Night Rain sing,
perhaps the reason it was able to
transcend where others fell flat making
the jump from its progenitors is because
other Soulsorns trained its audience to
be open to that idea from the outset,
even if the core gameplay loop is
different. These games have always
encouraged cooperation for cooperation's
sake with oftentimes no tangible reward
other than the satisfaction of helping
out another player on a boss that you
have a particular grudge against. I know
I have camped with my summoning sign out
in front of the godskin duo a bunch
because screw those two chuckleheads in
particular. So, Night Rain, despite its
frustrating res mechanics and unlucky
drops on occasion, still really hammers
home an aspect of this genre that I love
so much that I hadn't considered before
Jasmine brought this idea to us. I mean,
in Miyazaki's own words, quote, "Our
approach to these games, not just Elden
Ring, is to design them to encourage the
player to overcome adversity. We want
players to use their cunning, study the
game, memorize what's happening, and
learn from their mistakes." unquote. At
the end of the day, that core gameplay
experience holds true whether you are
overcoming adversity through rot
memorization and a solo grind, or
getting through with tools that the
developers gave you, like summoning
spirits, strangers, or maybe even with a
little help from your friends. And since
there are countless ways for players to
assist each other across the gambit of
FromSoft titles, to us that signals that
Night Re isn't just a co-op spin-off of
Elden Ring, but a natural evolution of
the camaraderie and multiplayer elements
of the genre as a whole. Because we
believe that that undying spirit of
jolly cooperation might just be the
keystone that makes a Soulsorn so
special. And the real getting good is
the friends we end up getting along the
way. Actually, on that note, Zoe
Jasmine, that ever dark tricphilos ain't
going to slay itself.
Hey, small girl, big hammer. I don't
make the rules. If you're loving the
return of EC, then a great way to
support us is by picking something up in
our merch store. We've got mugs, shirts,
pins, plushies, even a new Zoey puzzle.
You can check it all out by clicking or
scanning here. And then once you've, you
know, checked out, you can check out our
next video here. That sounded better in
my head. Would you believe that Angelo
Valenciana, Arl Posting, Dominic
Valenciana, Hunter Z, Joseph Blamea,
Kuya Koy, Lotus Wolf, and Zeliad's
Architectures were not only the best
legendary patrons, but they were the
first words I SAID THIS MORNING WHEN I
WOKE UP BECAUSE I JUST ROLLED out of
bed.