[Music]
[Music]
Oh boy, this one's going to be tricky.
I'm going to give you guys a heads up
right now. This topic is going to be
tough to cover in a single episode. It's
like every third sentence seems to
reveal a whole new topic we really need
to discuss at length. So, I guess think
of this episode as an introduction, a
preview of several topics to come.
There's just no way we can do all of
these issues justice in just 6 minutes.
How about this? Every time I mention
some topic that we plan to devote a full
episode to eventually, I'll pop up this
image. Everyone with me? All right,
disclaimer done. Let's dig in. There are
basically three types of diversity
available in games. Diversity of gender,
diversity of sexuality, and diversity of
ethnicity. Other types of diversity such
as diversity of religion or
socioeconomic
class seem to be themes we don't touch
on as often. First, let's talk about
gender diversity in
games. Obviously, we all know the
stereotype. Gaming is littered with Lara
Crofts and my Shiranouis. This is a
long-running trend in video games that
needs to go. Seriously, enough is
enough. This type of adolescent
pandering makes us look juvenile as a
demographic, and it alienates female
players. On top of that, it only helps
to reinforce society's damagingly
unreasonable expectations of women. Yes,
I know the same can be said of movies
and advertising and TV and everything
else. That doesn't give us the excuse to
keep doing it, but that one's an obvious
problem and pretty easy to fight, right?
If the game has ever advertised jiggle
physics as a selling point, it probably
belongs on my no-by list. Piece of cake.
But there's a much deeper gender issue
this industry has to confront as it
grows and matures. There are some pretty
strong female characters to be found in
games. Samos, Alex, Heather, Jade, the
boss. But are they meaningful? Many of
you may have heard of the Beal test.
It's a simple test usually applied to
movies to see if they contain a female
perspective. The rules are simple. One,
it has to have at least two women in it.
Two, who talk to each other. three about
something besides a man. Let us think on
this. How many video games pass this
test? Maybe a handful if we're feeling
generous. Now, the Bectal test may not
be the best metric to judge games by,
and gaming's version would probably
include four has a female playable
character or something of that sort.
Still, the Bectal test is at least a
good way to eyeball where we stand as an
industry. From where I'm looking, we've
got some work to do. But we said we
tackle three forms of diversity today,
so we better move on. Now, let's talk a
bit about ethnic diversity in games.
Take a second and think. How many strong
non-white, non-Asian characters can you
think of from non-sports, nonsquare
games? I'll
wait. Pretty short list, right? Now,
eliminate from that list all the blatant
stereotypes and bland characters. Not
too many left, are there? Embarrassingly
enough, people of other ethnicities are
much more common as enemies and target
fodder in video games. The worst part
about it is that we as an industry seem
to do it unconsciously. We don't even
think about setting a racial or
religious group as the default enemy and
then attach points or reward systems to
killing them. If there is any merit to
the argument that games can adversely
affect one's psyche, this is certainly
not helping. This is not a problem we
can afford to ignore. So, what about the
final category, diversity of sexuality?
This one is especially tough because our
industry isn't good at addressing sex
maturely in general. So, trying to find
diversity in this field is asking a lot.
Let's just start by looking for any
playable characters in video games that
are openly homosexual or bisexual. And
Shepherd doesn't count. Haha, no. Those
guys don't either. Let's see. We've got
Makato, obviously a stereotype. Then
there's Hana and Rain, who are just an
exercise in blatant pandering. Zevron,
at best a ham-handed and stereotype
reinforcing effort at a bisexual male.
And Juani, maybe. I never got to pursue
a relationship with her. I could never
figure that out for sure. Oh, and then
there's Kanji from Persona 4. You know,
I think Atlas actually managed to
address the issue of wrestling with
one's sexuality with a remarkable amount
of class and good taste here. Shame they
backed off that story point as the game
progressed, but whatever. I'll take my
victories where I can get them. So,
that's what, five characters out of all
the characters in all the games ever
made. And only one of them actually
delves into sexuality in a real and
tasteful way. We're not batting a
thousand here, guys. You want to know
what's really shocking? There are social
games out there that are much more open
on these issues. Frontierville lets you
choose the gender of your spouse
regardless of your own character's
gender, and not in a silly, trivializing
Fable 2 kind of way.
Frontierville. How is it that Zinga is
more mature about this than almost the
entire mainstream game industry? So,
video games not super diverse. Okay, why
do we care? We could talk all day about
the social benefits of diversity and the
fostering of common understanding. After
all, games are a great way to make you
walk 10 miles or kill 10,000 aliens in
another person's shoes. But we're not
going to argue that point. Instead,
we're just going to say this. This
industry is limiting itself. There are
so many stories left untold and so many
experiences missed or marred beyond
repair because of our inability to
create meaningful human characters
outside of the demographic we've
established. We can learn a lot about
ourselves regardless of race, gender, or
sexuality by stepping into a role that
is foreign to us. So why have we failed
so spectacularly in these areas? To some
degree, it's a lack of diversity in the
game industry itself, but that's
becoming less true every year. The game
industry is actually a much more diverse
group than you would think. The problem
is really that we're still trapped in
the idea that we're just making games.
So these sort of decisions often don't
get a great deal of thought. Instead,
the game creators simply make what
they're comfortable with without
stopping to reflect. That's just lazy
design. So would we like to see more
diversity in games? Yes. But there's a
flip side to that that needs pointing
out. Token characters aren't the
solution. They are part of the problem.
Don't just shove black guy, gay guy, or
female into your game. Give them some
meaning and depth and character. It
insults everyone involved when you stick
these sort of one-dimensional characters
into a game to be politically correct or
pander to a demographic. Just choose the
characters that are best for your
narrative and for your play. But I
expect if you do your homework, you'll
find out that these characters turn out
to be white, straight, and male slightly
less often than you might think. Well,
more on all of these later. See you next
week.
[Music]
Hey. Yeah. Yeah.