Welcome to part two of our series on how
games can be used in education. Last
week, we talked about how games can free
us from a fear of failure and make
homework a learning opportunity rather
than just an assessment by giving
students the instantaneous feedback they
need to freely discover and explore.
This week, we're going to talk about
what that instantaneous feedback does
for teachers and how games can help us
give each student the lessons they need.
One of the biggest problems with
schooling is that classrooms are simply
too big to give each student the sort of
personalized attention they need. And
this is true of almost all modern
classrooms, not just the overcrowded
60person classes we sometimes think of
when people talk about our educational
crisis. Now, many of you who are
watching this are probably much better,
more experienced teachers than James.
But when he talks about it, he feels
pretty strongly that it's very hard to
give 100% to more than 10, maybe 12
students at a time. Any more than that
and it gets difficult to understand
where each student is struggling and to
craft lessons for each of them on a
personalized basis. And yet this is what
games let us do. You see, one of the
great struggles in trying to educate a
nation whose population numbers in the
hundreds of millions is that we have to
create a standard curriculum for
everyone. And this is in many ways
fantastic. It helps ensure that all
schools are teaching up to a baseline
level. It allows teachers to share ideas
about curriculum nationwide. It creates
a standard set of knowledge that
colleges and universities can then build
from. But it's not right for everyone.
In fact, you can pretty much guarantee
that it's not perfectly right for
anyone. And this is especially important
in education. As often when you hear
someone say something like, "I'm not
good at math." It's not that they aren't
good at math, but rather that at some
point in their education, some part of
the curriculum didn't make sense to
them, and they got left behind. That
small gap in their understanding just
compounding over time as the class had
to move ahead. This problem could, of
course, be corrected if teachers had
both the information they needed to
identify where each student was
struggling and the ability to tailor
their assignments to each individual
student's needs. Clearly, that's
ludicrous in the context of modern
schooling. No teacher will ever have
time in the classroom to make
specialized assignments for each
student, and often they don't even have
the data they need to pinpoint what tiny
subconcept a student is struggling with.
Not so with games. Think about games as
they stand today. Think about how many
metrics games already take. We know
wherever you click. We know how long you
stood waiting to make a jump or how many
people died on that one ledge. We can
take in vast amounts of data and if we
want, dynamically alter the experience
based on that data. At the simplest
level, we've all played games, whether
or not we realized it at the time, where
they adjusted the difficulty on the fly
based on our performance. On a slightly
more sophisticated level, we have things
like the director in Left 4 Dead. Now,
think about using that for education.
Imagine a child going home each night
and a game being able to feed back
massive amounts of data to their
teacher, automatically calling out
anywhere the child is struggling or
highlighting places where they excel.
Imagine it doing more than that. Imagine
the game they play actually choosing
challenges for the child based on this
data. Imagine one child being assigned
something that helps shore up their
understanding of cross-cancelling
fractions while another gets a little
more time focusing on order of
operations. Imagine the game actually
being able to send the child through
micro tutorials on those subjects if
changing the play by itself wasn't
enough. And finally, imagine the game
being able to put a special flag on the
assignment so it immediately got noticed
by the teacher if the systems within the
game weren't enough to help the student
through whatever they might be
struggling with. Games could
automatically tailor assignments for us
based on our needs without overburdening
teachers who are already stretched to
the limit. And it could give teachers so
many more tools to understand where
their charges may have misunderstood a
lesson or missed a fundamental concept.
This may sound wild, like it would take
an incredibly extensive game system, and
it would, but nothing beyond what we're
already capable of. In fact, when you
consider that every student in America
would be playing the thing, immediately
making it the most played game of all
time, producing a game like this
suddenly sounds incredibly economically
efficient. When we stop thinking on the
scale of entertainment and start
considering the size of the public
school system, an endeavor like this,
while by no means trivial, becomes
completely reasonable. It would take a
great deal of time and effort. It would
require an incredible amount of work
with teachers and subject matter
experts, and even then would probably
need some trial and error before we got
it right. But it's by no means outside
what we're already capable of. So when
someone asks you why we should have
games in schools, beyond making them
more engaging, you can tell your
interlocutor that games allow us to
provide teachers with incredible amounts
of data to work with to better
understand the learning needs of the
children in their care. And that games,
if we were willing to push for doing it,
could allow us to automatically adjust
assignments on the fly. They could allow
us to serve the needs of each and every
school child individually rather than
having to hope that our universal
standard works for them. We catch you
next
[Music]
week.
[Music]
Heat. Heat.
[Music]