James has a very strange supposition
about how to teach game design
to somebody who's never done it before.
And I don't mean teach in the casual sense, I mean like teaching in a formal setting at the university level,
because as many schools as we have out there
offering game design programs,
most of them are still trying to figure out this problem:
how do you properly teach game design?
♫ [Intro Music] ♫
James had so many students
come up to him and say
"My schooling didn't really prepare me
for the life I wanted. It didn't really
prepare me to be a game designer"
and it's led him to wonder if perhaps we need to take a whole new approach to how we do this.
More than this though, it's also the fact that
he's had more and more professionals
come up to him lately saying that
when hiring for junior positions,
they don't put any special emphasis on people
who have a game design degree
because many of the people they've
hired from game design programs
haven't proven to be better
candidates. In fact, they've often proven
to be less adaptable than those with
other educational backgrounds.
Overall, it's really made him question how we go
about educating designers,
and after putting a lot of thought into it,
the strange hypothesis he's come up with is that
we are perhaps teaching too much
game at game schools.
I know that sounds odd, but hear me out.
We learned long ago that we shouldn't
just teach designers
tools and software, game engines and 3d
software; a game designer should be able
to pick those up on the job. Every
company I've ever worked for has had its
own unique scripting language, or at
least its own crazy additions and modifications
to the tools they use, so
simply learning a piece of software
isn't enough, because tools change
constantly and they're not universally applicable.
If you've learned Maya, but
then you find yourself working on a 2d
mobile game, well, Maya's not gonna do you
much good. If you learned Unreal 3
a mere half decade ago, that knowledge is
practically worthless today.
So much of the industry has moved on to other
engines and even those using Unreal now
are working with such a radically
different version that what one might
have actually learned in classes on
Unreal 3 doesn't have a lot of application today.
And most schools have realized this.
They stopped just teaching tools long ago.
Instead, they went on to teach courses like
level design and game balancing.
But here's the thing: level design and
game balancing are actually just tools as well.
They aren't fundamentals. They aren't the key skills
that a designer needs to be a good designer.
James talked about this at GDC, and in
preparing to do so, he asked many of the
professional designers he knew what they
really look for in a fellow designer,
and it basically boiled down to these things:
First: communication. You need the ability
to express the design to members of
all the different departments clearly and concisely.
Second: collaboration. You
need to be able to work with people from
many different fields and with many
different mindsets. The ability to take feedback
and to really incorporate it in your design.
Third: a love of learning.
You need the ability to be able to pick new
things up quickly because different
projects will require developing an
in-depth knowledge of different things.
You might have to learn about the
flowers of the English countryside
or the weapons of World War II, not to mention
figuring out the scripting engine and
the pipeline and the peculiar quirks of
whatever team and studio you're working with.
And a designer needs to love doing it
to really do the kind of deep dives that
allow them to add the little touches
that really make a project special.
Fourth: scope. You need to be capable of
creating realistic design plans and the willingness
to cut even the parts you personally love the most
in service of the project as a whole.
Fifth: logical thinking. You need to be able to
build and work with logical systems,
as that's the foundation of most game
systems and scripting languages.
Sixth: lateral thinking. You need to be able to
see problems from a new perspective, and
find answers outside of those that are
traditionally used.
Seventh: a breadth of knowledge. This is the only one
on this list that I think is debatable, but most
designers I know like to see potential
applicants have knowledge of things
other than just games, as this gives them
a greater field to draw from when
solving design problems, which in turn
leads to better solutions.
And if you look at this list you'll see one
commonality: none of those things are
really game specific skills. It doesn't
matter if you're coming in as a level designer
or a system designer, I'd rather
see that you have good communication and
collaboration skills, a sense of scope,
and the ability to learn quickly,
than to have a level design or system design
course on your resume. So as utterly batty
as it might sound, in a world where we
only have a very limited number of
courses to prepare you to be an effective
designer, I would rather see us cut the
game specific courses from game design
degrees if it meant us being able to
provide a better grounding in the rest
of those skills. If James had to make a
guess he would wager that a well formulated game design course would actually look a lot like this:
First: a hardcore focus on the liberal
arts. And when I say hardcore, I mean
challenging to the point where failure
is not uncommon. It would include a
grounding in the philosophy and
literature that makes up
the Western tradition along with a
focus on Psychology and Mathematics.
The variety and volume of the material here would
hammer in the ability to rapidly
assimilate new materials, and the courses
would be taught in a discussion format
with regular papers to train up
communication skills in both the verbal
and written medium. All rote tests and
quizzes would be abandoned, as this
education is far more concerned with how
the students are using and playing with
the ideas they are exposed to than with
their absolute retention of the details therein.
Additionally, the pillar of
mathematics in the course would be
strong with at least one math class per
semester. This encourages logical
thinking and give students the one
almost universally applicable design skill.
Next, one to two courses in
formalized logic would also be a
possibility as this also reinforces the
logic training and makes the jump to
scripting easier for designers who don't
have much experience with scripting languages.
And then, anchoring the program,
each semester would have an underlying
mega course project course that all
students must take where they actually
make games. Every semester, month in
and month out, every month they're there.
The best way to learn to make games is to make them.
This course would be given
at least twice the credit hours of
most courses, and students would be
expected to spend a fair amount of time
outside the class on this course. In this
course, the students would work in teams,
preferably interdisciplinary teams if
the school can support that, to create a
game that integrates an idea or topic
from the other courses. This would build
collaboration skills, teach scope, and
build lateral thinking muscles as the
constraint of having to incorporate
elements from their core liberal arts
courses will force them to rethink
traditional game genres, or force them
out of established genres entirely. Such
a degree would probably preclude large
class sizes and would require someone
with a fair amount of development experience
to mentor the students in the project course,
but if that could be achieved,
it would produce far more
adaptable designers that are far better
prepared for the industry and far more
desirable as potential employees.
Way more so than those that simply have a
smattering of game balancing courses to their name.
♫ [Outro Music Begins] ♫
Anyway, I hope that sparked some ideas.
♫ [Outro Music Continues] ♫
Thank you for watching, and I'll see you next week.
♫ [Outro Music Continues] ♫
♫ [Outro Music] ♫