I definitely didn't get distracted in
the 5 seconds between when we hit go
live on Twitch, when we hit go live on
YouTube. My brain is totally a welloiled
machine of focus and drive. And I didn't
get distracted looking up a map of what
parts of the world are at day and night.
We also didn't get distracted by uh
speak singing the lyrics to Toto's
reigns down in Africa. um nor to
imagine.
Yeah, there was a lot of Yeah, there was
there was a lot of stuff that didn't
happen. But also, hello. Good morning.
Also, happy Memorial Day for folks in
the US. Yeah,
good morning. This is This is the best
way to ring in your Memorial Day with
your cookouts or your existential dread.
that. Yeah, I was gonna say with going
to the pool,
but you know, focus, commitment, and
sheer will. That's correct. I am also
John Wick. That is that is correct.
Johansson.
Fair, fair, fair. Well, we have a
phenomenal episode for you today. Um,
phenomen is it going to cause a
phenomenon, dude? A phenom, if you will.
All right. Um, if I
I'll just I had three different thoughts
all of which I can't say. Yes, it will
be a phenomenal episode.
Will Oh boy. Happy breakfast to you as
well, Miss Inkwitch. And good morning.
Good morning. Good morning. We were what
we were trying to figure out beforehand
was was there anyone that this stream is
their bedtime stream? Um, and we're
figuring out where the daylight line is
and who would be going to sleep to the
duet tones of us speaking andor singing
to you about video game news of which
there is much. Oh, so parts of Mongolia,
maybe a little bit of Russia,
maybe a little bit of Russia. And of
course, if you're in either the daylight
circle or the nighttime circle, your
sleep cycle is your own business. So to
if you're a researcher at McMmero
station, how you doing? Boy oh boy, do
we have FTC news about active blues for
you?
It's really going to affect your
research is what I'm saying. Mhm.
I missed if you got this up or not, but
um
Janet uh Oh, I can't. Interesting. What
can't you do? I was gonna pull up Medusa
skirts on behalf of all of Janet heads
Twitch chat potty cactus. Uh I was gonna
say, do you do you have do you have
gaming news or or do you have a cactus?
Janet, I have gaming news. J also Janet.
Yeah. Well,
look. Uh I'm trying to think. Is there
anything else we need to do in the
pre-show before we go to the show show?
I got to thank Punching Bag for 49
months. Kim for bitties, THC for 59
months, Mean Ninja for 420 bitties, and
there's a new Brad. Brad, say hi. Be
nice. Please don't lick him. Oh, hey,
Shing Girl for 12 months, maybe.
Um though I've observed it and now
collapsed the waveform. Uh Neo
Whizmaster as well for the tier three
for how many months? 90 months. 90 n 90.
I don't I didn't think I was 90 months
old.
Is this like one of those things where
you're like how many seconds old are you
and you're like a million and you're
like wrong. I guess I guess that is the
conversation I had with myself when I
was trying to debate whether I was 90
months old. Yeah, that's exactly right.
Exactly. All right. Um I like this.
Remember we don't have any room in our
apartment for it. That's correct. I also
love that there's this like cross talk
that only happens on screen at our
discretion between Brad and Janet.
That's great. That's right. Uh Twitch
and YouTube are two starcross lovers um
in in the streaming space and we are
uh currently thanking Neo Whismaster for
20 gift subs. Thank you. Deeply deeply
appreciate that. Yes.
Uh and I did like this. Did I miss the
leaderboard? I'm slipping.
What? I don't I don't I don't know. You
were you were being generous. You were
giving other people the illusion that
they would hope, right? Yeah. A glimmer,
a belief, right?
Um, well, very thank you. Thank you so
much for that. We very much appreciate
it.
Yeah. Yes.
Yeah. Listen, if if if Brad and Janet
over on Twitch and YouTube want to build
a secret tunnel, by all means, please do
so.
You may have to invest in a VPN or talk
to your internet service provider before
you figure out how exact if we're
talking about a digital tunnel, a
digital secret tunnel. No, I think
they're talking about a physical one
like a physical se
that's more work then you need to learn
to whistle
right so that you can also whistle the
theme to the greatest movie about
digging a tunnel, the great escape um
while digging a tunnel. So, you can
whistle Toto's Africa.
Uh, I Fun fact.
Yeah. I can't whistle.
I can't whistle. Here's your fun fact. I
couldn't whistle. And then I taught
myself to whistle one summer while I was
working at my old job. Yeah. Cuz I was
wandering around outside a lot and I was
like, great, I'm not around anyone for
significant periods of time. Yeah. See,
kind of. Yeah. But I can't like do a
tune. You'll get there. I could be a
dolphin. That's about it. Um, I mean,
I'd trade you I'd trade you in a
heartbeat for being a dolphin.
Yeah. Um, ah, dolphins. Dolphins have
the best We are going to There is a new
Echo the dolphin game rumored to be
being made if I'm tying this back to
video games, but uh, dolphins have the
best PR manager, I think, of all of
nature's creatures cuz dolphins are
jerks. They're super jerks, but everyone
loves dolphins.
It's because they're It's not It's not
unlike that scene from Finding Nemo,
right? Where it's, "Look at me. I'm a
flipping dolphin. I'll do a flipping
trick for you. Look at me." Yeah. Right.
And then And they also fight sharks,
right? Which I mean, people like because
they're afraid of sharks, but really
sharks are just water puppies that are
very confused,
right? Like yeah, they're confused water
puppies. That's fair. That will kill
you,
right? But that in that way they are
like a puppy if you wrong puppy wrong
time, right? It depends on the size
andor uh ability to move through liquids
that the puppy is. That's I mean that's
fair. If hippopotami weren't waterborne,
they would be the hippopotami of the
ocean. They're cool to look at and the
little ones are cute, but don't get bene
between it and the little one or it and
the food.
Also, Jacob, you're not wrong. Pandas
also have a damn good PR team. You know,
we really should find all of these PR
teams for these animals. Um, and hire
them. Hold on. Can we volunteer to be
those PR teams in one of Patch's videos?
[Laughter]
Here's the thing. Can we pitch patch
this video? He just he can get the
regular ones, right? No. Can we pitch
the video? We should pitch patch We
should pitch tears to a video about the
the the It's not ranking the animals.
It's ranking their PR. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
Right. Right. Right. Which animals are
perceived better than Which animals are
perceived? Yeah. The public relations
for the sloth is tight. All right. Um
Okay, cool. Now that we've thoroughly
derailed our brains and Janet, let's do
a show. Hey, I like that. I feel I mean,
we're going to go to the void for a
moment so the show can start proper and
then we'll return from the void either
stronger or crushed into a zepptometer
of matter. Well, I'm vamp for a second.
I'm
vamping. Uh, I sparkle in the sunlight
while also drinking ironesque liquids
that sometimes ta smell like sulfur when
they're
dry. Vamping. I have sharp teeth like
I'm over here dying and I also have to
deal with this. Do you see the
conditions I'm forced to work in, chat?
Do you do you see do do you witness
witness?
I did exactly as I was asked. I I don't
know why there's the animosity here. You
know what? What?
[Applause]
[Music]
That wasn't the opening. That was just
Why was it the opening? Cuz remember in
the pre-show when I had to relaunch OBS
because it was doing the thing.
It didn't reload the thing. So, now we
have to do it again. Chat, one second.
[Applause]
[Music]
Good morning, Matt. Ah, good morning,
Will. Good morning to all of you.
Welcome to Games for Breakfast, the only
internet talk show. We talk about this
week's gaming and tech news, but that
also when we do the show open, it's this
it's correct the absolute first time.
And we never just do a tribute. You got
to believe me. I wish you were here.
It's just a matter of opinion. Oh, good
god. Welcome and good morning to all of
you here. I like how that went from pop
star to man in suit adjusting papers at
the evening news. Hello and good
evening. This is the evening breakfast
news. Hello and welcome to games for
breakfast,
[Music]
right? Yeah. Yeah. Exactly. Yeah. No,
it's totally that. Right. It's 100% that
we we're Yeah, we It's that level of
gravitas. Yeah. Right. Pump and
circumstance.
Yeah. Sure. Right. Exactly. It's those
things. Uh well, we have a great show
today. It's so great. My arms are cut
off. Arms are always cut off. But but
they're more cut off today because of
how great the show is. Okay, just go
with it. Just go with it. You know what,
Matt? I believe you. I appreciate that.
Also, happy Memorial Day yet again. Uh
it's time for Memorial Day coffee. Um
there's extra in here cuz I think we're
going to need it. What? Which one are
you drinking? Oh, actually, real quick.
Monster energy drink. What are you
drinking right now? Ultra Fantasy Ruby
Red.
She will they ever knock it down to just
like grape like do do we need No. So
ultra so
on the nomenclature regarding the names
of monsters. Um Ultra is the sugar-free
line. So and then and then they need to
name it something that they can like at
least claim is unique, right? Cuz if it
was grape, then it would be the same
flavor as lots of other things which are
just grape. And they need to be unique,
right? They must have
pizzazz. Must be green. Green. Green.
Okay. Super green. That's fine. That's
Ruby Rod. Anyway, any Yeah, that's what
it is. Why? If there was a monster drink
called Ruby Rod, I would uh a thousand%
drink that without question. I I my my
fear my fear is that I would drink it
and then I would wake up and my entire
closet would be full of cheetah print.
Uh fear? Yeah, that sounds like a
solution to a lot of life's problems. I
I just wonder how well it'll green
screen, right? Like just like
everybody, if you know how well cheetah
print will green screen, you should
message us on blue sky. That's right.
let us know exactly all of the
experiments that you've done and and how
we might be able to better get Will's
new wardrobe showing up crisp and clean.
Now, I will say that like there are
there are other factors to consider. For
instance, um I had a professor, his
favorite theory was that if you had two
different plaids, right? So, if you had
like a plaid pajama top and plaid pajama
bottoms and they were different plaids,
you got it. Y and you waved them back
and forth near each other, observers
would be unable to ascertain your
location because their eye would be
unable to perceive all of the plaid
clashing. You would functionally be
invisible. So I also wonder about that.
So if you got that answer too, I guess.
No, I mean like if that would happen,
right? Yeah. and you happen to be
watching, this is your opportunity to
get back in touch and and uh reconnect
with the student who still believes in
many of the teachings that you you gave.
Um I do like this. How fast is this
plaid? It everything feels like space
balls when we're talking about speed and
and visibility on Plaid. Yeah. Yeah.
There's only one man who would dare give
me Raspberry and that is Wilbur B
credits. Will, can we get to the first
story for the day? I suppose if we must
uh though I regret to inform well I'm
happy to inform is a follow-up from last
week's um show. So last last week we
talked a lot about this Darth Vader AI.
We had some comments about how people
thought it was hilarious and cool and or
stupid and people seem to be kind of
divided on this. One group of people
very much do not like it uh is um the
Screen Actors Guild. Uh, the Screen
Actors Guild has actually filed a unfair
labor practices charge with the National
Labor Relations Board against Epic over
using an AI powered Darth Vader instead
of giving that work to actors who can
actually do a Darth Vader voice.
So, oh yeah, I was going to say, uh,
basically, uh, SAGA announced that they
had filed an unfair labor practice
charge, right? And they said, "We
celebrate the right of our members and
their estates to control the use of
their digital replicas and welcome the
use of new technologies to allow new
generations to share the enjoyment of
those legacies and renowned uh renowned
roles. However, we must protect our
rights to bargain and terms and
conditions around uses of voices that
replace the work of our members,
including those who previously did work
for matching Darth Vader's iconic rhythm
and tone in video games." So what
they're saying basically is they're not
coming down
against the the Jones estate selling the
rights and being able to do this. It's
also there's a secondary issue of
protecting the rights of their members
who currently would have gotten that
work if this did not exist.
Um, granted, um,
uh, basically SAG after said that Epic
and Lava Productions quote, "Chose to
replace the work of human performers
with AI and did so without quote
providing any notice of their intent to
do this and without allowing the unions
to bargain over fair terms." This all
comes to us from Kotaku, by the way. You
can see the article in the show notes.
So, chat's chat's got um a couple of uh
thoughts going on. One of them is that
um this is uh correctly that this is not
about whether or not James Earl Jones
gave permission to do this, right?
That's all above board. We stipulated
that when we talked about this last
week, that all of this is legal.
That's never been the question. The
question is whether or not it's ethical.
Those are different things. Um and
similarly, SAG's uh unfair label
practice charge is essentially um this
is sort of a litmus test I think in a
lot of ways because it's a very big very
high-profile case where they can say
hey it's cool if you want to do that but
you can't like the they're in charge of
all voice acting. So when you're
replacing voice actors with other stuff
but want to use voice actors for some
things then they kind of get upset
spaghette which is good right that's
their job as a union. This is kind of
like a grievance except it's external to
a it's sort of like a union grievance I
guess. Yeah. Um and it'll be interesting
to see if if and where this goes. Uh
because I don't know
I the and SAG After by the way is also
currently on strike against a few large
video game companies like uh for voice
work right like and so this is sort of
in in putting putting in line more
grievances there because
there is no legal wrongdoing here with
the use of the voice as it was sold
correctly and and that is all fine. It
is just
that no one here's the thing. Uh
Fortnite didn't have to consult
with SAG ARA before they did this.
There's no legal thing in there,
especially because right now there's no
deal signed. Yeah. But what this is is a
big slap in the face to the possibility
of getting that deal signed and modified
to make this a place where both actors
and people who want to sell their
digital uh likeness rights can be happy,
right?
Um yeah, it's it's uh yeah and actually
no, you basically said that
like it's a little shaky standing there
considering they're pretty much not part
of the deal. The thing is though, and
this is this is why we're at such an
interesting influx, right? Or or
congruence of
events, AI as it stands now is, and who
said who knows if it'll get there or
not, it probably will, but like cannot
replace successfully, and by
successfully, I mean to equal the
monetary value of uh all voice actors in
video games. It just it's not quite it's
not there yet. Um what SAG after is
trying to do is get ahead of that issue
and be like we know this is coming. We
need to make sure that there are
protections put in place for all of the
people that we represent. And and I
think because we're at this touch
point, if if the if the strike continues
and if people keep pulling back, that
will basically hurt the ability to train
these AIs on those things in in a
certain way. Again, there's lots of
stuff out there already that could be
done, but like it's a matter of when you
start fighting back and against what.
Does that make a little bit of sense?
This is also just a really good um PR
move for SAG. Uh because this like sort
of in the same way that we were talking
about it, right? Like we're talking
about it because it's a big deal.
because it's a big deal. This is kind of
the perfect time for SAG to choose to
like, hey, you're not allowed to do that
and we're going to be visibly about you
not being allowed to do that rather than
doing it in a bunch of smaller cases
where they might have won, but they
don't get the visibility for their
cause. Right. Sometimes it is better to
visibly win uh fight a losing battle
than it is to win a uh invisible one.
Yeah. Uh in in in things like this. And
then Retrash brings up a really good
point. Do they expect actors to join
games in real time to act as Darth
Vader? Right? Like if if this is uh Oh,
you got something. Well, I got
something, too. But why is that the
assumption, right? Because they could
have just made a big complicated Darth
Vader voice pack like they've done for
other characters in the past, right?
They didn't need to go in this new
direction. Well, the exercise this this
is where it gets really interesting.
Truly, the exercise is using an AI
chatbot to be Darth Vader. Right.
So it's a new kind
of I new kind of technology that they
are using and implementing in the game,
right? So that someone can talk to this
character and and respond in in unique
and sometimes offensive ways. Um and the
issue there is you can truly never get a
uh voice actor to do exactly that to be
someone on real you just can't do it.
There's too many, you know, etc. Right?
So, how do you then how this comes down
to what provisions and and um things can
be put in place for actual regular voice
acting work with SAG ART knowing that
stuff like this with new emerging
technologies that actors couldn't
possibly be involved in real time with,
right?
What are the things put in place to
maintain safety nets for actual human
voice actors while the work moves in the
opposite direction in some places?
Right. And and and to be clear, the
reason that um this I mean uh Dan's got
a great question here, right? Why why
should Epic listen? Uh it's because SAG
does have leverage, right? Because Epic
does still use voice actors. So the idea
would be while you may have done it for
this experiment, unless you're willing
to for us to sort of um blacklist you
from getting voice actor work, which has
happened, right? Then um you got to
knock this off, right? There is leverage
that occurs there, right? And like
again, whether or not it's ethical for
SAG to tell a company what it can and
can't do in terms of technological
innovation is sort of a
different bigger ethical moral question,
particularly as it pertains to AI, but
they do have leverage that they can use
to
say no, you can't. And this isn't
technically through courts. I believe
this is through the National Labor
Relations. Yes. board which is a
nonjudicial entity but there is a like
complex labor union there can be
consequences based on what unions decide
to do I really like this comment because
it kind of brings something else really
interesting before it's Fortnite's doing
too much why do we need to talk to Darth
Vader it's funny so I both really love
Fortnite for this and I really don't
connect with Fortnite for this not just
Vader but like
Fortnite does a lot
right? Like it is it is beyond uh just a
game at this point. It is it is a place
to hang out. It is a place to uh see
your friends. It's a it's a place to do
there's racing games. There's all this
there's so many different elements of
Fortnite. It is a smorggish board of
things. It's truly a digital third space
at this point,
right? They don't need to do any of
this. But they but like
Okay, here's a fun question for Brad and
Janet. What if this was a dedicated
non-fortnite Star Wars themed game where
the plot was you are Vader's Sith um
what's the word for a Sith underling? Is
it apprentice? Yeah, it's apprentice.
All right. You play as it's like
Stariller, but like we're doing it now,
right? Yeah.
Um, and in that game you have an AI
Darth Vader that talks to you. And the
goal of that that thing is to make it
feel like the the pure reason that
experience exists is to make it feel
more true that you person playing the
game are Darth Vader's apprentice.
Right.
Okay. As opposed to, hey, here's Darth
Vader running around in Fortnite. You
can chat with them. if there was if
there was something like an artistic
intent that accomplished artistic impact
as opposed to like, hey, it's a funny
party trick. But this is interesting
because you could argue on both sides,
pure artistic content, intent of
experience or fun party trick, why it
would be pro or against the union's
problem with the art form being done.
Like there's this it's super interesting
and you could argue both sides of both
cases. Correct. And and by the way, when
we're talking about this, we're ignoring
all of the other myriad ridiculous
issues with like power use and like
establishing the greater trend in like
should AI be used. That's not the
question at stake, right? We're purely
looking at the SAG after versus epic
conundrum, right? It just that bit,
right? cuz I swear if we don't put
fences on some of these things, Matt and
I and definitely chat will sort of just
wander out into like new territory and
then it gets weird. So, we're put
fences. Hey, fences, SAG and Epic and
that's it. Okay, great. Awesome.
Anyway, it'll be curious to see if this
uh dust up uh moves a needle in a new
direction. uh the the space for voice
actors in video games in the next god
two to three years probably even less is
going to be very interesting to see and
I hope that uh SAG after gets some
protections in there for their actors
because at the end of the day
um it's the techn is only going to get
better and it was trained off something
so
hopefully they can get some some some
protections put in for new voice work
being done in video games. Yep.
Absolutely. Okay, cool. Next
up,
Matt, we just talked about it. Do you
know video games are art?
No. They are. They are. Did you know
video games are Okay, second up. Second
up. Do you know that art is political?
All right. Well, I've played exactly one
video game in my entire life, and that
is Metal Gear Rising Revengeance. And I
have to tell you, there's not a drop of
politics. No politics in that video.
Metal Gear Rising Revengeance. the the
the game about a former child soldier
who is now an international mercenary
attempting to stop a plot concocted by a
uh nanobot enhanced US senator to
unleash a nuclear war on the world.
Definitely not definitely not political.
There's nothing there's nothing
political there. And and will I'm
frankly I'm offended you would even
suggest it. Right. Okay. Great. Awesome.
So, in news that video games are art and
art is political. Um, therefore, by the
way, all video games are political.
That's just true. If you don't like it,
you could be upset about it, but I'm
right. Um, politics are the interactions
of human beings. Correct. Uh, and all
art is political because all art is made
uh in interaction with other human
beings in a state in the world and says
something about the artist's experience.
So,
Geogesser, you might be like, "How in
the world? I'll get there. I'll get
there." So, Geogesser was invited to
participate in the
esports World Cup in real. Well, can you
can you also explain what Geogesser is?
I I can indeed. Geogesser is a game,
which is absolutely fascinating to me,
where you are placed randomly somewhere
on a map. In most cases, competitive
geogesser is played on a world map. You
are placed somewhere on a world map in
Google Street
View. And you need to determine from
Google Street View with varying
parameters, how many steps you're
allowed to take, how much you're allowed
to look around, how long it takes, where
in the world you are, proceed. It's been
done for video games. It's done for a
lot of things, but it's it's usually
done for the the actual Earth. Um, and
there are some people who are pretty
dang good at it, who are good at like,
oh yeah, that telephone pole that's only
in Bellarus. And you're like, "What?"
And they're like, "Yeah, and it's this
town cuz I remember that this town is
the only place where they hang the flags
this way in Bellarus." And then they're
like, "Click." And you're like, "It's 10
meters from there." And they could have
guessed anywhere in the world. How?
That's geoger. So,
um there uh there was going to be uh an
esports uh World Cup geogesser event in
Riad. And some people who made the maps
that are often used in competitive
geogesser said no. Now, here's the truly
interesting part. Well, they didn't say
no. They they they complained about it
and they pulled their maps. Right. I
guess that's intentionally saying no.
Correct. Right. Right. Here's the very
interesting part. The people who made
those maps do not work for Geogesser.
Their community, it's a community-led
effort to make these maps that people
play
on. And the community map makers could
with essentially updated the maps to be
black and said,
"No, we don't want our work to be used
at an esports event in Riad for sports
washing for Saudi Arabia.
And and that's not new. We've talked
about that in the past that plenty of
people have had objections to Saudi
Arabia's um using esports to sort of
sports wash away a lot of the serious
allegations that have been leveled
against them by the international
community and particularly because a lot
of the allegations against them concern
um rights of uh women and queer people.
And would you believe that in esports
there are a lot of women and queer
people who couldn't participate if they
had to go to Riad because they'd be in
danger. So a lot of people have been
protesting in a lot of ways and now
um Geogesser uh has has spoken up and
said, "Oh yeah, we hear you. We won't
go. Thank you for telling us how you
feel about this. We're gonna
not we'll we'll let you know what we're
going to do with all the stuff that we
had planned for the the World Cup, but
um you've made it clear as our community
that you don't think this is a good fit
for us. And we totally understand. This
is what we thought. What they originally
thought was that this was going to be an
opportunity to tell everyone how
interesting and cool the like learning
about the world is. Right. This is
competitive geography. Right. Right.
Like this is competitive. Like learn
about what infrastructure looks like,
learn about what vegetation looks like
around the world to learn more about the
world to get good at a video game, which
is kind of cool, right? That's like a
cool idea and I can understand that
being a way that they want people to
interact with the world, but their
community was like no because the
benefit of the increased visibility for
Geogesser is far outweighed by the sort
of detriment of rubber stamping the
sports watching problem. And yeah, look,
good on good on Geoger and Geog
community for standing up for what they
believe in and not just going with the
flow. It's funny because like obviously
um Will and I were chatting about this a
little bit before the show and it's like
the geogesser is obviously not uh the
largest thing going from a monetary
perspective going to this uh esports
world's uh thing in Riad. Like I mean
obviously like I think Blizzard, EA, and
Epic all have stuff there I imagine. Um
like the big the big the big. Yep.
Um, and I mean they're not going to pull
anything that's just kind it's just or I
I would be very surprised if they did.
But even though this is sort of um not
as big as those things, it is good
because we're talking about it.
Hopefully other people are talking about
it. The people on Kotaku who we get this
article from are talking about it. Um,
and it's important to remember sort
of, how do I put
this? So, Geogesser is big on Twitch,
right? Uh, so much so that it was
invited to participate into this this
thing, which means it has a it has a
sizable pull. Yeah.
Um, I think it's important to remember
when you have a thing, be it a a channel
or a game or a movie or a community or
something and you have the opportunity
to grow. Even if you take that
opportunity, you start going down that
path and your community says, "Ah,
nope." On at large and mass, um, and you
listen to them, you can always like in
the long run, it's much much better to
kind of pull back. You know, it's funny.
Um, I don't know if you saw this. This
is a little bit, it's um, it's gaming
adjacent, but um, Adam Conover
um, uh, did a paid spot for this, uh,
crypto tech thing called the orb, and
everyone basically went after him and he
did, in my opinion, a phenomenal
follow-up video apologizing for it and
thanking the community for for like
calling out calling him out. And I think
we
I think when mistakes are made or or you
go down a path that you don't it isn't
necessarily the best for whatever you
have in your community. Um moments like
Geio Guesser pulling back here or Adam
Conover coming on and being like, "Hey,
thank you for calling me out. I effed
up." Like those are really strong
important moments for the people at the
center of these communities. And uh I
don't know. I I'm glad that this story
I'm glad that Geogessor did this because
now that's a bigger thing. No ukulele
apology. Yeah, he didn't. Yeah, no
ukulele. Two out of 10. He didn't I
don't know if he knows how to play the
ukulele. So, uh I don't know what he did
with the money, Phil. I believe he he
didn't take it. Yeah, he just didn't
take he did. And by not taking because
some people like, "Oh, we should have
taken it and donated it to charity." Uh
he did not take the money. So he
wouldn't and that meant that he could
actively and truthfully talk about
whatever he saw, right? So he does in
his video. Yeah. Right. So that that
that in case you're wondering like why
don't people take the money, it's
because not taking the money opens you
up to more freedom to to say stuff. Um
so yeah. So I think this is really good.
Um I think it's really good for
Geogesser that they have a community
that's aware of the impact of their of
their game. I think it's really good for
a geoger that they listen to their
community. Um, and uh, I'm just really
happy. It's really good. I'm no I'm no
good at geoger. My brain can't focus for
like beans on like where we are. It
would be like guessing like uh, I'm
somewhere in subsaharan Africa. Wrong.
Incorrect. You're in Mongolia. And
you're like, I don't know how I got
those wrong, but I did. Um, yeah. So,
um, next up, speaking of things that are
difficult, or not or not, as the case
may be. Hey, who knows what this game
is?
Someone knows it. I I'm pretty sure
someone knows it. Someone knows it.
Yeah. Uh, we can't move on until someone
says Brad got it. That's lies of P. That
is correct. There we go.
So be a soul like game and souls like
games have
been notorious. I'm gonna go with
notorious. Notorious
for uh no.
Sorry. Yes. Go fight you. Um for not
doing accessibility or difficulty
settings terribly well.
that's sort of been a weakness of the
genre um as a whole for a bit. Um
they're they have taken steps to make
the game easier in some ways, right? And
and the community has taken steps to
like make it harder for those who want
it harder. Allah, no summons in Elden
Ring, right? Summons are there to make
the game easier, both because you have
someone else doing damage and because
those summons divide aggro between the
summon and you, right? So like summons
are a a way to make the game easier if
the player wants it to be easier. That's
a whole option, right? Or like mimic
tier or whatever. Oh, mimic tier. Um,
but they don't explicitly have
difficulty settings. People have modded
them in. There's a apparently there's a
difficulty mod for Elden Ring where you
can set things to 25, 50, 75 uh or 75%
of their health and outgoing damage and
all that jazz, but they've never really
come first party in
games till
now cuz Lies of P updated and
added difficulty options. Well, is is in
their is in the process is in the
process in
DLC. And I thought that it was the the
the the
the quote from director Giwan Choy uh
was
perfect. We wanted to make sure a wider
audience of players could play the game.
I told VGC, "We have a lot of feedback
from customers and from our developers.
So by making development adjustments and
introducing these difficulty options, we
can offer the experience to different
types of players. This broadens the
base.
Period. That's it. I think this is a
really good move. I think this is also a
really good
um
uh I think this is just a really good
step for a big game that got a lot of
publicity to say,
"Hey, we should do this. We should make
the game accessible to as many people as
possible because we think our game is
good and we want more people to play
it."
Yeah. I find And then there's It's funny
because like
You can go all around with the like the
intent of the gameplay experience and
blah blah blah blah. Like let's let's
even say that that is what's being
argued about when when it's about
difficulty things when I don't really
think that's entirely the case. You
could very well cordon off different
styles of things quite easily. But now
the creator of this isn't a mod. The
creator of the game is coming back and
uh and adding something to the
experience that they find important. aka
the intent of the experience of the
game. Like the the will of the game has
come back and added this thing and
people are mad because they think it
doesn't speak to the intent of the
game. Is a snake eating its own tail
there. Like the creator did the thing,
right? This this reminds me of um there
used to be a pretty controversial scene
in Super
Hot and the developers uh updated the
game and took it out. Yep. And they were
like, "Hey, we don't we had an idea for
the artistic intent behind the scene
when it came out and we don't think it's
landing the way we wanted it to, so
we're taking it out." And people were
like, "Yeah, they had to do it cuz
cancelled or whatever." And the
developers are like, "No, we're artists.
We we saw our artistic intent wasn't
being met. We're doing a different thing
and people just completely miss when the
artists do that thing. Right. See, uh Ky
Clone says, "Souls always have a bad
feelings within me." It's see they
always leave really good feelings within
me. But there's an interesting thing
here. If the if the goal of a game, and
this this is very clearly not the goal
of every game, and that's totally fine.
If the goal of the game, like Lies of P
is is basically flat out stating, is we
want to get the most people playing as
possible, putting in options like this
will get more people playing. That's
just it. You can, and Dark Souls and
many Souls likes have not put those
options in and at the choice of the
crater have limited the people that play
those games. There's a reason why
there's a lot of different reasons why
um Elden Ring kind of cracked out of the
the Dark Souls like niche into what I
would consider like truly mainstream.
And it's to Will's point, even though it
is there is not intrinsic difficulty
settings like a slider or easy, medium,
hard, hurt me daddy or whatever the hell
the the other ones are in Doom.
Um, there are mechanics in Elden Ring
that make the game much much easier. But
of course, even that is obtuse like in
most Soulsike games, right? And the
community also has a capital O opinions
about it. They're like, "Oh, you didn't
really beat the game. You used summons
to to which I I urge I urge those
people. I urge them with every fiber of
my being, go outside, find some green
leafy vegetation, some ground cover
lying across the, you know, the area
right outside and put your face in it
and just roll around just I also want to
call out something that I I I am guilty
of and I know that uh many people are. I
think the people that complain about
those sort of things are a very very
very loud minority. I we we often call
them up because we've seen a tweet or
like a thing or something. I don't think
that is the majority of people that are
actually playing these games. I think
it's the majority of pe of the majority
of a very small minority who has uh the
time and energy to be mad about a thing
that wants to complain about uh
something that might help other people
enjoy the thing they're enjoying. I
think one of the problems is that um
while it is true that it's a very vocal,
very small minority, because of the
degree of vocalenness, right, it comes
across like it's a it's a problem that
shows up significantly when we're
talking about these things because
they're so loud, right? It it becomes a
thing that needs to be addressed in at
least in some degree. Yes. And the
reason it is so loud and needs to be
addressed is again I'll go back to us.
Like people like us bring it up. Like if
I it's because it's a story because we
disagree with it or someone's being loud
and dumb. Like it it again there's no
like one causal point that you take out
and this all fixes it. It's just it's I
always want to make sure that when we
are calling out an action that we don't
like making sure that we also say like
we also know that we also are feeding
into this cycle. Yeah. Like it's it's
just it's just a very minor
accountability regardless. Hell yeah.
Liza P, make the game you want to make
like great. I think it's cool. More
people more people will play it. Yeah. I
like I like Blum's uh idea. Instead of
algorithms trying to sell us weird
stuff, I wish someone would make an
algorithm that would make the previously
loud minority to be a lot less loud for
for things like this. Yes. Yeah. For for
things where there are people trying to
gateep games and are like unless you you
know, it's always funny to me too. the
the people who are usually the biggest
on accessibility for games like this are
the people who are at the very tiptop,
right? Like the people who are like,
"Ah, yes, I beat Mellennia twice hitless
at the same time. Once using a dance pad
and once using a controller. I think the
game should be more accessible and have
difficulty settings so that more people
could play this beautiful game that I
love so much that I beat Mellennia Twice
Hitless once with a dance pad and once
with a controller,
right?
That's that's what we want to see. We
should be uplifting those voices as
well. We should be saying, "Hey, like
the these are people who are absurdly
good at the game." And they're like,
"Yeah, you should you should do that."
Anyway, um good on them. Good on them.
All right, it's time Matt
Stop and Shop. Oh, I mean, maybe. Oh,
yeah.
Good use of a meme. Good use of a meme.
It's an older meme, so everybody checks
out. It also isn't entirely accurate,
but I couldn't I couldn't I couldn't
not. Right. Most fair.
So, we were pretty sure this was going
to happen uh following the election uh
and
um stated goals by the current incoming
administration of the United States
executive
branch to change the way that it was
doing business. And the FTC is now
following through. They have dropped
their
um the appeal is over essentially like
the the the last bastion of kicking and
screaming to prevent Active Blizz from
owning or from merging with Microsoft or
getting bought by Microsoft. What? It's
been so long I don't even remember what
the original deal was, but Active Blizz
Kiss with Microsoft. Okay, now they
bought him. Yeah, FDC says it's fine.
You You two can go make out. It's cool,
I guess. Or rather, they're going to be
grumpy about it, but they're going to
stop trying to fight it in court. Yeah.
Also, that is not Billy Mays. That is
Andrew N. Ferguson, who I believe is the
Federal Trade Commission's um uh
chairman. Okay.
Uh here's the interesting thing with
this though. I am I am I don't want
companies to be bought and consolidated.
It's going to make a worse product. We
all know this. This is not the precedent
is there. This is not up for debate.
Um the interesting thing and I I even
though I in my graphic made it overtly
like oh well this FDC chair let it
through, right? Um and and while I do
believe that something like this would
be easily let throughable in the current
administration,
um I
actually think that this decision
weirdly even from a legal perspective is
not because of corruption in the current
administration. I think
that if you look at what has happened
with Microsoft since it bought
Activision Blizzard and the fear and the
thing that the FTC was saying and that
other companies were working with the
FTC to say is like well now Microsoft's
going to hold its most valuable
properties away from other people like
they're going to hold Call of Duty,
they're going to hold all of these
things. They're gonna they're going to
choke out the competition and Microsoft
said no we wouldn't. And Microsoft has
kind of been doing, and again, this is
not me singing the praises of a
corporation. This is just what they're
doing, has done the opposite. If
anything, Microsoft has kind of shot
themselves in the foot for any sort of
exclusivity that they could remotely
have. They've been putting stuff on
PlayStation. They've been putting stuff
on Nintendo. They've been doing a
campaign saying anything can be an Xbox.
like they they are not doing the thing
that this FTC FTC challenge purported
purported purported that they would be
doing at least up till now. So
therefore, outside of all of the current
minations of the current
administration, there's no there's
nothing here yet that is remotely like
what everyone was afraid of. That's not
to say it's not going to come. That's
not going to say that they're not being
smart about something. They're waiting
for the next generation or doing these
things happen over long periods of time,
not just a few years. But I found that
very interesting because it's like, oh,
all the things that they were afraid
were going to
happen kind of the opposite's been
happening. Yeah.
Right. Yeah. And social, you bring up
you bring up this exactly, right? The
problem isn't that they are. The problem
is that they could. And maybe this is a
long play. Like maybe they're doing this
to make this deal go through, right? So
that's why we need to make um we need to
uh suggest a new uh chairperson of the
FTC. Um maybe the FTC should buy Disney
so they can be watching Wizowski. Always
watching. Just like that. It'll be
great.
The FTC won't let me me or let me be me.
So let me see. They try to shut me down
when I was at MTV, but it feels so empty
without I can't There's nothing rhymes
with me from Activision Blizzard. No
freaky. It doesn't matter. Yep. Uh I
think this is I don't know. We We'll see
how it goes. It It'll be interesting.
I'm sure the FTC is going to pop up uh
in in in the games and tech space again
reasonably soon. Um I just get that
intuition, but we'll we'll see. Uh,
okay. I'm checking the time. I'm
checking the time. All right. We got
more time before ads.
So, you did. You tried. It's true. So,
lots of people had this kind of
question, right, which is that the the
Switch 2 does have USB accessory
support, right? Because you can plug in
a USB camera. You can plug in a lot of
things via USB into the USBC. There's
two ports. Wow. Well, and uh we don't I
don't know that we verified how many
ports are actually on the dock.
Oh, I don't know. But there's two on the
console. There's two on the console.
There's one on the top, which looks
really stupid. There's one on the bottom
plug in the dock, which means there's
one port when it's Wait, why does it
look stupid on the top? Just cuz of the
Oh, you just mean when something's
plugged into it with the wire going up.
I see what you're saying. Yeah. Yeah,
the wire looks really stupid coming out
of the top. So anyway, but uh one
developer has now confirmed that if you
don't want to use the the Switch
mouse, you can use another mouse as long
as you can get it to, you know, plug
into the Switch. But it will have mouse
support for nonJoy Con mice, which is
good cuz the more I look at it, the more
my hand hurts thinking about using a
Joy-Con 2 as a mouse. Like, will it
work? Yes. Do I want to do that? No, I
don't. I have a big chunky 12key. Like I
don't, you know, big big chunky 12 key.
Like I don't I don't want to use teen
tiny little blade. Nah. Just nah. Like
it's a cool idea and for the people it
works for it's great. I just think it's
going to hurt my hands. Um Well, we'll
be sure to test it as soon as either of
us get a pre-order for the Switch.
Right. Well, oh, by the way, by the way,
by the way, if you got a pre-order from
Walmart Oh, what happened? They're
cancelling a bunch of them. Whoa.
So, pre-orders, we are now in the
pre-orders get cancelled phase, so
please be on the lookout. Um, also,
apparently, um, Best Buy is going to
have stock day of or uh Best Buy and or
Target are going to have stock day of,
but it's going to be physical delivery
only, so you have to like go to the
store. The morning I'm not doing it. I'm
not. I'll wait. I feel like we are both
too old for this. I feel like waiting in
line for consoles is a young person's
game. And I feel like we al like yeah, I
could go do that and it'd be great and
cool and wonderful and I do want to play
those games with friends, but like we'll
still be playing Night Rain. So like
Matt and I could both go wait in line
for Switch
Twos or we could jump on here and play
Night Rain. I I just Here's my thing. I
really, really, really wanted to do a
Nebula group 24 player race like on the
opening weekend. That's my And I know
that won't happen now. Like I wanted to
really organize it with a bunch of
people who got Switch twos, but I just I
I don't I don't see it in the cards. I
my my thing from Nintendo is not going
to be in. My my connections have dried.
Um we'll get them eventually. Yeah,
it'll be fine. It'll be cool. I mean,
like, if if the game is good, then it
won't matter when we get it, right? Cuz
like we've played games that are like
older and I'm playing FF6 right now. I'm
playing Final Fantasy 6 and you know
what? It still slaps. It slaps a little
harder because of the pixel remake
stuff, but like it still slaps. Well,
wait. It'll be fine, right? Patience.
Yeah.
Um, yeah.
Uh, T Wait, hold on. Min says, "Target
keeps testing your bank account. If you
pre-order, if it fails at any point,
they cancel it. But the testing also
ties up funds for a bit." Yo. Whoa. Way
to go, Target. Just batting a million.
You know, Target canotically a business
right now that's doing very well. Um,
true. This true. Uh, we got into the one
absolutely god awful boss fight in six
uh last week and it sucked.
Um, anyway, I'll be very excited once
this I I eventually get a Switch, too,
but it it will not be on launch day.
Yep. Uh, okay. Next up, Blue Sky news.
Reminder, you can follow both of us on
Blue Sky, and we sometimes say words,
and you can say words back at us as we
say words, like convincing me not to buy
a $300 Expedition 33 jacket. Um, don't
do that. Yeah, in this economy, Chad's
convinced me not to. Uh, they did a good
job. Um, what's it look like? I'm not
telling you because I'm not going to buy
it. It's fine. I'm gonna look it up. No.
Expedition 33. Why? Why are you doing
this? No. See, now you're going to want
one. And you haven't even played the
game. I haven't played the game. I'm not
seeing a $300 one. Or is this a custom
one on Etsy? Yeah, I got a c It would be
a custom one on Etsy just cuz I don't I
don't trust it. Oh, yeah. You don't need
it. But it's cool, though.
Unless you're cosplaying, right? Yeah.
No jacket. Yes. SKA plushy. That's true.
Correct. All right. So, um the uh one of
the things that I think is really cool
is that they are going to be doing
offplatform discoverability, which is
wild. So, for anyone who remembers ye
old and bad days of
Twitter, one of the things that you may
have seen was creators on Twitter
posting things and then posting in a
reply to their own tweet the link to
whatever where they're wherever they
were live. That's because Twitter was um
using its algorithm to bury any post
that linked off Twitter. Um there was
some com No, it was I believe still is.
Yes. I don't Okay, true. I also don't
care what Twitter is doing because I'd
rather not be on social media at all
than go on Twitter right now. I don't
know if you've been there, but it is
officially the bad place and we will
continue to not go to the bad place. So,
um, so there was a bunch of problems
with that and it became very hard to use
Twitter for discoverability despite
being one of the places that a lot of
people had originally turned to for
discoverability for places like Twitch,
right? Because Twitch has god awful
onplatform discovery, right? Twitch does
not do a great job with it. There are a
couple of tools that they use and that's
about it, right? Unless you're a front
page um as like part of one of the
shelves or you're front page on a
carousel or you're in a directory that's
really hot or you know do a ton of
networking. The platform itself doesn't
offer you
discoverability. And Blue Sky said
that's stupid. Hey, what if we what if
we introduced a feature where you can
you can put a
link to to like a streaming site in your
bio and when you go live people can see
on blue sky that you're live and leave
blue sky to go watch you where you are
making content. Yeah.
Yeah. Mind
blown. What a social media sky with
actual offplatform
discoverability. My mind it reels. It's
pretty great. Uh I do worry like I
there's been some reports about blue
sky. Nothing nothing bad but just like
how it's not growing as fast as it kind
of needs to to survive. I think what's
it at 1.8 mill users or something like
that. I I don't I don't remember what
the actual or what was that more? Hold
on. I'll find out. Yeah. But like the I
think this is a good way to get more
people to sign up overall because if
they can make it the place that you go
first, even if you leave it, chances are
that you'll stay and interact or you
you'll be trained up to actually use the
platform. You know what I mean? Um Yeah.
36.1 million users. 36.1. I knew it was
bigger than that. Yeah. Um there and and
you know it
is the number of daily posters is
falling
off a little right. There were about a
million people posting daily and like
there that's what I was thinking of.
Sorry that's where my number was. Yeah
there there's like it's it's falling a
bit but like that doesn't make it dead.
I didn't No one ever said it was dead.
Yeah I know. I I I have been seeing
people saying it's dead. No no no. It's
just it's a matter of you want you want
it to be able to survive and continue
and and the sad truth about a social
media platform is it does need to not
exponential growth and not whatever but
in in its infancy and blue sky is in its
infancy. It does need to grow and
generate enough hype to get more people
on it if we want it to become
ubiquitous. And and truly, I think this
decision, even though it is sort of a
um uh sideways kind of decision, like
how could getting people to leave your
platform be good for your platform, it's
great for your platform if you can train
enough people to go to your platform
before they do anything else.
So, I hope that's kind of what's going
on. Yeah. Um
I love Blue Sky. I'm a huge fan. I like
it. That's where I'm at. Yeah. Uh, what
is Dead May Never Die? Is Blue Sky
planning to IPO? Not to the best of my
knowledge. Yeah, as of now, no. But you
never know. Well, they've also, here's
another thing, too. Blue Sky is also um
a reminder the test platform for the
backend protocol that powers Blue Sky
and the app protocol that powers Blue
Sky. They have also successfully tied
into other platforms all using the same
sort of backend. So they all talk to
each other, right? It's not as federated
as Mastadon is because Mastadon is too
federated for its own good. Um, but it
is like they they they are working on an
open standard for letting social media
talk to each other. It does feel a
little bit like the social media I would
want to exist in Cyberpunk. We played
Cyberpunk last Thursday. I can't stop
thinking about Cyberpunk now. I blame
Matt. Um,
hey, you're welcome, Chum. Ah, thanks.
Uh, okay. We are going to do
um we're going to do ads here in a
couple of seconds. Uh, please look
forward to it. We're going to do some
ads here to tell you things you can't
spend money on, while some of Twitch
chat gets ads for things you can spend
money on. So, please look forward to
that. We'll do about 3 minutes of fake
ads. Will you get about three minutes of
real ads to keep pre-rolls off and then
we will resume the show or we not? You
will miss nothing. If you don't like
ads, you can go refresh your beverage,
pet a cat, get a snack, do all those
things. We'll be back in three minutes.
Uh Matt, would you like to go first? No.
Okay. But I will. No, I will. I can go
first. You want to go first? Yeah, I can
go first. Okay, go for it. Hi there,
everyone. Will from Extra Credits here
to sell you responsible use of social
media. Did you know that you can not
social media all the time? Did you know
you can social media a little bit, not
constantly plug it into the back of your
head like it's some kind of Ethernet
jack and your skull is just like a new
internet device? Did you know that you
could social media sometimes or once in
a while? My social media is currently
full of pictures of cats and bodeas and
bunnies. You don't you don't need to
like be constantly worried about
creating content or following or liking
things. You can just do it do it once in
a while if you want to.
That's good. That's good. Um
also, uh Oh, sorry. I was going to say I
was going to vamp for you while you were
thinking of not being able to stop
thinking about a game is my life. Nice.
There you go. Yeah. Big big big same.
I'm gonna play it again. I think I'm
gonna play. All right. Well, hey
everybody. Matt from Extra Credits here.
Is your time just too busy and you can't
play Expedition 33? Well, do I have a
deal for you. It's called B Sad. That's
right. All you have to do is just look
at all of the things you have to do,
like I have in my own life, not being
able to play Exhibition 33 while all of
my friends are very much enjoying it.
And then I'm like, "Oh, gee, I'm kind of
sad about that." And then you've
automatically gotten something for
yourself out of the deal. You have
caused another emotion in the chemical
soup that is your brain to be triggered
by a fear of missing out or FOMO. But
don't worry, because Expedition 33 will
still be around when you have time. Here
we go.
You can't buy sadness, Will, but you
sure as hell can rent it. I'm pretty
sure you could buy Sadness.
I don't know. I'm pretty I'm pretty sure
you can buy Sadness.
Uh Tony says that was more of a PSA than
an ad. Yeah. Yeah. But they're ads for
things you can't buy. So yeah, they're
like PSAs. Um, also the ad timer over on
Twitch is being stupid and I can't tell
exactly how many ads how many minutes of
ads we're actually in. So, you know. Hey
everyone, Matt from Extra Credits here.
Do you ever have to figure out how long
your ads are going on and you rely on
something on Twitch, an Amazon
subsidiary, to tell you how long those
ads are going, but they're never
accurate? Well, then do I have a product
for you. It's called Don't Give a [ __ ]
Because when you don't do that, all you
have to do is just vamp or talk about
whatever you want. Like the Elden Ring
movie, which we're going to be talking
about soon, and I have a lot of
thoughts. And you don't have to worry
about when the ads are triggering or
when the ads aren't triggering or when
Will is going to tell you that the ads
are done or when you read Just Be Sad,
you'll get an insignificant portion of
the Expedition 33 experience. I think I
understood the assignment. You did.
Exposition 33 is at the end of the day
extremely French and depression is very
French. Surreal depression ex incredibly
French.
Uh that's right.
Um yeah yeah.
[Music]
Uh I also liked Red's comment. Xbox 33
just went out for some milk and a pack
of cigarettes. I'm sure it'll be back.
That's right. That's that's right. Also,
we forgot to mention at the top of the
show, but we'll mention it now as we
come back from ads because this is a
period in time when people are like
generally paying a reasonable amount of
attention. There is no breakfast next
week.
I don't know why I thought that was so
funny. Yeah, no breakfast next week, but
we'll be back the following week with a
piping hot
serving of all the news you can use or
or abuse or snooze upon. Yep.
[Music]
Um,
also next week is going to be
bananas. Banana
nan. It's just bananas. Okay, that's
that's that's all. We'll figure it out.
Sorry. They they debuted Midgar's card.
I'm very excited. Anyway,
all right. All right. Moving on. Moving
on. Uh, we are
It's funny because
Oh, yeah. We're on this one.
Yeah. Yep. Yep. So, uh, Embracer
Group. This might Matt was like, "Why
are we talking about this?" And I'm
gonna tell you why I think we're talking
about
this. I think this might be the last
time we talk about Embracer Group. We
can only be so lucky. I Yeah, I kind of
think it might be. So the reason I think
it might be is this feels like the
moment of actual like curlosion
uh for Embracer Group. Um so we we'll
see. Um Video Game Chronicle uh brings
us this story, but they are um they have
spun off
into sort of
three large subsidiaries, right? that
are all their own thing and are now
spinning out of the main
conglomerate. Um, two of them. So,
uh, Coffee Stain Studios,
um,
publishes Deep
Rock is first party for,
um, Satisfactory, a couple of other
games. Um, is sort of their like indie
label thing. Sure.
Um, they're getting spun out as their
own thing and instead of being known as
Middleear and Friends, it'll be known as
Fellowship Entertainment. That's a
little better. Yeah. And that's going to
be doing Lord of the Rings, Kingdom Come
Deliverance, Metro Dead Island, Killing
Floor, Darksiders, Tomb Raider, and
more. And more. And more. It sounds like
a YouTube video title. Uh, and so
they're they're
um those sort of feel like solid
units, but I don't know what else
Embracer could say that would move the
news needle. This kind of feels like it.
They're like, "Yep, this is its own
company. This is its own company. We're
done here. We've successfully milked all
of the capital that we could possibly
milk out of all of these things that
were producing things that you liked and
now produce fewer of them.
Yeah, I just it's funny when you have
all these companies and IPs sort of
shuffling as much like a card deck like
Embracer Group kind of has with them. I
just like it feels
like the damage is done and now who
knows what's next. So, like,
uh, I I don't know. Like, uh, cool.
Like, uh, you know, the thing I got out
of this story, honestly, is the renaming
of Middleear and Friends to a to just be
Fellowship. Uh, Fellowship Studios. What
was it? Yeah, Fellowship Entertainment.
Entertainment. It's better. I don't
know.
Um, like I hope this means that these
properties get the
attention and
and passionate developers on them that
they require to keep moving forward and
not be sort of like the
um the leftovers, you know, like of of
previous gaming times. I would love a
new Darksiders game or a Tomb Raider
game. Um,
uh, I would love some good Lord of the
Rings games again. Um, I'm trying to
think the last really, really great Lord
of the Rings game that I played.
Probably
uh, Shadow of
Mordor, but that was WB.
Mine was the Third
Age, which was a Lord of the Rings JRPG
where at the end of it, your party of
legally not the Fellowship fights
Sauron. The great eyes, by the way,
while other things are happening, but
you know how the eye just goes out when
the ring is destroyed? That's actually
cuz your JRPG party was busy fighting
Sauron. That's so funny. It I swear I'm
making none of this up. You can look up
the third silly. You think about you
think about the 14 hours of the extended
edition and what they had to do to like
get there, but it's actually just a JRPG
fight that ends it and the ring doesn't
really do much. Like it's like I don't
know if you've seen the new Mission
Impossible movie, anybody. Uh but there
uh there are two movies sort of
happening in tandem in that movie. And
it's like that's what we're seeing here,
right? Is is the ring is important. It
has to happen, but also you get to punch
God in the face. Um, so yeah, I don't
know. Yeah, those qualifying as a JRPG.
Yeah. Uh, yeah, we all know your thesis,
Will. That's true. Uh, anyway, I just
thought this was an interesting note. I
feel like this is probably I I'm hoping
this is the last we hear of Embracer. I
would like them to be done. Thank you.
I'd like them to to make a game or
something or do something with with all
this stuff. No, I would just like I
would like more games to come out of the
little the the the subsidiaries, but
like I don't want to hear about Embracer
anymore. I'm done with it.
Not as powerful as the power of
friendship. That's true.
Uh, okay. Speaking of friendship, it's
the place where you go now on your
iPhone to hang out with your friends.
Yeah. So, this is kind of a weird story.
We've talked about this story, I think,
since the beginning of of Games for
Breakfast, back when it was called Extra
Breakfast. That's correct. This is Well,
that's because this story's been five
years in the making. Yeah.
So finally after all of this nonsense
between Fortnite trying to take money
and Apple saying you can't have the
money and them going to court and saying
Fortnite says that Apple is taking too
much of the money and Apple says no
we're taking the right amount of money
and the judge and the everything and all
that jazz. Now,
um, Fortnite was told that they could
reapply to be on the App Store, and
Apple rejected their first proposed
version to be back on the App Store. And
Fortnite and Epic went to the judge and
said, "Judge, they're not letting us
back on the App Store." And the judge
said, "Apple, you have to let them back
on the App Store now." So, Fortnite's
back on the App Store and climbing the
charge quickly because everyone's been
trying to get it for the past 5 years
and can't. And also they got a bunch of
free press out of the back and forth tit
for tat with the judge and letting them
back on the app
store. And I think this also might be
the end of this story. this might be it
where so I yeah I have never released
anything on the Apple um the iOS store
but I do know that the cut the the the
previous terms of service where you
couldn't like basically have your
currency or what you're selling in game
not be bought through Apple um
apparently you can buy V-Bucks straight
from Epic now in that app and it works
fine and
uh it's I'm curious to
see what ripples this decision has
um
on other people's
monetary offerings well in the iOS
store. So, one of the really big ones is
that um and this was a problem that a
lot of people in sort of our bigger
spheres were talking about on socials
for a while was Patreon. Patreon was
going to uh have to to charge additional
fees to let people manage their
subscription through the iPhone app
because of the way that everything was
worded and now they're not going to,
which is pretty big. That's great.
Um, also I don't know if it's going to
end up this way, but it may end up that
Twitch and YouTube um don't need to
uh have different costs for
um mobile transactions and desktop
transactions. By the way, if you're ever
on Twitch or you're ever I don't know
what the cut is on YouTube, it's
probably better because you're doing if
you're on uh Android.
um subscribing, buying bits, buying a
membership over or a super cheer over on
YouTube. Um those are all cheaper on
desktop because there aren't platform
cuts on desktop, right? Same reason. I
imagine that those will be shortly to
follow.
Yeah, I think this is a honestly um a
really good move for not a really good
uh outcome not only for Epic and
Fortnite, but for the majority of people
trying to release things and make a
living even mainly small small creators
uh off of iPhone apps. Um
I there is a sort of and I don't know
enough about the the legality of this
world because again I haven't interacted
with it. There is a sort of safety in
having your monetary stuff go only
through Apple. Yeah. Because now you
have to be and this is fine, but as a
consumer you have to be more savvy on on
who you're giving your credit card
information and relationship to. If you
want to, you can still buy through
Apple. You'll just have it'll be an
upcharge because it's going to cover
whatever the fees are that for for using
that service. Yeah. So like like with
Fortnite and Epic, Epic is a known
entity. It's big enough where chances
are I mean
other you will get what you are paying
for whether or not individuals find the
right amount of value for the amount of
US currency. That is neither here nor
there. But like it's not like they're
going to be taking all your stuff and
bailing, right? Like Yeah. Whereas uh
now this opens the door for other pe
other groups maybe even some less
scrupulous ones to have their own
payment systems which again you could go
after legally if you wanted to. Here's a
version of Snake that with a
microtransaction for a million dollars
like the good old days of iOS, right?
God like the good old days of IO. Do you
remember Do you remember chat? There was
a DLC and there was a microtransaction
in micro in one of the games for like
hundreds of thousands maybe a million
dollars that was like literally just to
say that you had it like it was just a a
visible display of wealth and then No,
it was an app. It was an app on the when
the iPhone first came out. It was an app
just called like shiny gem or something.
Yeah. And the app was $10,000.
Yeah. And you just got a gem. It was
just an image of a gem.
Insane. Now
granted, those things, you know, stuff
was been on is still on the iOS store
and will still be on the iOS store. It's
just now if you have a payment uh
relationship with someone outside of
iOS, it might be harder for if and when
you get scammed to get unscammed. Yeah.
Perto NFTs. Yes. Exactly. Correct. just
as useless as the You know what's funny
though? It's I wouldn't even call it a
proto NFT. It's dumb as hell, but it's
honest at what it was. It never lied to
you. This is $10,000 and the app is a
picture of a gem you can look at on your
phone. It's not like you'll get to trade
this. It's going to go up in value. No,
no, no, no, no, no. It was a JPEG you
looked at when you clicked a button on
an app and it said that straight up. So
if someone bought it, I mean other than
not understanding that and of course you
should be able to get the refund for
this horrible thing, but like listen, it
seems NFTTS I think are wayier.
That's fair. Yeah. Yeah. Yep. Yep. Yep.
Uh yeah. So I I don't know. I think this
is I sort of don't feel like the story
is fully done. I feel like there there
might be another chapter. The other the
other big thing, by the way, that that
goes into all of this that that is sort
of a behind the scenes is
um Apple is not going to get a lot of
grace from any judges
anymore. They weren't really getting a
ton to begin with, but they have been
caught
willfully like disobeying court orders.
Now, um the judge was not happy uh and
and expressed that very clearly that
Apple had was willfully disobeying uh
direct uh instruction regarding the the
fi finalizing out this thing from the
bench. Uh and they needed to fix that
now. Um so we're gonna we're gonna see
how like the the next time they show up
in court. I don't know that they're
going to be able to find a friendly
judge. I don't know what Apple's next
big court case is going to be, but this
one has dragged on long enough and has
been big enough in the public eye and
they've screwed up with the judge enough
that I think it's going to be a problem
for them. I'm curious where Apple is.
Now, we're going to we're going to get
out of the fence here for a second. I'm
very curious where Apple is going like
because they obviously exploded during
due to innovation, right? back in the
day and now it does seem like they're
taking good ideas from other people and
sort of polishing them and making them,
you know, uh, accessible in their
ecosystem. But like the Vision Pro,
obviously that didn't do what it was
supposed to do.
Um, the Apple
intelligence, no one seems to care about
their version of AI. Or maybe they care
about it just as much as every other
Gemini, whatever the hell is going on
when it's all baked into this nonsense.
Um, they're not the iPhones and the
eyewatches, uh, the Apple Watch and the,
you know, earpods and stuff like those
are all cool, but they're all kind of
the same. We're buying the same thing
with a better camera or a new biometric
feature or something, but there's
nothing like like nothing and this is
this is the way technology works, but
like nothing has worked as well as the
magic rectangle in your pocket, right?
Because that changed the way society
functioned. So if your business model is
based on that or in a lot of different
ways, I'm not saying that Apple's in
trouble. I don't think it is. I'm just
curious what the plan is. Right. you
know. Well, I I don't think they've been
I think the Vision Pro was sort of their
last hailmary shot at being known for
innovation. I think they might just be
known for doing the same thing like now,
right?
Like I don't I don't know that there's
any more.
I don't know of what other new product
they could reasonably
introduce that wouldn't be incredibly
well I mean it could be incredibly
dystopian right but like then that's its
own problem but I don't I don't know
what else there is right they already
pioneered the tablet market so we have
we have large form portable computing
small form portable computing desktops
they've already got the I and I'm I'm
like one foot in the Apple ecosystem I
used to be all the Uh, I have a PC cuz I
liked it for streaming and for gaming
and and on uh for the amount of money I
could spend for video editing and
rendering. It was just cheaper to get a
PC and and sort of get one that worked
for me. Uh, my um laptop is Mac. I don't
think I've ever found a laptop better
than a MacBook Pro. I just haven't. Like
I if if there and I've I have bought and
returned multiple PC laptops
um because I would I wouldn't mind
getting out of the ecosystem. I've also
had Android phones. They're for me it's
just it's not as smooth and and I will
take and again this is all personal
preference. I'm my opinion is not the
correct one. Um but like they still have
an ease of use in certain areas that I
feel like is not easily matched uh
enough where I now live in two
ecosystems and it is a bit of a pain.
Like I had Shahir, my podcast uh partner
for the only podcast about movies, sent
me a really great uh 360°ree walkthrough
we did um at PAX like talking about the
episode that we did for the panel and
I'm going to post it on YouTube as a
short on the only podcast about movies
channel. If you're not following that,
maybe look it up. Uh, and I realized he
had texted it to me and I couldn't get
it unless I wanted to go find my laptop,
open it up, get it from there on
iMessage, I couldn't easily get the
message of the link and I was like, can
you please email me that they like there
are problems with not living in an
ecosystem, right? Yeah. Um, I I will say
uh from a hardware perspective, I'm I'm
totally on board with the MacBook Pro. I
have one that is stopped getting updates
and uh one of my weekend projects
sometime when I get time is to uh and
you know what I I'll even let Brad and
Janet help with this.
Brandon, I need a Linux Dro that goes on
a 2013 MacBook because the hardware is
fine, but it's out of support for Apple,
so it's not getting like updates
anymore, even security updates. Um, my
next big my next big project that I'm
going to do at some point, who knows
when, is I'm going to start looking into
Plex servers.
Yeah. Uh, for all of my physical media
needs. Um, which I have an old iMac that
I think can run it fairly well as long
as I'm not encoding or streaming off or
encoding off of it live.
Speaking of Matt, yeah. Is your better
half using the internet right now? Oh, I
don't know. Yeah, we might want to. Or
Steam. No. Oh, maybe not Steam. I am I'm
I'm slowly being broken apart. They got
to me. They found out I was using iOS
and Android at the same time. That's
right. Will tell my story if I
disappear. Uh,
okay. Uh, once upon a time there was a
guy Yeah. Go. There was a guy named
Matt. Um, he used to work at MTV and
then he found a cat named Zoe. Uh, and
then it became her story. Uh, and then
Zoe audition to be the mascot of a
channel called Extra Credits and
everyone fell under her hypnotic spell.
Uh, and then, uh, after that, um, she
successfully convinced everyone into
thinking that, um, they should make the
entire,
uh, studio be all about her. Uh, and she
was successful in this venture. So now
we can't do anything without Zoe. That's
right. I thought I was coming back. I
thought the story was bringing me back
and it didn't. I'm going super low, but
no one is downloading a thing, I don't
believe. Okay. Well, that's that's
great. Um, can you refresh me? Uh, you
can refresh you in in there. Uh, right
click on your There should be like Yeah,
right click on your face. Uh, yep. Show
stats. Show stats. Top of stats. top of
stats should be um send key frame to
viewers.
Send key frame to viewers is not at the
top of that window. Oh dear. Well, hold
on. Let me let me see what I can do.
I'll ask Hey Jamie, are you downloading
anything? Okay. Nope. Not her.
Oh. Oh. Oh dear. Well, that's You know,
we'll try this. Is that Well, that's
helping. helping a little.
I don't know. This is the content you
come here for is my bit rate problem. I
mean, it's it's getting better. It's
getting better. Clap if you believe.
Yeah. Okay. There we go. Yeah. Yeah.
Yeah. We're fine. We're we're
recovering. All right. If if my bit rate
starts going down before we talk about
the next story, I'm going to be very
upset. Yeah. No, that's fair. Uh because
the next story is Matt's big story uh
for this week. So, basically, um, we
don't know where Apple's going, but
Fortnite's back on iOS to stay in
climbing the charts, and you can once
again, if you really want to play
Fortnite on iOS, I don't get it. I'm
curious about it now. It's funny, I took
this screen grab uh, and I was like, do
I download this and try cuz like I can't
imagine, has anyone in Brad or Janet in
either of the chats played Fortnite on
an iPhone or a or a phone in general?
Like, it can't be.
How is it? How is it fun?
Like, how do you Okay, left tenant. You
did it. You played it. And quote, "It's
not great."
I would take Dan's word on it not being
great. But I wonder like, okay, this in
my
head, not playing Fortnite would be
better than playing Fortnite on a phone
if that was the only way to play it. But
it I I I have to be in the minority here
because tons of people play Fortnite on
mobile.
I don't get it.
Yeah. Only seen uh Aaron brings up Yeah.
Only seen kids outside playing
Fortnite and Sean Fortnite has some
industryleading UX designers. That I
think that's why I'm curious about it.
Like Oh, I'm going to cough.
Yep. Tax says uh
that um the the FOV is terrible. Yep.
That that that's probably true. Yeah.
And all you know is your phone gaming.
Yep. That's very true.
Yeah. Uh people are saying that you can
play with a controller, right? You can
pair a Bluetooth controller with your
phone. That makes sense.
Yeah, that'd be fun. Maybe. I don't
know. I might download it. I have a
Fortnite account that I ignore. I have
one skin and it's a Borderlands Psycho.
We played on stream for a while, but we
only got paired with bots because we're
both scrubs. Yeah. Also, there was a
report that there's like it's something,
again, this is all apocryphal and
hearsay, but something like 86% bots.
Yeah,
probably. I don't know. Like, if I'm
going to play about Who knows? I I have
I have many other games that I would
rather play than Fortnite. So, yeah. You
know, it's funny. Fortnite almost gets
me with every skin it does, right? Like
I I was like, "Ooh, John Wick, that'd be
fun. Oo, Sabrina Carpenter, that'd be
fun. Ooh, Scorpion, that'd be fun." But
I never make it
past only Only one game has gotten me to
install the entire thing and then had me
hover over the purchase button, and that
was Call of Duty Skeletor. And then I
opted out of it, and we wrote an Extra
Credits episode about it. James wrote a
really good one based on that called
Skeletor Wants Your Wallet.
Um, anyh who. Yep. Hey, go play Fortnite
on your phone. Or don't. Yeah. Or don't.
I'm not I'm not your I'm not your real
dad. I'm your one of your two internet
dads. That's right. Hey, internet dad.
Yeah. What up? Your turn.
Oh, chat. Okay. Okay. Okay. They made
Matt's Borbose kiss. Just so we're all
aware, they made movies and Elden Ring
kiss. And now Matt's going to be totally
action figures. Yeah, that's going to be
totally normal about it. This is Elden
Ring and this is movies and it's
um
Okay, so it was announced, first of all,
there was a lot of rumors going around.
Rumor had it that there was going to be
an Elder Ring movie in the mix, and
everyone's like, "Okay."
Um, and I too had that very same uh that
very same
reaction. Uh,
however, now uh it is real and it could
be magnificent. Uh, there's going to be
an
A24 Elden Ring film from director Alex
Garland.
Now, up until hearing uh Alex Garland's
involvement, I was basically thinking
like all the everyone made their own
memes of Jack Black from the Minecraft
movie. I wanted to make my own for this
show.
Um which I think I think I nailed what
we'd all be worried about if an Elden
Ring movie. The only thing I'm missing
is uh Tom Holland in there somewhere. Uh
and maybe Chris Pratt, but there weren't
enough like multiple characters. Right.
Right. Right. Um,
Zenaia. Zeniah has to be in there as
some random like character who speaks
like once so they can claim that Zenaia
is in the movie. Yeah, it could be um uh
Zenaia as Ronnie. Um, there we go.
That's it. Yeah. Um, or Zenaia. I I
would say Zenaia regardless.
Um, Alex Garland
uh pictured actually we can go to the
next the next uh slide. Will this is
Alex Garland and I don't know just a
show of hands who is familiar in chat
with Alex Garland's work. While you're
saying that I will say there's a couple
really interesting things that have come
up about Alex Garland in in in his quote
gamer cred uh that uh I've really really
enjoyed. one, he has been uh he's been
on record giving interviews about uh his
experience with Dark Souls and and he
describes Dark Souls, like the Dark
Souls franchise as like living in a
dreamlike lore that you're terrified of,
but you never want to leave in a certain
like I'm I'm um I'm paraphrasing, but he
has he has a very deep uh appreciation
for the Soulslike games.
Um, and and then two, he there was an
AMA a while ago, I forget, but I think
it was during the press conference of
Civil War, but uh he or maybe it was a
little bit later where he was saying he
was having a hard time stopping playing
Shadow of the
Eurs, I think, this property. Um, I'm
just going through chat right now. Most
people are not. Some some people are um
talking about exod annihilation. Okay.
So, people recognize him enough, but I
want to go through because I was very
much not excited for this when it was
announced until I heard he was involved
because Alex Garland is one of the is
one of This is actually a sad thing to
say, is one of my favorite directors
that I continually forget about. And I I
actually want to say I think that might
be one of the highest praises I can give
a creative andor filmmaker because it's
not about him. It's about the stories
that he puts forward. Yeah. Like a lot
of times like Christopher Nolan, you
remember Christopher Nolan, not
necessarily the element of Oppenheimer X
Y and Z, right? Like there it's it's so
there's a there's a a real compliment to
the art when the artist is not the thing
in the forefront of it. So obviously the
first thing that came to mind uh is
Xmachina which is a phenomenal film. If
you have not seen it, you absolutely
should check it out. But there are um
obviously that takes a place a lot more
in a realistic uh formality than Elden
Ring realistic uh of sort of like a tech
a tech titan gone arai uh with future
tech. But the vibes in it I think are
quite soulslike if you if you kind of
drill down into like the mystery box of
it and it feels like there's so much
more lore even in the small house that
most of this movie takes place in uh
that you're slow you're you're very much
rewarded for like diving deep and
thinking about more. Also, the acting in
that movie is phenomenal. Phenomenal,
right? Cuz it's it's three people
playing off each other in a house. Like,
it's barely legally not a blackbox film
and it manages to feel like so much more
than a blackbox film. A thousand%. Uh,
and then uh we'll go into I think it's
Annihilation is the next one I have on
here. It is indeed with Natalie B. Uh,
and if you want to go into exploratory
vibes, going into a literal, I'm getting
a little too literal in this, but like
the golden fog wall in Elden Ring, they
have to walk through a blue soapy fog
wall in this to get into the realm of
annihilation. And there's already the
equivalent. I heard someone saying like
the different kinds of animals that like
everything's mixing together in
Annihilation. There's like essentially
already rune bears in it. So, he's
already got that like down. Yeah. Um,
but again, it's sort of like going into
a place that we are not familiar with,
but you know that there is a reason why
everything is put together. I think he's
proven it here that you can just that
applies so well to Elden Ring. Um, next
up, I forget what the order was. Oh,
this was a a series that I have not
seen, but I've heard good things of. It
was a Hulu series, but I think you can
find it on Apple now. It's called Dev.
And and it's it is
basically uh I from what I understand he
directed eight episodes of it, but I
think he was the executive producer of
it. Uh and there's a bunch of Dark Souls
II footage used in the background. So
I'll just use that uh as as my thing
here. I've heard good things. Has anyone
seen Dev Bobation? Bob, you saw
it. Uh and Blue asks the real question.
Who will Pedro Pascal be playing in the
Elder Ring movie? If it's not Redon, I
riot. Um, has to be something where you
can't see his face. Uh, yeah.
Uh, so yeah, let's keep on moving down
the line. So, Men is another film I have
not seen, but I've actually read a
decent amount. And if you men is
like from what I understand it it is the
it is the it would be right at home
without spoiling anything of it. It
would be right at home as like an Elden
Ring side quest like a quest that is
going on in the background or a thing
that's happening. Uh and it's very
pertinent and uh pointed to a lot of
different things. Uh let's keep it
moving.
Civil War. Look, uh, the the way that
the lore of Elden Ring, written by
George RR Martin, is put
together is entirely it surrounds a
couple different wars and multiple
pieces of two different families,
sometimes three depending on the
splintering of it coming through and the
complex comp political minations that
you as the player and hopefully whatever
the per purview of the the POV character
in the film would be from are now
waiting through the consequences. is of
all of the things going on and you're
not seeing the big picture. You're in
the thick of it in the middle of the the
consequences of what is going on. I
think he nails the vibe entirely there.
Mhm. Um and then uh Warfare, another
this is a film I have not seen, but
Shahir and a couple of my friends sort
of have. Um, this this is an interesting
piece to talk about because what this
movie uh does from what I understand is
uh truly kind of show you the the re the
day-to-day momentto moment horrors of
war. It is not um a sort of like hurrah
actiony event. It is the oh god sort of
version of it. And I think that that
level of gravitas is important because
while Elden Ring has a lot of like big
scale action that you're always a part
of, there is always a takeback of like
what it all kind of means if you're
interested for the lore. Last night I
was playing Elden Ring. I wasn't feeling
very well this weekend and I was playing
Elder Ring and I got to the shaman
village in Erdree. I'm not going to
spoil what that is, but it is a it is a
place where the experience of the game
changes and gives you a a feeling that
you were not expecting from the medium.
And uh I think uh films like warfare
sort of speak to that as well. And then
of course just for sheer
badasserie, the man wrote Dread. Pete
trees. The man wrote Dread. Peach trees.
The man wrote the Carl Urban film Dread.
And if you haven't seen Dread, I'm not
gonna say anything else. Go see Dread.
In fact, the only the only uh sort of
mark on on Alex Garland's record is the
following
frame. He did actually write DMC. And I
was not a fan of the writing of the DMC.
I think that's 2013 remake. Uh, but that
I'll let it slide because everything
else about this
guy, this is the perfect human being to
make this movie. Now, I who knows if
it's going to be good. So many bad
things could happen. Yeah.
But man, like when you look at the at
the body of work from this gentleman, I
do not believe there is a better human
being in the general Hollywood system to
make an Elden Ring movie than Alex
Garland. Okay,
so get hyped if this is the kind of
thing that gets you hyped like it gets
me hyped. I I will be taking questions.
This has been Thank you for coming to my
TED talk. Uh that's kind of where we're
at. Yeah, it's real good. And and I
think the announcement of this is is
well timed, right? Because Night Ring
comes out this week. Yeah. Um speaking
of which, by the way, for for everyone,
Brad, Janet, others,
um that's actually a topic of some
discussion. Matt and I were going to
play this week. Matt has other places he
has to be, which is why there won't be
uh why there won't be a breakfast next
Monday. Sometimes, chat, there's a video
game you've been waiting for for a year.
Uhhuh. And then and then your your real
life for things that you love and that
are very important. uh you have to you
have to prioritize those as opposed to
which does stink
because it is I I feel like by its very
nature Night Rain is going to be
something that like I will now rather
than be in the beginning of it I'll have
to play catchup
which which it it makes me feel sad
season. Um, so
so Friday we actually have a a vote and
and and maybe we can do like sort of an
informal poll here by show of um
spamming
chat. Do you all want to dive into Night
Rain with me? Because I've never played
Elden Ring, so I have some catchup to do
on that front. Would we like to make
three stacks of Elder Ring Night Rain on
Friday or Final Fantasy 6 and finish it
out? Maybe. We're going to I'm going to
play a bunch of Final Fantasy 6 today
and on Wednesday and we might finish it
out, but I don't know. We will have some
left to do, but we could do full stacks
on Friday or that. There's also a chance
that I will be back Monday afternoon and
will we could play in the evening. Yep.
We also have a couple of people we've
asked to be our third because the other
Night Rain news is that the devs forgot
that duos exist. Um, and so you can only
queue as solos or as three people, but
you cannot queue as duos. So, we're
gonna make our own three stacks. Um,
I agree. It won't feel right without
Matt. That's why I'm asking. It's
seriously I will be fine if people play
it without me. I just I I my original
goal was to make it so I worked my ass
off and got like the majority of the
work done for the week that it released.
I do not think that is possible anymore.
Uh but we'll see. We'll see how it goes.
Yep. We'll figure it out.
Um so that is going to do it for our
show today. Thank you all very much for
joining us for this meandering tale of
um weird legislative action, weird
judicial action. Well, I guess it's
mostly judicial and unions and politics
and video games. And then a very good
interesting piece of news about an Elden
Ring movie that will probably not suck.
So that's good. Listen, everything is in
line for it not to. A million things
could get in the way. That's true. A
million things could get in the way. Um
but we'll we'll find out, right? We
we'll find out. So chat, all that
remains to us now is for Matt to do our
patented uh extra Sorry, not extra
gamster breakfast sign off. You
mentioned extra breakfast earlier.
That's why it's a Yeah. Um to to sort of
draw us together as a community and to
bind us into like one cohesive family as
we as we go forward into the week and
the week after this until we see you
again on June
something. 9th. We'll go with June 9th.
Uh hey OWD by the way congratulations
and welcome to this being the first live
show you see. I'm glad you were able to
catch it because you weren't working.
That's awesome. Yeah. Um well well
luckily uh OWD you can now join us right
yeah in the thing that will just said
the community building exercise and you
all know it you all love it I don't even
need to preamble it anymore so here we
go thank you for watching games for
breakfast we'll see you in two weeks and
until
then first we Elden then we ring let's
Elden ring
[Applause]
[Music]
I can't believe you made me put that on
my hard drive. I hate
it. What a fun show. Yeah, great show.
What a fun show. Yeah. Yeah. Hey, Yuri.
I thought it was good. It was it was
Thanks for being here. It was a little
um
I feel like some of our best shows are
the ones where we're talking about the
news we want to talk about because
there's enough space to talk about the
news we want to talk about and not
like the thing that we have to talk
about because it's so big that there's
no room in the news cycle for anything
else. Yeah. Like that's real big. The
titling and thumbnail for this one are
going to be rough. Um but we got to
figure we'll figure it out. Yep. We'll
meet up later and and do that. So, um,
hell yeah, chat. Uh, right now it's time
for us to say bye to Janet. Janet, uh,
if you want to come over, I'm playing
more Final Fantasy 6 today.
We're, you know, I'm going to be totally
honest. Over to Twitch. Yeah. Yeah. I
don't I don't I don't remember where we
are over on Twitch. So, come come over
while I figure out where we're at for
Final Fantasy 6. Um, and I will see you
all. There should be a design club on
Thursday for Janet. So, please join us
for that. I'll let you know. I'll put up
the the pre-show thing as soon as uh
Jeff and I know what the topic is going
to be and we're going to decide that
tomorrow. So, uh please look forward to
that. So, yeah. Uh Janet, till then take
care of yourselves. Boy.