Some of my favorite gaming experiences
have been those rare occasions when
out of nowhere
a game changes the way you see the world
or teaches you something about yourself
Recently, James was telling me of just such an experience he’d had
A video game asked him a question he couldn’t answer.
He said he was playing the game,
he reached a certain part
and then he had to just set down the controller and think
He sat there, cross legged
pondering for more than half an hour.
Then, he picked up the controller
He knew what to do (or rather, what he would do).
And in doing so, he learned something about himself.
Today, we’re going to discuss that one question
that tiny moment in one game
and show just how much impact a single,
well-crafted scenario can have.
For those of you wondering, the game was Mass Effect 2
By this point, I figure most of you have played it.
If you haven’t, don’t worry, you should still be
able to follow along. But, you know … <i>spoilers</i>
Seriously, go play the Mass Effects, they’re great games.
Alright, everyone left the room who doesn’t
want to hear Mass Effect spoilers then? Good.
There comes a point in Mass Effect 2
where the player is asked to decide
the fate of a faction of the Geth
a sentient machine race.
Here’s the setup:
the Geth were initially one unified group,
then they began to have ideological
and religious differences.
Now one Geth sect has come to believe that it
is the will of god to destroy Commander Shepard
That's you
and the other sect feels that it should protect Shepard.
The player is given the choice to either
destroy the Geth sect that wants Shepard dead
or reprogram them in such a way that they share the
beliefs of the group of Geth that want to protect him.
They won’t even know they’ve been reprogrammed.
So yes, there is a clear storyline question being asked, but
what is <i>really</i> being asked of us, the player, here?
On a surface level, this is a question of
how you deal with religious fundamentalism.
It is meant to lead us to consider current world affairs
and ask ourselves:
“Are those the only two solutions?...
...Are there options other than total destruction
or the fundamental undermining of belief?”
But there is another question here, a more introspective one
just as serious as any question about
modern life, if a little more abstract
Fundamentally, the player is being
asked: “What does it mean to be human?”
“What is at the core of being a sentient being?”
This is the same question philosophers
and poets have asked throughout time
We can trace this very question from Aristotle to Milton
We see it in Hume and Nietzsche, Descartes and Kant.
It is a question that we as
human beings can’t help but ask
and we do so through every medium we have.
So let’s take a closer look
at how it’s being asked here.
Imagine, for a second, that this Geth sect is you
 and the belief in question to be something
that you believe in very strongly
or hold very dear.
ow imagine someone could take that belief from you
say the religion of your father
or your belief in the worth of your own individuality
Imagine that they could do it without
asking you, without you knowing
without your volition at all.
Imagine that they could wipe
away your beliefs so thoroughly
that if you met your former unaltered self
you would disagree so violently that
you probably couldn’t stand each other
Now imagine that the only way to prevent this from happening
was a struggle to the death
Which would you choose?
I for one would rather go down fighting
Is not our free will,
our ability to choose our beliefs
at the core of what makes us human?
Is it not our ability to overcome our instincts that make us sentient?
What would we be without that?
To me, this question also sparked thoughts of
forced lobotomies,
brainwashing and re-education.
And yet, here the question
was presented so reasonably!
As you are playing you might think “Of course, I
should rewrite their beliefs for their own good.”
You might come to believe that this faction of
the Geth doesn’t understand its own evil nature
and you should <i>benevolently</i> try to save them
from their “clear path toward self destruction.”
How many manic depressives have gone on the table
how many homosexuals have been sent away to be “cured”
how many “heretics” tortured
how many lovers of democracy
interned by these same arguments?
Being forced to confront these questions
to understand how they are
presented and what they mean
taught James something about himself
taught him what he believed the
place and value of free will to be.
But just because that’s the answer James
chose doesn’t mean it’s the right one!
If you go back and play that section of the game
again, you may find yourself thinking differently
or approaching the problem from a different angle
This is the unique power of video games as a medium:
they ask us to live our decisions
In this medium, we cannot be spectators.
We are forced to confront our own actions.
And that forces upon us a level of introspection.
Now, some of you may be thinking that this is a
silly thing to be talking about in a video game
that we are reading <i>way</i> too much into this.
Guys, that is something we<i> have</i> to get past.
Mass Effect 2 is a well thought out
game, made by an incredible team.
No one would think twice at trying to understand the meaning in an Oscar nominated film
or Pulitzer Prize winning book.
Is it somehow beneath us to learn about
ourselves from an interactive experience?
Do we doubt the makers of games <i>so much</i> that we think them
<i>incapable</i> of putting anything of worth into a video game?
I don’t believe much in “authorial intent”
but I believe the guys at Bioware are
sharp enough to know what they are doing.
If you go back to that part of the game
you’ll notice that the mission where you’re
asked to decide the fate of the Geth
is called “A House Divided.”
This is a reference both to one of
Lincoln’s first speeches on slavery
and to a biblical passage
specifically, Mark 3:25 and Matthew 12:25
where Jesus is accused of
heresy and demon worship
That biblical reference is no accident;
many of the your other crew member’s loyalty
missions reference biblical passages as well.
Miranda’s refers to Luke 11 and the story of the prodigal son.
Garrus’ is a reference to Exodus 21:24.
Thane’s either refers to Deuteronomy 24:16
or Leviticus 26:39, depending on how you interpret
the character and his relationship with his son.
This isn’t just haphazard.
The developers want us to understand
the dual nature of their reference.
They are using the context to clue us in
on the nature of the question being asked.
This moment in the game really only falls short in one way:
not embedding the question
into the game mechanics.
As our medium evolves
designers are learning to embed and
reference these sort of dilemmas
with all the tools that games provide.
Mass Effect 2 does a brilliant job of making you live the
dilemma of choosing between what may well be genocide
and the utter subversion of an entire race’s free will.
Unfortunately, the designers missed a great opportunity
to reinforce this dilemma at its conclusion.
If both choices had resulted in Renegade points
instead of one being labeled the “Renegade”
choice and the other being
the good “Paragon” choice
this would have been a fully realized attempt at using the medium
of gaming to provide the player with a moment of introspection
Here alone, the designers fell short
looking at the question and
the game as separate entities
But, I guess one can’t ask for everything!
We’ll get there.
So, no matter how you
approached this dilemma
or what answer you gave when you played it
I hope you learned something from the experience
As you can see, video games are absolutely
capable of enriching our lives.
I for one can’t wait to see them get better and better at it.
See you Later!
Outro Music: “Frame of Mind” by Aurora, SGX & destructo
Subtitles by C.Storm