All right, gang. I am so glad I was
finally able to schedule Nick drawing a
bunch of us on the EC crew getting
together and checking out this escape
room I've heard so much about. I don't
know if you all know this, but I
flipping love escape rooms. You know, it
is just so nice sometimes to get out and
play games instead of just talking about
them all the time, you know? Oh, hey,
it's Zach and Christian from Doors of
Divergence. Fancy meeting you gents
here. Ooh, did you guys design the
escape room we're doing today? Oh,
thanks. What's this? Our first clue,
maybe? Hold on. This is a script. Wait,
it says we're already in the escape
room. Fellas, I just wanted a chill
night. Is this an episode? Where is
everyone going?
Right, you are, Zoe. Who am I kidding? I
love talking about this stuff. Okay, so
let's take a moment to learn about some
of the psychological hacks that escape
rooms use to keep us all locked in.
[Music]
This great gaming escape is brought to
you by you, our lovely patrons over on
Patreon. Your support makes this show
possible. Thank you so much. The modern
escape room is actually way more complex
than it lets on. And that is by design.
So, in this episode, guest writers and
hijackers of My Night Out, Zach and
Christian, are going to spill all the
tea about innovative design techniques,
time-tested psychological hacks, and
reactive and interactive game elements
that escape rooms bring together to
trick your brain into feeling like you
are the hero in your own otherworldly
adventure. But first, because you know
we love it, some history. Escape rooms
can trace their roots through a wide
variety of media and time periods.
Victorian parlor games, theme parks,
haunted house design, video games such
as Mist, and adventure games on websites
like Newgrounds and Mini Clip. Heck,
even the name Escape Room supposedly
came from a flash game in the early
2000s. Though the first credited
physical escape room, is widely
considered to be the real escape game
made by Takato's company Scrap in 2007.
It was held in a small room in Tokyo and
gave players an hour to escape by
solving a series of puzzles and riddles.
While simple for the time, this did
prove an inflection point for the entire
industry. And soon after, escape rooms
began taking off like wildfire. There
are now an estimated 50,000 rooms in at
least 44 countries. But as escape rooms
grew in popularity, so did the
prevalence of many other forms of
entertainment, meaning that escape rooms
really needed to v for attention against
bigger and more visible competitors. So
to survive in this uphill battle for
audienc's attention, modern escape rooms
have not only had to grow in scope and
scale, but also began borrowing a
plethora of psychological tricks from
things like video games and theatrical
experience design in order to make their
IRL games more impactful. Heck, from the
second you step in the front door of
your local escape room, you're already
being hit with enough misdirection,
memory tricks, and good old-fashioned
flim flam to give everything from PT
Barnum to PT on the PS4 a run for their
money. Actually, to start, let's focus
on that first moment when you arrive at
an escape room. Most escape rooms are
training you how to play even before you
enter the quote game. And I don't just
mean when they tell you where the
emergency exits are and not to break
anything. Because escape rooms are
immersive worlds. You, the player, need
to be invited into said world in a way
that's different from experiencing other
forms of media. Like when we watch
movies and theater or play video or
tabletop games, we intrinsically
understand that we're only dealing with
representations. There is a screen,
table, precinium, or the like between us
and the action. And these things make us
more willing to suspend our disbelief
because you know that you're not really
Master Chief killing the flood or
falling in love in a less than good TV
show or singing his I want song I'm not
throwing away my headsh shot in the Halo
hip hop musical I am working on eat your
heart out Lin Manuel but because escape
rooms ask you to be the protagonist
while you are physically immersed in the
experience around you getting you into
that gameplay role requires a bit more
work by the designers and that's where
they bring in a a little magic to help
out. Oh, I am, bud. And for once, it's
not about a collectible card game. I'm
talking about using a design technique
called the magic circle. A term coined
by Dutch historian Johan Huisinga, and
is in essence the idea that when we
play, we need to create a space outside
the rules of normal society where we can
all agree upon shared illusions. And
this right here is the first real trick,
folks. without explicitly stating it. A
well-designed escape room will give its
players permission to play along with
being immersed in their world. They
typically do this in a two-stage
process. First, you want to establish
the world the player is going to
inhabit. There are many ways to
accomplish this, and most escape rooms
use a combination of these, such as
themed video introductions, letters, or
game masters who wear a costume and
speak to you in a particular accent or
something. This not only instructs you
on the rules of the game, but also
starts to mentally prepare you for the
new reality that is waiting for you
beyond that first door. Then stage two,
they give the players someone to be
within this world. No extensive
backstories or the like, but something
simple that a player can use to frame
their experience. We like to call this
an endowment. It may be a title like
detective or magician. It also may be
something physical like a badge or mask
or letter they need to deliver. The best
versions of this are simple and
archetypal, something easily understood
by the players and that gives them
something to act upon because those
things will pull the players even
further into the magic circle and
encourage them to dip their toes into
the narrative pool and fully suspend
their disbelief. Okay, now the players
are ready to believe in the fantasy. But
how do designers ensure that said
fantasy world is not only fun but also a
place where they can instruct their
players into having the best time
possible? And by instruct I of course
mean manipulate. Actually more
importantly, how do they do that without
overwhelming and confusing their
players? Well, enter tricks of the trade
such as color, lighting, and the concept
of the weenie. No, not that kind of
weenie. You see, when a player first
enters a new space, especially a highly
themed one, like most escape rooms are,
people have a tendency to get
overwhelmed. Choice and analysis
paralysis, which we've talked about on
this channel before, can cause a player
to slow down or lock up. Of course, an
escape from designer wants to encourage
and guide their players progress more
than they want to impede it. But seeing
how you can't throw up a marker on a
player's HUD or something to indicate
where they are like they would in a
video game, what are we as designers to
do? Well, there are a number of
techniques at the designer's disposal.
Color being the most common in escape
rooms. People are naturally drawn to
colors or patterns that stand out. Red,
yellow, and orange are the most common
with a number of evolutionary reasons
they jump out at us. Some studies
suggest that a heightened awareness of
the color red, for instance, helped our
ancestors distinguish ripe fruit from
surrounding green foliage. And the
visibility of red and yellow is why OSHA
standardizes those as warning colors.
Sorry, this apple is delicious. Anyway,
depending on the circumstances, any
color could work. For instance, if you
are in the official and apocryphal
hectomancer escape room, that I will
remind you also does not exist, starring
everyone's favorite hectomancer, the
blue one. Blue objects are probably
going to end up being pretty important.
It's an easy method to latch the player
onto the story they're about to
experience in a subtle way that they
probably won't consciously realize.
Another technique becoming more
prevalent as escape rooms grow
increasingly theatrical is, of course,
lighting. Lighting not only lets you
highlight important objects and places,
but also helps set the mood and tension
as well. A subtle red wash might lend
more menace to an abandoned hospital, or
a flickering fireplace casting shadows
might set players on edge just before a
big reveal. Of course, lighting isn't
just for tone setting. Actually, one of
Christian's favorite lighting techniques
is pulled from the worlds of both video
games and immersive theater. Because
escape rooms take place in the real
world, it can be very difficult to get
people to stand where you want them to
without telling them to directly do so.
But because of people's natural aversion
to darkness in real world situations,
you can trick people into standing
somewhere. Need to get them out of one
room and into another? Simply dim the
lights in the current room and bring up
the lights in the room you want them to
move to. Or need to get all the players
on one side of the room for a big
ending. Only light that side. Even
without direct instructions, players
will naturally follow the implied
direction. But it can go further than
that. For instance, let's say they just
can't find that one last puzzle piece
they need. Well, as a designer, you
could plan to hit that hiding spot with
a pulsing soft light. Not anything super
blatant, just a little brighter or
suddenly in a different color than your
regular lights. This is something that
the guests won't notice, per se, but
their brains will. And suddenly, boy
howdy, that missing piece they needed to
win will be found all on their own. And
that's a really great feeling that
you're engineering for your players. And
then there's the favorite technique of
our other writer, Zack, the weenie. The
technique again is called the weenie.
I'm not calling Zack. Zack, I'm not
calling you a weenie man. I'm just Okay.
All right. If you've watched our other
videos on theme park design, you'll know
this technique well, but let's go over
the basics again. This juvenile term was
coined by Walt Disney during the design
of Disneyland. And the weenie was a big
object in the center of each of the
themed lands to draw guests in as well
as give them a reference point to
navigate with. In escape rooms, this
usually is a large puzzle built into a
big object in a room. Players are
instantly drawn to this puzzle first
because, you know, big and rapidly
discover that more often than not, in
order to solve this puzzle, they need
information from a number of different
smaller puzzles strewn about the space.
This naturally causes teams to break
into smaller groups to investigate the
other puzzles. It also creates this sort
of delicious information imbalance, so
players begin to talk to each other.
This can help with groups that maybe
have that one guy who's a little too
into escape rooms, as well as creating
space for different kinds of play. But
most importantly, it creates a sense of
choice. Do I, the player, want to hunt
down the three books on how to rewire
the missile, or do I want to crack the
safe that has the launch codes? Maybe
I'd prefer to work on getting the
chemistry of the jet fuel for the
rockets just right. With all the
solutions, feeding back into a central
or meta puzzle for the room, teams
quickly start collaborating and building
a quick sense of camaraderie, even among
strangers. It truly is awesome to see.
Um, uh, what was I saying? Sorry, I just
moved into the next room and totally
forgot what I was doing. Uh,
that's right. Another common problem
that designers run into is known as the
doorway effect. Ever get up and walk
into a different room only to
immediately forget why you did that in
the first place? Same. That my friends
is the doorway effect. This fun little
flaw in the human mind involves what
psychologist Elden Tulving called
episodic memory. See, he believed that
when our brains organize memories of
everyday events and experiences, we do
so within the context that memory was
formed. Basically, he thought it's
easier to remember something when you're
in the environment in which you learned
it. So, if you learn something in room
A, then immediately walk through a door
into room B, the surrounding context of
that memory has changed, and your brain
is more likely to, well, dump it. This
is especially true for escape rooms
because the gameplay often involves
actual doorways you have to step
through. Not to mention, scenery will
change drastically as you move space to
space, which makes your brain want to
say, "Oh, squirrel." and forget some
previous info. Accordingly, the escape
room designer needs to be very
particular about both when and where to
introduce new information. Many
multi-room escape rooms use clearly
visible notes and cutscenes, not only to
reiterate discoveries made in the
previous room, but to deliver new
information as well. Because if it's
revealed that the butler had known about
the blue hacknommancer's secret missile
project the whole time, the designers
don't want you, the player, to walk
through the door into the next room and
immediately forget it. This also works
for more practical directions as well.
For instance, if you backtrack and
discover the launch key hidden in the
first room you were in, most designers
will place the ignition switch it
unlocks in clear view of the door in the
second room as to remind the players
where to go when they re-entered the
space. But, you know, some designers are
not content with manipulating just their
players attention or memory. Oh no, some
designers will take the controversial
step of meddling with the player sense
of time itself. In escape rooms, time is
everything. Because only one group can
be in a room at a time, just about every
escape room is on the clock. And for the
most part, clocks in escape rooms can be
relied upon. But do you know what escape
rooms and NBA games have in common? The
most exciting part is the last few
minutes when the heat is on. And only
one stubborn puzzle stands between you
and victory. Well, folks, that is where
legends are born. And to fully tap into
this feeling, some designers are not
above, let's just call it a little
manipulative chronommancy. For instance,
3minute warnings might be given when
there are actually 5 minutes on the
clock. Also, some games have built-in
buffers, so the game master has the
option of giving out a few extra minutes
to sneak players across the finish line.
So, always be nice to your game masters.
This can get rather elaborate, too.
timers and clocks that can actually slow
down in real time, making each tick of
the second hand last a second and a half
or longer. Sometimes a designer might
include a timer that is less precise,
like an electronic candle that is slowly
burning down. Heck, some escape rooms
are abandoning visual timers entirely
and using a playlist of increasingly
intense music, pre-recorded narrations,
or some sort of elaborate special
effects to mark time. all in service of
getting players even more of that sweet,
sweet end of game tension. Then finally,
once your emotions, behavior,
information retention, and sense of time
have all been lovingly manipulated for
your enjoyment, you've done it. You
escaped the room, and that means no more
tricks on you, right? Wrong. The escape
room you're at might insist upon taking
a picture of your team and tagging all
your players on social media. Or perhaps
they'll ask for feedback on the room or
record you talking about your favorite
moments that you just experienced. Now,
cynics will say that this is simply to
make marketing content. And I mean,
sure, but the truth is actually far more
interesting. The art of the debrief is
actually all about helping you, the
player, cement your memories about the
great time you had in the escape room
together. Players who discuss their
experience immediately afterward while
the adrenaline is still flowing will
retain stronger recollections and
positive association with escape rooms.
David Spira, editor-inchief at Escape
Room Artist, often calls escape rooms
quote machines designed to create
memories, and designers take that idea
very seriously. And that is a concept
that helps both the players and escape
rooms in general. Two things can be true
at once because a group of friends who
still talk about a lastminute save or an
awesome special effect or even how they
worked well together as a team are much
more likely to stop being one-time
escape room players and start to become
escape room fans that enjoy them so much
that they'll come back for more. So now
friendos, I have a little homework for
you. If you are able, head out to an
escape room near you. And while you're
getting lost in the story and gameplay,
also take a moment to identify these
psychological gameplay elements that
we've talked about today. And keep in
the back of your mind how some designer
had to craft the experience that solves
the puzzle of giving you an
unforgettable adventure. That's no small
feat. Oh, hey, look. The rest of the
crew made it out in time. Take that,
Blue Hemancer. You were never my
favorite. Thank you once again to Zach
and Christian for giving us a peek
behind the escape room curtain. And be
sure to check out their escape rooms
they've designed in the description.
bonus points if you can find all of the
tricks that they used. They did mention
they kept one or two to themselves.
That too. Thank you everybody so much
for checking out this episode and all of
the tricks of the escape room trade. And
this was made possible by all of you
lovely patrons over on Patreon.
Seriously, we could not bring EC back
about once a month without all of your
support. So, it means the world to us.
I've missed doing these so much. I'm
really super pumped to be back and you
are making that possible. And if you
happen to not be a patron yet, please
consider joining. There's a bunch of
cool perks up there. You get different
4K wallpapers for every episode. If
you're interested in history, you get to
vote on the topics we do over there.
Heck, you can even make me read your
name if you pledge high enough.
Actually, if you want to hear how that
sounds, I'll roll that in a minute. But
seriously, thank you so much. You know
what they say. You either die a hero or
live long enough to see Angelo
Valenciana, Arles, Arsing, Dominic,
Valenciana, Hunter E, Joseph Blame, Kuya
Koy, Lotus Wolf, and Zeliads
Architectures be the best legendary
patrons. That's how the saying goes.