keep us motivated to play through
Fallout 4 and for you to help or hinder
what
I I have another I have another this has
never happened before. Yep. Redo the
intro because YouTube said we were live
and then it said, "Hey, I see that
you're live. Do you want to go live?"
And I went, "What does that mean,
YouTube?" And YouTube said he So now
we're live on YouTube. Yeah. Even though
we were live on YouTube before.
Welcome everybody again. Don't worry
about it. Don't worry about it. Second
or third time to this year's 2025
Birthday Bash for betterment for our
crowd control run of Fallout 4 for Best
Friends Animal Society. Um I will keep
doing this intro for as long as people
donate. Uh we have our donation bar
right up there. And you might be asking,
Matt, what happens when you donate to
this wonderful, wonderful cause around
the day of your birth? First of all,
you'll be giving me the best birthday
you possibly can. Second, you'll be
making a bunch of animals lives very
like just absolutely so much better. You
can check out Best Friends Animal
Society. I believe the link is in the
description for the for the charity. If
not, it can go there in a little bit.
Um, I'm working on that. Thank you,
Will. Um, we had to be live for real
because we are live for real. Are we
live for real? Well, uh, Kyenne just
donated
$100. Explosive generosity. That is
kicking us off. Okay, so wow. We haven't
even gone over the prizes yet and we're
halfway to one. Actually, we're a little
bit closer to one. Sorry, there's a
little bit chaos. We're getting this all
working this morning. Um, but what you
can do with your donations is buy coins
through crowd control to mess with my
game live while you're helping animals.
For instance,
see if I can find
these.Oop. There they are. I got to wait
for that. Hold on. Wait for it. Thank
you for the 50 months, Antas. It It is
worth the hype and the chaos. Yeah. Uh
$5 gets a cat a new wand toy. You can
get snuggle toys for kittens for around
$10. These are basically what you the
amounts can go to sessions of
hydrotherapy for pups. Actually, for
that $100, let's just jump right that
straight there. What you just provided
essentially is care for one special
needs or cat. One dog or cat for one
whole month. You just did that. So,
thank you very much for for that so far.
We'll be going through these for the
rest of the day. Just wanted to kind of
start that off. Uh, I have confirmed,
Matt. I cannot pin a comment. I am
working on other things that I can do.
So, don't don't don't you worry about
it. It's a Okay. Uh, something that's
happening that's interesting, and I
don't know if this is on my end of um uh
social stream, is the Twitch comments in
the mixed chat. I'm seeing
twice. It's not the end of the world.
It's just whatever.
You know, Matt, that's a really great
point. Let me work on that. That's fine.
Uh, our first guest is going to be
swinging in in approximately
48 minutes. Not that we're counting. 48
minutes. So, we are going to get started
in Fallout to kick things off. Uh, is
there anything else we need to go over?
Oh, prizes. Will, do you have the mental
bandwidth to talk about how giveaways
are going to work all day? Uh, you can
pick. You You can You can pick. Do you
want me to fix Twitch or talk about
giveaways? Fix Twitch. So, giveaways are
going to work like this. Will is going
to be the master of of giveaway
ceremonies. And
basically roughly every half hour or so,
we're going to put up a timer, maybe a
little bit more. And there's a ton of uh
Oh, I have the list of all the prizes
type things that are going to be going
on today. We have gifts uh for just And
by the way, you just have to be here and
be hanging out to enter to win these
things. And because we're doing a um
mixed YouTube and Twitch chat, not only
can we see both of your uh your messages
here, thank you so much, Alerted. I
appreciate that from YouTube. And then
let's see. Uh this is this is a test
message from Will. That's so so both
chats we are seeing them. We're just
seeing Wait, I just saw a donation to
God, there's so much going on. Uh was
that last donation, Dr. Swolls. Wow,
that's some team orderish.
$111 birthday cents. Thank you so much.
Uh Wow. Okay. Okay. I No, it's still
delaying it. Why is it doing that?
Anyway, uh giveaways going on for the
whole day. We have stuff from uh Atomic
Mass Games, Bounty Rock, aka Tailspire,
Dwarven Forge, Extra Credits, that's us,
uh Hero Forge, Hit Point Press, Nebula,
and Onyx Path stuff we'll be giving away
uh on the as soon as tech issues are
completed. We might get that ball
rolling as we start. Um next question
for everyone. How is the audio mix? The
music's going right now. The music will
not be going the entire time, Matt. Yes.
Did Did the word further test message
only show up once? It only showed up
once, Will. Okay, cool. I got that back.
Boom. Um uh Okay, cool, cool, cool,
cool, cool, cool. Thank you very much.
Tight tight, tight, tight, tight. All
right, great. Excellent. Awesome. Um I
think the last thing to go over, Will,
and take a breath. You just did a lot of
real quick fixes, and I appreciate you,
Will. the I everyone who's been at Brad
over on Twitch or or newly Janet over on
YouTube absolutely knows that all of our
streaming stuff would die in a in a
fiery wreck if not for Will William B
credits uh basically running the show in
the background. While this is the first
time that we are streaming from my rig
dual boot, don't talk about the test
stream. The test stream last night
didn't happen. Um there's no evidence
that it happened. There's no evidence
that it happened. You can't prove it.
Um, this is Will is running this entire
show uh through the magic of the
interwebs and it's very much
appreciated. Will, thank you for for
doing this. I know it is a lot and uh
hopefully we can raise some money for
some for some furry friends while we
while while you stress out about the
tech nonsense. Yeah. Okay, cool. Great.
Um, okay. Deep breath. I have everything
working. I think YouTube is happy and
they have the links to the to the crowd
control and to the fundraiser and it's
pinned there and it's also in the
description of the video on Twitch. And
here on uh or on YouTube and here on
Twitch, you can use the commands
exclamation mark giveaway or exclamation
mark um charity or exclamation mark CC
to get all the relevant information.
Speaking of giveaways, because this is
the first time we're doing giveaways on
two platforms at the same time, we're
doing them through neither of the
platforms. So, both of the platforms are
inconvenienced equally. That's right,
Google. Welcome to a third platform.
We're taking you not to a secondary
location, but a thirdary location.
That's correct. It is in fact a thirdary
location. Uh oh, how
fascinating. Okay, I'm not going to
worry about that.
Um, so, uh, the way it's going to work
is you're going to fill out the form in
Exavation Park giveaway or that you can
find in the description of the YouTube
video of the YouTube stream. And uh
you're going
to be entered there to win. Uh one
caveat, we're doing potentially a big
thing later that you will need to be
present to win. Um if you're wondering
why all the information, I need a way to
contact you. That's your email address,
which we collect when we when you do the
form. We won't use it for anything else
unless you tick the little box that says
you want us to tell you about like this
but later, right? If we're doing
something like this but later, then
we'll tell you about it if you tick the
box. Um, and I need to know if you're in
the US or not, cuz we have a series of
physical prizes that can only be shipped
inside the United States for reasons
that definitely don't rhyme
with
interlalmear. Got it, right? Yeah. Okay,
great. So, uh, those things are in the
form. Please fill it out and we'll be
drawing winners. We'll remind everyone
to fill out the form. Only fill out the
form once. You get one entry per person
for all of the giveaways, but your entry
rolls until you win something. Uh, and
we have so many things to win, Matt.
It's It's really quite incredible how
many companies and organizations stepped
up. And we're super generous with their
stuff to give so that we could give it
away to you to thank you for being here
while we do stupid things at Fallout 4
for your entertainment and to raise
money for an excellent charity. Now,
let's go over what our some of our our
sort of goals are for this stream. Oh
gosh, we didn't even know. So, we are
the kickoff uh or or the preview, I
would say, of Best Best Best Friends
Animal Society's Best Friends Day. And
that is a series of um and uh Samantha
from Best Friends will be on later today
to to tell us about that a little bit
more. But the thing you need to know is
see that number up there? The
$325.75. Guess what, Buttercups? That
number? Everything we raise today
will be matched as part of best friend
uh as part of the best friends day
campaign. So that means technically that
325 is doubled. Whatever we make today
doubles
and uh it is it's absolutely fantastic.
Um yeah, side note, there is a little
extra thing that I will be doing every
$250 we make. Zoe gets a treat. I don't
know where Zoe is. I'm going to crinkle
the
bag and hopefully she shows
up. We'll see if that works. Uh but
we'll we'll knock that down as Zoe gets
one treat so far. Okay. Uh and then at
$500
That's right. We're very close to this
already. Yeah. You want to say it while
I while I summon the cat? Yeah. Yeah.
Well, while Matt's up as a cat, at $500,
uh we we will uh Matt and I, we not Brad
and Janet. Matt and I, we don't trust
y'all with this yet. Um will will get
the ability to decide on the name for an
adoptable pet. Uh we will be taking
suggestions uh at some point later on
from from uh Brad and Janet. Uh and so
that's going to happen at $500 and
that's part of Best Friends Day, which
is very cool. Uh, and then at
$1,000 at our first
goal, we will institute for the
remainder of the stream in various
formats and places
uh, a camera placed in into Zoe's secret
Fallout vault. I've heard tell that Zoe
has prepped. Anonymous. Thank
you. Did someone say give the kitties
treats? Yes. $100. Thank you so much.
So, we're getting there to that second
treat already. and naming that animal.
By the way, when we will and I get the
ability to name an adoptable pet at
$500. If we raise more money later
today, perhaps we'll we'll we'll let the
hive mind sort of have a say. We're not
going to stick a a lovely animal with a
with a with a a you know, floaty boat
name. Uh but we we will take
suggestions. Adopt a flickle sticks. A
that could be flexible sticks. You're
right. that that that I I don't want to
curse some poor pet with the name
Flixel. But Matt Matt, we have been
talking for
11 12 12 minutes and we have yet to show
them Fallout. So, um I need to tick off
the Zoey treat counter for when she
shows up. Yeah. Okay, great. Awesome. Uh
the So, shut down this music. Yeah.
Okay. So, the way that this works is in
both chats, uh, on on Twitch, we're
blessed with an extension. You can also
exclamation mark CC to get the link
directly. Over on YouTube, you can click
on the link at the top of the of the
thing. Um, thank you, Pavaro, for that
$50. That's very generous. Thank you.
Uh, and um, as Matt enter, keep going.
You you do the tech. I'll do the
explaining. I'm good. We're swapping.
We're flip-flopping. I'm here. Do you
hear the ominous tones?
I guess I do. Um, you will be able to
make purchases with your charity
donation. So, if you want to donate
through crowd control, you'll get coins
to do that. And um that is how you you
do the thing. Uh, are we ready?
We are unprepared to crawl out through
the
fallout with us. Yeah. So, just so
everyone knows, there must be someone
who can help you in combat. I have
already done the beginning of this
because you it doesn't let you start uh
the crowd control stuff until you're
back in Sanctuary. So, here we are. You
can't do anything in Vault 111 because
it's very easy to break the game in
Vault 111. Like, apparently inordinately
easy if the tutorial doesn't go as
planned for the game to just be like,
well, I give up and out. No. So, right
now, I don't know how many of you are
familiar with Fallout 4, but this is
where we are. And our missions right
now, I'm trying to load my pit boy on a
on an
Hey, an donated $100. I got to move that
too, I think, to be a little bit. Can we
change the colors of that, Will, or is
that just random?
The colors of the text. It's okay. Yes,
I can change the text color. Give me a
second. I need to change. I also have my
pit boy here, which will be really nice
because we don't have to go into the
menu all the time. Uh, so I think we're
good to go. Okay, so shall we start this
adventure? You've played so much, Cloudy
Fanta, thank you for the happy birthday.
That is me. Hi. Hello. What? Rad
Scorpion. Did someone summon a rad
scorpion friend?
I believe rad scorpions are always
friends. Oh, now you may think that this
is going to waste, but if enemies were
to appear, it would certainly not be a
waste. Yeah, if an enemy appears right
now, right, then this red scorpion will
help out. Oh, so something that people
should know.
Uh, the way this is going to work, cuz a
lot of these things can kill me pretty
dang quick.
Um, I will try to stay alive and fight
and I will never like just try to save
out of something you do. However, if I
die, it's going to bring you back to the
last save. So, just always remember
that.
Yeah. Um
uh and yeah, that was the There you go.
All right, everybody run. Yeah. Okay,
Red Scorpion, come with me. Will you
come with me? So, uh that that is the
difference between friendly stuff and
companions. Friendly stuff is sort of
exists in the world and won't attack
Matt and will attack things that might
attack Matt. companions will come with
Matt until otherwise stated. So that's
why the if if you're looking at like why
companions are much more expensive, uh
it's because they actually like stick
around. You may also notice that there
are rat rats. They are quite cheap. Uh
they are powerful in large numbers, but
individually they are weak, aka chat.
Chat is is all of the Brads. So uh
please please enjoy that um that part of
it. Uh you will find a wide variety of
things throughout the day. Uh that will
Oh, I should go into my inventory. What
What color did you What What color did
you want the uh I don't I don't know.
Maybe the color is fine. It just it
didn't look uh Oh, well, wait. So, side
note, Will, while we were getting this
through, and there's so much to explain,
we did crack $500. So, we now get to
name a pet. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
Um, well, we can start we can start
working on a list like like new
expectant parents, we can start working
on a list of names and then we'll we'll
see if they feel right later on. This is
very ominous. I haven't played this game
in a long time. Yeah. By the way, uh for
for small donations, uh you can change
the weather, you can change the time of
day, all of those take effect instantly.
They're all kinds of little things.
What's that? Um
That's not a dog.
That's Zoe.
Excellent. Excellent. Excellent. Uh,
Zasquatch, thank you so much for the 25
taking us to $600.75. You're all by
yourself.
You lose your owner, buddy. Yeah.
The mod. There's half dog noises, half
cat noises.
Together. Hey.
Okay, you're with me.
Let's explore. I'm going to pin the
crowd control. So, we found something
chat. Where'd she
go? The problem is she's harder to see
now.
Oh, toolbox.
Oh, a stimpack. Thank you.
Power still works. We got a workbench.
Okay, let's keep moving. The goal is to
get through as much of this game as
possible today, by the way. Yep. There
there are there are there is much to see
and and so little time. Um, someone
suggested that we name the pet Martin,
short for Martin Ellis. Oh, that's good.
Will, can you keep a list? I will I will
I will do my best to keep a list. Uh, I
can write it down. No, no. I got I got
it. I I have a I have a thing that
that's part of my job today.
What just
Oh, Karen and David, thank you so much
for the $50. The everybody those Hold
on. Let me let me Yeah, I don't know if
they're watching or if they just found
the link, but I very much appreciate it.
Well, if they found the link, then they
also uh did the thing. Uh, hey chat.
Chat, I'm gonna need Wait, hold on a
second. This is very important. I'm
gonna need someone to donate
$525 real quick. Just for nothing. Just
for the bit, just for the me. I'm going
to need I'm going to need $525. David
and Karen are two of the most lovely
people. They were uh my old landlords
when I was in Brooklyn. Uh that's so
sweet that they donated. Also, Doride,
thank you for your donation as well.
Yeah, Doride, thank you. Thank you so
much. And again, ever um it's kind of
interesting. Lots of people feel like uh
when we do fundraisers that they can't
contribute a lot, right? Cuz you know,
gestures broadly. Um it is really
important to remember that uh together
chat is strong. So, uh every little bit
adds up. every dollar, every, you know,
$10, every $5, and it all adds up over
the course of the next
12 and a half hours.
Yeah, that we're going to be doing this.
So, we have guests, we have people
coming in. It it we promise it's going
to be it's going to be real good. Um,
all right. We're in conquer. Did that
pin take? Did what? Okay, that pin
actually took. Okay, cool. Great. Great.
Great.
Um,
I think we're going to be getting into
our first firefight here in a second.
I'm not I'm not wearing the tie and I'm
not sufficiently disheveled to be Agent
Schmecker.
This pistol. There was a fire fight. I
can conduct it though.
Let's see if this works. It worked.
Okay. Okay,
great. Cool. Cool.
Friendly rat rats. Where are they? There
they are. Yeah. Oh, look at them.
They're so ugly and hideous and cute.
Those will Oh, no. They fight the
chickens. You've discovered the secret
hack. So,
yes. Gobsite, thank you so much for the
$5.25 for the bit. Hail safe. Yeah,
there we go. Look at that. All right.
Great. Um, wow. They uh Oh, no. They
They are. Rad rats are vicious. There we
go. We got it. Trent, thank you so much
for the 525.
Okay, Chimkin. Chim chim chiming. All
right. So, uh I'm going to be moving
pretty quickly through this beginning
part because I kind of remember it. Mhm.
Also, I feel like at this point, I'll do
this every once in a while. I will save.
By the way, it saves all of your things.
So, if we have to load back here, where
did the rats do the rats all run away
for the chickens or did they go eat
something? Oh, there's one. They're like
they So, they sort of disperse. Unless
they have a reason to like be in a
place, they they will all disperse.
So yeah, it's it is too bad we miss
66969, but
hopefully we can get to
69 69696.
Oh, wait. Am I supposed to Hold on. Am I
supposed to talk to someone out here
first? I don't remember.
Yeah, the rats are just friendly. But
they will like if you summon chickens
near them, they'll go attack the
chickens. Like there's ways you can hack
this very quickly. Yeah, Chickens are
neutral. Um, anything that's aggressive,
they will attack.
Also, we're not sure how this is going
to break stuff. Rats. Rats. Rats. Nova,
thank you for the $25.
Uh, button. Get out of
[Music]
there. I'll show my Wow. I'm I'm a crack
shot right now. Still alive. Yeah. For
large donations, by the way, you can uh
Oh god, they're wolves. Where? What are
they? They're wolves. I believe those
are friendly. I believe those are
friendly. I don't I don't Oh, that's
right. If the icon on the left is blue,
it's friendly. If it's red, it's an
enemy. Are they just ripping through
stuff in here? Probably.
Oh my god, those go my wolves. Go.
They are tearing through this place.
I mean, turns out low-level raiders not
a match for wolves.
They're like, "Wow, ripping through."
I'm going to put on some leather legs
here real quick. There we go. They uh
they they they were like, "Yeah, we're
going to fight a a person coming out of
a vault who has just a gun." And then
they're like, "Why is there a Who
summoned Will? Can you tell me who
summoned these wolves?" I can indeed
tell you who uh who summoned those
wolves. Those wolves were summoned by
uh uh Fayb Vang or Fate T Vanguard. Oh
my god. Thank you, Vanguard. The wolves
just cleared this room for me.
Ooh, it's a whole lot. Preston was
supposed to shout from the balcony and
toss you a laser musk. Maybe because the
rats finished off the raiders that flag
failed the fire because there was
nothing dangerous. Yeah.
Okay, this is my favorite hacking game
of anything because you can try to find
these little sections that take away
duds. You basically look for symbols.
Did you know this, Will? No. You look
for symbols that are like the the
brackets to each other. So, for
instance, like I just found that one um
a lot easier with a mouse than a
controller when you're clicking all the
way through. This won't take me too
long, he said confidently. Is the medium
one.
Oh, yeah. Like this. Like this will take
away a dud because the two brackets
close it. Do you get it? Yeah, I got it.
All right, let's try one. Let's try
giant. Okay, likenesses. So, there's
three of those letters. It's kind of
like a wordle sort of thing. There's
three of those letters that are in the
right thing. So, uh, can't be swamp,
can't be Texas, can't be he, uh, heart,
can't be here, can't be heals. Uh, could
be plant. That's it. Boom. Unlock that
security gate cuz we're going to need
that later.
Okay. Very interesting. We need to take
this power
core. I I remember a little bit of this
game. Okay, great. Down here. Okay,
great. I'm I'm going to
try. Okay. I did not know this was here.
This is not a plant. This is I don't
know what chat. Is this supposed to be
here or is this one of the mods I put
in?
I believe that's supposed to be here.
That feels like it's supposed to be
here. It's in the right texture thing.
All
right. It's just wolves randomly
wandering around murdering stuff. I love
it. I love that the wolves just cleared
house. Yeah. Uh for anyone who's
wondering, yes, a coin is uh one US
cent. Uh so 100 coins is a US dollar.
I'm a crack shot.
All right, we did it. Ah, freedom. I
should probably heal myself, huh?
I love having the the iPad to do all
this stuff. Mhm. It's very It's very
useful. Okay.
I'm coming in there. Did we thank
Anonymous for another $100 donation? I
don't know, but if we did not, I I don't
know who this Anonymous is, but they're
pretty dope. Uh, thank you.
Let's go for Let's go for Let's try this
real quick. I need I'm a sucker for
vats. Look at that. Took care of it.
Checked the text message while we were
killing these raiders. We got this.
Shotgun shells. Double barreled shotgun.
Left leg sack with hooded hoses. This
all sounds great. Yep. Uh, by the way,
uh, friend is over on YouTube. I do want
to
um,
uh, I do I did just want to ask uh, if
anyone over on YouTube was having
problems getting into crowd control.
Also, Stephen, thank you so much. Russ
keeps telling me the settlement needs my
help, but he's been giving me the stink
eye ever since I started sending the
since I inherited to protect those
settlements. Listen, he's kind of picky.
I guess it's fine.
All right. I don't know, but Preston
Preston Gar, I want his hat. Damn it.
Perfect timing for the fandom.
Minute man. That
was technical, but a minute was that was
the idea. So, I joined up. Wanted to
make a difference and I did, but things
fell apart. That ain't it. Now it looks
like I'm the last mini man left
standing. The world's changed. The
world's changed so much. Oh yeah, they
talk in this one. You all right? Mhm.
Listen, we need your help. Imagine being
a voiced video game. What brought you?
Couldn't be me next week.
Uh how much we want to tell my son? My
son Shawn's been kidnapped.
He's not even a year old. That's messed
up. I'm sorry. I know how this world can
be. My water. A month ago, there were 20
of us. That is messed up. Yesterday,
there were
eight. Now we're five.
First it was the ghouls in Lexington and
now this mess. Mhm.
Uh ghouls. Ghouls? What are ghouls? Wow.
You really aren't from around here, are
you? Ghouls
are irradiated people. Most are just
like you and me. They look pretty messed
up and live for a long time, but they're
still ones named Walter Gogggins. The
ones I'm talking about are different.
The radiations rotted their brains made
them feral. They'll rip you apart just
as soon as Look at you.
Anyway, we figured Conquer would be a
safe place to settle. Yeah, agreed,
Dolphin. About the characters in RPGs,
the vague prompts. This is like they
basically say the same thing you're
about to say.
Uh, let's see. Tell me. Let's hear it.
Stures. Tell them. Yeah, tell me.
Sturgeis verte bird up on the roof. Old
school. Pre-war. You might have seen it.
Well, looks like one of its passengers.
Hey there, someone. Seriously, sweet
goody. Well, come on in. We're talking a
full suit of cherry T45 power. T45 power
issue.
I like it. I like it.
Yeah, I thought you might. Protection
with an able to go into control, but
your coins weren't there. Get the suit.
You can rip the mini gun right off the
bird. Do that. Are people having
trouble? Those traers get an express
ticket to hell. You dig?
Good idea. Minigun. Keep it moving. Now
we're talking. I know,
right? Only there's one hitch. The
suit's out of juice. Probably been dry
for a hundred years. It can be powered
up again. But we're a bit I wonder what
we'll do to power it up.
I'll help if I can. What you'll need is
an old pre-war FC. Uhhuh. But we can't
get to the damn thing. Look, I fix
stuff. I tinker. Bypassing security
ain't exactly my forte.
You could give it a shot.
Already have it. Actually, I already
grabbed the fusion core. We're set.
Well, all right. Maybe our luck's
finally turning around. Once you jack
the core into the power armor and grab
that minigun, those raiders will know
they picked the wrong fight. Good
luck.
Okay. Also, Mama Murphy, ma'am. Dog meat
sure did find us some help. Oh, now now
Zoe will be named Dog Meat, which is a
He's a good dog. He's a good dog.
Oh, indeed. That's dog. I'm gonna do
this. Let's see. You should Oh, yeah.
Cuz Mama Murphy, it's the che
takes a lot of chems and can see the
future. Sight been that way for as long
as I can check off about see the future.
Yeah, that's incredible. Incredible. I
can see a bit of what was and what will
be and even what is right now.
I can do that too. Yeah, I think we're
doing that all together as as friends. I
can see there's something
coming drawn by the noise and the
chaos and
It is. Okay. Mama, you're you're
freaking Oh, so we can we can do the the
the yellows apparently are the ones like
trying to convince them to tell you
something. What is it, Mama Murphy? I
need more. Please. I'm sorry. Uhhuh. All
right, let's get out of here. Actually,
I'll check here if there's some settings
for subtitles. I don't know if there is.
General sub dialogue subtitles on.
General subtitles on. Let's try it. Hey,
thank you so much for the $100. That's
so lovely. Thank you. Thank you. We're
at $89625.
chat. If we crack $1,000 before we've
been live for an hour, I'm gonna That'll
be then I'll have to find I'll have to
that'll be four treats for Zoe and I'll
have to find her Fallout shelter. That's
correct. That that is correct. Uh, thank
you so much for the birthday wishes to
Matt. Thank
you. Very much appreciated. Yeah,
please. When you said it like that, I
thought for a second it was going to
play the Beetle. Thank you from last
year.
two years ago,
wherever whenever that was. Whenever the
Zelda one was. I think it was two years
ago. Oh god, we've done this so many
times. Yeah, many times.
The goal if we break a thousand, Marco,
is um we I I hunt and show you where
Zoe's fallout shelter is, aka there will
be a cat cam. All right,
listen listen. Some people are not used
to our shenanigans. So, I do just want
to make sure that people know that there
there there is a a thing. Oh, like an
actual thing. And then we will reveal
the the next goal. So, the way this
works is we have goals lined up for a
bit.
Um much like a uh a Kickstarter. So, if
we reach $1,000, we've got a goal. If we
reach the next milestone, we got a goal.
Um, and some of them are pretty awesome.
United States Army Staff Sergeant
Michael
this past Saturday, October 23rd. It's
my birthday. While in route to West
Stockbridge, happy birthday. Will a
vertebra crashed into the roof of this
museum. The cause EMP following nuclear
detonation. Several, in fact. From the
intel I've gathered, this was a global
event.
The co-pilot was killed on impact. Pilot
died of his injuries a day later. Day
after that, Flarity and Cano were shot
by some scared, desperate survivors.
Then Preszanski took off running. Thank
you, Trent, for the $10. I think there
was one before that. It was from
Immortal Lab. Thank you so much for uh
team Palen droning. My armor's fusion is
burned out, so I guess my soldiering
days are done.
I'm heading to Boston on to see if my
sister survived all this. She's got an
apartment on Boilson Street.
This is Mike Dailyaly signing out. Good
luck and God bless America.
God bless America. Here we go. Are
raiders coming?
If you were waiting, the rats the rats
are just killing them from
before. Watch, watch, watch. We may have
made rats too cheap. No, we didn't. Look
at that. Look at that. Look at my
minions. You're doing this.
Thanks so much for Yeah, that number was
too orderly. That's correct. We'll we'll
talk more about that once we get in. Is
that how that has to do with the death
claw? Hold on. Let's watch this. Is that
Is that Is that a scripted death? Yeah,
that is a scripted death. Okay, cool.
Great. Awesome.
Let's see how it does.
Go rats. Go.
Wow.
the Okay. Wow.
I I think it may be that they don't
attack the rats
because they don't know what to do with
the rats.
I'm just looting. I do know that
summoned stuff fights friendly summon
stuff, by the way, cuz it comes in and
looks for things to fight. So, uh if if
you are interested, there are there are
some big things. Some of them will just
kill Matt. Uh,
okay. Great. I eat my babies. Get the
chickens. Get the chickens. They're
going. They're running. That's so funny.
Yeah, this is a John Z. It's a Fallout
4, a plagues
tale. All right, I think I can go talk
to everyone
now. Uh, trying to thank you for that
$25.
Oh yeah, these guys. These aren't I I
freaked for like a split second when I
just saw five wolves just waiting in
this building. They're your friends.
That was a place with rat. That's
correct. I'm just glad you were on our
side.
Everyone okay? Guy is going to be okay
now. Yeah, I have to stop speaking cuz
he speaks. We can at least move
someplace safer.
Listen, when we first met, you asked
about the minute men. One thing you
should know about us, we help out our
friends. Great. So, here. Oh, one thing
we probably won't be doing in this
stream is doing any actual settlement
stuff. Feels like that's just going to
be too chaos and and boring at the same
time.
You're welcome. Anytime. Well, since you
say that, maybe you'll come to Sanctuary
with us. That's my town. Use your help
getting settled there.
All right, Garvey. Let's do it. I'm in.
Uh, at $1,000, I will go get Zoe from
wherever she is. Place her safely in the
Fallout shelter, and she'll get four
treats.
I've seen it. Oh, Mama Murphy. I know
your pain.
Go on. Okay, girl. I'm listening.
Out of hope, but all's not lost. I
remember Mama Murphy just saying a lot
of stuff that like you'd know based on
the back of the game cover. He's alive.
Yeah.
Where is my son? Where is Shawn? Oh, I
wish I knew, kid. I really do. But It's
not like I can see your son. I can just
feel his life force energy. He's out
there and even I don't need the sight to
tell you where you should start looking.
The great green jewel of the common Oh,
I love Diamond City. Diamond City, the
biggest settlement around.
Great. What's in Diamond City? Is Sean
there? Look, kid. Oh, man. now. Oh, so
here's a moral question, chat. Also,
grass, thank you for the $25. More
treats. More treats and the other
animals. That's right. Murphy, we talked
about this. All right, we're
going to kill you. So, Mama Murphy, I've
never done this in a playthrough, but
I've never given her kemps. I've always
felt very bad. Our new friend here. He's
going to need Why did that double play?
I don't know. Let's get going. Sanctuary
awaits. All right, folks. Dark.
It's safe to move out. We're heading for
that place Mama Murphy knows about. All
right, thanks. It's not far. She knows
about it? You mean she had one of her
visions while she was stoned out of her
gourd? And now you want us to just head
out on another wild goose chase based on
no better plan than Mama Murphy saw it.
Hold on any worse then. Everybody just
take it easy. Everyone take it easy. You
have all these wolves on your side. Got
a better idea of what we should do next.
So many wolves.
Anybody? Do we have we have to wait for
this conversation to finish, right? Then
we can go like the quest we have right
now.
We could go to Diamond City. We could
join Precedent Sanctuary.
Um I could listen to VaultTech distress
signals, investigate the last known case
of missing caravan. I mean, what I have
I have all the expansions on here, too.
So, like, is there any like people that
are big Fallout fans that want me to go
a specific direction? I'm not saying
I'll do it, but
Suggestions are welcome. Yeah, I was
going to say suggestions are welcome.
Donations are more welcome.
Um, yeah.
[Music]
Uh, this game has some questions, but
the writers are not good at answering
them.
That's true. Cuz right now, unless
anyone has any
other Marco says northwest, just walk
northwest. Sure. I mean, you needed a
direction. So, northeast seems good as
any.
You know what? You're right. Let's just
West is like the left of the east. Thank
Thank you. Let's move out. Northwest it
is. The rats are this way. Behind you,
boss. They are.
Yeah. We northeast. All right. Guard.
Guard conquered. Brad rats. Yeah. So, so
you'll notice that like there is now a
pack of Brad rats in Concord. Um, and
they are they are doing a great job of
mulching things, but they will stay in
Concord. So, if you all would like to
repeat this experience, more rats are
required in every location we go to. So,
it's possible that Matt could just
become the rat king. Uh, and that's
fine. So, we found something. Aqua,
thank you so much for the 19 months.
Thank you. Thank you. For the birthday
wishes to Mac, thank you. Thank you.
Very much appreciated. Oh, I see.
Twitter says, "I found a settlement in
distress. I've marked it on the map.
That's too bad. We're not doing too damn
bad."
All right, we are in fact tired,
Grandpa, of settlements already. And we
haven't The weather sucks. It does. The
weather could be changed if people were
so inclined. Uh we we saw we did see a
great many uh very generous donations.
Andrew, I did see your thing for the
save. I think that was very smart.
A small black cat. Oh, there we go. Hard
to see in the dark. It is.
Thank you for the 408. Time for chaos.
96920. Okay, that is pretty chaotic. Uh,
so chaos. I am team order. Why Why did
it not is the rain scripted for this
part of the game? It wasn't when we
tested it. That I have questions about
how that nucacca was in the middle of
the shelf. Okay. Okay. I I need to say
this up top. If that if this is the
problem you're gonna have with Fallout,
then you got to buckle in a lot harder.
I'm just saying I'm just noticing some
things for the for everyone uh
wondering. I've never played Fallout cuz
I don't generally vibe with Bethesda
games. I've never found a Bethesda game
that I like really enjoyed playing. I'm
not saying they're bad games. I'm saying
I don't like them. Um so, uh this is
this is a journey for me. Um I'll clear
the way. Your team order. I'll take a
breakfast burrito.
Nice. Yeah, I will need a burrito at
some point. Yeah, it's true. Rebuilding
America one rat gang at a time. Correct.
Oh, now it's clear. But that's good.
That's good. This actually is very
pretty when the weather is good. Yeah,
but it's this is in DC, right? Yeah. As
someone who lives very close to Oh, no.
This is in No, it's not in DC. Three is
in DC. Uh, four is in Boston and
Massachusett. Okay. Yeah, where I just
was for packs. So, we'll be I was going
to say that makes it even worse.
Uh, let's see. Your power armor's fusion
core is low. No, it's at 25%. We're
fine. Bethany Ezda. That's correct.
Bethany Ezda of the Connecticut Ez.
That's right. Exactly. Of the
Philadelphia EDAS. The Philadelphia Ez.
That's right.
I think I'm going to ditch the power
armor cuz it's boring in sanctuary. That
seems good. I'll put it in the garage.
That's where I like putting it. I use
like like you're uh like you're a dad
with a workshop, right? It's it's your
it's your dad workshop project. You got
to go out in your jorts and uh go work
on it on the weekends. Yep. Scorpion.
Scorpion's Garden Town, right? That's
true. There is a Scorpion. is guarding
the town. Some someone's going to come
and be like, I'm going to steal all the
stuff. I'm a raider. Oh god, why is
there a scorpion? So everybody, if
you're looking to put friendly like cuz
I'm not going to build up sanctuary at
all. Okay, so sanctuary gets attacked.
So if sanctuary gets attacked, the only
thing that can protect them right now is
that one rat scorpion. I feel like to be
fair, given the effectiveness of the
rats that we've seen, that might be
enough. Um
Okay. How do you get out of a a hold? E
copper chef, thank you for the chaos.
$47.97 bring us to $1,000 and
$17.17. Thank you so much. That is our
first goal. Let me figure out Oh,
there's some rats. Look at these rats.
Okay, so sometimes, by the way, when
rats spawn in, they they they get a
little confused. So sometimes they'll
just freeze for a second. Don't panic.
That's them figuring it out. Also, a
word my mechanics. How do I get out of
this thing? Uh, hold. Yeah.
Great.
Uh, where do I do this thing?
Hey, Matt. Quick. Matt, how do I do the
thing? Oh, the thing. You got to help
me, buddy. How do I How do I do it? It
could be anything really. Um, it's true.
Um.
Uhhuh. Uhhuh. Ditching some stuff
here. Need to a
lot. We're
good. Do I have to do this? Oh god, it's
light mode. Why is it light mode? Why do
I still have the minigun? I'm not going
to take the mini gun if I'm not care.
Oh, I guess I can take it.
Sure, why not? All right, our ne So, so
first up, we got to pay up. Yes, we have
to pay up. So, here, two seconds. Don't
spawn anything for a moment. I'm going
to save.
We're back. We're good. We're going to
go back here.
Okay. You can still hear it in the
background. I I turned it off. I did
that. Um, okay. Here we go. I think I
found if I can find the right button to
find it. The Zoe The Zoe Fallout
Shelter. Okay. Okay. I I think we're
live right now to the Zoey Fallout
Shelter. That's right. Uh let me double
check here real quick. Hold on. I'll
just
go. Here we are. Welcome to the Zoey
Fallout Shelter.
Uh I need to go get her. I hear her
meowing right now. So, Will, you need to
vamp while I go. Well, fortunately, I
don't have to vamp alone. Uh, so that's
Oh, good. Here. Do you want me to put in
the guest? Uh, I would I would love for
you to put in a guest. Uh,
hi. There she is. Hi. Hi.
Just lurking in the background. Hello.
Uh, Erin, while Matt's going to get Zoe,
uh, why don't you, uh, tell everyone at
home in brief who you are and why you're
awesome. Uh, and there's there's a lot
of
I sure to explain why Erin's awesome in
like small words, but like you
know the topic. I appreciate that. Um,
no. Hi everyone. Uh, thanks for having
me. Um, some of you may have seen me
getting up to shenanigans on this uh,
channel before. Um, but the short
version is that I'm a nerd and I also
play a lot of video games and also I'm
the science adviser on Star Trek. So, we
Star Trek nerd out with each other all
the time. Hell yeah. Erin, thank you so
much for for being here today. I have to
go make good. Uh, I don't know if you're
watching stream right now. That's Zoe's
Fallout shelter we're in right now, and
I have to go get her there. Uh, with
these treats, I'll be right back. All
right. What do you need? I see your
face. Uh, I need something for Matt when
he gets back, but that's okay. Oh, okay.
Okay. Nothing on my end. Nothing I need
to fix? No. No. There there is
um chat. I spend a lot of time in OBS,
but one of the problems that we've run
into is that when Matt is doing setup
stuff, I can't see Matt's OBS. So, I'm
doing every like I'm I'm essentially
like closing my eyes and playing digital
chess uh without a board to get Matt to
set everything up.
Um that happens. It It does. So, it's
like I want to leave. And Matt's like,
"No, you gotta stay on the camera. You
must stay."
Zoe, I made it nice for you.
Let's see. Let's see if she stays. I do
love it. Aaron may be doubled. Did you?
I turned her down. She shouldn't be
doubled anymore. I Okay, cool. Great.
So, talk to me real quick again. Hello.
Testing. You got me? Yeah. Yeah. Erin's
a little louder than you will, but
remember she's coming in on your thing
as well. But the BA guest also in in
OBS. What is Zoe doing? Yeah, she's
making biscuits. Zoe is making biscuits.
Love it. Okay, great.
I can actually and I can do some of the
Yeah. Here, I'm gonna get us back into
the Oh, you know what we should do real
quick? I'm gonna Erin, you're going to
disappear for two seconds. We're going
to put put you right back.
There we go. Hey, there we go. So, we
have the cat cam. We have Aaron. This is
all working fairly well at the current
junction. I think it's time we should
start doing a prize or a giveaway, I
should say. All right.
I'm honored to be here for this, of
course. Uh, wrong button. Uh, where uh,
which one should we do, Will? We Oh,
god. Hold on. I was not I was getting
ready to do something completely
different. What do you want to do? I'm
sorry. I'm jumping the gun. I was gonna
I was going to tell everyone what the
next stretch goal was and update the bar
and then do the giveaway. Let's do that.
I'll keep playing and then we'll do the
giveaway right after. All right. So, uh
up next at uh a mere 2500
what? Aaron's not in the I need to fix
something cuz right here Erin's right
there. You don't have to do anything,
Erin. I just have to figure out why
you're not in the game. Give me Keep
talking, Will. Keep talking. Okay. So,
for for for the low low price for the
low low total donation of
$2,500, uh Matt and I will engage a
costume change for the remainder of
stream. It is that
we're going to regret this costume
change because it is uh we're both East
Coast and it is um quite warm today. Uh
and uh having examined the costumes
which we acquired for this, I'm going to
regret this. Um, so please please look
forward to it. Uh, there we go. It's
like part of Eric. I know. Well, this is
Okay. I don't understand what's
happening here. Hold on.
Weird. All right. Give me a second. I'll
fix this. I see. I see my sort of there.
Yeah. Yeah, it's great. I don't I don't
know why this is happening here when it
worked yesterday in testing, but welcome
to live television, everybody. It's not
It's not television, but it is live. Uh,
yeah. Hey, I I can tell you for certain
I will not be wearing a Corgi Kigarimi
for the entire time. My tailbone won't
take it. Um, fun fact about the Corgi
Kigarimi. While it's very cute, it's
very cute. It does have a tail and that
tail when you sit on it lodges directly
into your tailbone. So, your butt hurts
a lot after a bit. Um, breakfast was
about the maximum amount of time I can
sit in the Corgi Kigarimi. So, uh, no,
it will not be the Corgi Kigarimi. Okay,
so let's let's test something real quick
here. So this is cat cam. Aaron's still
there. This is the cafe. Aaron's still
there. This is the game. I know the
game's not there, but Aaron's still
there. We now go back to Fallout while
Will does all the things. Okay, great.
Awesome. It will not back. Give it a
moment. Yeah. So now uh so the the bar
has been updated to reflect that. We
also need to thank uh Oh boy, why is it
why is it not doing that thing? Oh,
Mortal Lab, thank you so much for the
501 and mindless indulgence for getting
us back to an orderly number 3283
donation. Why is the game not showing up
now? It took a second last time. I know,
but this not this long of a second.
There you go. Oh, there we go. Great.
Dark magic. Look, it's Zoe. Dark magic.
Oh, we need to put uh cat cam on this
scene. Oh, cat cam. You got it. Uh
all the cams. Is she down there? Yeah.
Oh my god, she's down there. I can see
her moving. I can see her moving around.
All right, chat. Sorry. Sorry for that.
That's the these great moments of
transition when we bring our friends on
and do stuff are
uh nice and chaotic. So, um we will be
getting to a giveaway momentarily, but
let me set that up real quick. While I
do that, Aaron, tell us about your pets.
Cuz that's that's we're we're here today
to celebrate animals and celebrate pets.
Aaron, tell us about your pets. All
right, I will let me introduce because
she's here.
Chat gets two cat cams. Oh, there's
another black cat who's entered the
chat. You can barely see, but she's
right there. Hello. This is Toothless.
Her name is Toothless after. Her name is
Toothless. She does have her teeth, but
she has the personality of the How to
Train Your Dragon. Sure. She is a all
black cat and she lurks in the shadows
and is
talkative and uh has the most adorable
little face.
A Where did you get that?
Uh I got her from the uh Stray Cat
Alliance here in Los Angeles. So she was
a stray. Um she
uh eats like it's her last meal ever.
Um, and when we had two cats, she was
rotund, right? I will say that cuz she
was eating Oh god.
There we go. There there there's there's
the gas. Uh, that would be a ghost. Oh,
[Laughter]
sorry, Evan.
That's okay. The the the I appreciate
the cat talk may have been distracting.
No, this is good. This is what this is
what we want. Hey,
ragd doll physics. All right. Uh we will
I will be keeping unofficial count
number of times chat has killed Matt
successfully. Uh that's one.
Matt is now feared. I'm so proud. Okay,
I'm gonna I'm gonna keep going
northwest, I guess.
By the way, how far back? I haven't
played Fallout 4 cuz the open world
Bethesda games overwhelm me. Um, how far
back does it kick you when you die to
your last save? Oh, okay. Which isn't
terribly far. Th This is longer
temporally than it was in game because
we were juggling things and getting you
one. Um, so uh while while we're talking
chat, now is an excellent time on uh if
you are on YouTube, it's in the
description. If you're on Twitch, you
can exclamation mark giveaway. Uh you
can
uh go and enter
uh the giveaway uh spreadsheet. So, this
is a little different than years past.
Normally, we've done keyword things, but
in order to make it so that people on
YouTube can participate, we're doing it
with a spreadsheet. So, um, please go
ahead and, uh, put in your username,
your email, whether you're on Twitch or
YouTube, uh, whether or not you'd like
to get a couple of emails from us about
things that we're doing in the future.
You can put all that in and do that. And
then we'll, uh, tell you what you're
going to win and the the roll the
giveaway uh, in a little bit. But, uh,
do you want me to do the five sec the
five or five minutes? Yeah. Yeah. Five
minutes. But you're not going to tell
them what the giveaway is before we do
that? No, this one's a surprise.
Surprise. Give five minutes on the
clock. I I I will I will normally tell
them, but this one's Aaron. I'm so glad
you're on first because this is this is
the kind of delightful chaos that we
need today. Uh and Aaron is always um
quite tolerant of our shenanigans.
There's not a lot west here. I cannot go
that way. Why can't you Wait, do you
have a map? You cannot go that way. Uh
hold on. We do.
It's so funny because I'm not normally a
chaotic being and yet I feel like what
we went through through lockdown and
everything together I feel like we just
revert back to that state when we hang
out together which brings me lots of
joy. Yeah, it it is it is very much
um Okay, so Matt and I have this problem
where we're both normally incredibly
intelligent, eloquent, well spoken uh
people. No, no, you are. Shut up. I can
be too on occasion. Um, and then when
we're together, it all cancels out and
we have a collective intelligence down
charisma up debuff where we like just
become stupid idiots together and it's
hilarious, but we become stupid idiots
together. Um, and I feel like you
participate in that, right? Cuz you're
like, I'm an astrophysicist and I know
all these things about space and science
and all these other things, but also
what it turns into in the best possible
way. It does. Uh, all right. So,
Northwest didn't work out.
Now, let's open it here. Uh, oh, for
anyone who's interested in knowing,
uh, so my stats, my special perks at
this point. Oh, I can level up, too. I
should do that. What kind of character
should I be playing here? Anonymous,
thank you for those $10, bringing us to
$1,651. I would say that is rather
chaotic, sadly.
Um, right now I have sort of the
charisma and strength build going. Uh, I
also do really like perception. Like I
like the VAT system in this. I think
it's fun. Pure luck, Doride. I do not
think
so. We could if people want just luck. I
mean, also I mean here's the other
thing. There is a thing in the menu of
crowd control where you can actually up
my stats and that will make me play in
those directions regardless. There's
those are quite expensive. They're
expensive and there's they're and we
might they're expensive because we want
to make sure it's not just like done up
the entire thing in the beginning of
this stream. Uh there's also an
incredibly expensive one that I hope
does not come into play later that
knocks a stat back down to one.
Yeah. And brilliant.
Oh, the the the the running. Oh, spawned
a friendly behemoth.
What?
Are you okay?
Are you all right?
What? What happened? Why did he just
drop dead? Where did he Why did he die?
Give him the mouth. I I I need you to
understand, chat, that that showed up in
zero of our testing. That has never
happened in any of the testing we did.
Come
back. Breathe. Breathe.
I Okay. You know what? No, it's cool.
Toothless spawn too high up and dropped.
Maybe.
I don't I I don't know. So, what we can
do cuz that was not uh as it should have
been. Um, we can wait until Matt is
someplace interesting and then I owe
chat I owe chat a behemoth um at a at a
convenient uh time. Um, yeah, he he
decided to just take a little map. He
spawned Eep. He is Eie. He is EP and
Nepi. He's a behem. He's a behem.
Melon explosion.
Melon. Okay, that's implosion. Um, there
are many things that you can make
explode from Matt. Uh, melons is, uh,
possibly the funniest, but by no means
the use most useful. Um, a a fair
warning that if you spawn something from
Matt, he can pick them up. Yes. So,
melons are kind of useless, but very
cool and big and flashy. Um, but there
are like different flavors of nucacca
that you can do. There are different
like you can do perfect pies. Um, all of
those things will explode from that.
Um, Melon. All right, we will get
somewhere where something happens. We at
the beginning of this game is slow,
especially when we just wandered into
the into the northwest. Yeah. Um, thank
you so much for that prime over on
Twitch. And I also want to say I I've
seen a couple of people mention this.
Um, right before we roll the giveaway, I
want to I want to reaffirm this. People
are saying that it's um it's not
financially responsible for them to
donate right now. That is totally okay.
Your presence here is helping so much,
right? Your presence, uh, tell your
friends about the stream. Just hang out,
welcome people in. All of those things
are ways that you are meaningfully
contributing to our effort to raise
money for Best Friends Animal Society. I
promise it may not seem like it to you,
but what we need is a community that
welcomes people in. When people from the
Fallout community are like, "What is who
are these people? What are they doing?"
You welcoming them in is a huge help to
us. And and if you for instance like if
you can hang out here and do that that's
awesome. If you have to bounce for you
know life reasons it is a work day on a
Friday. Totally understandable. Uh is
that why is Zoe dancing there? What's
happening? Uh that is a raid. I don't
know why it's not showing what the raid
is. Yeah. You know what? We're having
interesting tech problems. Matt, just
keep going.
If you do have to leave because of life,
that is totally understandable as well.
Um, if you post just that we're doing
this on your socials with the link that
is uh can bring people say uh you can't
for whatever reason which are all
incredibly valid donate to Best Friends
Animal Society right now. Maybe someone
will see it that can and that's kind of
how this all rolls forward. So, thank
you very much for doing all that and
just being being here and helping out.
Okay. Uh now I need Now I need a number
generator. Where's my random number
generator? Uh Matt, you can uh Oh, wait.
What's happening? Did something happen?
I just heard something. So, you should
probably take care of that first. Nope.
I think that's actually in the game.
Hold on. We'll just get a pause here
real quick. Go back to the main screen.
[Laughter]
That's fine. Matt, you should pick what
people are going to win. And I'm totally
not abdicating that because I don't have
the brain power to decide on what people
should win for the first giveaway. How
about this? How about this? Um, I'm
giving it to you because it's your
birthday. It's Thanks, Will. Uh, let's
do something digital.
Let's
do uh I forget how many of everything we
have, Will. That's my only problem. It
doesn't really matter. Let's do
Tailspire. Give away a copy of
Tailspire. Right. All right. Yeah. Uh
so, if you're not familiar, Tailspire is
a wonderful um uh digital uh virtual
tabletop. There we go. It's a VTT. Um
we've used it before in our uh in uh oh
god words. In our actual plays, we've
done we did one Christmas for Christmas.
You can see it over on the X-ray history
channel. We have a bunch in the extra
credits channel. Uh we've been doing
this for a long time. It's really really
fun, especially if you want to like if
you want to play with friends from far
away. It's a very smooth and I it's a
glorious looking uh VTT, but it doesn't
do all of like the background stuff. So
you can adapt it to any system that you
have and you can incorporate hero forge
minis into it. There's a whole bunch of
great stuff. We love uh Tailspire and
Bounty Rock. So yeah, I used it with you
guys on one of our real play Bloodstone
Ballroom I believe the name of that.
Yeah. Also, thank you for the $25. Um,
so, uh, I have I have rolled on the
sheet. So, the way it's going to work is
I will announce your name. You will know
that you won and I will email you. Not
today cuz sending out these emails
today, not a great idea for my brain.
So, uh, I am happy to report that one
cloudy light bulb over on YouTube has
won has won the the the Tailspire
giveaway. I will be contacting you
um uh later this weekend uh
with uh your your code for Tailspire.
Also, I just saw someone donated $25.
Just a reminder, there's all like small
and large donations so help this cause
so much. For instance, for around 20
bucks, you get one week of prescription
food for a cat. Like that is a a
possibility of what your money is going
toward, like an actual tangible thing.
And that's a lot, especially because
there are, you know, uh so many animals
that do need to be taken care of. So,
thank you very much for that. Yeah, I I
see the dancing Zoey like a raid's
happening, Will, but I don't see the
raid. Uh that raid is from Lendor. Uh
thank you so much for the raid. Welcome
on in. Hello. Hello, raiders. Yeah, I
don't know why it's clipped off, but I
can look into that now that I'm not
trying to do a giveaway. You got the
group. I am however kind of trying to
talk to one of our friend and errands
because we may have a small schedule
revolving door which will occur but you
don't need to worry about that. I'll
just tell you it's fine. I am also
Matt's secretary today which is a
glorious thing because Matt just I just
bring people in and let them talk to
Matt. Hold on real
quick. I got I got to find it. So,
speaking of like Will, I feel like you
must have channeled something to Jamie
this morning cuz I asked her to go to
the store and get me some drinks uh to
keep me going during the day. So, uh I
have this cooler.
Did your fianceé pack you a lunch? We
have re Yes. We
have juice monster. We have Oh, those
are good. We have blood raz bucked
up. And we have watermelon.
Okay, so watermelon is great. That blood
rucked up though. Definitely looks like
she's coming in. I had no instructions.
Perfect.
Good job. Got the energy drinks. That
was great. You did great. The blood r
bucked up. You should save for later. My
favorite.
You should save that for later. That
that looks like gas station brand, which
means it will mess you up. Okay, great.
Uh, I feel like I should do either juice
or watermelon for breakfast. Will, do
you concur? Uh, yeah. Yeah, I juice is
my juice is my morning road trip goto
for like Juice actually has juice in it.
No, it doesn't. Uh, no, it it actually
does a lot. But I'll take your I'll take
your vote of confidence. Uh, thanks so
much for the raid. Uh, thank you so much
for the the well wishes and thank you.
Sorry, raiders. Welcome on in. Hi. We're
going to do the super brief
introduction. That's Matt. I'm Will.
This is Extra Credits. Welcome. We do
all kinds of stuff here, including uh
talk shows where we talk about like
video game news, where I talk with my
buddy Jeff about game design. And today,
we're celebrating Matt's birthday by
doing a charity run of Fallout 4. You
can donate to charity in the crowd
control link to get coins, which you can
use to do things like summon behemoths
or red rats or do any number of things
to affect Matt's gameplay. You're going
to be able to summon monsters to hinder
him or stuff to help him. We're going to
be doing this for the next 12 hours or
so. So, please settle in, buckle up,
hang on to your butts, cuz it's going to
be a wild ride. Anonymous, thank you so
much for the 25. Anonymous, thank you,
Will. That was amazing. Also, we are up
to 1,00 I'm going to move this real
quick so I can actually see this easier.
I keep trying to see the total number,
but I made my screen too small.
$1,1151. That's pretty orderly. Uh, it's
pretty orderly, not going to lie. Let's
get back. It's too orderly. So, what I
need someone to do is pick a random
number of digits of pi and donate that
incense. Thank you. Also, Zoe is still
sleeping right down here in the Fallout
shelter. That's Zoe right now. It's just
a little difficult to see her cuz she is
the same color as her cat bed.
Yeah. Also, you can't see Toothless, but
she has now cuddled up behind me as
lumbar support.
I love I love my favorite part of melon
is that it's just a jump scare. Like,
you know what? I'm taking these melons.
Okay, great.
Can you eat the melons? Maybe we're
going to find out after I pick up every
one of these melons. You thought you'd
come here for the Fallout 4 story. Uh,
did Oh, I have a question. Yeah. Did you
do the encumbrance mod? No. Oh dear.
That I know. That I know. Good luck.
Have fun. That was supposed to install a
mod. I looked for it and it wasn't easy.
I put the cat in the game. I put the cat
in the game. You did so great. You did
so great. You did so good.
Let's see. Uh, is it junk? Is watermelon
junk or aid?
Probably aid. Can you eat watermelons?
Like you melon gives you um uh 10 hit
points back. So, okay, great. Oh, I have
too much rad. Rad away. Use that.
Great. Perfect. Eating those melons. Eat
eat all the melons. Uh yeah, we Yeah, we
might need Yeah. So, a reminder as well,
if you're not familiar with crowd
control, if you have a bunch of small
donations and you want to pull towards
something big, you can do that. Um,
that's all functionality that's included
in crowd control. So, you can cool, it's
called, um, for something like getting
Matt a point of strength. That's an
option that you all can do. Uh, thank
you so much. The $157,
Aaron, so you you're not a Bethesda
games person. I'm not there. I am an RPG
person, but it's too open world for me.
I try to like follow the instructions
that I was given and then I die very
fast and often. But I have started
Fallout 4 a number of times in the same
way I've started Skyrim about 30
times. I've never finished them cuz I
die very fast. I will say like I have
gotten better at this before like over
time with different open worlds just
experience. But yeah, that was always my
hindrance before. But still love the
world. Like in principle I should love
this. It's just a too open world game
style for me. Got you. Don't make me
come in there and shoot up that little
I'm enjoying the shenanigans, especially
the piouette death fall that the uh the
thing did. All right, it looks like we
have a little standoff here at this at
the drum. The drum and diameter. Boy,
this doesn't involve you. Lower your
gun. You stop waving that gun in my face
or it's going to involve me. Okay. Okay,
just take it easy. We'll lower our
weapons. All right. Just don't do
anything crazy. Don't Brad Janet, don't
do anything crazy. Should I demand money
now?
Yeah, totally. Also, I don't know. Um,
so what we don't know, and we didn't we
didn't check this, and I'm I probably
shouldn't tell Brad this, but I'm going
to. We don't know how key NPCs interact
with summoned hostile mobs.
So, you know,
we'll find out. Oh, we'll find out. Come
on. Was that even chat or did you just
get I just died. So, okay. So, the
minigun is awful. I shouldn't be using
it right now outside of the power armor.
Mhm.
Where am I? What
happened? Where am I? Normal
conversations to begin a charity stream.
Oh god. Come on. Okay, we got to teach
you to uh What's the Do you have
quicksave on? There's no quick save, I
don't think. Is there Does anyone know
the command? Got to be quick quick save.
Uh
F5. Thank you. There you go. Nice. Yeah.
So quick before anything interesting to
avoid that happening. All right. Great.
Let's find that diner again and do that
again. I I pushed my luck. I was feeling
brave. Yeah. Uh it is in fact not alt
f4. Uh dolphin. Good try though. Good
try. Good. Very very good try. How dare
slash amazing. Also, this drink when you
first drink it, you kind of want to die
and then the aftertaste is really good.
Yeah,
I speak.
Welcome to the monster drinking
experience. See, it helps. It helps if
you drink it when you already want to
die because then you just skip that part
and go straight into the feeling better
part, right? Cuz every morning I wake up
uh with a big smile on my face. Put a
little makeup. No.
Why did you leave the keys upon the
table? Because you wanted to. Right.
Yeah, exactly. Um, uh, see, I just wake
up and every day I,
uh, I wish I wasn't awake. Every morning
there's a halo hanging from the corner
of my girlfriend's four post bed. Four
post bed. Yeah, I know it's not mine,
but I see if I can use it for a weekend
or a one night stand. Yeah. Right. Um,
this is now
By the way, if you've never been here,
this is normal. Matt and I have
precisely one brain cell and it travels
back and forth. Uh, that's the This is
the best we can do. Uh, sorry. I'm
slowly saving my to do this again. I
think we went Where was that diner?
It was this way, I believe. I think we
It was glowing somewhat. Yeah, I want to
find that. I Because I love the little
stories in Fallout games. That's
honestly the main story in Fallout.
Whatever. They're fine. I don't I didn't
I chickens.
Did they just run away?
Yep. There's one. I see you. Let's look
at them. Let's look at them and say hi.
Chicken, run, gun, run. Do they have
feathers? No, they don't. No animal here
has fur or feathers outside the Oh,
they're still walking at this point
because we res saved Preston. Yeah.
Okay, keep moving. Go my chicken
minions. Matt is in fact the reason that
the chicken crossed the road. It's true.
To get to the other brand. That is very
true.
Uh Aaron, uh what what do you have? What
what are some what are some things
you're working on that you can talk
about? Um right. Because that the list
of things Aaron can't talk about talk
about is very large.
Uh yeah, so we're I'm still on Star
Trek. So we are um they just announced
the season 3 premiere uh which is in
July 17.
Okay. Bad bad corporate sorry corpo
daddy. Uh and then um Starfleet Academy
his film season 1. So that's exciting.
Wait, is it based on the game?
I wish it's set in the disco era. But
please tell me it's based on the game.
If you've never seen it, uh the
Starfleet Academy game is
a delightful homage to the FMV era of
games where like it's lowquality
polygons mashed up with like VHS quality
filming. It's
choice. There's something soul healing
about the '9s Star Trek video games that
I think a lot of people don't fully
appreciate. They're so good. They're so
good. Um, and then I have a short film
coming out soon that uh we'll be sending
to festivals, but it was written and
directed by Tilly Bridges and Susan
Bridges. Uh, and it was aded and edited
by our friend uh Jesse Jinder. So, um,
that's been fun. Also, Erin, Jesse did
get a hold of me. Thank you. I was going
to ask when you said our mutual friend,
I was like, am I off the hook? Good.
Yes, you are indeed off the hooks. You
got a hold of me. Uh Jesse will be
joining us later today. Correct. The And
then my exact point later is uh maybe a
little in the air. We're working on
that. Don't worry about it. Don't
Whatever you do, don't worry about it.
Do not go the same direction. I've got a
different direction. That that that
seems true. And uh the reason I was
first today is because I'm getting my
tattoo sleeve finished this afternoon
all day. Excellent. Excellent. It'll be
great. Uh, and and you are a frequent
poster on the skies of blue. Uh, I am.
Uh, Aaron is actually the reason that
Matt and I got in to Blue Sky when we
did. I forgot about that. Yeah, Aaron's
the OG inviter of us to to Blue Sky. So,
um, do go give her a follow over there.
It's Dr. Aaron Mac. Mac. Yep. D R E R N
M A C.
Um, and then uh Will, I'm just going to
give this to you cuz a fan asked me and
it's been living rent free in my in my
brain for 48 hours, but can the Borg
assimilate changelings?
No. In the same ling up there, too. In
the same way that they can't assimilate
a monk, like a high enough level monk,
right? Someone who has complete control
over their internal physiology would be
immune to nanobots.
or whatever they called whatever they're
called in Star Trek nanobots. They're
nanites, nanobots, tiny Yeah. robots. Uh
they're immune, right? In the same way
that uh so anyone who has like perfect
body paladins are up in the air, but um
yeah. Yeah. Uh Matt, you doing okay
there, buddy? No, I'm out of bullets.
Hold on. Oh, Jack can fix that. There is
a way that you can donate. I have to
Okay. Uh, so while you're doing that,
um, Matt is currently mentally occupied
with all this, which means that I get to
take over. Uh, so yes, I I completely
think that change can't be assimilated
by the Borg. That's a wonderful brain
teaser. Unfortunately, I feel like it
has a solid. Now, my real my real
question is, wait, was that the bad
raps? I don't
know. Who even is to say, when's the
last time you saved Matt? Um,
I'm I'm think it all. Yeah, I'm gonna
I'm gonna chalk that up to uh to chat.
Um, can the Borg assimilate the
Terrasque? And if so, how screwed is the
entire
universe? Amazing. I love it. See, I
think what's been living written free in
my brain, though, is like, what if they
assimilated a changeling who was posing
as a different species?
Oh, well, the changing still has control
of their intern. They do. Yes, correct.
They like they're a shape shifter that
maintains the shape shifter quality even
when they change, right? They're not
locked temporarily. Correct. Yeah.
They're not they're not permanently
frozen. Except for Odo, but he was
turned into human. O Odo is
uh our very special boy. Oh boy. What's
happening? Are people doing bad things
here? What's happening? Oh god, that's a
real death claw. That is in fact that
that that is a chat provided deathclaw.
Please look forward to it. Um,
uh, I believe while Matt is fighting
this death claw, unfortunately, that is
close to the end of our time together.
Uh, it is. Thank you so much for joining
us. Good luck on the sleeve. Can't wait
to see it when it's done. Uh, and and
chat, of course, go follow uh, Dr. Aaron
Mack on Blue Sky. Uh, and find her
wherever fine posts are posted. Uh, you
can find her posting about all kinds of
wonderful and ridiculous nerdy stuff.
You will be smarter if you follow her on
Blue Sky uh, than you are right now.
It's like a free stat boost for
following her on blue sky. Erin, thank
you so much for being here. Good luck
with the rest of the sleeve. Happy
birthday. Good luck with the stream.
Enjoy your beverages. And I will catch
you all next time. Thank you. Bye bye.
All right. And now No, no, no. Don't
Don't put that away. Don't Don't put
that away. I was going to When someone
was on it, I was going to put it back.
Okay, cool. Well, someone's on it now.
Hey, Patch. It's this guy. Hi, Pat.
What's up, y'all? How's it going? Good.
Oh, you're a little bit loud. I think
Will can fix that. Patch aka uh the man
that myth the legend behind Tzu. What's
going on, pal? Hey, happy birthday.
How's it going? Thank you very much. Oh,
we are uh we sure are here. Let me get
back into the game. We sure are dying a
lot. I noticed.
Yeah. Um, turns out Fallout 4 when you
add random death claws outside of the
range that you're prepared for death
claws is get this typical. I almost took
it. I' I'd like the record to be shown.
Yeah, exactly. How are you, buddy?
What's going on? Uh, things are good.
Yeah, pretty chilled day. Um, I was that
a Sugar Ray reference I heard before?
I Okay, I'm going to let Matt answer for
that. My problem is that I have no
short-term memory during these events.
So, if you're like, "Was that an X?" The
answer is probably, but I don't
remember. It sure was a Sugar Ray
reference badge. Um, Sugar Ray, it
wasn't that song specifically, but uh,
another one of their songs, uh, Someday
is the first song I can ever remember
hearing. That's That's a friend, Matt.
That's a friend. Thank you. Yeah, if it
does if if it doesn't have the the help
thing, then it's a friend. Uh, the first
song you remember hearing? Yeah. Like I
I think I It's like literally the first
song I ever heard on the radio. Like
Fly. I just want to fly. No. Someday.
Oh, someday. Yeah.
You know how that one goes. I'm not
going to sing it for you. I mean,
man, I don't actually. If only someone
knew the word. Oh, man. Okay. All
right. You're You're tricky, you know.
Wait, what about what about y'all?
What's the first songs y'all can
remember hearing? Great question. Um,
the It was probably some Yeah, go for
it, Will. I'm going to take care of
these raiders. I was going to say you've
got you've got fighting, too. It was
probably something on Z104, which is a
DC area, which was a DC area staple
until uh it it turned
into, I think, exclusively a mariachi
station. Don't ask. DC's weird with it
radio stations.
Um, and I think it was probably
something by Google Dolls. Okay. It was
It was Oh, that's great. It was probably
either Iris or um
That's my favorite band. Oh, yeah.
That's right. Uh, I don't remember what
mine actually patch. Uh, I will, if I
remember, I'll get it to you or I'll tag
you in on Blue Sky. Uh, do you know
Scatune? Uh, they just they just did a
SCA cover of Iris. Oh, I have to check
that out. I It's so good. Right. How
does that that Huh? What? And then it
works great. And you're like, "Oh, okay.
Awesome. That's awesome. I'm going to
I'm going to look that up. Just going to
forget it." Yeah. Was a DC area staple.
Yeah. Pour one out for DC area radio
stations. What songs? You mean you don't
like uh what is it? No. No. Uno elz.
Wow.
So, there used to be a there used to be
a radio station called 991 HFS and they
had like a whole thing called the HF
Festival and it was like a big it was a
big part of the local music scene and
then overnight it got sold and became
Novo Uno Elz. Uh, hey there. In the span
of like literally an hour. It was it was
just very sad. I'll take a look. Sure.
All right. I need some I need some
ammunition.
Yeah. Chat, how how are we doing? How
are you all feeling? How's everybody and
Brad and Janet and everyone else? Uh
patch, by the way, someone mentioned
that they loved your quicky lizard
video. Well, thank you. I I had a lot of
fun making it. I just put out kind of
inspired by you guys, to be honest. Um
the I've been doing a lot more shorts.
Good. I've been seeing how Extra Credits
has been crushing it with shorts. Um so
I was like, I got to get in on this.
Yeah, it the shorts have been doing uh
pretty well for us overall.
Um, I did did you post that recently? I
think that came across my feed today,
actually. Ju, just yesterday I put out
the lizard one. Yeah. Great. But last
week I put out one about the whole 100
guys versus a gorilla thing and it was
like my most successful thing ever, at
least in terms of the first week.
So, I guess there'll be more of these. I
know. I love that. I was like,
man, be in the five figures range,
right? Yeah. Uh, no tools, no weapons,
right, for the the people. It's just a
hundred, I think. Well, yeah, because if
you if you add that in, then it's like,
right. Yeah. Okay. So, the gorilla wins,
right? Cuz the gorilla like picks up two
people and then uses them as people
chucks. And then the other 100 people
just lose, right? Like that's No, I
think if you add weapons in, it's it's
definitely the people. Oh, yeah. If you
add weapons, it's the people. We're
toolmakers. We're not strong enough to
fight a gorilla. Oh, you're saying
without without weapons, you think the
gorilla wins? Oh, yeah. Absolutely.
100%. Well, my friend, you must you must
check out my video. I I I will have to
do so. And if if people wanted to find
out what you think, they could go they
could go check out your video as well.
Give the gorilla grenades. Skier, what
are you doing?
The gorilla does not need fragmentation
grenades, but Matt does. A reminder that
your donations to charity can give Matt
things like grenades and ammo and guns
and pie and um uh what else? uh stats
and all kinds of things. Uh if you are
interested at all, you can check out the
crowd control menu to see what your
donations can uh purchase you in
game. Um also, you know, today patch, we
are raising money for Best Friends
Animal Society, which is a great
charity. Uh that actually one of their
main goals is to make all shelters no
kill by the end of 2025. And I believe
they are well on their way to doing
that, which all shelters I believe in
the United States. Um awesome. I know
you obviously are an animal lover. Uh,
and you have uh pets a pet of your own.
Is that I do?
Whoa. Is he just going to show up?
We'll see. He's usually pretty good at
coming to the whistle. Um, but I don't
know. Sometimes he's lazy. Let's just
show the gorilla the end of expedition
33 and attack it while it's stunned.
Why would you do that? That's like, oh,
yes. There he is. There's my puppy. Oh,
I'll look in a second. I'm going to die.
Chat didn't chat didn't even summon that
one. You got yourself into this. I don't
know if you can see. I can't really see
on the little the little monitor thing,
but yeah, I believe I I think I think
Chad can kind of see here. He's there.
He's He's very dark, so Yeah. A He's so
cute. Yeah, he's there.
He's got a similar Fallout shelter to
Zoe.
Nice. Zoe, I don't know if you can see
Patch, but Zoe's down here. That's
actually Zoe in her Fallout shelter. Oh,
there she is. Excellent.
We are not making a lot of progress. My
my water dog Iro. Yeah,
I suggest a compromise. A one at a time
dual dawn between man and gorilla, but
only the gorilla has a pistol. Okay. So,
I need to emphasize to all of you the
problem with the suggestions that you're
that you're doing that involving fine
dexterity. Have you seen a gorilla's
fingers? The gorilla cannot pull the pin
on a grenade, nor can it pull the
trigger on a traditional pistol. You
would need to get like gear made for
Master Chief in order to give it to the
gorilla. Now that I've said that, you
will all insist that Master Chief could
fight a gorilla, and that's a different
conversation.
I think Master Chief can 100% take a
gorilla. Oh, yeah. Absolutely, 100%. But
like that's, you know, I mean the brutes
in Halo are basically gorillas. Yeah,
they correct. Um, that is correct. All
right. Show a nice classic fantasy
movie. Like the never ending story.
Oh god. All right. It's always about a
gorilla. Can someone turn it to daytime?
Yeah, chat. We got coins there. There's
a there's a redemption in there for day.
Can we make Can we get some light in
here? In fact, if we could have the
whole stream at Eternal Day, that would
be cool. Um,
I'll save next time it turns the day.
Uh, and and quote the desk is correct.
Bastard chief could fight God and anime.
That is correct. Um, in fact, it it was
very interesting. We discussed on a uh
previous uh extra breakfast, our weekly
podcast about gaming news. Um, that my
definition of a JRPG is is very
inclusive, right? because people were
talking about whether or not Clare
obscures a JRPG and what counts as JRPG
and it's very simple. Any game where you
fight God with the power of friendship
and incredible violence is a JRPG
regardless of what like how you control
your character or whatever. And by that
standard, Halo 2 is a JRPG. Welcome
chat. It's you're just like it is right.
I'm not going to like back down from
this. That's my definition and Halo 2
beats it. So Halo 2 is a JRPG. Which
which god are you fighting in Halo 2?
The great god. I believe the prophets
are considered. Oh god, it's it's okay.
Cake jumper and friends, welcome on in.
Hello. Hello. Uh you you find us in the
middle of our charity stream where Matt
is very busy dying. So I will welcome
all of you. Wow. That that for now, but
they could change that at any point by
donating to charity. So that's Matt. I'm
Will over there in the monitors patch.
Um, you have joined us in the middle of
our charity uh fundraising stream for
Matt's birthday. Matt is uh we're
raising money for Best Friends Animal
Society. They're a wonderful
organization that's seeking to make all
shelters in the United States no kill
shelters by the end of 2025 and they're
well on their way. Um, we're doing this
by offering up Matt's playthrough of
Fallout 4 as a sacrifice to your uh
whims. Uh you are able to donate through
the crowd control link to earn coins
which you can spend on uh like rats that
they just summoned that almost killed me
so far that still might Yeah. Right. Uh
you can you can do things like that.
There's uh things for death claws. You
can make it easier for Matt. You can
give them weapons and ammo and pie and
all kinds of things. Uh so if any of
that sounds cool, do pull up a chair and
stick around. And of course Kate will be
joining us later on to hang out and talk
while we uh do more of this. Um,
oh, did I lock? You have to pick locks
now. Um, okay. How do you And and of
course, um, a reminder if you don't find
yourself in a position to donate, that's
okay because the world is gestures
broadly and screams internally. Um, and
a reminder that your presence here is
the thing we chiefly crave. You being
here helps us get the stream noticed,
helps more people come hang out. Come
hang out. Tell us about your pet. Tell
us about what you're doing. tell us
about your Fallout 4 experience, all of
that. Hang out uh and do the thing.
Yeah. Uh and please, if you uh if you
can't donate, share on your socials. Do
all of those things. Take these bobby
pins I got. Heck, if you can donate,
share on your social. All right. Uh so,
uh C asked, okay, I'm going to ask I
want to know what mod that cat companion
is from. I believe it's called Catbe.
Let's look at
it. If I go into my mods and I go, it is
called real cat meat. Uh you choose the
the different colors. Uh and then uh I
did Here's the thing. There's one in
that mod. There's one Oh, no. No.
Confir. Get out of there. Uh there's one
meow sound. I know that I I basically
replaced the the meow sounds it comes
with with Zoe's actual meow. Whoa. Yeah,
that's cool. Yeah. So, that is actually
Zoe meowing a bunch when she finds
things.
Yeah. Uh oh. You want to pick? It's also
super rad
radioactive. Uh I'm not going to stay
here cuz I'll die.
I mean, chat could just pump you full of
rat away while you pick save. Actually,
they can't cuz when you're in a menu.
So, like, is Hades a JRPG then? Oh,
yeah. Absolutely. 100%. Oh, yeah. That's
right. We're now discussing uh cake cake
and friends. We're now discussing what
constitutes a JRPG. And my definition of
a JRPG is any game where you kill God
with the power of friends and incredible
violence. Okay. Period. Yeah. Hades. Uh
Cult of the Lamb.
Yep. JRPG, right? Got a pretty wide
wide net there. Yep. Um of course, every
what we would consider traditional JRPG
ever, right? Uh every Final Fantasy,
every everything.
um is is all every Tales game. I can't
think of a Tales game where you don't
kill God with the power of friendship.
Um
Super Smash Bros. Yeah, Super Smash
Bros. definitely obviously
exactly crazy. It is after all about um
uh create uh creations fighting back
against their creator, right? Like so
true. What could be more JRPG than that?
All right, I can't get anything else in
here. Moving on.
Time. Uh, wait. So, let going back going
back to the pup. Where did you Where did
you get the boy?
Uh, we got him from a breeder in
Missouri. Nice. We had to drive down uh
like 7 hour drive from Wisconsin to get
him. Um, and then on the way back, it
was like the craziest storm of our
lives. So, he really he went through it.
Yeah. But he was super good in the car
the whole time. It was we couldn't
believe how how chill he was. We we
picked the winner. Yeah. Very very nice.
And that was a bit ago. That was a few
years now, right? Yeah. He's he's four
now. So, Yep. He's he's he's still he's
still a puppy. I still call him a puppy,
but there there is definitely eternal
puppies, right? There people who like
never they're dogs that like never
really grow out of being a puppy.
Anonymous, thank you for that 10
American doll hairs. Yes. Thank you so
much. By the way, Matt, did you say
you're engaged now? Congratulations. I
am. Thank you so much. Yeah. Go, dude.
Yep. Yep.
It's new. It's It's It's in the It's
still in the the phase where I have to
keep correcting myself instead of saying
uh partner to fiance. Okay. I was
wondering how long it had been. I was
like, did I just forget? But no, it was
it was um it was very recent. It was
like two weeks, maybe a little bit more.
Well, congratulations. Thank you very
much.
Okay. I don't know what is. Okay,
Matt is, by the way, uh, one of the side
effects of messing with Matt and making
him reload so frequently, uh, is that
his brain cooks like an egg on a
sidewalk. Phoenix, thanks so much for
that $10 donation. Deeply appreciate it.
Thank you.
Let's see what we can do here.
I love the bat system so much.
Silly. Looks like a lot of fun. I've
never played a Fallout game. Okay, I was
going to ask. Oh, wait. Were you going
to ask that? Yeah, I watch the show. My
wife is a pretty big Fallout fan and so
she was explaining all the things to me.
It was like whenever I'd have a
question, she'd be like, "I have the
lore answers. I got you." It was
wonderful. There's a lot more ghouls
here than I was expecting. That is a lot
of
cuz it's guys and ghouls. Anyway,
you look like you had it, but I think I
shot something explosive. We're going to
go back. We're going to take care of
those ghouls right now. I I I believe
you did. Um Yeah. Yep.
Uh
I agree with uh Grass. The show had So
it was I when I heard they were doing
the show, I'm like, "Oh no, this is not
going to go well." Uh that is that is
correct. The correct term for what Matt
just experienced is a curloion. Uh that
is correct.
Um because you can either implode or
explode, but no one ever just floats. Uh
it's sort of like you can be overwhelmed
or underwhelmed, but you're never just
welmed. Uh, thanks. Thanks, Robin. Um,
so you
know, okay, so now now you have some
allies. Now, now you have some allies.
Uh, the rats. Oh, wait. There's one bad
one. See, this is the tricky one. This
is what's tricky. They summon a bunch of
good rats and then I don't do anything.
And then there's one bad rat. Yeah,
that's right. Mhm. Oh man.
Technically speaking, by just existing,
you suppose you are floating right now.
Wow. That's what a thing to admit on the
internet. All right. Okay. We got a
scorpion now. We got a scorpion. This
will go fine. Uh a friendly scorpion.
Yes. Yes. So, if it's uh
the they will attack immediately if
they're not friendly. Um but if you if
you kind of see a little bit above you
on the screen, there's like a little
blue or a little red tag. Um if it's
red, it's bad. If it's blue, it's a
short. Um,
the scorpion is doing work.
Get them.
I do feel like we're kind of in the
golden age of video game inspired like
film and TV. Yes, I have noticed that
cuz they you used to be like the butt of
jokes when I was growing up. Like
anytime, oh yeah, we're going to make a
Mario movie or something like no way.
It's going to be horrible. Zelda, Legend
of Zelda cartoon. Horrible. Well, excuse
me, princess.
As soon as I mentioned I was like,
they're going to say Yeah, of course.
Yeah, you knew. You knew. You've been on
you you've done this show before. Yeah,
man. I don't remember being outside
Diamond City being so hellish with all
of these ghouls, but here we
are. I wonder if there's anything useful
in these crates. Oh, no. It's just a
ghoul. Bottle cap and a paintbrush.
That'll help me out. Yeah, obviously.
Okay, here we go. Bottle caps is money,
right? Yes. Yep. Well, there you go. Uh,
and in fact, it it is very funny when
you you will find bottled sodas um that
are that have various beneficial
effects. And when you drink them, you do
keep the bottle cap as
a drinka quantum right now, right? I
have an iPad that I'm running my
inventory on. Definitely not sponsored
by Nucacola Quantum. And you get the
bottle cap after you if after you drink
the the soda. Very cool. All right. So,
how is there how is there not rampant
hyperinflation in this universe? You
know, that's a great question. I think
people keep getting shots.
Yeah. Oh, yeah. No one's make a no one's
really making them and b
um inflation isn't really a thing when
the mortality rate's so high but people
aren't really worried about the complex
economic consequences of their currency
being backed by a soda company.
Okay, work
probably. Okay, the plants don't exist
anymore. Good. There is a finite supply,
right? Okay. I would also like to take
this opportunity uh to just to just do a
quick dunk to just ever so quick a dunk.
Uh and this is your regular central
reminder that bottle caps as a currency
is more sound than any cryptocurrency
that's ever existed.
So just saying uh from the top row whole
schedule. Hold on. Uh if if people are
feeling generous with their coins or
their
caps, what' you find, Zozo? Um,
uh, I could use a new weapon. Yeah,
there are there are Thank you, uh,
artillery for the thousand caps. That
was very nice. Yeah, there are, um,
there are a selection of new weapons
that you may acquire, um, and give to
Matt. Uh, we tried to make not all of
them hideously OP, but, some of them are
hideously OP. Yeah. Uh, cuz this this
thing's going to run out soon. I mean,
dare I go into the subway of Boston?
I think you mean the subway. Boston
Boston pocket hobby. Pay the guy a
quarter. Um
patch, you you came to East once, right?
Or were you just Did you drive us to
West? Uh the the Seattle one. Yeah,
West. West. Okay. Yeah. East is in
Boston, actually. It was We just got
back from it. Uh Oh, nice. How was it?
Like four days ago. It was great. It was
so good. Uh we actually East is always a
great time. Whoa. Okay. There was a mine
there. That didn't work. Um, we actually
did do a panel on kind of what you were
talking about, but there was been only
two um, video game movies released this
year so far, and that has been um, a
Minecraft movie and Until Dawn. And we
did a panel on not which one is better,
but which one is a better adaptation,
okay, of the source material. It was
very good. I'm I'm sure Shahir loved the
I the bringing back the m is Minecraft a
good adaptation because it makes you
feel the thing. Yeah, he didn't love it.
Uh it was fine. All right, you now have
10 weaponized nucaccola
quantum. I'll look at a second.
I believe those might be brittle made
of a reminder chat that our our current
goal at $2,500 and I should probably put
this actually on the on the thing um is
uh that we will uh adopt a costume
change that is more thematic to our to
our Janice Qua at $2,500. So do keep
that in mind. real quick. Zoe gets
another treat. Oh, not yet. Very close.
At
$1,250, Zoe gets another treat. Patch,
when we hit $500, Best Friends Animal
Society allowed us uh probably not for
the the the best to be able to actually
name a foster animal. If you had a great
pet name, what would that pet name be?
Whoa. A great pet name. Yeah, it's going
to take me a minute. We're taking
suggestions from all the guests and chat
just because uh
It's the demon core. I got to see I got
to see the animal. I got it's vibe, you
know.
See, I am a big fan of uh surfles but
wiggles bottom lord destroyer evolve,
but Matt doesn't seem to think that
that's a great pet name. So,
I don't know. So, wait, what? I don't
know. What did someone give me a bunch
of a second ago? Nucacola. Uh weaponized
nucaccola quantum. Weaponized nucaccola
quantum. I'm not seeing them in my
inventory. Should skill up though. Um,
it may be ammunition for something that
you don't have yet. Oh, it probably is.
I will I will I will interrogate the uh
the crowd control thing real quick.
Patch. Yeah. What are you working on
that you can tell people that you are
working on? Keep it clean. Ooh. Okay.
There is such a beast.
Uh, I have been working on a lot of
different things. I I have a a Mollisk
tier list video that's done. Just kind
of waiting to publish it. Waiting for
like a sponsor or something. Nice. Um,
so I'm excited about that. Uh, one of my
longest videos in quite some time. So,
yeah. Do you have a do you have a
favorite octopus or or uh any mollisk?
Mollisks for in case you're not aware,
uh would be like any clam, muscle,
scallop sort of thing. Any sort of
snail, slug, thing like that. I'm a or
anyopod. Truly, I'm a sucker for snails.
I think snails are super interesting.
Okay. I don't know the different bre
like I don't know the different like uh
different types of snails, but just like
Sure. It's one of those animals I'm
like, how do we Isn't there a snail
called the assassin snail?
Is there Is there I believe I actually
don't know that. Hold on. Wait. No,
we're baiting chat. No, no, we don't
look that up. Chat, look it up. Is there
Am I right? Is there a sale called in
the south? Well, we don't I I got enough
in my brain right now. I'm not looking
things up. Not today. Speaking of enough
in your brain, Will, we should do
another giveaway. We should put five
minutes on the clock. We should put five
minutes on the clock. Reminder that
we're doing giveaways via a form today.
So, you can uh exclamation mark giveaway
or you can find it down in the
description of the YouTube stream.
Please go ahead and enter your username,
which platform you're on, your email
address, and you can tick a little box
to get some reminder emails from us if
you want to. Um, we also need to know if
you're insider out of the US for
physical giveaways. Though, this one
will not be for this giveaway that we're
starting right now. Uh, that we'll we'll
pull for in 5 minutes is going to be for
Oh boy. Uh, uh oh, we're going to give
away some Nebula store credit. We're
going to give cuz patch is on. Um, we're
big fans of Nebula here because we're
part of Nebula patches, dude. Um, we're
going to give away $20 in Nebula store
credits so you can get all kinds of cool
merch from all your could get EC merch.
You could get Tearu merch. You could get
uh because you have stuff on the Nebula
store patch, right? I'm not making that
up. I've seen all over your pins are
awesome. Yeah. Do you still doing the
pin or is that just your pin? Yeah. Uh,
no, I do the pins. Yeah. Yeah. Hell
yeah. So, yeah, that'll be going. Uh,
I'll start. Oh, the Is the timer not
here? Hold on. Let me get this a gun. I
don't know. I know. I have too many
buttons. Too many buttons. Don't Don't
show them that. That's for later. That's
a thing for Oh, I did it. Oh, no. Secret
previews. What's happening? It's so
gone. Secret previews for things from
other people. Common name assassin snail
or bumblebee snail. I was going to say
you are correct. I I looked it up there.
It eats other snails. Amazing. Uh,
fantastic. Um,
all right. I'm hacking this computer.
Hope y'all like Wordle.
That's very true. Um, oh, so patch, this
is actually kind of fun. So, what you're
doing is basically you pick one of these
and it'll tell you how many like wordle
you get right of these words. But every
one of these like bits that you see as I
highlight over like it does that whole
bracket. If you can find bracketed
things, it takes away duds. There
there's one. Gotcha. So, it's like uh
mastermind. Yeah, a little bit. Uh,
there's one to 966 C. 96 C. There's a
dud. I got you. Yep, there it is. Thank
you, Will. Uh,
whoa.
Oh, boy. Out. Thank you so much for the
2589 getting us to 1168.
Okay. Wow. By the way, yeah, it's not
it's not Team Chaos. I'm going to need
I'm going to need like Unix time like
sense like donate like round off the
time in your current time zone and
donate that like donate hours and then
minutes, right? So like in in dollars,
right? Like I'm going to need some
chaotic stuff up in here. Uh we'll
explain that when Matt's done explaining
this. I know that I'm This is crazy. So
right now I think I have one try
remaining. There's three likenesses.
Start, rough. Oh, did I hit rough twice?
No. Razed. Oh, I shouldn't have done
rough. Okay. Hoped. H O. No, can't be
that. Can't be joined. Can't be not
that.
Can't be uh stone. S T O. No, can't be
stone. Dying. It might be
dying. Knife. That like the worst
version of they might be giants. So
dying or knife. It could work
among you die locked out. Whatever. I
don't need to go in here anyway. Forget
this.
Uh patch. Um we are we are growing close
to the end of our time together. Is
there anything you want to pitch?
Anything you're particularly excited
about? Is there any piece of media that
you think that everyone in our audience
should watch? Um whether it's yours or
someone else's, is there something
that's been bringing you joy that you
want to tell them? Oh gosh, very open
question.
Um, let me think. I mean, you can find
my videos at youtube.com/tzu.
There you go. Um, so that's always
something I'm happy to pitch. I think
they're pretty okay.
Yeah. Yeah, everybody. They're pretty
okay.
No, they're awesome. Thanks. Um, as for
things that other people should check
out, that's not something I made. Well,
okay. I I have been playing a game
called Dome Keeper a ton. Dome. Um, if
you've ever heard of that, it's like
it's a kind of a it's like I don't even
know how to describe it. It's it's a
roglike mining sim that it's kind that
you kind of switch between playing Space
Invaders and mining. So, it's like you
you have a base and you like burrow down
and mine materials to upgrade your base
and you have to come back every so often
to play Space Invaders basically.
um defend your base and then you go back
to mining and it's a very fun gameplay
loop. I had a lot of fun flags. Um so I
wasted a ton of time doing that when I
should have been working. But uh highly
highly recommend that game. All right.
All right. Uh so for everyone um who's a
big fan of Tzu's videos, I am sorry. I'm
sorry. I'm sorry right now. Hey Patch,
have you heard of this game called
Blueprints?
Uh I've heard of the game. I I'm not a
big fan of puzzle games, so I didn't
The rogike part sort of mitigates the
like the rogike and the puzzle sort of
mitigate each other. It's kind of like
putting pineapple on pizza. It's not for
everyone, but it does cut through the
grease and give you sort of an enjoyable
flavor. Sure. So, I highly recommend. Uh
all right, so we got two things to do.
One is bid farewell to Patch and bid
hello to our next guest. Patch, thank
you very much for coming and hanging
out. It's always a pleasure to chat.
Hopefully we can uh hang out in in in
meat space at some point soon.
Absolutely. Of course. Happy birthday
and I Yeah, that the wedding would be
hype. So there we go. There we go.
Listen, we just got engaged. We just got
engaged. We have to plan the whole
thing. You got to Yeah. Get on that. All
right. Later, Patch. Thank you. Yeah.
Yeah. Thanks for having me on.
All right. Uh, and now I will uh I will
add to our uh to our illustrious company
our our next guest. All right. You let
me know when it's good. You you can
bring them on right now. Amy,
you're engaged.
I love that this is the way that
multiple content creator friends are
finding out. All like there's going to
be a chain of this by the way. Like at
the end of Amy, at the end of your slot,
you're required to ask so the next
person coming in can compete the bit,
right? And roll it. Yeah. Well, congrats
and happy birthday. What a big time to
be sort of Matt Croll. What a big time
to be uh playing Fallout 4 to raise
money for Best Friends Animal Society.
How are you, Amy? What's going on? I'm
good. I'm good. Uh I uh last night I
went to see Beyonce here in the great
city of Chicago. Wow. Um, and we had
sort of a biblical storm right around
when the show was supposed to start. So,
it didn't start till 10, so I didn't get
home till 3, so I'm feeling electric
right now. Great. Perfect. Perfect.
Perfect. Well, um, Amy, for those of for
those folks who do not know, what
wonderful things are you involved with
slash in charge of? Oh. Oh, ho ho. Um,
well, I I work at a a company called
Wendover Productions LLC, and I do for
them whatever I am asked on a week-
toeek basis. Um, so I write uh a lot of
Half as Interesting videos. I am
involved in jetlag. I write a lot of
stupid challenges for the boys to
complete. uh and was recently on
hideand-seek across New York um where I
attempted to comport myself with dignity
to no avail. And then uh I was I I was
very involved in the Getaway where we
sort of um psychologically messed with
uh Matt across the desert. And now I run
Abolish Everything, a Nebula original
that you all should watch that is very
funny where Matt went on and killed in
our most recent episode. And that is
everything. That is everything. It was
an absolute blast doing all of those
things that I've been involved with, but
they are all amazing. Even even the ones
I wasn't in, Amy, are phenomenal.
I I have I have one one more thing and
then we can return to the gameplay and
to chat getting you killed in a new and
interesting variety of ways. And that is
to announce that Paxman here over here
on Twitch is the winner of our Nebula
code. Paxman, congratulations. You will
get an email sometime this weekend when
I can remember how to type. That's
right. Uh, real quick before we jump
back into the game, of course, we are
running uh this whole long day of
Fallout 4 uh to raise money for Best
Friends Animal Society, um a phenomenal
animal organization that uh we're going
to have some people on uh later today to
tell you a little bit more about it. But
every donation counts, everybody,
everything uh basically like it could go
something super small where like $5 will
get a cat a new wand toy. $10 can get a
snuggle toy for kittens. $12 can get
physical therapy for a pup. Uh,
enrichment toys or food puzzles. $20
gets prescription cat food for a week.
$30 can feed a newborn kitten for a full
month. That actually probably means for
the length of time it is a kitten. I
don't know the technical thing of that.
License may vary. Uh, $50 can provide
foster toolkit for kittens uh for foster
parents, which makes fostering kittens
uh for people much much much easier.
Then you get into the bigger ticket
things where you can get like a $100
could care for one special needs dog or
cat for a month, which all of these
things are super important. And they're
they're basically uh an organization
that's trying to make every shelter no
kill by 2025. And they are well on their
way. So if you are able, please donate.
You can donate, of course, uh and then
mess with my game, which will come back
momentarily. Um there it is.
Uh, you can help or hinder my progress
in Fallout 4 where me and a modded in
Zoe the cat who is down here in her own
little Fallout shelter. Is she mad that
I'm petting her with my foot? Yeah, she
is. Um, you're going to get bit. Yeah.
Oh, I'm going to get bit. Um, and you
can basically your donations that you
put towards this these real life animals
go with toward messing with me in the
game. And if you are not able to donate,
just being here is wonderful enough.
Please share on your socials. Let
everyone know that we're doing this so
hopefully we can save more animals. That
is a big long laundry list. In fact, if
you're uh here and you are over on Blue
Sky, there is a post from the main Extra
Credits account that you can go and
repost and tell people that you're here
and you're hanging out and you're
watching this. Amy Chad has a burning
question that they that they need to
know, which is did you get your uh
Jungle Squad? I believe last time last
time we were together, we were
discussing the acquisition of some goods
from IKEA and chat remembered that
because Brad never forgets anything
apparently. Brad of course being the
name of our chat. So sure they they um I
I so I Yes, I got Jingle Scog. Um you
can see me receive Jungle Scog in
episode 2 of Hideandsek New York. Here
is the deal. Let me see if I can find a
picture. I am currently at my parents
place in Chicago, so I'm not in my
standard apartment in New York, but
trust, if I were at my apartment in New
York, Jungle Scout would be within arms
reach of me. I am always around that
thing. I could not have anticipated how
profound a connection I would have to
that toy immediately. Um, it borders on
concerning. I I crocheted him a sweater
that he now wears. So, it was
interesting to It's like, well, now he
looks so naked on the show. Um, when he
doesn't have his sweater. Let me find a
good picture. Okay. I have I take
pictures of him like he's like my cat
doing something cute. He's looking so I
don't know how visible. Am I in frame?
Can you see? Let's see. Oh, yeah. Yeah.
Yeah. There you go. Back to your right.
Yeah, there you go. Yeah. Stop. There we
go. Yeah, there it is. Excellent. That's
him in his sweater right after I
finished making it. Um, and then yeah, I
like anyone who comes over and to, you
know, watch TV with me or whatever can
attest that like Jungi is present and is
being sort of held and engaged with the
material. Um, and yeah, it's it's gotten
severe. Here we are hanging out, being
best friends.
Well, I remember on the getaway, uh, you
were friends with a chicken.
Yes. Well, I really wanted it seemed
there would be an opportunity on the
getaway to hold a chicken because when
we were at the alpaca farm, they had
chickens and
I I like a chicken. Well, I'm just I
really am quite fond of animals in
general. And I I used to work at the zoo
for a brief spell and I had a friend at
the zoo who was a chicken named Coach.
And I liked to hold Coach when I was
allowed to do so. Um, and when I heard
there were sort of chickens around on
the getaway, I was like, "Someone got to
hand me, please, someone hand me a
chicken." Yeah. And and the chicken and
I just we got along quite well. But it
was it was a brief but beautiful
friendship. Uh, QB, thank you so much
for that $100 donation. Thank you. Thank
you for contributing to our nonsense.
That brings us to
$1,2680. I would call that an orderly
thing. That clicks us over the $250
uh area to give Zoe a cat treat. So,
let's do this real quick. She's
definitely being bribed to stay here.
Otherwise, she would not stay in in the
cat game all day. Hold on. I'm going in.
Hi, Zoe.
Wow.
Yeah. Hello. Oh, there she is. We're
getting your face. Yeah, this has been
set up for like a week, by the way,
chat. Trying to get Zoe used to this. Um
because we've never we don't do cat cam
normally. Like everyone's like, "Where's
Zoe?" The problem is getting her to stay
in one place and not be upset about it.
Oh, look at her. She's like, "That's it.
What?" Okay, I guess this is fine.
Whatever. Yeah, exactly. I can also It
just just so we're clear, I I made it
thematic lighting underneath there. Uh,
I can
like if I can get it to work get a
little bit brighter or like less colored
so we can actually see her a bit. Like I
also want her to be able to sleep. And
this and this footage of you kind of
petting the cat with your foot. Is that
raising money sort of is this that
simultaneously on like Only Fans? cuz I
do feel like if this I do feel as if
this is someone's kink then I do feel as
though there is one sock between you and
that making you quite a bit of money.
Not for me. Amy, I I really do
appreciate you always trying to trying
to get the marketing down. You know,
look, I'm a I'm a businessman first and
foremost. Yeah.
So, Amy, look, I'm just I'm just trying
to buy some cat toys or whatever. That's
right.
Uh, what was I going to ask you? I just
had another question. So, are you
familiar at all with Fallout? Uh, the
game, the series, anything. So, h have I
heard the word Fallout? Yes. Could I
recognize some of their more iconic
imagery when it appears around me and
I'm like, I think that's from Fallout.
Yes. Have I ever seen a single thing
that is currently on my screen in my
life besides YouTube? No. Okay.
Uh, we are in post-apocalyptic Boston. I
just station. It's going very well. Mhm.
Assist the soldiers.
Assist the soldiers. I guess it looks to
me like you're shooting at the soldiers.
Those are those are ghouls. Those are
ghouls. Well, my apologies. No, it's all
it's all good. Oh, I've only just
figured out how to make your screen
bigger and now I have now I've got a lot
more of a
[Applause]
Uh there is now uh however um it's about
to get more interesting. Uh thanks to
Vanguard, you now have 30 additional
ghouls to deal with. You should probably
work on that. Um quickly quickly
quickly. Uh yeah. So uh chat can um
summon more things heal me. That'd be
nice. No, they're trying to kill you.
Could you maybe befriend a ghoul and see
if one of them has medical expertise?
That you know that would be a really
good skill tree. Unfortunately.
Okay. Oh, we got some friendly rats. And
there and there is your sim pack. So,
you are you are you are
um also uh book. Thank you so much for
the $2 getting us
$1,270 flat. Team order winning.
Reminder team chaos. Your job is to make
the number lumpy so the people will
donate to the number.
So, okay. So, we're playing Fallout and
there's rules. I'm just sorry. I'm just
trying to wrap my head around the
situation here. Your your immediate goal
is to defeat the ghouls and help the
army who I assume are also sort of
anti-gool. Yes. What is your long-term
goal? Ah, that's to find our son Sean.
My son Shawn and and
and how did we sort of get separated? Uh
we were put into a vault when the
nuclear explosions happened in an
alternate 1960 and then a random raider
uh basically came out and uh killed
killed uh my my partner and then stole
our baby and I was stuck there. Couldn't
do a thing. That is very unfortunate. So
now if now if you help the army with
these ghouls, is this just a matter of
self-preservation? Does the army have
information about Shawn? Uh I don't know
yet to be perfectly honest. Oh, good.
Someone just summoned a friendly robot
for me, which is lovely. You know what?
I'm gonna save this. I'm gonna be ball.
I'm out of ammo. I'm gonna save right
here, and we're going to play from here.
Okay. All right. Everyone summoned a lot
of stuff. And I feel like Get wrecked,
ghoul.
There you go. We're now fighting with a
tire. I don't have any ammo for any guns
I have. Oh, no. I I No, that that that
was self-evident. I My question was what
implement you're using. Is that a police
baton or a What was that, Amy? You said
something. Oh, I asked if you had a
bayonet. No, I probably do not. Not at
this current moment. Sometimes when I
run out of ammo, strapping a butter
knife to the end of my gun desk. True.
That's right. Yeah. I just
of like uh you know the Desert Eagle 50
revolver with just like a butter knife
sort of masking tape to the bottom of
it. Feels very plastic butter knife.
Obviously for weight. You wouldn't want
to balance it, right? That's ridiculous.
You got to do what you got to do. Yeah.
I feel like I I did the right move
running to a small area that I could
fight off the remaining ghouls. Yeah. Uh
chat reminder I mean I'm not seeing
really any ghouls and that's like I mean
that's what you want. Yeah. Uh chat a
reminder that for $1 you can give Matt
some Wait, hold on. What just happened?
What just happened?
Uh, that would
be Oh. Oh, let me hold on. Hold on. This
just in. Wait, hold on. Uh, dragon lady,
thank you for the
$1,23456 donation with the message, I
may or may not have been putting money
away for this since last year.
Holy [ __ ] I'm dropping the the swear
words. I'm putting on electro swing
again because it deserves it. And we
need to go get changed because we have a
costume change. We have a costume change
now, Amy, because they got to
2,500. Uh, they broke that goal. Holy
moly. Thank you so much. Yeah. So,
Dragon Lady, you've got all the coins to
do all the things for the rest of today.
Yeah. Uh, how many cat treats for Zoe is
that? Uh, so we went from uh uh I think
it's that's five more. That's five more
catchies. So, Zo Zoe will be Zoe will be
pleased. Dragon lady, thank you so much.
Thank you. Thank you. Uh, so first off,
shout out to Dragon Lady for incredible
work. Second, does what level of of
power does Dragon Lady now have over
you? Uh, it's significant. It's very
significant. Uh, Dragon Lady could
derail or or move this stream in a lot
of different ways. Wow. Yeah, there
there are. Um, so in Fallout, a lot of
the the things are based on what's
called your special stats. Um, because
it's it's funny cuz it's an acronym, so
that the first letter of all the stats
spells out special. Um, okay. She can
add to those. She could reset them to
one. Uh, she can um give Matt ammo or
guns. She could summon a bunch of big
monsters at inopportune times that would
like, we saw one of them earlier, it
literally smashed Matt flat. Matt was
like wandering and someone was like,
"What if there was a behemoth?" And then
Matt was a pancake like immediately. Um,
well, I'm just I'm very excited because
based on what limited information I have
about Dragon Lady, you seem like someone
who thinks about things in pretty great
detail pretty far in advance. Yeah. And
I'm interested to see kind of
what what kind of chaos there is. All
right. Um, Matt, do you want to hang out
first while I go? You go get changed and
I'll hang out and then I'll go back to
the game. Dragon lady again. Thank you
so much. So uncomfortable. Amazing work.
Oh my gosh. I'm excited to see these
costumes. I didn't bring It's okay. It's
okay. Uh I can put on my mom's reading
glasses. I think that's as close as
we'll get.
Perfect. Perfect. I I feel more fallout
already. Yeah. Here. Wait, let me I'm
gonna I'm gonna have to double up so I
can see. Hold on. I got to do this back
in. There we go. Now I can see
everything. There he is. There he is.
All right. I need to go put on my
things. I'll be right back. Yeah. And
then we're going to dial Well, you can
probably get away without dialing in my
green screen. Uh, is it is it safe to
assume that everyone watching this but
me understands the outfit you're
wearing? This is the outfit that you
start the game wearing. Got it. You you
are you are in vault uh 111 and you you
spawn this is a vault suit. Um, in this
case, it's a polyester hoodie in the
middle of uh Maryland summer. So, I'm
gonna get a fan real quick. Yeah, I
don't really want to waste chats time
asking questions they all know the
answers to. Uh, all questions are good
questions. All questions are good
questions. Um, look at this. Duel in
vaults.
I am from Vault 33. Now, which vault
which vault do you actually start the
game in? In this one, I believe it's
111. Yeah. Okay. 33 might be the show.
I think 33 is the show. Yeah. Also,
we're gonna be we're going to be a
little bit fad screeny, but it's almost
nice. It's almost like a sheen. Well,
part part of mine is this. Hold on.
I'm here for it. They did this.
I don't have a green screen. I'm just
genuinely in a You're just generally
there. Yeah. Okay. We're getting We're
getting back into this now. Sorry. All
right, we got all three is
101. 33 is the Amazon show.
Got it. Let's talk to this man who we
saved.
Hello. I appreciate the assistance,
civilian, but what's your business here?
Yeah, what is our business here?
My business is sarcastic. Let's do
sarcastic pest exterminator. I heard you
had a feral problem. Evading my
questions is fire way of getting
yourself ejected from the compound. Are
you from Are you flirting? I think so. I
think we're falling in love. Um, okay. I
think I'm gonna push my luck a little
bit. Why all the questions? I I love I
love that this I believe is the first
time that Amy gets to see your
illustrious stupid helmet. I want a
different helmet, but I haven't found
one yet. Oh, yeah. That's um It's very
um Scarecrow, right? It's very Scarecrow
from Nolan's Battle after all. Well, it
sort of looks like you are a dog that
got kidnapped with by having a bag
thrown over your head while you were
delivering a newspaper. It's funny, Amy,
having never played this game, you know
about the plot. If you want to continue
searching in, you could use an extra gun
on our side. I mean, yeah,
very intuitive. I'll continue to help.
You owe me an extra. I got I got to do
things now. Paladin dance. That's not
right. Over there. I can type. Hey, can
anyone lend me some extra brain cells so
I can type? That would be great. I've
been trying to send a distress call to
my superiors. All right, they're trying
to send distress calls, but it's too
weak. If I may proceed, I just say that
I it took me a while to figure out like
whether brain cells are something that
can be transferred within game and
that's what you were asking about. We've
been throwing a lot of jargon around. So
I No, I'm picking up on I'm having an
amazing time. I feel like you know
I come here. I get very invested in a
game for a brief period of time and then
I forget about it for one year.
Well, uh this I'm having a great time.
This just in. Zoe is taking a bath. Um.
Oh, wow. Hello. Oh, no. Now she's done.
Oh, no. She's good. She's still going.
She's a little weirded out that she's
next to herself, but that's neither
there. While we're here, uh we thought
we'd tell you
about our uh our $3,500 uh goal, uh
which is up next, which is that at
$3,500, we'll be watching a classic film
in the public domain, but one that you
might not think is in the public domain.
I had to check twice uh over dinner with
me and Matt later on this evening. So,
please uh look forward to that. Um we
will probably be uh dropping some
cryptic hints. You also now have a level
up which I believe is uh likely courtesy
of Let's get moving. Outstanding. Oh,
no. That that's not even courtesy of
anyone. You just level up cuz you did
see Actually, here's a weird backwards
thing. It is courtesy of someone.
Whoever summoned those 30 ghouls, I
still get experience points if I live
through this stuff. That's very That's
very good to know. If you kill all the
stuff Yeah. Brown sugar's hard to the
point you need to use mortar and pestle.
Oh, see now this is the little guy that
I know. Yeah, I know about this guy.
He's also a little bobblehead right down
here. Hello. And is and is he you? He's
he's like Vault. Okay, so VaultTech in
world is a is a company that made
Fallout Shelters for when the world
imploded. And he's their mascot. He's
their mascot. Okay. I mean, out of all
of these um
uh things here. Strength, perception,
endurance, charisma, intelligence,
agility, or luck. Which one should I add
a point to?
Mhm. I won't go through too much like
what the what they mean for you. Yeah.
No, no. I'm This is good. You know, I I
was initially thinking charisma because
what a valuable skill, but I'm very
drawn to this sweet little jump roping
animation and therefore I'm going to say
endurance. I'm going to get some damage
resistance. There we go. I think you
should be better at what he's doing.
Yep. There we go. Because he looks
amazing. Great. All right. I've spent my
point. Back out. I want you to make
certain the perimeter. Excellent. I am
now 10% uh more durable. Time to prove
your worth. Okay. What did I have to do?
Head to the police station. Resupply
yourself. Great. Give me these stacks.
Move out. Only big guy. Let's go. Yeah.
Yeah. I'm coming. All right. We're
moving on. Have you been in Boston the
whole time? Yes.
Okay. And you're going to be in Boston
the whole time? Yes. Or or or
surrounding surrounding area? Um well,
of course. Cambridge, many will be quick
to tell you, is just outside of Boston,
of course.
Okay. Fall to arms. Speak to Paladin
Dance. I think I just follow him through
here to get like my orders or whatever.
Sure. Where'd he go? Mostly Boston most
of the time. Yeah, that's a good way to
do. Paladin dance. You ready to move
out? What are we doing? Why the police
station? I'm not sure. I guess I'm
ready. I think I'm ready. Yeah, this is
the kind of guy that I wouldn't ask many
questions to. Follow me and try not to
lag behind. I just feel like if I bugged
him, he could kind of squish me like a
bug. The helmet flip's kind of cool.
Yeah, I like that. I wish I had more
than this baton.
I believe Jack gave you 45 ammo. Oh,
really? For which gun? I assume you have
a 45. Thank you.
I don't know what the guns are. I've
also never played this, Amy, so I'm like
going off of like vibes.
Yeah. And the vibes are electric. Boogie
boogie boogie boogie. Amy, I I don't
have the sheet in front of me and I
cannot remember. Do you have a pet
currently or or what's your what's your
what's your pet?
I do not have a pet uh currently. I I
have had some in my time. I've had a
number of fish uh each of whom I love
dearly and who lived I would say
appropriately long lives for their
species. Put that on the record. Sure.
Um and then I had a a a period of time
where I had a a foster cat who was like
sort of an unofficial foster. It wasn't
like through a shelter and agency. It
was just my building superintendent's
brother's wife's cat. Okay. Um who
wanted who needed to live somewhere
else.
And it was co and I was and I've been
quite fond of cats and I was like I can
have a cat for, you know, this like
school year um and hang out with hang
out with this sweet little creature.
Well, you know, we've only got so long
left on the stream, so I'm going to on
my portion of the stream. So, I'm going
to skip a lot of details here. Okay.
But Rocky the cat uh at the tender age
of 10 had not been neutered and as such
when he was moving to new places he had
a real passion for peeing on those
places and I as someone who was living
in a place he was moving well this seems
intense what you're going through. Yes.
No.
And no I know I just sort of like I'm
looking for pictures of this cat. I look
up and suddenly you're in like a whole
scenario.
God, you're okay. Lord, that I mean
those shouldn't exist. You have been
crippled. Yeah, we got to use stimpack.
Chat can also use a stimpack. Oh, or you
could just get ragd doll.
Like the infinite spinning ragd doll
just in place as it fades out. Book
dragon, thank you for that extra dollars
to put us back to a orderly number. Or
is that chaos number? I couldn't a There
he is. That's a very cat. That's a very
cute cat. Yeah. Helicopter. So, they
take Rocky to get neutered and they pick
the cat up and they're like, "Hey, did
you all neuter our cat and they were
like, "No, but he does have diabetes.
And this was not at a time where I could
really afford a cat that had diabetes."
So, we did enlist the services of an
awfully specific charitable organization
called Diabetic Cats in Need. Cannot
believe they exist. Glad they do. Um,
and as we were sort of caring for his
diabetes and and you know, at the urging
of of
DCIN, doing like blood testing and stuff
just to see how his blood sugar was
being managed, we learned that that cat
didn't have diabetes.
Um, which was uh, cool. Well, that's a
good that's good.
It is good. I would have liked to know
um, maybe from the veterinarian. Look, I
am no advocate of violence, but if I see
that veterinarian, it's on site. I have
trimmed easily 90 minutes out of this
story. Um, but anyway, I had I had a
very sweet, medically complicated cat
for about 9 months um before he he was
adopted to somewhere he could live more
long term. Um, and uh and that was my
most recent pet. All right.
Well, I'm I I am glad even though you
went through some harrowing things that
Rocky did not in fact have diabetes.
Yes. And look, I'm as glad as anyone.
And uh I will I will say that my
experience with Rocky, it was obviously
a different organization, but does speak
to like had had there not been some
random money thrown at this random
organization that pays for diabetic cat
care. Um I do not know where we what we
could have done with that sweet anthem.
So, uh, you know, teams were sent here.
Yeah. I mean, it's funny. It's funny how
much these, uh, Oh, they killed the
Sorry, I'm figuring out why I have all
this great a tuxedo.
Um, I was going to say, um,
organizations like that, like Best
Friends Animal Society and and charity
streams like this that raise money are
the are the ways that those like those
animals can actually be taken care of.
So, at home. Yeah. Like it's very it's
very literal in terms of what the what
the money does, which is nice. I do
think it's kind of you mentioned at at
the start of my half hour here that, you
know, the goal of this organization is
for shelters to be no kill in some
amount of time. And it is interesting
that I do feel like I've logged on and
for 30 minutes just watch you kill and
shoot uh creatures and animals
ceaselessly. Not cute ones.
Listen, listen. There have been things
coming to stop me and Zoe's adventures
in the wasteland. Uh, right. But if they
had just left me alone, it would have
been fine. Oh, self-defense argument.
Yeah, perhaps perhaps if if the Fallout
universe had uh an organization like
Best Friends Animal Society, uh, some of
these problems could have been
alleviated before they became right. All
of these ghouls would be in comfortable
foster homes rather than chasing you
down. would be placed with with with
wand toys and bubble boxes. They would
have enrichment. Yep. Brad is very
familiar with that description food.
Yeah. Oh, good. Well, you got the you
got tread ghouls. Uh I Yes, I'm uh wait
you know the drill. Wait for the I I I
know. I actually have to launch crowd
control. So, I'm going to wait for a
point where you just recently saved and
are not actively doing something that
happens. Like, are you not currently
shooting a dog? This cannot be good for
the fundraisers. No.
Listen, I I shouldn't have followed
dance is really what we're f is really
bringing me down some dark paths here. I
suppose I did advise this. Yeah, but I
also am going to leave in probably about
30 seconds. So, you sent me down this
path.
Yeah, it would not be the first time
since we met, Matt, that I sort of led
you astray for the entertainment of of
the invisible masses. That is that is um
a thousand% true. I would say and I pray
it isn't the last. No, it'll keep
happening. One day I hope I hope I can
bring you uh and pay pay back the favors
you have given me. Look, I'm I'm
incredibly
suggestible. It will it will be horribly
easy. All right. Uh, now that dance has
stopped momentarily, this might be a
good point for us to swap guests. Okay,
so let's uh Yeah. Yeah, let's go back
there. Amy, is there anything you want
to you want to pitch as we as our time
together draws to a close? Is there
anything that whether it's your thing or
someone else's thing or a piece of media
or whatever, is there something that you
think that more people should be
watching or looking at or reading or
listening to than they currently are?
For sure. I'm going to I'm going to say
three things. I'm gonna start by saying
that everyone should watch Abolish
Everything on Nebula. It's a very funny
comedy debate show where comedians and
Matt Crolls uh discuss true
um things that they want removed from
society. It it could not be more stupid.
And someone in my vicinity is getting a
phone call. I don't know if you can hear
that. I agree. Um it's so so dumb. It's
so so fun. I love working on it. I think
anyone could enjoy it. You should watch
that on Nebula. My thing that I'll plug
that I don't work on is if you happen to
be in the surrounds of New York City, my
friend Sila, who's on the same episode
of Abolish as Matt uh is doing her
standup hour at Ars Nova on Wednesday
called Sila Pool It Ends With Me. Great.
Um she's been working really hard on
it's going to be fabulous. I'm so so
excited to go. Um and then the third
thing I'm going to say is congrats on
being engaged Matt and also happy
birthday because I was told that I
needed to sort of do a handoff. Yeah,
there you go. Correct. And our and our
guest is in fact waiting in the wings.
So we'll we'll do a quick handoff. Amy,
thank you so much for joining us. Amy,
thank you. Thank you for having me. Good
good luck with the ghouls and what such.
Thank you. Bye bye. All right. Uh and
now I will bring to
you our next guest.
Hello.
How are you? I made it.
Welcome on in. Yeah. Happy birthday.
Thank you so much. How goes it? It goes.
Uh we have we have raised
$2,569 in the last damn uh two and a
half hours. Is that correct? Uh that is
correct. Since 11 a.m. for Best Friends
Animal Society. Jesse, and I'll just say
this before we we go through your full
introduction. That means also because we
are part of Best Friends Day, um that
money is matched. So, that will actually
be around
$5,000. So, yeah, that is pretty
exciting. Also, Zoe is down here, as you
can see. Uh, they earned the cat cam in
the Fallout shelter.
None of my cats are around because I had
to close I my fiance makes me close the
door whenever I'm on a stream or
whatever, so the cats can't get in. So,
unfortunately, you won't see them today.
That's okay. Well, we will talk about
them uh in a little bit. Jesse, uh,
please uh intro yourself. tell all the
fine people uh all of the wonderful
things you do. Uh I am a weird dork who
dances on the internet like the rest of
you. Uh I do video essays about science
fiction, pop culture, and queer stuff.
Um a lot about Star Trek cuz I'm a giant
nerd. Uh and I'm also a filmmaker. I
directed a movie called Identities and
that is on Nebula. And then I am also
directing an episode of Subliminal,
which is a Nebula show coming out
probably later this year, early next
year, some in that vicinity. Um, yeah.
So that's that's the short version.
Yeah. Hell yeah. Also, I'm
No, I'm just saying I'm also very
excited about the fact that I'm on a
little Fallout screen. That makes me
very excited. That's right. You and
every I believe in every version, you
still are present wherever we are. Yeah,
we we spent a long time setting this up,
chat. Like cannot stress enough that we
we wanted this to to be cool for for the
guests and for all of you. Um
you did good. Oh, thanks. Uh
Jesse, we also have a mutual friend. Uh
you're you you are also a friend of Dr.
Aaron who was on earlier. Uh yes. And I
was actually texting her right after you
uh you came on for about taking care of
my cats cuz I'm flying to New York.
She's coming over this weekend to take
care of my cats. Nice. Excellent.
Excellent. Yeah. Um so, uh you we we
kind of have two paths before us, Jesse.
Mhm. We talk about pets. We can talk
about Fallout. What are you feeling? I
could talk about pets mostly because I
have not played a Fallout game and I
played New Vegas when it came out and
that's like the last time I played a
Fallout game in depth. That's that's
fair. That's that's fair about I have
never played a Fallout game so I was uh
yeah never um I'm not a huge fan of uh
Bethesda's open world games and all the
recent ones have been open. I've been
I've been playing uh like I was waiting
so badly for the Oblivion remaster cuz I
have such nostalgia for it and then I
kept playing it and I'm like kind of
boring it is it is for better or
worse the same game. Yeah. Yeah. Mortal,
thanks so much for the $462 taking us to
$2,51152.
That is a very orderly number. Thank you
very much. I appreciate that greatly.
Both of you please continue. I'm just
dealing with one quick thing here that
we're going to get moving. Yeah,
absolutely. Um I don't know why that's
playing twice. I don't I don't know.
It's dark magic. Uh it's it's extra
birthday time. That's That's correct.
Yeah. Um yeah. So uh I've been playing
uh much more linear games recently or
very like much less openw world weird
games. So I've been playing Blueprints
and Clear Obscure. And uh and by the
way, if you chats both uh on YouTube and
Twitch, you'll be pleased to know that
uh Twitch chat convinced me Wednesday
that the game that we'll be be uh
playing beginning Monday is a Final
Fantasy game, much beloved by many of
you. I've been convinced for the first
time ever to play Final Fantasy 6. So,
please please look forward to that. On
Monday, we're going to go uh we're going
to go try and beat up a clown. Uh, and
I've been told I must suplex a train.
I'm not allowed to not suplex a train. I
must suplex. You must. It's It's
required. Yes, of course. Yeah. So,
that's another franchise I've only
dabbled in. Like I played I played Final
Fantasy 7 remake. The first one I played
What's the one with Lightning? Uh, main
character 13, two, and three. I played
the first I played the thirst for 13.
That's the only one. And then I think
that's really it. I think this is only
Final Fantasy. Oh, and tactics advanced.
Okay. Yeah. T tactics. Um, uh, see, I
have played entirely too much of Final
Fantasy 14 now with the critically
acclaimed trial that includes Heaven's
Word and Storm Blood with no limit on
play time up to level 70. Um, I play
it's it's my MMO of choice. Uh, and so I
have approximate knowledge of many of
the titles in the Final Fantasy series
because they've all made it into 14 in
some way or another. There's a whole
raid series where you fight a bunch of
bad guys from six, for instance. Gotcha.
Gotcha. So, I've fought Kefka, but not
like this. So, um Yeah. Yeah. I've like
vaguely seen a lot of 10 cuz my I had a
friend in college who was like super
super about 10 and it non-stop. So, I
know a little bit of that, but that's
really about the extent of it. Uh Val,
thank you so much for those $25. Thank
you. Thank you. Let me go get the rest
of that message. Why? Oh, okay. Wait, do
you have a cat in follow? Is that a cat
following you? So, I modded Zoe into the
game. Oh. Oh my god. Oh, I love that.
Yeah. So, I could How you doing, buddy?
Let's see if I can do tricks. Hey, boy.
You know any tricks? And that's her
actual meow I put into the game. Oh,
that's so cute.
I love that. And she will take down some
fools as well. Yeah. I mean, I basically
monitor over the game's dog that's like
a Rottweiler. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
Yeah. Well, I mean, I feel like that's
appropriate for cats, too. Honestly, I
honestly I'd buy it more for a cat
taking down some people than uh than
dogs, frankly. Yeah.
Uh Val, thank you so much for the bits
as well. Um yes, and and Chad is
correct. Soon there will be Final
Fantasy Magic the Gathering. Uh oh,
yeah. They I I feel like Jesse, you're
intimately familiar with this feeling
where someone takes uh two two blurbos
that you love deeply with your whole
soul and then makes the blurbos kiss.
And when they make the blurbos kiss, I'm
not I I'm responsible, but I'm not
really responsible for my actions.
Certainly not for my financial
decisions. That was me and the Lord of
the Rings Magic the Gathering and the
Doctor Who Magic the Gathering. I bought
way too many decks. Way too many decks.
I actually have a box of uh Lord of
Rings that I used with my little brother
to um do like sealed and we did some
sealed
uh two weeks ago. Not last Wednesday,
but the Wednesday before and I cracked a
one ring. Oh my god, that's so good.
Hell yeah. Also, Spicy did something
just come in from Spicy. Spicy Farret,
thank you for the $25. Yes. Thank you,
Spicy. Yeah, my uh my screen is delayed,
so I'm having to refresh. It's also not
obeying the
wondering what I should do here. If I
should do agility. What's my I guess I'm
doing charisma, too. I don't like the
deal prices. I'm not going to be doing a
lot of stuff. You learn is also inense.
You need to up your German Shepherd
apparently. That That's what Oh, German
Shepherd. You want me to up my charisma,
Jesse? Is that what you're saying? Up
your charisma cuz you need to you I was
disappointed you did not win on Abolish
Everything. Uh cuz you tweet about that.
Oh, yeah. You you I I mean, no no shade
to anyone else in that episode. They did
great, too. But you kicked ass in that
one. You throw in the papers. I was
like, "Hell yeah, I'm here for this."
Thank you. So, a little a little glimpse
uh glimpse behind the um the curtain
here. Uh I actually because I am not a
stand-up. I hadn't done standup for 13
years. I um I did a I hosted like a
month maybe three or two weeks before a
what is essentially was a dry run at my
apartment with a bunch of my standup
friends as the establishment.
I built a lect turn in my apartment to
run it and try to get it down. Um, yeah.
And, uh, I think it paid off. I think
No, it did. It worked. It worked. You
did really, really good. I really
thought you you nailed it. So, uh,
everyone on that episode though was so
incredibly tight. Like, I've been
watching every episode of the show. It's
been fantastic.
So, oh, here's I'm a little bit lost in
where I'm supposed to go.
But what we we were talking about um Oh,
put making Blurbos's kiss.
I'm just I'm nervous. I'm really nervous
for the day that they do a Star Trek one
of those. If they ever do a Star Trek
Magic the Gathering, I might go
bankrupt. It might be a problem. Will
that be the thing? That will be what
ends you. That will be the thing that
ends me. I will literally spend the
entirety of I will just be like, you
know what? I don't need I don't need to
save this money for retirement. It's
fine.
Jesse. Jesse, we're content creators in
the US of A. We can monetize it. Yeah.
Yeah. We'll be doing I'm giving up on
that. Yeah. Will and I will be doing
this stream till we're 90. Until you're
90. But we can't wait to move into the
retirement home right after they
remodeled it for all the millennials
with the podcasting studios, right? Like
that's going to be the thing in
retirement homes is podcasting studios
and D and D tables. I I did I did have
that moment when I was a kid where I
kind of realized like there's going to
be a day where we'll all be in the
retirement home and then like the
Pokemon theme song will come on and
it'll just be a bunch of like
nine-year-olds. It's going to catch all
Pokemon.
Name that Pokemon. It's a goddamn
Jigglypuff. I know
it's Pikachu. All
right, I'll be on the lookout for these
synths. Apparently, Jesse, the synths
aren't our friends. I I don't like the
way you say that. I don't like the way
that you say it that way. I don't know
either. I don't like it. That feels That
feels offensive. Yeah, I I listen, I'm
not disagreeing. Uh, also, I just got
confused. Who is this random man? Did
someone What is happening? Uh, there
might be some people just coming to pay
you a visit and to, you know, try and
take your blood. Oh, wait. Are there
vampires in the fall? No, no, no. Oh,
god. Okay, I need to get to a point
where I can do a Don't die. Don't die.
Don't die. Don't die. Take the snip
packs. Take the stimpack. Guard me.
Guard me with your life. I did like the
Fallout show where they have the
stimpacks or they just like like eat it
or whatever or whatever. No, they just
inject it into them and it's like, "Oh,
yeah. Fixes fixes everything. Fixes my
limbs falling off. It's all good." Yeah.
Like it's it's magic. It's magic pills.
All right, I believe that was all four
gunners.
Laser pistol. Yes, please. Let's really
turn this round upside down. Yeah, I was
going to say that is the disadvantage,
chat. These are real enemy unlike in um
when we did this for Elden Ring, but
they weren't real enemies. So, they
didn't give things like souls or drops.
These are real enemies. They gives
things like XP and caps and drops. No,
this is D. So, now is that a bloody mist
corpse? Yeah, because uh lasers uh melt
things. Oh, that's cute. So, let's see.
Weapons. Let's get some Let's get the
laser pistol. I think I have a laser
pistol plus somewhere. Fallout 3 has
vampires, apparently. Good to know. Very
good to know. Uh Spicy, thank you so
much for the gift of ghouls. Uh or the
gift of gunners. The gift of gunners.
Yes, it's the gift that keeps on giving.
Thank you. Thank you. It's the gun that
keeps on gifting. I don't know. While
Matt's doing some menuing, uh I think at
the top of the hour will be the perfect
time to run our next giveaway. Perfect.
Um, so, uh, a reminder that you should
go and, uh, either in the link, uh, in
the description of the YouTube stream or
exclamation mark giveaway on Twitch. Um,
you can enter that uh, enter your
information into that form. You only
need to enter once all day and we'll be
drawing for another digital prize at the
top of the hour. This time, I believe.
Looks like a dead end. See if you can
find a way to get that door open. I'm
thinking I'm thinking it's time to give
away a Hero Forge Mini. So, we're going
to give We're going to give give away a
Hero Forge Mini with free shipping.
Here, let's let's show the people what
they're getting here. Hold on. Give me
two seconds. Let's show them what
they'll win. Show them. Boom. Okay, so
for those of you who are not familiar
with Hero Forge, uh Hero Forge is a
phenomenal um just remove the cat cam
here for a second so you can kind of see
it. Uh also, thank you for that follow.
Uh, Hero Forge lets you basically build
your own custom miniatures for your
tabletop games. And this is a color mini
that they print in color. They've been
doing this and refining this for years
at this point. Um, I have some of their
old ones, but at the end of my Strod
campaign, I want to see if I can show
this off a little bit cuz I was just,
again, this is not a painted mini. This
came out of a out of a 3D STL resin
printer color. So, I'm going to try to
do this and my camera's going to get a
little bit messy. Alex, thank you for
the
$59.17 bringing us to that's a beautiful
number.
$2,62069. Let's just hold on here. I'm
gonna zoom in. Sorry, I'm going to be
big for a
second. Okay, so hold on. Let me see if
I can come on. Focus. Like the level of
detail just in Browns. This was uh
Jamie's Rogue, but like even like if you
just look again, this is just out of a
printer. Like it is like you can see
details in the eyes. The camera is not
doing it justice. So in at the top of
the hour Oh god, there I am. Still back
up. Back up. Go away. Uh we will be
giving away one of these where you can
design your own mini and have it sent to
you uh for freezes. Yeah. Cool. So
again, uh make sure that you're entered
in that thing in the doohickey. All
right. Meanwhile, in Fallout.
Yep. Uh, so Jesse, are you are you
coming uh to my neck of the woods for
business, pleasure, or both? Uh,
pleasure. So my uh my sister's g
graduating. I don't know why I said it
that way. Graduating um this weekend, so
I'm going back for a party. And then
also my brother um and his uh uh wife,
they just had a kid. So I'm meeting my
nephew for the first time. Oh, nice.
Yeah. Very cool. Yeah. So, we're doing
that and then just hanging out for a few
days. I was Oh, god. Oh, no. Hey, this
is 30 feral bulls with a small close. Oh
god. Oh no. And Matt is left without his
pog rifle, which
Oh no.
I can do some heels. Is that a giant
one? What's that one next to? Oh, you
got molds. That was excellently timed,
Dragon Lady. Excellently timed. Dragon
lady came in and and dropped a insane
donation. Um, and now we'll be running
my life for the next 8 to 10 hours.
Yeah, it's perfect. That was that was an
excellent use of a welltimed thing. And
it was had a chance. You gave him a
sporting chance. That's right. You also
can't spawn behemoths inside. Yeah. Um,
does that mean one might spawn outside
when we leave?
Oh no. Oh no. We'll see. I don't bring
up behemoths for any particular reason.
Behemoths are uh 15 20 ft tall. Um and
they will squish you flat. Also, Jesse,
I'm sorry that interrupted what we were
talking about. So uh uh meeting u
meeting nephew. I'm an aunt. Uh I am a
new aunt. So meeting him and then also
uh graduating sister. And then also my
um my fiance is officially meeting in
person my mom for the first time. Okay.
Uh because they they've they've
met cuz we've been dating for years and
years, but like my mom doesn't leave New
York ever and we just haven't had a
chance to like go and like physically
see her. So like I've seen her, but like
my fiance hasn't. So it's the first time
they'll be physically meeting in person.
So that's it that'll be fun. Yeah.
Right. So you got a loaded you got a
loaded plate. Well, let me know if you
have a free time for for a lunch or
coffee or something. I am I will. Yes.
And then also uh when I come in for
subliminal, I'm planning to come like a
week early. So, I'll be around for that
week with minimal to do outside of
prepping. So, hell yeah.
Okay. So, those were Oh, the synth had a
shock baton
and an institute pistol. I think this
laser pistol is probably going to be my
best bet here. I do remember the uh the
gun in Fallout 3 where you could just
fire whatever the hell you want like
teddy bears if you don't. That was that
was fun.
I'm trying to remember what else I
remember Three Dog. Did I listen to him?
Three
Dog. H that That's a game that I have no
like way too much nostalgia for.
It's the same thing with Oblivion. It's
like I started playing Oblivion. I'm
like, man, this game was was so much
cooler in what is it? 2006 or whatever
the hell it was, right? Wait, hold on.
Why is Who summoned a cow down here?
I mean, hello. Hello, friend.
Just a good He's just a good little boy.
Yeah. Yeah. He's just doing living his
best life, you know. I don't have any
stimpacks left. Um, so this will be
fun. Oh boy. Oh boy. So, wait. Uh,
Jesse, what are uh your pets names? So,
I have uh four now technically. Uh we
have Kipo, who is named after Kipo and
The Age of the Wonderbeast, one of my
favorite shows. Nice. Uh we have uh
Kingsley, who is a big gray cat, who is
the most jealous cat that you will ever
see. He consistently meows and like if
you pet him or touch him, he instantly
purr like a race car. But like if you
start petting any other cat, he will
literally run at you and demand pet.
Yeah, it's adorable. Um then we have
Jedha, who is just uh she you she was a
feral cat who grew up um like outside of
a pizza place. Oh well, good good
choice. Good taste. Yeah, she was it was
great. Uh but yeah, we we adopted her
and now she is like the sweetest and
like will not stop like like making
biscuits every morning for breakfast.
So, she is the most adorable and like
the best thing I love about her is if
you start petting her and you start like
scratching her like shoulder blade.
There's like a spot on her shoulder
blade. She's like one of those
collapsing dolls where she just
completely like flops. So, you just
start petting her right there and then
she's like will fall right into you
being like, "All right, I have no will
of my own anymore. I'm just yours.
You've hit the spot. It's the best." Um,
and then and then the fourth one is
Smog, who is actually Dr. Aaron's cat.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So, Yep. Yep. We just
adopted him a few weeks ago, so he's
still getting used to used to everybody,
but they was uh curled up with Ko this
yesterday morning. So, nice. Seems to be
going well. So, yeah. Excellent. Uh
also, thank you everybody who's messing
with me right right me out. Uh you
summoned a bunch of stimpacks for me,
which was great. And then a bunch of
blood worms, which was less great, but
I'll take it. Okay, good. I mean, who
doesn't want blood worms, you know? I
got some blood worms. It's time. Oh boy.
Laser. Oh god. Oh god. Oh god.
I love that they just pop out of the
ground like this is rough. Okay, here we
go. I need an open space and a wall.
Too relatable. I need an open space and
a wall.
This thing does not have good reload
time. Oh, he pushed me away from the
wall. Well,
at least they're coming at you one by
one. That's kind of for now. For now.
Okay, I guess staying may not matter.
Mell explosion. That's not going to help
me at all.
That's perfect. Beautiful. Absolutely
beautiful. Thank god I got a Brotherhood
of Steel guy with me. Help me, Paladin.
Maybe. Yeah, you the
Well, so he listen fascist. True. He
also hates corporations, which I just
when he walked in here, he's like, "Just
get corporations all this." And I was
like, "All right, I can I can buy we can
we got some donations to thank." By the
way, we got to thank uh Copper Chef uh
for the uh 2269
which is apparently somewhere to be
found in pie as all numbers are. Uh, and
then Spicy Fair for the $100 donation.
Thank you so much for that generosity.
We're we're clocking in on um on that
$3,500. A reminder your your reward at
$3,500 is that when Matt and I take a
dinner break, we will add to the mix
classic film uh which we feel while not
directly thematically related to Fallout
is in the spirit of Fallout. It would be
the kind of movie that if we're running
around in Fallout that you'd find and
where you'd be like, "This feels
right. Because again, we can only do Oh,
look at there's some of our friends
right here that we What's happening
here? Potato explosion.
Potatoes. Jokes on you. I love potatoes.
I was say I'm fine with that. Yeah, it's
uh Can I Can I swear on this uh Can I
swear on this stream for for Everybody
gets one. All right, I'll give one. Uh I
I one of my favorite jokes in anything
in any video game comes from the Game of
Thrones video game. Okay. Um, there was
like that Telltale game or whatever and
there was a there was an option like a
dialogue option where you could ask
someone why they ended up at the wall
and the character goes, "Oh, [ __ ]
potatoes."
You [ __ ] potatoes. No, I stole
potatoes. It's my favorite line in
anything. That's perfect. Yeah. You boil
them. You mash them. Put them in a soup.
Yeah. Put them in stew. Stew, is it? Is
it? No, it's it's correct. You're right.
You're right. It's stew. I screwed up. I
I will take my Lord of the Rings card.
It's fine. Now you only get so many of
the Magic card set. Yeah. Yeah. I have
to I have to give them back. I'll give
you back my uh my uh my um Aragorn.
Uh Aragorn the is a dope card though. It
was nice. It is a very very good card. I
need to play some In-person Magic. I was
just at PAX and I should have done it
there. Uh but I didn't. Um uh I haven't
played in person magic in a while. Like
I played the Lord of the Rings one, but
I haven't like it was with um Aaron, my
fiance. So we have uh we haven't like
played anything regularly. I've been
playing a lot of arena. Um I'm climbing
on arena. I'm teaching other people
arena in preparation for being able to
play Final Fantasy on arena. Um
playing bring a 70 to come to New York,
Jesse. Maybe it will sometime. I will
100% do that. I uh
Oh, these are big, by the way. These are
these are some of the best foods that
you can eat in the game. Uh, which is uh
why this one is a touch expensive. It's
also a touch expensive because you make
Matt stop whatever he's doing and run
around trying to find all the pies on
the floor. Um, which I think is the most
hilarious part of this. It is It's not
stopping either. It's No, there's 100.
Oh my god. It It takes a bit. Um, yeah.
Um, what was I saying? Yeah, I would
definitely die to play Magic. I actually
been playing there's that new I for what
it's called. the the Star Wars one
that's basically the gathering of Star
Wars. Uh not Outlaws. Um why am I
blanking? We've done like two shorts on
it. Um it's good though. Sorry, my
brain's Yeah, I'm pretty It's I've been
playing it and I literally don't know
what it's called either. Star Wars Magic
the Gathering. What's it called? Star
Wars the Gathering. That can't be right.
There's no way that's correct. Darn it.
What? I can't believe I'm blanking, but
I'm unlimited. Unlimited. I knew it was
a U word. Yes. Oh, with Star Wars. It
could be it could be billions of Oh,
it's funny. This tells me how many I
have in my inventory. I've got 93 of the
pies.
Matt will now spend a very long time
looking for the remainder. Six pies. Oh,
wait. I think I saw one on that
bookshelf that they ju they just
announced a new magic card. Nope. I
thought I lied. Uh, it's an instant
ramen card.
Perfect. Perfect. Of course, it has
flash. So, though it is an artifact, it
can be played like an instant. No, no,
it's perfect. Perfection. Uh chat, a
reminder that in three minutes we'll be
rolling that giveaway for a uh Hero
Forge mini. So do go ahead and make sure
that your name is in the sheet to get
your uh entry in for a uh thingy. Do
hickey thing of a bob. Hero Forge Mini
with free shipping. And that's anywhere
in the world, by the way. We can give
you free shipping anywhere in the world.
Wow. Thank you to uh Hero Forge for
doing that. Uh what was I going to say?
Oh, also uh while you do not uh it just
everyone's being here is the way that
you can enter into these giveaways. We
do urge you to donate to Best Friends
Animal Society, which is what we are
doing right now, which is where all
these pies came from. And these
potatoes, it looks like some rogue
potatoes were here. Um you can you can
everything you donate you can use to
help or hinder my playthrough of this
game. Um nice. I just learned some
science. That's great. Science. Science.
I'm a little bit lost in here because I
haven't played Fallout in a long
time. I am not reading all these notes.
Um,
too many notes. That's why you'll die.
Yeah. No,
people aren't here for reading. People
are here for fighting. Yeah, I'm here
for reading. I don't know what you're
talking about. Oh dear.
Oh, how many are there? How many are
there? What were there? Were there more?
There are only
two. That reminder, you can summon other
friendly things to help like rats.
Dance helps so much there. Yep. Are
these bad rats or good rats? Good rats.
Yay. Brad,
the the delay does make it a little
difficult. By the way, we do have the
delay turned down as low as it'll go uh
on both YouTube and Twitch. So, uh if it
if you miss something because of uh the
um the delay, we do apologize, but it it
will technically go no lower. Uh Jesse,
I know that you have a place you got to
be and stuff you got to do, but is wait
pitch pitch us. So, I've been asking
everybody, pitch us something that
you're working on and pitch us something
that you're not working on, but you
think more people should watch. Ooh. Or
watch. Um or consume. Consume. Consume.
Uh well uh can't actually pitch that
anymore. Well, I was working on a book.
I need to find a new publish. That's
another conversation. But I am working
on uh Subliminal, which is uh the show
on Nebula that's coming out uh later
this year. I'm going to be directing an
episode this summer in June. I'm really
really excited about it. We just
confirmed our cast. It's really really
awesome. Script is really cool. It's the
first time I
Wait, pause Jesse for a second. You're
roboting hard for a moment. Uh, Will,
can you refresh that? I am working on
it. Cool. We'll let
No, it's not letting me. I'll keep
hacking, Jesse. One second while Will
does magic. Does does technical magic.
I'm Look, I'm trying. Okay, I got you. I
trust you completely.
That's a mistake. No one should trust me
completely. Trust you completely. Um,
one second. I don't know why it started
roboting. Jesse, try again.
No, no. Now you're just gone. How could
you just be gone? Don't. That's so
weird.
By the way, obligatory. This has never
happened before. I have no idea why it
would happen now. Jesse, come back.
Jesse, come back.
[Music]
Uh, we're going to do this. And I don't
even know what that I need to see what
that uh what that donation was when
we're back. We'll look. Jesse still
can't hear Jesse. Hold on. Let's um I'll
keep hacking. Yeah, you're just going to
hack into the matrix. I'm going to hack
into the matrix. Maybe if I get this
right. Yep. Yep. Yep. Yep. Yep. Yep.
Uh no, we're getting all of the
data. We're like literally getting all
of the data. And I don't know why jumped
out of the call to jump back in the call
on Jesse's
end. This just says help. Uh yeah.
Jesse. Jesse, no.
Um, we can do that. Our next guest is
also ready, so we could we could Jesse,
can you write can you write your goodbye
just very quickly? I'm so sorry this
happened, but I know you have uh planes
to catch. Yeah, literally in this case.
Um, friends, as always, go find go
follow Jesse Gender. Uh, available on
Blue Sky or um uh or wherever fine posts
are found. You can find her work all
over the internet. Do go follow her. Uh,
she's wonderful, amazing, lovely. Thank
you, Jesse. Travel safe. We'll see you
all next time, hopefully with fewer tech
problems. That's right.
Bye. Okay. All right.
So, we got to do two things. Okay. One
of them is get our new guest in. So,
let's do that. Okay. Here we go. 3 2 1.
Let's jam.
Hey. Hello. Hello.
Hello. That looks so cool. And we can
hear you. This is amazing. We just had a
little bit of a technical hiccup. But we
back. And then uh before we introduce
our guest, I do need to apologize to
chat for I have lied to you. Oh no. I've
lied to you like a filthy liar. I said
that at the top of the hour we would
give away a Hero Forge Mini. I lied to
you. I lied to you so hard. We're gonna
give away two. Oh. Okay. Well, yeah.
Right. Yeah. You you know it. Uh so
let's uh roll those. So I need to roll
this many giveaways. Uh, our winners are
going to be Violet over on YouTube.
You've won a Hero Forge Mini. Uh, and
really, that's that's how that works.
And,
[Music]
uh,
Ernie Steppla over on YouTube as well.
You've also won a Hero Forge Mini.
Congratulations to both of you. We'll be
doing more and we'll be doing more
multi- pack giveaways here in a little
bit. So,
do make sure that you apply uh on the
thing. All right. Now, let's introduce
our guest. Sorry, I had to take care of
It's okay. Samantha, welcome. Welcome to
whatever this is.
Thank you. I'm so happy to be a part of
whatever this is. Thank you for having
me. Of course. Well, thank you. So, uh,
you are from the place that we are
raising money for right this very
moment, Best Friends Animal Society. Uh,
can you tell us what you what you do
there?
Well, Best Friends in general, as I'm
sure you know, is a leading national
animal welfare organization, and we are
dedicated to ending the killing of cats
and dogs in America's shelters, and we
are so grateful for your support. And my
job, so I have actually the coolest job
in the world, I think. Um, I'm the cat
content strategist and I'm also the cat
behavior expert for Best Friends. So,
basically, I just get to do all cat
things all day and all the different
departments and volunteers and adopters.
Everybody just comes to me and asks me
their cat questions. So, like that's a
job. That's amazing. I have a cat
question right now. Uh, so we're playing
Fallout 4. I'm not sure how familiar you
are with the Fallout series. Um, but
it's a post-apocalyptic sort of weirdly
light-hearted version of that in some
ways and very dark in others. But
because of that, I've built a Fallout
shelter. You can see below uh for my cat
Zoe. Is this good cat content right
here?
Let me see. Yes, that is good cat
content. And that is coming from a a cat
content strategist. So, like that's
legit evaluation. That is great.
She I thought she was face down. She's
just lying and wait her eyes up. Yeah,
that is so ready to pounce. Immortal
app, thank you so much for the Oh god,
what was that donation? That donation
was $10.72, taking us to
$2,755.72. We are a mere I can do math,
I promise.
$750 away from getting you all a movie
with our dinner. That's right. Um, and I
believe we should start dropping a
couple hints about maybe. But hold on. I
want to ask I want to ask Samantha a
question. Uh, well, so uh we have teams
here before we get back to the game. Uh,
when we ever we do these streams, we
have uh team order, which I have been
defaulted into, uh, and then team chaos,
which will is is now, and we try to get
the number of uh the amount raised to a
certain point. Right now, this is a very
orderly number.
275572. It's just it's it's backwards
and forwards, right? So, team order is
winning. No pressure because we both
just met you.
Which team are you on?
Um, oh my gosh, you're making me choose
between the two of you. My personality,
I say, is more team chaos. Well, I was
gonna say that would make the most sense
to me because of all of the cat duties
that you have. Yeah, exactly. There's
not a lot of order and structure when it
comes to cats. Do you want to see one? I
have one right here. Yes, absolutely.
Owen. Oh my gosh. What's their name? Oh,
wait. I know this. Uh that you sent a
video of them watching uh watching your
show. That's right. It's French. It's a
French name. It's Maurice. Maurice. Oh,
Maurice is like, I need to sleep. Yeah,
I actually I
didn't I didn't I didn't mention we lost
him. Yeah, it's all right. We got We got
for a brief moment things were perfect.
Yeah. Um I actually began my day with a
cat who decided uh though he is not my
cat that my room was the only place he
wanted to be. Uh and so began attempting
to uh remove my door from its hinges.
Um, and unfortunately for me, he is
smart enough to know how to turn a
doornob. He's a raptor. And that and
that means that if I don't get up and
get the door, he's just going to keep at
it till he gets the doororknob because
he knows he can get the door knob. So
that was a round one or what? I He's
done it before. I have no idea how No
one's ever seen him do it because he
only does it when he can't get in and
I'm asleep and the only reason he wants
to be in is because no one's paying
attention to him. So if someone else is
home, they're outside my door and they
can pay attention to him, but no one
will pay attention to him if I'm asleep.
So he is chaos. He's also on TV. That's
right. Yeah. Right. Exactly. With the
last donation, we did crack $2,750. So
basically, we got into another
$250 interval, which means Zoe gets one
more treat. So Zoe, I don't know. You
have to eat it off camera.
I can't see her head. No, she got it.
She got it. Trust me. There we go. I saw
a little I see a little ear moving
there. I want to see her face.
Zoe. So, oh my gosh, she's so beautiful.
She She is uh our incredibly mouthy,
charismatic uh cat. her uh her her best
trick uh is getting into Matt's arms and
then refusing to bend her elbows or uh
knees and just putting her her her legs
straight out um and then making kitty
biscuits in Matt's beard whether he
wants her to or not. It's a great trick.
It's a wonderful trick. We use it on
stream all the time. A little bit
connected. Do you remember um a couple
years ago there was that like cat
intelligence test where they put the
cats against the wall and if they kept
their legs straight it showed that they
were smart and the ones that just kind
of like crumpled into the wall like it's
not it's not an actual scientific test
but the fact that the she keeps their
arms straight means smart. There we go.
Look at that. Look at that. Look how
smart you are. She knows. Oh, she's so
pretty. Smart and pretty. Well, so not
only is Zoe here with us here, but
actually if we go back out real quick,
the game will come back any
moment. I've modded Zoe into this game.
There she is.
Oh my gosh. Sadly, her name is Dog Meat.
You can't change that because she's
normally a dog character. Uh but she is
here. And the best part,
I Hold on. Let's see if I can
tricks. Hey boy, you know any tricks? I
modded her voice, her actual meow into
the game. Oh my gosh, that is really
cool. Yeah. So, normally that's a dog
character. It is a uh cat character for
today. I love that. We went when we do
something uh for these streams, we do it
uh too hard, some might say. Yeah, I
think you are awesome. No board like
overboard. That's right. Uh, while I
hack this, uh, can you tell us like a
little bit sort of like we've been going
over all day sort of what where, uh,
these donations go, like how they can
sort of help. Uh, can you sort of while
I while I deal with this nonsense fake
computer within a computer, can you sort
of go over all the different ways this
money is going to help animals? Yes. So,
at Best Friends, we have our national
animal sanctuary, which is in southern
Utah, and it's on like 3,000 acres. And
we have every animal you can imagine,
even wild animals and bunnies and pigs
and horses and cats and dogs. And at
that sanctuary, there are over 1,600
animals that we care for there. And they
all have some special special story. I
just got back from the sanctuary last
night. Oh, yeah. So, I was just there in
the magic of the sanctuary and just it's
one of those things where just being
there, you go, "Wow, this is this is
what it's all about." And I saw just all
these cats and you know, like this cat's
paralyzed and this cat is blind and this
cat has, you know, it's just all these
special needs cats and dogs and every
breed and type of animal that we are
caring for there. And then around the
country, we have like brickandmortar
locations where we help rescue animals
from the shelters and we get them
adopted there, too. So, I'm in Los
Angeles, we have one here, we have one
in New York, we have one in Salt Lake
City, and we've got them just like all
over all over the country, but we also
partner with I think like over 5,000
shelters around the country. We just
kind of are like this connection between
all of these all of these rescues. And
if one rescue doesn't have any room and
another rescue has some room, we help
coordinate so that they can transport so
that animals are getting a chance to
live all over the country. And instead
of being killed for space, we're just
kind of like arranging it. We're we're
the big umbrella and under us are these
5,000 rescues. And that's that's what
we're doing. We're we're doing our best
to end the killing of dogs and cats in
America's shelters. Yeah. Well, that's
an awesome that's amazing work and thank
you so much for for doing it. Um Oh, I
love it. I'm so happy. I cried every
single day this week because I was so
happy. I did and I actually took a
video. I'm going to make a compilation
of here's me crying here and here and
here and but they're all like happy
tears just like I can't believe this is
my life and I get to be a part of this
and we're doing so much good that I just
I mean that's me I cry all the time
anyway but they were happy happy tears
at the chances that these animals have
gotten thanks to Best Friends. Yeah. Um
so and and we are and correct me if and
when I am wrong we are uh this stream is
sort of a a precursor to Best Friends
Day. Is that sort of how it's working?
Are we like the first Oh, and someone
just with their donation summoned this
this random cow to be in this basement.
So, yeah. Oh my gosh. Sorry. Side note,
they can everyone Oh, boy. What's
happening? Um, I believe I am now stuck
in this doorway. Uh, and now I have to
go down. Uh, anyone who donates money
through crowd control can add things to
the game or mess with me in different
ways. Um, so all the donations, a lot of
them that people are going towards, they
can use a thing to just make stuff
appear. Um, like what kind what's the
silliest thing that could appear? Oh,
uh, that that would be that there's a
thing called a melon implosion, which is
where, uh, 30 watermelons just explode
out of Matt randomly.
Yeah. Uh, that is awesome. It's a thing.
What was What was I saying? Oh, uh, best
friends day. Uh, so we the the we are
now in in in donation matching
territory. Is that correct? Yeah, it's I
mean like technically all the donations
and like the big push for it. I think it
starts tomorrow. Actual best friends day
is June 8th every year and we've kind of
just like taken that on as like our, you
know, it was a thing before us and just
people called it like, oh,
sorry to interrupt, but they just did
that. So here's all the melons. Melons.
Yeah, they're just they answered my
prayer in my head. I said, "Oh gosh, I
hope someone does that." Well, yeah, I
know. It's just melons. Uh, he can eat
the melons. They're not very good,
though. They're just melons. It's just
random. Yeah, but it's fun. And it is.
And the cat was there. Zoe was there
with the melons. I hope they didn't
frighten her. No, she's good. She's
She's stalwart.
Okay. She's stalart. I love it. So yes,
June 8th is Best Friend's Day and the
donations are starting like tomorrow, I
think, is our big kickoff for for
donations and you are ahead of the
curve. You are our first and we're so
excited and so grateful. Thank you. No,
of course. And I mean the our our um
this tradition that we've sort of done,
turning my inevitable march toward dust
into doing good for for groups like
yourself is one of my absolute favorite
things. It's probably my only favorite
thing about getting older.
Um but the um but it's just so lovely
and the community here across on Twitch
and on YouTube are absolute uh monsters
of goodwill. Uh I can tell I can tell
and I I didn't get to say happy
birthday. Happy birthday. Thank you very
much. It uh what a great day. It is.
Well, it's funny. Today is not
technically the day, but it is close
enough. When is it? When is the actual
day? Uh April 26th. Okay. The problem
that we had this year was that um we
everything was all around April 26th and
we were like we could either squeeze it
in April 26th or we could wait until
midMay and then do it properly in
midMay. So we and it tied to be
perfectly honest it tied better uh it
tied better with uh sort of getting at
least close to Best Friends Day. Um
totally you're kicking it off. Yeah.
What a fun way to kick it off with
watermelons and towels and
kinds of fun things. Who would have
thought? Yeah.
Let's see here. Offline. So, uh, how how
did you get started with with best
friends? Like, are were you there from
the beginning? Did you come in? Uh,
there we go. Later in the game. I have a
fun. Are you Are you trying to play the
game while you're also asking me
questions? Yes. Wow. We We do this
frequently. We do this a lot. If I I I
am uh Now I'm picking locks. Uh it my my
brain is not my own for the next um 10
more hours, whatever we're doing this
for. Uh so I can this is uh what we will
call streamer debuff. Uh where when
we're streaming, we are attempting to be
uh entertaining and also play the game.
So I if there's a choice, Matt will just
lose at the game. Matt will just Matt
will get run over by zombies or whatever
to keep the conversation going. Also,
Chad is kind of trying to take advantage
of that to get Matt run over by zombies.
They've done it twice already, I
believe. So, I helped with one of them.
I love it. I love it. Okay, so my story
is is interesting. I I used to work for
Disney for many years. I was a performer
who wore a crown and a dress. Wait,
which one? Who were you a Did you Who
were you a friend? I did. I did a lot. I
worked at Tokyo Disneyland and when I
was in Tokyo Disneyland, I got to be
like all of them. But in Orlando, in
Disney World, I was mainly one. And do
you want to guess?
Oh, hold on. Hold on. Don't look at my
hair. My hair is not a clue. It was a
wig. So, don't guess Ariel cuz everyone
goes, "Oh, Ariel. Ariel." Yeah. Yeah.
Yeah.
25 years ago. So, I mean, okay. Thank
you. you for that $25. Um,
autom first. I have like a triage of
like where to guess cuz you said you
said not to listen to the hair which
made me go to a specific place. Snow
White.
I was Snow White, but that's not the
main one in in I'm going to guess
Cinderella. No, that was I've never done
Cinderella ever. It was It was Think of
my last. There we go. That does make a
lot of sense. Yes. Nice. So I worked for
Disney for many many years and then I
was a first grade teacher. So and then I
um so like that's just my background in
performing and in educating and so then
I started working at Best Friends as I
started volunteering there actually in
2013. I was working in Disney in
Imagineering and in the evenings I would
go volunteer at Best Friends in LA. They
had a kitten nursery and I remember
seeing it on Facebook and it was like,
"Would you like to give a bottle to a
baby kitten and I was like, "Yes, I
would like to do that." And I went and
and you go there and there all these
little babies and you give them their
bottles and I loved it so much I quit my
job in Imagineering and became a cat
caregiver for Best Friends and was like
cleaning cat poop and never been
happier. Never been happier. I was like,
"This is what I'm meant to do." Like I I
was so happy. And so then I started with
best friends, you know, 11 years ago and
I started caring for the cats and then I
became the cat behavior lead and then I
kind of moved into this like all
all-encompassing just the cat lady for
best friends that answers all the cat
questions. And it's cool because in my
job right now I create videos and I do
conferences and seminars and all these
things. So I'm using that performance
background and the education background
and the cat background. So, I was able
to put like my two former careers into
animal welfare. And like that's why I'm
so happy. That's why I'm just like I'm
doing everything I love to do in such an
amazing organization and where I feel
appreciated and it's just it's just
amazing. I just love you're talking to
the right person because I love Best
Friends so much. I mean, we we very much
do, too. This is the second uh the
second uh charity stream we've done with
with you guys and uh it is always
absolute blast. Also, may I say uh your
entire team, we work with a lot of
charities and they're all great in in
all sort of different ways. I will say
you you guys are are some of the most
um uh uh available and uh very helpful
in in assets in questions about what's
going on and all of the things. And it's
always it makes our lives so much
easier. So, thank you very much to you
and the team for that because uh Oh, I'm
sure they're watching right now, but
just in case, I will make sure to pass
that along to them. They've been super
helpful for me also in preparing for
this and you know, I saw all the emails
and everything and I just kind of sit
back and let them just pop in and hi.
So, yeah, I will definitely thank them.
Thous%. Will, what do you got? You have
concerned face. No, I was I was going to
solve that puzzle for you cuz you done
enough that I could do it. Oh, I got
you. Well, next time. Next time. I have
to find a place. I have to find a place
to put a power core.
Uh, sure. It's somewhere. I I I I assume
like that's where I took it from. It's
so dark. I have a hide. And they spawn
chickens.
There there are just chickens. Uh,
great. Yeah. Um,
and if we get stuck at some point, by
the way, we can ask chat the living
repository of all what to do here. Yeah.
Where where do we put this power? Chat,
check your corners and keep it quiet.
No, he has nothing good to say. Okay. Is
that Is that you? No, you're not that
robot. No, I'm this guy. This tuxedo in
a in a weird mask right now. Uh, hold. I
think it might be upstairs. Alex is
playing the the Fallout noise. The air
raid siren. Uh, we did get another
donation. Thank you so much to Oh god.
Hold on. I have to reload page. Uh,
thank you to uh club for the $50. Thank
you. Thank you. Thank you. Oh, the
chickens are still running around like
crazy. Yep. The chickens will just
chill. Are they safe? They're not gonna
get hurt. Uh, okay. So, here's the
thing.
Here's the thing. Uh, be a part of this.
The the the nature the the the natural
order of the world. If if hostile um uh
creatures are spawned, they can get
hurt.
Uh Chad says either you weren't supposed
to take it or on the breaker on the wall
by the computer. Breaker on the wall by
the computer. Also, thank you for those
$10 from Roller. A wild Snorlax appears.
You're right. It's true. Need a poke a
flute. Are the chickens um evil? Are
they No, they are neutral. They they are
they are just here. They just are doing
their kind of like the the the big cow
with two heads called the Brahman. Um it
it's they're just here trying to do its
best. So I thought you could plug it in
here, but you can't. It just says
warning. Power loss detected. Engine
core is offline. There's a wall
somewhere. A wall. So, like I took it
from here, but you can't put it back.
Okay. And it wasn't doing anything
anyway.
Okay. Sorry. You came at a you came in a
you came in a a moment that shouldn't be
a puzzle that Well, this is this is
fantastic. I'm enjoying this. I like
this. Grass says it's on that wall by
the computer. On that wall by the
computer. Got it. Coming back. Oh,
chickens are in my way. There we go. We
got it. On the wall by the computer. To
the right. Maybe you didn't interrogate
that breaker box panel thing. This
thing? No.
No. No. Oh, wait. Battered clipboard.
No,
I'm not seeing it, y'all.
Oh, we'll find it. Yeah, we we'll find
it. The these uh this game is from 20
back. It's a little janky. Oh. Okay.
Turn around. Turn around. Go back to
where you picked up the power core.
Uh, turn
left. Uh, it's near the door back here,
apparently. Near the door.
Listen, I'm just speaking for chat. Uh,
is it is it be the door? Oh, but it's in
the back room apparently. But that
doesn't make any Oh, on on the south
wall. I'm really for you. I'm really
hoping you find this. Wait, hold on. Do
I have to actually hack this and do it
correctly? I probably do.
Hold on. We'll get there. We'll get
there. Go for it. Go for it. Uh, okay.
You have I'm looking for duds. Can duds
spawn two lines or No, they can't. And
also, wait till I try two before the
duds are used cuz sometimes they take
they reset your chances. So, this works
basically, if you're wondering, uh, it
works almost like Wordle. So like the
first word I chose is days and it only
has one of the letters in the row that
it's in. So that is not help. Oh, so
actually that for instance like let's
go. Prop has none of them in the same
thing. Camp has one the A, right?
So camp could work. Owns could work.
Duct could work. Duct could work. This
is going to help you find where to plug
it in. Or this is an old Yeah, this is
this is the puzzle that'll help us turn
the power on so we can see what we're
doing. Oh, yeah. I would like that. I
would like you to turn the power on
because I can't see anything. Oh, did I
hit camp twice? I'm such a goober. All
right. No, no, you you only hit it once.
Entry and I'd like this once. So,
there's camp. So, we know for a fact
that it's that whatever word we're using
has an A in the center.
Oh, the uh harm is the word on the last
row on the right. This one. Yeah. Want
to try? Yeah. Got it. Boom. There we go.
Okay. Yep. We did it. Power options.
Here we go. Now you can turn the power
on. So, and this is we'll run into all
kinds of puzzles like this and sometimes
we'll be able to figure it out.
Sometimes Chad will have to help us.
That's nice you have help. Yeah, it is a
thousand% is nice. Awesome. I'm sorry.
I'm no help. I'm not The only video game
I'm good at is Animal Crossing, if that
says anything. Oh, yeah. Animal Crossing
is a wonderful game. It It's It helped a
lot of people. I had I know friends who
had like birthday parties and
gettogethers and all of that in Animal
Crossing. We used to do that, too. Yeah,
it got us the co. Yep. Absolutely.
Oh, well, that didn't work. That that
that was bad. Oh my.
Did you Did you save after you saved?
Oh, that was although it is gross. And a
reminder, Matt, that our next guest
transition is more complicated. Oh, it's
it's the big one. All right, hold on.
We're going to get through this.
Oh my god, this chaos. It It'll be fine
probably. And if it's not, then we'll
reload. Nah.
All right, Brad, send in the rats. Yeah.
So, we can ask chat to help with rats.
They're a friendly. So, hold on. Let's
get them over here. Wait before you send
rats. We love rats. These are these are
rather large rats. These are rats the
size of a small dog. Those are more
chickens. The chickens. Chickens. It's
not It's not helpful. They're a
distraction, but not a not a good one.
Oh, that's chaos in there. Yeah, I'm
just trying to hide back here.
Get these robots. Is that Is that
everybody? All right, I'm saving. Oh,
no. It's not. It's not everybody.
Very, very not everybody. It's okay.
Um, so while Matt while Matt is off
doing that, that's the other reason that
there there are two of us is that while
Matt is Yes. Um, you know, uh, otherwise
occupied. Uh, Samantha, um, is there any
what what's the one thing that you wish
more people knew about the work the Best
Friends Animal Society does, but you
never get asked, so you never have a
chance to talk. What's that thing? Well,
I I my favorite statistic actually
that's not communityally talk about
because I'm usually talking about cats,
but it is if
6% people in the United States, 6% more
chose to adopt rather than buy, we would
end completely the killing of dogs and
cats in American shelters. Oh man. 6%
more. So if you think, well, it's not
going to make a difference if if just I
decide to adopt, it's not. It is. It is.
Cuz it's just 6% of the people who are
already planning to adopt or get a pet.
Just 6% more and then no dogs or cats
will be killed. That's that's a really
awesome system. And also not something
that's like out of the realm of
possibility, right? Yeah. It's not like
half again. It's it's it's six people
out of every hundred. Yeah. One out of
every 16. like it's not it's not
unreasonable. So if your family is
thinking about getting a pet and you and
you give them that statistic, you say,
you know, you love animals, you don't
want them to be killed. You don't want
dogs and cats to be killed if you if you
adopt one. And you can adopt any kind of
animal. There's so many different ages
and sizes and breeds and looks and
colors and everything. You can find so
many different kinds if you just you
just have to have a little bit of
patience to wait, you know, for that pet
to to come in. But there are different
breed rescues and if you just keep your
eye on it, you can find the exact one
you want. And right now we're in kitten
season. So if you do want a kitten,
there are going to be plenty of kittens
to adopt everywhere all over the country
coming up soon. They're getting almost
to that 8week age and uh there's going
to be a ton. We have an event tomorrow
actually and we're gonna bring a bunch
of kittens there. Yep.
This is a good place to uh pause because
we do need to do a complex guest
transition. Thank you so very much for
joining us for telling everyone about
the work that you all do. You're
welcome. Thank you. So, thank you so
much. Don't thank me. Well, we can all
thank We can all thank chat both Brad
and Janet. Brad is our chat on on if you
heard us saying that that's on Twitch
and Janet is our chat on YouTube. uh
that everyone's been incredibly generous
and it's been lovely. Samantha, thank
you so much and uh keep doing all the
awesome stuff you do. Happy birthday.
Thank you so much. We're super super
grateful and thank you for having me. Of
course. We'll talk to you soon. Bye.
Thanks. Bye. All right. All right. So,
now we've got a complex a complex break
everything. Okay. So, I've got So, he's
getting up in in prep in preparation
because it could go. got I
have I have one in one and one in two.
So, you should be able to just bring
them on. Okay. Okay. And it should work.
If it breaks If it breaks everything,
I'm I'm kind of sorry, but you know,
here comes one. Here comes one.
Okay. We got a Ben. We got a Ben. Let's
see if we can get it out.
Okay. I got to move. I got to move. Cam.
Oh, wait. There's the cat. Oh, man.
There's too many buttons. There we go.
We got both.
Excellent. Hi, gentlemen.
Hello. Hello, uh, gentlemen. It's It's
It's good to be in this here, Pit Boy.
There we go. We're going to move to the
side a little bit to show more. You're
You're our You're our only double today,
and we had to We're like, Screen Real
Estate has never been more valuable.
That's right. Sure. It it it is in fact
the best investment you can make uh with
your digital money is screen real
estate. It turns out
guys, what if I said I would like us to
be even bigger? I feel like we're
bigger. I want to be I'm moving my
camera closer to my face. Yeah, I don't.
Yeah, you would have to do that. You
would have to do what I do like that and
we can all just sort of Although it's
going to block Adam. I'm doing the whole
charity stream like this. That's I think
that is how pit boys would react.
Donate to Best Friends Animal Society
for these beautiful big faces. Uh how
could you say no to them?
Please. All right. Let me let me really
get sit here. There you go. Every
everybody should
donate cause that we are raising money
for raising money for Best Friends
Animal Society. Uh yeah, Samantha from
from Can I bring Mr. Cat in here? Yeah.
Yes, please do. I'm gonna go get him.
We'll talk. Ben, Ben, what's up? How you
doing, buddy? While while Adam goes and
gets uh the kitty. I'm good. I'm good.
We just um got back from Chicago. We
were filming a docu series out there,
which should be a charity done at some
point for animals. I'm getting Mr. Cat.
Oh, can we hear Adam? We can. I think
I'm hearing Adam on stream. Yeah. No, I
I got it. It's okay. Okay, we're good. I
I I have a mute button on the back end,
but keep going. Um, yes, we just got we
we just um were in Chicago uh filming a
docue series about the Are you familiar
with the Chicago annual scavenger hunt,
Matt? No, but I those are all words I've
heard before, just not in that order.
Well, well, oh, Adam's back. We can let
Adam weigh in. Adam was in in fact the
uh the uh showrunner on this project.
Oh, hell yeah.
Hi everybody.
This is Mr. Cat. Mr. Cat is 17 years old
and he has one tooth. Yo, what a tooth
it is.
What a magnificent specimen of tooth
right there. It's one of his front
teeth. It's a little fang right there.
Amazing. Hi, Mr. Cat. Hey, Mr. Cat. Mr.
Cat seems very calm and content and uh
relaxed, which is which is unusual for
him. He's he's often a very grumpy guy,
but he's being good right now. Well, he
knows being good, mister. He knows this
is for a good cause. He knows that we're
raising money for other cats like him.
That's true. That's true. Ben, have we
tweeted? We need to tweet and such to
tell people that we're on this stream.
I retweeted. You retweeted? I'll
retweet. I'll retweet. Thank you very
much, gentlemen. Because again, we've
been talking about we we uh for
instance, we all know that uh money is
tight these days and uh for people that
cannot donate or not financially able
to, the best thing they can do is come
here, hang out or tell people about the
stream itself to get it in front of more
people so we can basically make more
animals lives better. That is the goal
for today. That is why Will and I are in
shiny matching blue vault suits. Yeah,
that's right. Uh, by the way, our next
goal is, of course, $3,500 US, uh,
raised for Best Friend's Animal Society,
at which point we will put on a movie
while we eat dinner. Uh, I will give you
all a hint. Um, this film would be
certainly termed a cult classic uh, and
is one of my favorite movies uh, to bear
that label.
Also, it's in the public domain. That's
how we can play it. It's also in the
public domain. Yeah. We're not we're not
committing open piracy on a charity
stream. No. Um
um that would be irresponsible. Ben and
Adam, how familiar are you? And you guys
are going to pop away for a second, but
you're going to pop back in a minute uh
in another second with with Fallout 4.
Me? Not at all. I I have played maybe
three or 400 hours of that game. Oh,
good. So, you'll Okay, here we go. Let's
Let's um let's do this here real quick.
Uh Ben is still here. I get Adam back in
by doing this. There we go. We're all
here. Cool. Great. Awesome. Yeah. And it
I promise it is not Velociapaster 2.
Although that's what we did last year
was we watched Velocipaster. I think
that's I don't know if you boys are No,
no. Last year was the Lego Star Wars
cutscene compilation. The year before
that was Velocipaster. Um which
is spectacular. No notes. Fantastic.
Velocaptor is in the public domain.
No, that was back when uh Amazon would
let you
you could do a thing called Prime
things. They had they had a thing called
watch parties where we could tell it was
essentially a a syncup where we would
tell people that we were watching
Velociapaster and it would let people
log in to Amazon on their own device and
watch in sync with us. Um, but we would
only actually be broadcasting our faces
while we watch Velocure and there's like
a little applet that let people like
watch them. Um, but they don't do that
anymore because every time they have a
decent idea on Twitch, they evaporate it
uh for some reason. They just they
deprecate all the ideas.
Where are we right now in Fallout? Yeah.
Talk to me. What's going on here? What
is this?
talking about what's happening here. So,
we are we are helping the Brotherhood of
Steel right now uh repower a radio
transmitter so they can get help.
You were kind of near the beginning.
Well, hold on. He The reason why I'm
following Paladin dance, I remember that
name. Um is because when we walked in
here, he's like, "These corporations are
the reason everything went wrong." And I
was like, "Okay, fine. I'm sure the
other foot will will switch." Uh, the
other shoe will drop. I'm a little bit
tired. Um, I think that the shoe will be
on the other foot. Thank you. Thank you.
So, that's where we're at, I guess. Or I
suppose the other shoe will drop, I
suppose. But it could be either one of
those. Yeah.
Um, Jazar guesses it's Night of the
Living Dead. It is not Night of the
Living Dead, though. That's an excellent
film.
Engine control terminal.
Uh, Matt. Yes. Now that now that you
have uh such a steamed company, I'm
going to step away ever so briefly to
fetch a be to refresh my
beverage. Chat,
I
better I don't know which one it's going
to be, but I expect either donations or
no donations. Whichever one gets you to
donate more when I come back up. Wow. Uh
so, so gentlemen, you said you were just
in Chicago.
We just flew back from Chicago and boy
are our arms tired. Is this a project
that you can discuss or not discuss?
I think it's a real thing that occurred.
So, it was it was a public event that
happened. So, I don't think that um we
can really be that secret. Okay.
Um, well, should we should we just
explain what it is? Take it
away. I just got horribly crippled and
that's the only thing that will make me
feel better. Well, this is terrible news
for you. Um, so each year the University
of Chicago puts on the world's largest
annual scavenger hunt. Um, this has been
happening since
1987. And it's an enormous list of over
300 items this year. I believe 346 items
this year. Hell yeah. Um, although it's
not just items. It's it's it's finding
things, but it's also making things and
doing things. You have to record
yourself doing all the things. You have
to record yourself doing many things.
There are many in-person events that you
have to take part in. Much of it takes
place around the campus of Chicago, but
there are some things that will require
you to move about the city and sometimes
further than that.
Um, and yeah, it it was uh it was a it
was a lovely time and we followed three
teams um who were competing in the
scavenger hunt, all made up of students.
Okay. Um three different teams. And you
know, I guess I won't give too much
away, but um I think that it I think
it's going to be a very interesting
What? What is it, mister? Are you
feeling okay? Do you need Do you need to
be a little bit more supported? Do you
want me to hold you like a baby? He is a
baby. 17-year-old baby. He likes it
better. Is that Is that not what you
were hoping for? What were you What were
you hoping for when you were moving
around? He wants He likes to feel
supported. Of course. As we all feel.
How's that? How's that, mister? Is that
better? Ben, you'll notice I've here
when I explained it. I've modded Zoe to
be dog meat. I I' I've se Well, the
thing is I'm seeing about like five
pixels worth of Fallout 4 in your It's
very very difficult to So, I only have
the game.
You can in in this. Are you looking at
the window of everything? Like there's
I've made it full screen. I've made it
full screen, but nonetheless, it's it's
at a very poor resolution on on my end.
It's interesting though because I went
and I pulled up the stream separately on
Twitch and it's crystal clear. Oh, maybe
maybe I should do that. No, but it's
delayed so it'll throw you off. That is
one of the disadvantages of this is
because of the way this technology
works. Um it is a little harder when
there's four of us, right? which is why
um it gets worse for Matt and I seeing
our guests when we're switching between
guests cuz there are extra people in the
room. But it is on my long list of
things to improve for next year. I am
constantly looking to improve uh these
streams and the experience for everyone.
Wait, are you wanting to be in a
different way? Um you
want So Matt, is Dog Meat your companion
of choice here? Yes. I haven't met any
other companions yet, but the only other
mod I did other than turning dog meat
into Zoe is um the fact that uh you
could have multi you can have dog meat
and another companion. Hold on one
second. You want to go you want to go to
the other room, buddy? Okay, you can. Hi
everybody.
Don't drink energy. What if you got me a
coffee with the energy
drinks? Maybe. Maybe. I'm We're raising
money for animals. We'll see if it
happens. Probably. That That mod sounds
like cheating, man. So, fun fact, Ben,
uh, it is, but also the the game was
originally designed with the that in
mind to be the way it is. You're
supposed to always have dog meat and a
companion. Um but but they found that it
made the game too easy
and so they just kind of turned it off
late in development.
Yeah, I that there's a lot of sort of
spaghetti code underlying these games.
That doesn't really surprise me. I don't
know if you guys can tell, but I'm I
mean Mr. Cat when you hold him, I mean
it is crazy how much hair you get on
you. Um, so I'm sort of getting going
absolutely lint roller mode right now.
Um, um, Adam may Adam is doubling. I'm
doubling. That's not your fault. Adam,
give me two seconds and I will fix it
right up if we didn't set it to the
control browser source audio via OBS and
mute it. You got it. This is um this is
my fault. What's happening for what it's
worth um audience is that I waited too
long to sign up for a slot and then the
only slots left um or when the Knicks
are playing tonight um which I have I
have plans to go watch
um thus my incredible outfit here. Um
and so I had to crash Ben's slot
instead. Although this is now tradition,
Adam, talk again.
Yes. Hello. It's me, Adam, from Jetlag
the game. Now they should be uh not
doubling. Okay, great. We have fixed the
problem. Pray we do not fix it further.
Um, okay. So, so Ben, you've played this
game uh 3 to 400 hours, so you say?
Yeah, probably. I could look right now.
It's some unfortunate number, but yes.
Well, that could have gone smoother, but
mission accomplished. Did this Did this
MF just give me You know what? I'm gonna
talk back to this guy. Uh, who's your
companion of choice? Smoother. I thought
we did. Um, maybe this is a boring
answer, but I like the um robot in the
robot DLC. Gotcha. Gotcha. Gotcha. I'm
not certain I could have accomplished
the mission alone. I liked um I liked
the reporter. I'm trying to remember
back when I did it. Um
and constructive criticism is the best
way to detect and mentally. However,
Valentine doesn't diminish your role in
the operation.
Said, I believe we have two important.
First and foremost, I think you'll find
this. May it serve you well in Thank you
for the gift of this righteous authority
laser rifle.
Um, thank you. You're welcome. And
then as far as Sorry, I'm just trying to
get through this nonsense so we can keep
on moving. Uh, Adam, you have never
played a Fallout game. You've got a
choice. I've never played a Fallout
game. Do you want me to walk through
what I know about Fallout? Sure. Okay,
here we go. You ready? Um, I know that
it takes place after sort of a nuclear
uh world ending event, I believe. Right.
Am I correct about this? Yes. I know
that there's that little blonde guy that
loves doing that thumbs up. I know that.
Yep. Um, I know that uh I know that uh
there's that Walton Gogggins is in the
TV show about it. Yep. And I know that
also the the lady from uh Yellow Jackets
is in that show. And then that's the end
of what I know.
I mean, that's a lot. I know. Well, I I
pretty much have have it all down.
That's the entirety of the thing. Uh oh,
man. I don't know anything about that
show. Have you watched that show? It's
excellent. It's surprisingly excellent.
It's excellent. It look everyone
rightfully so thought that it was going
to be hot garbage when you're making a
Fallout show. It was an absolute
delight. Everyone understood the
assignment. I cannot sing that show's
praises enough. Wow. Okay. Wow.
Uh I'm going to wear a dirty army
helmet. And I I know I should wear the
leather chest piece for protection. I
kind of just want to wear a tuxedo. I
want to feel fancy. It's my birthday. Uh
uh now I'm the guy from PUBG.
Yeah, that's it. Um Casey over on
YouTube chat says that they know
everything they know about Fallout from
H Bomber Guys video essays. There we go.
That's fair. It's valid. That's a you
know I feel like there are there are a
number of things which I have never
interacted with directly but in some
sort of semifugue state while I cannot
sleep have put on any number of of docu
series or documentaries or whatever um
and absorbed approximate knowledge of
some of it right and so I feel like I
could be in a room when people are
talking about speedrunning or the the
deep lore of Fallout or whatever and I
won't be lost but I have nothing useful
to contri contribute to the
conversation. Sure. Sure. Sure.
What was that? It's true. In my in my
head, I'm like, I love Fallout New
Vegas, but then I realize I've never
once played it and I just have watched a
lot of videos about it. He is one of Oh,
I was going to say I went back and
restarted it um with some mods and stuff
and it is excellent, but it also is
still it does sadly everybody I will say
it feels a little dated. Uh cuz it is
but it it's it's just one of those
things when you've been playing
something uh like modern RPGs that it's
hard to get through. I I find it hard to
get through even though the story is one
of the best. Well, and I think that
that's one of the such the unique things
about video games, right? that like
because there is more to it than one
person can probably reasonably
experience, right? There there becomes
this shortening of the media in a way
that doesn't really hold for other
stuff. Like you wouldn't shorten like I
don't know Lord of the Rings or uh
either the movie or the book, right? And
then you would like you would go and and
experience that media for yourself.
video games. There's just too much
media. Yeah. In like one package to get
all of it. Dragon lady. Oh my god.
Dragon lady, you did. Okay. Yep. No.
Yeah. You were in the water. You were in
the water. Crab. Crab. It's a crab
wearing a bus.
Yeah. And spewing eggs. Oh my god. I
didn't realize it spewed eggs. That
didn't show up during testing. Nope. Um,
okay. Okay. Well, Matt's in a world of
trouble because there's a crab wearing a
bus. It's a hermit crab. It's its home.
Yes. I remember that in the game. That
is I think one of the DLCs.
Uh I also believe that you cannot hurt
it on the part that is covered behind.
Of course. Of course. Why would you?
That makes no sense. Okay, I'm going to
run out of ammo so hard here. list.
Uh, YouTube chat is suggesting that I
may be incorrect that they think many
people read summaries of Lord of the
Rings, possibly the book or the the book
or the movie. And and I think that
that's certainly true and maybe Lord of
the Rings is difficult for me because um
it's media that I have engaged with
deeply and
has changed the way that I think about
the world. Well, I was going to say
famously those movies were shortened
because there are very very long
versions of them. Yeah, that's correct.
I And I suppose I forget the theatrical
movies. By the way, you did just get off
screen. So, while it is inconvenient,
you may want a quick save here. Uh,
Matt, yes. Do you mind if I ask you a
few questions here? Absolutely. I I will
my answers will be terrible, but I would
welcome them. Okay. Um, what what is
what are you shooting at? You keep
shooting. So that is a giant hermit crab
uh wearing a bus
if someone could turn it to daytime. It
might be easier for Ben and Adam to see
slightly.
Uh they can with their with their
donations turn it to daytime.
I see. Am I out of ammo? Okay. So I can
barely make out this hermit crap now. I
see. Oh okay. Oh hello. So this is
apparently how we get people to donate
money. Yes. Yes. We just we just now I
want them to make it night. Make it
night again. Make it night. Make it
night. Make it night. Make it night. And
then you know what demand's going to
come next. Make it night. Make it night.
Also, the best part about this is this
is distracting Matt while he is in a
fight that he is in no way equipped for
or prepared for. Um because I want to
win though. He has a dinky little gun
and is Thank you for the potato
explosion, dragon lady. That is not
helpful.
Matt, have you considered locking in?
Oh. Uh, uh, not right away. You know, I
think he's got a point. I think Adam's
got a point. No, consider merely locking
in night again. Make it day again. I
can't see. Make it day. I can't see.
That's true. I can't see now. Can
somebody make it day again?
This is genius.
They'll never catch on. I love this
comment from Twitch chat. I read a
summary of The Hobbit movies. It was
called The Hobbit by JRR Tolken.
It's impact Zoey. Sorry.
All right. Where is this hermit crab?
Uh,
I don't know. If somebody were to make
it day again, maybe we could see where
the hermit crab is. It's outrageous that
nobody is making it day. Can someone
please make it day for God's sake? I
love I love that this is consistent, by
the way. That this is just the
experience of having Ben and Adam on. Oh
no, now it's raining. Now, now it's
raining. And that's not what we asked.
That's fine, but make it day if you you
can make it rain, but it has to be
during the day. This crab turn. This
crab is dead and floating. What other
things can the audience summon, Matt?
Oh,
they can summon. Uh, well, let's let's
look at the menu. Well, actually, Matt,
let me ask you a related question. So,
okay. Thank somebody made a day again.
Um, thank you for that, Matt. I have a
question for you. Yes. Um, what would
you say is the most inconvenient thing
that the audience could do to you right
now? That's a great question.
Um, what is the most inconven Are these
good rats or bad rats? Okay, they're
good rats. Uh, what's the most
inconvenient thing? Okay. Okay. I don't
want this. This is not dragon lady. I'm
I'm looking at you. This is not an
invitation right now. There is something
for an exorbitant amount of money where
you can turn Oh, thank you for the 100
harpoons. I don't know if I have a
harpoon gun. Uh, where you can turn one
of my stats to zero or to one. Right
now, someone has upped my charisma. I
might have done it to nine. I would not
love that. What? Just Oh. Oh, someone a
rat while I was in my do that. Good. I
like that. That is that is also the
other thing is that
um because of the nature of like the the
quick save and such uh we've made it
incredibly easy to get back killed. Um
so inconvenient is often at that moment
summon a large number of enemies to just
ambush Matt wherever he is. There's one
that summons a a horde of 30 zombies
essentially called gh.
Um
okay let me I'm I'm I'm going to do a
little bit of work behind the scenes
here. We only have a few minutes left
before it's time for us to leave. Not
the back rat while menuuing. Correct.
The back rat while menuuing. Uh, truly a
legend. Somebody make a day, please.
It's so dark. I can't see. I can't see.
I love I love, by the way, that it
wasn't the hermit crab. No, it is
summoned. It was the rat while he wasn't
paying attention. Also, the drones were
different. Also, that crab ate a garden
gnome.
All right, I'm going to go into my
inventory. Please,
you should also probably save. Kill
Matt. Kill Matt right now. Could
somebody make it, guys? I can't see
anything. Could somebody please make it
day and then kill Matt? Also, I love how
uh Ben and Adam are essentially serving
as additional debuffs for Matt during
all of this.
I'm trying to Well, this is very tricky.
It's true. It is. I'm trying to get
involved in this crowd control thing and
it's it's it's making it very hard for
me. Yeah, I have I have heard reports
that it has been harder than usual
today, which I do apologize. Uh it
didn't show up during setup,
but I guess that's just how the jets
lag. Wow, true. Wow. So, thanks YouTube.
Appreciate y'all. Thanks. Well, there's
a settlement over there, I'm sure. Oh,
is that where I came from? I'm sure it's
ina. I think I did it. Okay.
Have you ever set up the settlement on
the on the island? I like doing that
one. No, that is good. I I've wanted to.
I've never actually I haven't done much
of this. I did I did basically uh really
made sanctuary a good home for a while
and then I didn't really do other ones
elsewhere.
Boring. I know. You should do the
island. How what's the coin what's the
coin to dollar ratio here? 100 coins to
a dollar.
Okay, so each coin is a penny. Um, we
did get a really excellent question uh
which maybe um we're we're uniquely
positioned to answer uh thanks to Ben's
development um which is what are the
special stats and why are they
important? Um and I only know enough to
be like they're important because
they're what lets you do things, but I
don't know how or why. So can can either
you or Matt speak to that? Yes. The the
special stats. Mhm.
It's just like any RPG where you have
like I don't know in F it's like in
eight or nine different stats that you
can increase like intelligence,
charisma, strength, things like that.
And then the more of like each of those
has like a particular
uh like thing like a like a particular
benefit that the higher the stat the
more so like the higher your charisma
stat like the lower prices are going to
be on the whole but then also the higher
the stat the like better skills you can
get that are associated with that stat.
That sounds really boring when I explain
it like that. That's a fun video. That's
all right. I'm not prepared to fight
this. Uh, thank you for that $25. I'm
not prepared to fight this these super
mutants. I just don't think I'm geared
up enough. Uh oh. Um, given that you got
absolutely obliterated by a single
rocket from one of them. That seems
correct.
I feel like Adam while he's looking away
uh is is trying to make my day worse,
but better at the same time. Yeah. Um,
that just means we need more rats.
That's true. Um,
Adam, is there an option to summon a
death claw? Oh, okay. Let me take a
look. There's a friendly one and a bad
one. Oh, is this normal that the guests
will try to mess with you or is this
just something that we This is something
that you have um you have coined and
continued. Uh some people have followed.
Okay, so
it spawned some Oh, my buddy Nick
spawned chickens and now the wolves are
eating the chickens. Excellent. Great.
The circle of life. I recall last year
we were playing Elden Ring and I bought
$20 worth of rats. That is correct. We
actually in many ways this year's theme
is to some extent inspired by that. Um
we made Rad rats quite cheap to summon
um because they don't follow Matt. They
just sort of stay in the area and get
angry at anything that gets near them.
So, so let's if if y'all want to throw
rats at this problem, I'll go into this
settlement and we'll see if enough rats
can take out. I'm gonna I'm gonna make
it day. Perfect. There we go. Thank you,
Adam Chase. There's one of the chickens
way down the distance. And
so, um, let's take a look here. Wait
till we get inside to spawn those rats.
It'll be good if I can lure them out
because the rats won't leave.
rats. Hold on. Let's I need to get into
this place first. That might be one of
our favorite guest quotes, by the way,
is Ben, last year I bought $20 worth of
rats. That's what I would it be helpful
to you if I sent you five chickens. Uh,
not terribly.
Okay. Well, I'm going to go ahead and do
it anyway. Okay, great. There they are.
They're in here. They're They're moving
though. Very good. Actually, they may
serve as a distraction.
I need to I need some Did they see me?
Oh god, what is happening? What? Okay,
that was a good choice.
Oh god. Uh, hide. Hide. Let the wolves
do the work. Scorpion. There's rat. Oh,
those are bad. Okay. All right. Well,
well, you did kill Mad. I died a
horrible death. Oh, he did. Great. Okay.
Um.
Oh, and you saved right here. I did. Oh,
lovely. Okay, I can get away if I needed
to. Yeah, it's it's I have to be totally
transparent with you that it's really
hard for you to tell what things on this
item are good or bad.
Uh, some of them should have like
hostile or friendly. I see that. Okay.
Um,
Ben, can you look through the menu and
you tell me what you think the best
thing for me to do here is? I haven't
even been able to figure out getting the
menu up. You got much further than me.
Okay. Uh, so I would say just follow
your heart. Yeah, pretty much anything.
Anything you see, we we've made we've
tried to make all of them interesting.
Anything that was boring, uh, we
removed. Um, because I'm googling stuff
here.
I thought I had that. Uh, that death is
probably a good time for us to because
our next guest is ready. Um, also Ramon,
thank you so much for those $100. Thank
you so much for the donate and dash.
Deeply appreciate it. Oh, it's daytime.
Okay, great. Now I'm gonna do my thing
here. All right, get one more in for
Adam. Oh, boy. What happened? A gulper.
A lot of Oh, okay. No, that's a good Oh,
they're fighting. Let them fight. Yeah,
you got to get out of there.
[Music]
I see who your next guest is, and I'm
very excited for the future of this
stream.
Okay. I also would like to share that I
keep ordering things and it keeps not
charging me. So, I don't know what the
deal is there. Some some things there's
like a a behind thescenes cool down um
that it's messing with. I'm not entirely
sure on all of it. Um as much as we use
this system once a year, we only use it
once a year. So, I don't have full
knowledge of it. Like I said, I have
of many things. Gentlemen, thank you
once again for make bringing the day and
the night and a lot of uh of my death
for a good cause. Uh real quick shout
outs. Anything you want to shout out
before you leave.
I'd like to give a big shout out to Ben
um who is my dear friend. And I would
love to shout out Adam who is also my
dear friend and does a lot of great work
on various things that we do which you
should watch. There we go. You know
where to find them. They're everywhere.
They're ubiquitous with the internet.
Ubiquity. All right, gentlemen. Thank
you so much. It means the world that you
that you came and stopped by. Uh we'll
talk to you soon, guys. Bye. Thank you.
All right. Hold on. Hold on. Hold on.
Okay. Okay. Good. Good. Good. With that,
we have our next guest added into the
scene. Are we ready? Yes.
There he is. Oh, [ __ ] They could see
me. What's
happening? What is happening, y'all?
What up, buddy?
I'm good. It's good to see you yet
again. Um, and I mean, nobody could get
enough mad.
Um, what is going on? Like I just jumped
into something that What are you all
What are you all fighting a lot? Well,
first and foremost, uh tell the people
at home who you are and all the
wonderful things you do. Big up
yourself. Um I am foreign uh from the
channel Foreign Man in a Foreign Land. I
also live stream at Foreign Fridays. Uh
I am a part of the Nebula fan and that's
how I got introduced to the lovely uh
Extra Credits. Um, and and yes, I I
haven't had I haven't had the pleasure
of meeting you yet. I I How you doing?
Howdy. I'm well. I am well. Uh, I do all
of our live stream stuff. Matt's the one
that does the the melodious voice stuff
and the the show running. And if it's
live and generally full of chaos, bad
puns, and tech problems, uh, it's my
fault. Well, no. The problem aren't his
fault. The solutions are I'm the
problem. It's me. I can't I caused just
as many problems as you. I just fixed
them before you noticed them. Okay. As
someone that live streams, you you're a
godsend. So, pick up yourself. Like,
seriously, this is very difficult. I
need a you um preferably in the Bahamas.
So, yeah, I need that. I have been
thinking about relocating. Maybe we
should talk. Aren't Aren't y'all all I
mean just Yeah, a little bit. Little
bit.
I was just there and I actually got
stopped in TSA. That's a funny story
that I like to tell now. Um, they took
my phone, they took my phone and they
did the thing, the whole rigomearoo. Um,
Oh no. Yeah. I got it back thankfully
and I didn't I locked it so they
couldn't use my face to open it up. So,
I guess if they found out my my social
media, they would absolutely, you know,
they probably wouldn't let let me go.
Uh, but yeah. Um, on you for for
thinking for forward thinking in that in
that case. Yeah, it's unfortunate we got
to. Yeah, I know, right? Uh, also, uh,
we just got a $50 dono. What just
happened? Indeed. I'm gonna call that
out here in a second. Also, chat, in 10
minutes, I'm going to do another pair of
giveaways. So, make sure you are
exclamation mark giveaway to enter. Put
your name and your email address and the
form and I'll tell you if you've won a
thing. And we're going to be doing that
in 10 minutes. And this time, we're
going to be giving away I have to load
my giant spreadsheet. Oh, yeah. What are
we giving away? I got things for
everything. Uh, we're gonna give away
two copies of Realms of Pugmire by our
good friend Eddie Webb, courtesy of the
folks over at Onyx Path Publishing. You
will need a drive-through RPG account,
but they're free. Um, so uh we'll we'll
give you all of the information uh for
that uh if you win. All right, I'll put
some time on the timer once we're there.
Also, we did crack another $250, which
means Zoe, my cat, gets a treat. So,
let's see if I can actually lure her to
the So, you might notice uh for uh they
unlocked at $1,000 the cat fallout
shelter, which is below me. Zoe's not
here right now. That's my foot. Uh but
I'm going to see if I can lure her back
for free. Yeah. Right. Right. He's just
out here giving giving away the gripper.
Pause. Everyone
um so to answer the rest of the question
uh of what we're doing and what we're
fighting, um Matt is sort of attempting
to make his way through Fallout 4. Have
you played Fallout 4?
The fact that you assume that it's wild.
No, I've never I Is that like the little
guy that'd be like the pitbull that guy?
Um, so, uh, it's that series. Um, so
Matt is, uh, running around the
wasteland of Boston after a nuclear
apocalypse. You're going to need to
adjust. I'm going to I'm gonna fix his
camera right now. That's me. No, no, you
you stay sitting so I know where to put
it. Uh you're the tallest uh in relative
to frame of all of our guests so far. My
name is Big Body. It it comes with the
territory.
Uh so uh the the the twist here is that
people who donate can summon things to
help or hinder Matt. So for instance,
one of our very generous donors just
summoned a hermit crab so big it uses a
bus as a shell and Matt had to fight it.
Um, so yeah, it's it's and there's all
kinds of because it's in a
post-apocalyptic like nuclear wasteland,
there's all kinds of like um mutated
stuff and zombies and everything. So,
um, some of chat's helping Matt, some of
chat's hurting Matt, but either way,
everyone's just trying to watch Matt run
around and scream a bunch. Uh, which
we're accomplishing. So, jobs are good.
That is correct. Wow, that was They
should put you on PR. They should put
you on payroll for for PR for Fallout
cuz I never played it but now I want to
play it. Oh boy. Someone summoned a
giant cow. No, no, no. Oh, is that the
angry brahman? Yeah, that's the angry
brahman. This [ __ ] scary, is it? Um,
okay. We got this. Reminds me of Halfife
a little bit. Yeah, the look of where we
are right now feels that way.
Hold on. These super mutants are getting
me. Come on. Come on. Don't run away.
What just I'm trying to I'm going to
just like [ __ ] like spam every
everything that I got real quick with
this link so the people could take a
part of this Fallout Joy which No,
please. Yes. And that's what we're
saying to everybody. We know for
instance we're doning money for Best
Friends Animal Society. We know money is
tight for everyone these days and we
really appreciate that people cannot
donate to just to share these links of
this stream of this madness that we are
doing. Um so more people can get aware
that it's happening. My brain is crying.
How long have y'all been streaming? I
think the game just crashed since since
11. So we're on hour 4. We're going to
go till about midnight our time. So it's
going to be about 12 to 13 hours total.
You're wild for that. I could only do
two minutes before like the like the
lower the lumbar of my box decides, you
know, protest against me. So, I don't
know who spawned what, but it did crash
the game. Uh, Spicy Fairy, thank you for
that $25. Zoe is back in her in her den
right here. That's good. I I think I'm
going to say that uh I'm surprised it
took four hours for the game to crash to
be totally fair. A thousand%. All right,
so let's see here. Yeah. Uh, yeah, chat
live. Will tech question real quick and
then I I have a question for foreign. Uh
tech question. If I I'm going to launch
the game through crowd control because
the because the session is still live.
Correct. Yes, that's that should be
correct. You should be able to rehook it
into the same session. And if you don't,
then we can cancel the session and start
again. But it shouldn't need to. Crowd
control's gotten a lot more stable than
it was the first year we did this with
Dark Souls and everything blew up.
That's true.
Uh oh, y'all are experts at this [ __ ]
Like honest to God.
Uh,
I just put it in my I just put it in my
Discord and I'm trying to spam it. Um, I
put it on on my uh community tab too on
my lo my cuz I just finished streaming
so ADHD brain is like all over the
place. So, forgive me. No, no, thank you
for Thank you for spamming it. It does
mean a lot. I understand that feel by
the way. The I'm done streaming. Now
what? And your brain is just like
nothing now. You're like but I had so
many things that I wanted to do after
stream.
Adam Chase, our boy, just wrecked me
with rats. I saw his name pop up.
Wrecked. He also summoned the giant cow,
by the way. Adam is out here doing a lot
of work. Chaos. All right, I'm going in.
Um, yeah, I have been doing it for Oh
god. Yeah, this is
year
seven. Seven. Yeah, this is seven years.
This super mutant is carrying a nuke. Oh
god.
Yeah, it's just up. Um, you had a
question before, but I'm going to ask
for a question while you're busy
fighting all the uh, what do you stream?
And then secondarily, what kind of video
games do you play? H, so Nintendo fanboy
right now. I don't know if you can see
it, but I have that right there. So that
means that I'm a satist. Um, I like I I
like pain obviously. Um, I mean I I've
been getting into like I just bought
like a PS5 which was just like an
impulse kid buy. I got to get your
account. We got to friend up on that.
Play some stuff. Yes. And recommend me
games because I just did that of boy
like you know I just got into that. I
cry profusely. No Chris Judge carries
that game. His performance.
Yeah. You see you're a capital G now cuz
I I'm assuming that's a voice actor.
Yeah. Yeah. It's It's the actor who
plays um It's the actor who plays in the
Someone just make it foggy or is they
uh No, no, that's that's someone making
it foggy. You're also covered in blood
because the rats are coming for you. So,
you know, don't The rats are coming for
you is a sentence I didn't expect. Well,
I I can't.
All right. I like I like By the way,
chat, good job with the combination of
fog and rats. I feel like everyone's
really getting their Yeah. Right. Yeah.
small fastoving objects and foggy very
difficult to deal with.
Um, okay. So, so you've played Nintendo,
you just got a PS5, you finished a boy.
What's your favorite Nintendo franchise?
Do you have one that you particularly
enjoy? I mean, I I'm definitely like a
Breath of the Wild type of guy. I enjoy
Zelda like a lot. I And to your other
question about like streaming, so I
wanted for my gaming type cuz I more so
like do like commentary streams, but I
wanted to do some gaming stuff, but it's
really difficult. apparently I'm
learning to stream Nintendo games
because they hate us so vehemently like
copyright strikes apparently um the
apparatuses in itself like trying to
hook up a Nintendo Switch to stream and
doing all of that is just not coded for
an online experience and I didn't really
realize that until I started the stream
like even Mario Kart has like a dog tail
well actually this is a no dog's good
especially for the stream like I was
more was saying like dog poop tier uh
level online experience. There's no
chat. There's like very bare bones like
they're still standing on the globe when
it's Mario Kart. There's nothing. So
like I've been trying to figure out like
why are there not enough Nintendo
streamers or at least I don't know
about. It's because of that. So trying
to figure out y'all are big gamers. Like
maybe y'all could help me with that. No.
Um I think one of the um one of the big
things is uh lots of people have tried
to mod Nintendo games. They've like gone
and they've said, "Cool. It's a Nintendo
game. I get that. I'm going to put mods
in." And Nintendo's been super copyright
strike happy against them. Um,
Matt, you did make it. I did what? Oh, I
can't cam. Sorry. Sorry. I'm trying. I
know. He's just getting mulched over and
over here. This is top tier content. Um,
this is great. That's a big part of it.
The other part of it, um, I did a talk
on this and I need to redo that talk
because it's changed some. Um, you see
how in this game like there's a place
where I can sit, right? So like on the
game screen I'm in between the compass
and the HP bar, right? Um, and Matt's in
between uh or I'm between, you know, two
different pieces and Matt's between two
pieces and you're over a piece, but we
made that choice intentionally. Um, you
can't do that with Nintendo games cuz
every corner is important and it's not
designed to like put a camera in any
game or it's not designed with streaming
it in mind. It's designed with a very
different sensibility. So, like that's a
whole problem, too. I totally feel that
though. I've I've tried to do some
Nintendo games and it's been hit and
miss. What do you think about the Switch
2 coming? I'm I'm excited for We're
excited. We're trying to get them.
That's the thing. Yeah, we apparently
can't get them. Um, and that's that's
okay, I guess. Like, it's not it's not
like Mario Kart World is going to be
worse after launch. Um, it's I'm so
looking forward God Adam.
I appreciate the generosity of all the
money towards saving animals while using
animals to wreck me. Yeah, this is
great. Um, this is this is pretty good.
Uh, well, you see, Adam's not debuffed
by being on stream anymore. So, um,
yeah, we're trying to get him. Uh,
really excited to play it. Uh, I think
the text packs look good. I'm very much
looking forward to the it actually
having more horsepower when docked cuz
the other one, like the dock doesn't do
anything. It's just like a plast. A hunk
of plastic and like a little box on the
back doesn't help you at all. And at
least doc does.
Dragon lady just spawned. If I can like
knock this down, I get something good.
I didn't think we could. Is there a
chance that any spawn comes to
legendary?
Oh, that's wild. Oh, come on. I don't
want to die. I don't want to die. I
don't want to die. Oh, there are the
rats. Legendary enemy has mutated. Yes.
What console is this that y'all are
playing this on? Like Steam. Okay. It's
ah you see, so like that's another
thing. Like I I'm not even in the PC
masteries. I'm a Mac guy. Uh no, it's
funny. So I used to be very much a Mac
guy cuz it's just better for work. Um
but I want to also stream. Uh I don't
know where the body of this thing is and
I want its loot so bad. What just
happened? I'm saving.
Okay, hold on. Thank you for the sim
pack. Uh, dragon.
Where's the body of that legendary
monster?
Marty's leather chest piece plus one.
There we go.
That is actually going to keep me from
dying a lot.
Um, yeah. So, it is much harder on PC,
although or on Mac, excuse me. Um,
although if you're going to do console
stuff, it's more or less the same,
right? OBS runs regardless. You can plug
a capture card in regardless. It's just
that the games don't run on Mac, so
that's a little harder, obviously. Um,
take care of that. God, I'm getting
distracted by all of the weird stuff
happening on that screen. Uh, this is
made for me, ADHD core, cuz I mean,
like, you're hosting, Matt is getting
wrecked by rats. This is like I know I
know my target. I got to provide stimuli
constantly, but they're right. You got
to If anyone's feeling generous, I could
use some rad away.
As you can see, uh it's hard to see uh
for and it's behind you. My hit points.
You get radiation poisoning and you
can't heal as much when you have
radiation poisoning.
Oh, thank you. With that rat away,
there's a lot of there's a lot of lore
that comes with Fallout. I was expecting
to see the little guy with the thumb. I
haven't seen him yet. Oh, here. This
seems very different. Hold on. Oh, here
he is. Let's level up. Okay, that's a
real thing cuz I got some levels. Um, so
he This is Vault Boy. He's the mascot
for the VaultTech company, which is the
uh mythical company that made all of
these nuclear Fallout vaults that people
have been hiding in. Um, and so, uh, all
of this is all essentially corporate
propaganda that the, um, that the player
engages with, uh, in different ways.
And, um, we're wearing, uh, the same
like suit that he wears. Oh, you are.
Yeah. As an committed, I
This was the, uh, the $2,500
uh, prize was the costume change.
This is um, this is a polyester hoodie.
It's a It's comfortable. It's shiny and
does not breathe. You look like
invincible. Yeah, a little bit. Yeah.
Yeah. All right. Uh uh Foren, out of all
of these uh stats, strength, perception,
endurance, charisma, intelligence,
agility, or luck, what should I up? Oh
man, that's a lot of um knowing about
the game. Just just it doesn't matter
like what actually does. I'm a strength
guy. I would go with strength. Hopefully
that that bodess well for the future.
We're going to do Iron Fist. Channel
your Cheeto. Unleash devastating fury
punches. Do 20% more damage to your
opponents. Also, thank you. We just I
can't see that donation. Well, it's too
small right now. That was immortal with
$15.89 taking us to $3,77.3.
Thank you for telling me. Thank you.
Thank you. That is team order. Oh, also
foreign. We do team order and team chaos
here. Okay. So, I have team order,
meaning I like the donation number to be
exactly where it is right now. It's
3,77 and 3 cents. So, it's
307703, right? Like like it's a it's
even, right? And I would like it to be
some random pile of numbers so that
someone will donate to make it even
again. See, I'm evil that way. Wow,
you're all raw. Okay, there's levels to
this because like no after just starting
to stream about like maybe a few couple
months ago now and it's fun. Like I
think I'm right now my partner uh
partner application at Twitch just got
denied because apparently you need to
keep the VODs up and they said hey you
don't have VODs. I was just like y'all
didn't tell me that [ __ ] But also VODs
down they just Yeah, they just Okay.
Yeah. Yeah. They they well so they just
made it so they u it used to be that you
could like highlight a stream and you
could say this is a this is an important
stream I want to keep it. Um and there
didn't used to be a limit on that uh and
they were like yeah you could just put
up however many and then all of a sudden
they were like hey you know how we said
that you could uh you could keep them up
forever. We lied. you have a month to
get all of to get under a 100 total
hours of highlights. And for us, we've
been streaming here for 7 years. Um, it
was
3,500 hours of content that I had to go
through and pull down off the web and
archive. Uh, and that was the least fun
I've had over a weekend in a long time.
So, if you if you leave it up, what is
the what is the penalty? Well, uh, well,
they threatened to just randomly start
deleting stuff until we had less than
100 hours. Um, cow. Uh, so I had Yeah,
friendly cow. So, I had to pull out. So,
what they want now is for your not the
highlighted VOD, but for the There's a
there's a tick box. Um, I think my uh
Discord's in the signup sheet. If you
hit me up on Discord, I can talk you
through where it is. Oh, for sure. God
damn. Yeah, it's y'all have been do
y'all are definitely veterans at this
[ __ ] We've been going for a minute.
Seven years is mad. Like, and uh we're
still finding new things to do. Like uh
this week I'm playing my um my first run
of Final Fantasy 6 uh which is going to
be a lot of fun cuz apparently it has
the best villain to ever be in a Final
Fantasy game. Uh well, I'm going to say
second best and a whole bunch of people
are going to fight me and then we're
going to have a nerd fight about it and
it's going to be great. Um, shower. I I
always realize how lowerase gamer
lowercase G gamer I am when real gamers
are in the room. So, I just like sit
quiet and I soak this [ __ ] up because I
mean like this your hosting I only know
about this like kind of tangentally
because of being around Matt, but your
hosting reminds me of uh what's it
what's it called? The D the Dungeons and
Dragon ship. Oh yeah, we'll get you. And
like I well you've been trying to get me
in Matt has been literally evangelizing
uh Dungeons and Dragon. I know what that
is. I only seen it like in a King of the
Hill episode. So like I was just like ra
I don't know much about it. I'll
probably be ruined in it. Matt's been
trying to convert me though. Yeah. Um uh
so I I'm a push back, right? You say
that you're lowercase G gamer, but
you're out here trying, right? You are
out here enjoying your Nintendo games.
You're out here, you have a favorite
franchise, you are engaging with it, you
are eager to learn more, you're doing
it. That's all that we need, right? Like
I think a lot of people in the game.
Yeah. I think a lot of people are like,
"Oh, you need to have played XYZ QRS."
And you're like, "No, like it's okay.
Think about it this way. Do you are you
not a lover of music if you only listen
to one genre or you have favorite band?"
Right. Yeah. Like of course you you love
music, right? as an idea. You might have
a favorite that you go to, but in this
games are just like that. Um, you play
games that all you're a gamer. In fact,
uh, there's a wonderful
statistic. One of the most commonly
overlooked groups of people when we talk
about the average gamer is middle-aged
housewives playing games on their phone.
That's actually one of the biggest
demographics of people, and they're also
one of the biggest spending groups of
people for the games industry. So,
I got distracted by someone putting this
two-headed cow here. Yeah. So, like the
a like gamer really means far more than
we give it credit to. I didn't even
think a phone gamer actually. Yeah. But
they are you don't think about it, but
that's there's so many people like the
the the
the user base is so much larger than any
console. Yeah. And I always got people
like when I bring up the fact that I
play Nintendo games, like they already
discredit me as potential as a gamer
because like it's not a serious console
apparently. You know, Breath of the Wild
is is absolutely wild. Uh there was a
speedrunner who got invited uh they're a
content creator, so they got invited to
big enough to get invited to the Switch
2 event, like the physical inerson
event. And there's a limited amount of
time that you get to play on the Switch
2 at these events, right? They're like
they're like, "All right, you get 30
minutes, but the Switch 2 has all of the
games installed, right? So, um, it has
the full version of the Switch 2 version
of Breath of the Wild installed on the
Switch 2." And he was like, "All right,
bet." And beat the game during his
session by running directly for Ganon
and beating Ganon Bacon with a pot lid
and like a sword. He No way. Yeah. No, I
got to see that. I got to see. Who is
this man? I I don't even remember who it
is because the that's that's the
speedrun record. Like you can look up
all of the speedrun records, right?
Nintendo games are difficult and deep
and complex and have a rich history and
I think it's um like discounting
Nintendo games is doing a great
disservice to the people who play them
and love them. Yeah. Also, Connor, thank
you for that $25. That was very
generous. Conor, thank you. Um
speedrunners are in fact a different
breed. They are. They are wild. Yes. And
also I agree with Cake. People who say
Nintendo isn't real games need more
whimsy in their lives. Also true. Not
all games have to be grim dark. Whenever
in the year 2027 when we're all able to
get Switch 2 for we got to get you. I
have a dream of doing like the 25.
There's 24 people. Um Oh, I ran out of
ammo at the perfect time. Reload faster.
No, there's no ammo to reload. I have
nothing. Okay. Um, I want to I want to
get the whole Nebula crew who has Switch
Twos and like actually like stream a the
dumbest the dumbest stream possible of
everyone racing. Yeah. Oh, I'm so down
for that. If you get Jesse Gender in
there cuz cuz that woman right there, I
tell you that she
absolutely demoralized me in Super Smash
Bros. She did not disclose a power
level. So, like I just innocently got
into a game with Jesse Jender and we're
just playing on her stream and like she
let me win like the first round and then
she repeatedly marshed me. I was I was
repeatedly committing suicide by the end
of the match cuz I was trying to I was
just trying to run the clock. I was just
like, "No, no way. I would rather die
this way." Because like she then
discloses to me. She's like, "Yeah, my
ex was a pro gamer." I was like, "Now
you tell me. Now you tell me." after
like my ego has been plummeted on a
Friday. So that means the whole weekend
I was in bed like thinking about my life
cuz I identify as a Super Smash Bro like
you know soda popping. Yeah. You know
like I identify as one. I might not be
one but like I I really do I see myself
as one and like she just ruined that
dream. Oh my lord. So she got to be in
that. Uh she was just on she was on uh
three guests ago, two guests ago.
Everything's bleeding together. Some
number of guests ago. Hey, there's a She
took my time. She messaged me and her
switch. I got right off my stream and
then I looked at my um Discord and then
she was just like, "Hey, I'm flying. Can
I take your time?" And because I love
Jesse sometimes more than I love myself,
I was just like, "Yeah, go for it." I
said, "I'll be there for three." Yeah, I
very much appreciate you guys. You You
both took care of that behind the
scenes. I We were having a slight
technical hiccup while that was going on
and I didn't see any of that. So you
guys dealing with that was very very
very helpful. Jesse messaged me Grizz um
behind the scenes, right? And this this
just kind of goes to like the whole like
there's more to streaming than people
realize. So um so much more when we're
streaming, whoever's on and and this is
deep lore that a lot of people don't
know. Whoever's on the left is the
streamer, right? Matt is broadcasting.
But Matt's not running this call. I'm
running this call from my PC and I'm
giving all of the relevant info to Matt.
So, Jesse messaged me so that I would
know what to do when she popped in
instead of you, right? And like it's one
of the reasons why this only works as a
twoerson operation cuz I I can't like we
did this backwards for my birthday. I
played uh Luigi's Mansion actually with
crowd control. Such a good game. And um
imagine trying to fight uh King Buu at
the very end and chat makes you go first
person. Like they can force you out of
the game and into first person. Oh, it's
wild. I didn't know that they could do
that. I didn't know that you had all of
this like different um ways of like So
y'all are breaking my brain with like
the stream integration because like
y'all really go in depth. This is a
whole production. Like I don't know if
they realize multiple tasks.
Yeah, we've spent probably eight hours
this week doing tech alone before the
start. Oh, I got to step I got to step
my [ __ ] up. Oh, this is this is some
different level [ __ ] Anytime you want
to talk tech, I am always happy to like
for you on Discord. We'll talk
you you can block me, bro. Like, no.
Always happy to talk because uh I got
helped out a lot when I started, right?
Um, and I just consider it paying it
forward, right? Like streaming only
works if everybody like learns all of
the weird tips and tricks cuz there is
no like school of streaming, right? All
of us figuring out stuff for ourselves
and then passing. Matt, it is 3:30 and
our next guest is ready. And did we do
the giveaway yet? Uh, we have not yet
done the giveaway. So, we're going to
when we go back to the big screen to
switch guests. Okay, here we go. Going
back to the big screen to switch guests.
Ford, thank you so much for I've seen so
much of you, man, this year and it's
been so lovely. you were randomly. It
needs to be like that. I got to I got to
come through when y'all next time and
I'm going to let you know because I just
passed through and I just happened to
catch you all after you killed by the
way killed Abolish Everything. I saw the
the highlights and I've been dying
alone. If y'all ain't seen Matt on um
Abolish Everything on Nebula, y'all need
to see it. It's probably the best [ __ ]
ever. The only reason why, actually, let
me not spoil it. But here's the deal. Uh
I am so looking forward to two days from
now I believe is is that is that yours?
It could be. If not if not it's if it's
it's either uh this Sunday or two weeks
from this Sunday you'll get to see uh
performance on Amolish everything. God
damn, I'm scared. I'm shaking in my
boots. Anyway, I appreciate y'all. Y'all
are lovely. Big up. Sending you all kind
of love. This is an amazing thing. I'm
about to go and like spam it some more.
I was just totally getting all of the
the expertise and I'm definitely going
to hit you all up. Y'all be easy and um
and definitely big up Zoe. Big up Zoe
for sure. For sure. She's right there.
There she is. Hi, Zoe. She's sleeping,
not in frame as per usual for a cat.
Foot for free again. All right, I'm
getting off here. You need to start
selling that foot, man. I'mma see you
all later.
Later, man. All right.
Uh so uh while we're getting our next
while we're getting our next guest on, I
am running two giveaways. I am happy to
tell you that for those uh Pugm uh
copies of Pugm courtesy of our friends
over at Onyx Path, we have uh IDK Just
Want Prime and Gladius 424 have both won
copies of Pugmire. I'll be emailing you
uh with relevant info, but you're going
to need drive-through RPG accounts to
claim those. Let's get our next guest in
her. You know her, you love her. She is
a queen of chaos. Uh the mistress of all
things Shark and Dave. Uh please welcome
the one, the only, the fantastic, the
lovely, the digital cake
jumper. Oh, wait. Hang on. Hang on. I
got
to the wrong. Ah, there we go. Now I'm
the right way around.
cake, how are you? How are we doing? I'm
good. I'm good. I um I was streaming
earlier. I made some flan I made which I
I was not able to try on stream because
what I learned is when you're making FL,
you have to let it cool for like a
hundred years. So, I won't be able to
taste it until tomorrow. But other than
that, you know what? I'm pretty good.
I'm pretty good. How are you doing?
How's it been so far? How's it going?
It's been great. We've been raising
money for Best Friends Animal Society.
Right now we are at
$3,25.31. We have a couple people to
thank as well. Right. Well, that kind of
we're going. Sorry, you were chewing. My
bad. Yes. I also need to thank Book
Dragon for the 127, which is the last of
our local time. Thank you so much for
that chaotic donation. And Mecca for the
7654. That's
$76.54, which got us to our current
totaling. And huge. If you want to watch
us watch with you a public domain movie
about a plant.
Interesting. About a plant. Uh $3,500 is
the goal to be. We'll be watching this
movie in the public domain. It is a cult
classic film about a plant.
YouTube and Twitch, listen. This movie
is public domain. We researched it. Do
not do not They know their stuff.
Um, uh, what was I going to say? Oh, uh,
so yeah, again, we're raising money for
this wonderful cause. I'm going to do
something real quick. Cakes, since
you're stopping in, basically any amount
of donation for for folks is super
helpful. Uh, they basically at $5 you
can get a cat, a little wand toy. $10,
you can get a snuggle toy for some
kittens. $20 can get a dog or a cat for
some physical therapy or hydrotherapy.
Uh, 15 is puzzle toys and enrichment
toys. 20 is one week of prescription
food for a cat, which can be
life-saving. $30 you can feed a newborn
kitten for a month. And in my opinion,
that's the entire extent that a kitten
exists because then they are a cat. I
don't know if that's medically accurate.
Uh for $50, you can buy a foster tool
kit for people fostering cats. And with
$100, you can care for one special needs
cat or dog for one month. So, right now,
uh, Cake, I don't know if, uh, I'd
mentioned this to you before, but we're
part of the Best Friends or the Best
Friends Day, which is Best Friends
Animal Society, uh, thing coming up,
which means that that
$3,25.31 will be matched and will
eventually be double when this ends,
when their whole campaign ends. I think
it it runs like two weeks after this.
So, yeah. Huge,
huge, huge, big if true. Big and true.
Big and true. Oh, I got it. Now I got to
fix K's thing here because now now
you're too short because Hold on. Hold
on. Forward.
Yeah, we got it.
I just love that takes defaults to
Grelin when only partially on screen.
Like that. That's her default mode. Um I
look like I'm up to something. It's
like, you know, let me just I'm just
fixing the wires down here. Hang on. Do
you know I can No, I got you. But let's
be fair. When are you not up to
something? I mean, if you're not up to
something, you're definitely up to
something. Does that make sense? No, it
doesn't make sense. Doesn't make any
sense at all. So, uh uh here here's your
here's your your easy pitch intro. Cake,
you've been playing Bloodborne for the
first time. Oh my god. I've been
watching that vaciously.
It's so good. I've never So, let me let
me give you the the lowdown. I've never
really played a Souls game before. I've
never played a FromSoft game before. I
played I want to say maybe three hours
of Dark Souls II back in 2022. It was
like a sub gold thing reward and I did
okay because I had no idea I was getting
myself into. I rushed in. I didn't take
my time which you got to do with games
like this cuz you need to figure out
what you're doing, you know. So, was
that cow? Yeah, they summoned a cow. But
it's a friendly cow.
It's a bunny. Thank you. Oh my goodness.
How long the $5? Thank you. Thank you,
man. They love the chickens. The
chickens are So, let me just uh real
quick. We'll get back to Bloodborne in
two seconds. Oh, god. Bloodborne.
Bloodboard. Blood. Um, the chickens are
interesting because they're cheap and
they don't do anything but distract
everything. Oh, beautiful. So, like it
could save me in a pinch. Have you uh
have you played Fallout 4, Case? I
haven't. I I've been completely on the
other side of Bethesda. I've only ever
played like Elder Scrolls games and at
that I've only played two. And and you
know, your cheese quest is of course at
this point uh legendary. Uh
Cake does a um to call it a modded
Skyrim playth through would be
disingenuous. It is at this point a
Skyrim's mod play through. It kind of is
like at a certain point. We've
especially had one or two years where
it's just like, oh, I think we put some
Skyrim in these mods, you know? Yeah.
Correct. Um, and it's it's an absolute
delight. What they're doing right now,
is a melon explosion, which is
distracting from a lot of things for
this blood worm that is trying to slowly
murder me. Yeah. Uh, so sorry, we were
talking about Bloodborne. Oh, yeah. Oh,
yeah. So, Bloodborne's been great. So,
yeah, I didn't really remember anything
from playing Dark Souls 3I. Um, I
remembered
struggling cuz I didn't know what I was
doing. So, I wanted to play for Agent
and Age and Ages, but we did a PS4 and
they're allergic to releasing it on
anything else. So, I was like, "What do
we do?" And Mcdara comes over, for
anyone who doesn't know, Mcdara is my
husband. I love him very much. Um,
McAara comes home one day and like,
"Hey, guess what? I bought a PS4." And
I'm like, "What?" And he got it for €8.
I was like, "Okay, that's okay. Fair
enough. Fair enough." So, I was like,
"Oh my god." So, I I messaged Zaren, who
I believe is in the chat right now. I
see you. Um, and I was like, I I do have
PS4. And he was like, say no more. Don't
do anything. I was, "What are you
doing?" He's like, "You are going to
receive a copy of Bloodborne Game of the
Year Edition." I was like, "What?" So,
yeah, I started playing it like a couple
of weeks after that when I got an
opening and I took it really slowly. I
even said at the start, I was like, "All
right, lads, don't expect anything
fantastic. We're going to take our
time." And it has been
incredible. It really is. I you know
when you play a game that people are
obsessed with and you finally understand
why they're people are obsessed with it.
It's like I played Twilight Princess for
the first time last year. I was like ah
I get it now. I understand. Y and it's
oh it's so good. Like it's a beautiful
game. The bosses for the most part like
I won't spoil anything super big like in
case anyone hasn't played it but like
bosses generally very fair because you
have to learn new things. I did beat um
a certain little spidery boss recently
who I will be very glad to never see
again as I live. But everything else
it's like I feel like the game is really
egging you on all the time even when you
get killed. And it's so cool. It's so so
cool. It's beautiful. It's gorgeous. I
love it. It's a big part of my brain.
It's it's great. I'm so glad you are on
this journey. I love it when people that
I I like watching uh do literally
anything find Bloodborne or Souls games
because it is just for me chef's kiss.
Uh actually uh hey yes are you going to
be getting Elden Ring Night Ring when it
comes out? I have not played Elden Ring
yet.
Yes, but it's on the list. So uh I am I
am also uh in the Elden Ringless camp. I
am also unfortunately uh as the kids
would say maidenless.
Um the
um uh the I'm I'm very much looking
forward to Night Range because Matt and
I get to play co-op. Uh and Night is is
a PvE uh sort of like rogike. Uh,
imagine if imagine like a boss rush
that's like 30 minutes long. Uh, where
you're like running around the overworld
and gearing up and then going to fight
bosses. And the bosses aren't all Elden
Ring. Uh, they're from, you know,
different parts of the series. Yeah. Um,
Matt and I are definitely going to play
uh, if you end up in it, you absolutely
have to make a time uh, where the three
of us can run. It is a threeperson game.
Like it's made to play alone or with
three people. You actually can't duo. So
yeah, we're going to be random people
going to be like, "You have a copy of
this game. Play with us." Yippee. That
would be so cool. I want to play
eventually. I'm having a hard time
identifying the good rats from the bad
rats. Uh-huh. Almost like that's part of
why they're so cheap. What am I supposed
to do in here? Can Can someone in chat
tell me what I'm supposed to do in here?
Also, I saw that uh Deie Deie asked uh
Doom Dark Ages stream when Will, are you
planning on playing that at all? I am
not right now. Uh though not for um uh
not for lack of desire on my part. Uh
Doom Dark Ages is what we found is that
the way my brain works, I don't scream
shooters well and talk at the same um I
unless one exception
I'm healing in a hero shooter. Sure. I'm
healing in a hero shooter. I can do
pretty much anything because I'm a
support bane
in every game and real life. So, um it's
second nature to me, but that's the one
exact for you is that. So, uh it's a
little difficult. I do want to play it
and I do want to talk about it cuz I
think it is very interesting.
The minations of where Doom has gone. Um
yeah, vicious wolves.
Oh, William does. Get out of here. Get I
need a better
gun. Jack, can can we get Can we get out
of that? Gun. Gun gun.
Ah, go on.
Someone just gave me something.
The dog is getting me. Um, you're
supposed to find a button to lower the
water according to grab. I I did that
already. Am I supposed to lower it more?
I believe so, cuz there's more than it
can. Sorry, I'm eating pie. Uh, people I
have a uh uh uh Okay, I have my like
inventory on an iPad. Oh, clever. I'm
trying to like that's how I can like try
to heal while not just going into the
menu all the time cuz the very clever
the menuing in in in Fallout uh is so
much worse than the menuing in Skyrim.
And yes, I need it. Oh, cuz I was going
to say like the menuing in Skyrim is
like you get used to it, but there's a
mod for it for a reason. Yeah, correct.
We we tried to do light touch with these
mods because
um the uh
the more modded it is, the more the mods
tend to take over and we did want to
have like some semblance of like um it
being coherent and also some mods fight
with crowd control pretty badly.
All right, I have no idea what's
happening.
Oh, there's all the lads around. I've
never played Fallout, so I'm just
looking. I'm like, "Oh, there's the
lads." Yep. Yep. Yep. There's the lads.
If we could if we could pull together if
we could pull together 5,000 uh coins
from everybody start a pool for it. Um I
happen to know that Matt is a particular
fan of the Wastelander's friend, and
that might make his and I know he's got
a whole bunch of extra 10 mil uh that
he's been picking up and getting
throughout the day. So, if we could get
we can get some uh some some pooling on
that, that might make this a little more
interesting and a little more forward
progress and a little less Matt dying
over and over again to the same thing. I
mean, if you're going to donate to
animals, I don't care. But I I'm
offering I'm not saying that there's a
problem what we're doing right now. I'm
saying that if they want to see more
different things uh that aren't this sea
of red dots in this very small room. I
want to figure out where this button is.
Button. button. Who's got Is this it?
Oh, button button. No. What a what a
terrible looking button. Here we go. Is
that lowering it? There we go. Oh, with
a terrible fluffing sound.
Also, a reminder that you do have
grenades. Oh, yeah. That's true. Do
this.
Stay with me, kids.
[Music]
What just happened? Oh, gnarly.
Ah.
Okay. Okay.
Chat's working on it. Chat's working on
it. Uh, we're currently at 51. Yay.
There we go. All right. Grab that,
please.
Okay. All right. Huge.
I can't die on my first thing I'm
fighting while while you just gave me
this wonderful gift.
The reason I love this gun, uh, A, it's
great, but B, it has a scope like Snake
Kliskin's
gun. Oh man, don't die. Don't die. Don't
die. Oh, he's a big lo. Boom. Okay.
Boom. Done.
Got it. He's not a big lo anymore. He's
always rats. Nearly always. I got to eat
the pies. I like a little It's just It's
just a guy standing there holding a gun
and just shoveling pie into his face.
It's like jeez in Skyrim, right? Yeah.
Yeah, she's like
you can do it with melons,
too. Weapons,
actually. Hey, if you play Fallout 4,
doing
um doing uh a dessert, just a perfectly
preserved pie from Fallout 4 might be a
good food and drink. Cuz for those of
you who don't know, cake is also uh an
excellent uh baker and chef and makes
all I I mean, I'm all right. I've seen
it.
as usual. And um
okay, we are That would be fun though. I
do love a good recipe. And has the
recipe for the pie. I think someone
summoned me a Brotherhood of Steel
friend, too. And melons. Oo,
the dichotomy of chat. Brotherhood of
Steel companion. Melons. Melons. All
right, hold on. Where do I go now that
it's lower? This is I like this dungeon.
I am also confused by Hey, Wolf. Are you
with me? Are you a good wolf or a bad
wolf?
I don't know. That reminds me of like
the are you a good witch or a bad wolf?
I'm not a witch at all. I'm Darthothy.
I'm just a wolf.
I don't think we're in Kansas anymore.
Will, should we start a countdown for
another prize? I was I was actually just
looking at that. Let's do Hey, let's do
a Let's do a pair Zoe plushies. A pair
of them. A pair of Zoe plushies. So, we
will be giving away two. So, a reminder,
um, you can get this. Wait for it. Wait
for it. 3 2 1 fall from the sky Zoe
plushy. This Zoe plushy or one that's
looking straight at you instead of
giving you bombastic side eye. Uh, uh,
from the Nebula store. We'll give you a
code for uh, Zoe and a code for free
shipping. Um, and, uh, all you need to
do is fill out the giveaway form. It's
under the stream over on YouTube and in
chat under exclamation mark giveaway on
Twitch and I'll be rolling on that here
in 4 minutes and 20 some odd
seconds of those. There's also a live
one here.
This is the one with the
She's so cute.
Yeah. Uh yeah, we'll be away from Zoe
getting another treat, by the way. I'm
just saying. Yeah, right. Exactly. And
um only only uh was at
$28969 nice away from um watching a
movie over dinner that might rhyme a
little bit with um I'm curious what
you're of Okay. Yeah, I did get it
earlier but uh that's scorpion.
Is that a friendly? No, that was not a
friendly something. Where? Why is it
green? Why is the HUD green? A I don't
trust this at all. That scorpion is not
dead. He's lurking. He's waiting. He's
waiting for his moment. Mhm. Kate, what?
Yes. What is What do you think the Oh, I
got to protect this cow. What is What do
you think the um the most Just seeing I
know you're not familiar terribly with
Fallout, but the most familiar the most
Falloutesque uh meal or thing you've
cooked or baked?
Oh, I mean I've made some things that
were probably not deliberately that
would not look out of place to fall out.
Sure. Sure. Oh god. I'm actually not
sure. I feel like I did make meatloaf
recently that looked a little dubious.
And I feel like, you know, desperate
times I I don't know anything about the
food of Fallout, but I feel like if you
were playing Fallout and Yeah. I feel
like if you like it tasted fine, but
it's hard to make something like that
look nice. I feel like if you saw the
meatloafing game, you'd be like, "Yeah,
that looks about right." About right.
All right, fair. And it looks a bit
dubious. Yeah, that's that's about
right. Meatloaf tastes great, but it
it's it's messed up. It looks messed up.
Messed up. It's not something that it is
impossible to plate. Well, yeah, it's
not possible. Like we made it's just
like an ingot and I was trying to like
cut it up nice and put a little like
like a sauce or something on it like
glaze. I was like, I don't know. It
looks a bit fleshy.
Uh, question for chat, for Brad and or
Janet. Uh, is there another switch that
I've missed to lower this further? I
feel like there's probably I feel like
this is made much more difficult by the
fact that there are large numbers of
random friendly things floating around.
That's why we're doing this.
The whole reason's
Can I offer Can I offer a very quick
very silly incentive for whoever donates
next? I don't have anything to give
away, but um next donation I am going to
ragdoll myself. Okay. All right. And
that's a promise. It's gone. It doesn't
matter how much. I'll just be I'll I'll
just I'll I'll just
All right. Okay.
Chaos Incarnate. I mean, I'm pretty sure
that she got the VTuber 50% for VTubing
and 50% to show how she could break her
VTuber. Dang. How did you know? How did
you know? There's a reason I went for
3D. One of my favorite YouTuber tweets
about like Vubing is more. Oh no. Oh no.
Oh. Uhoh. Oh.
Well, Matt's dead. Who? Be strong.
Oh, be strong.
The funny part is everything else
belongs near him. Be strong. Believe in
the heart of the cards.
Yeah. I'm eating pies. I'm shoving pies.
Yeah. Hold on. Wait. Get out of here.
Get get hit. I hit too many buttons. Oh
no.
I refuse to be taken by this horde.
Get wrecked.
That one outside the window still alive?
I don't know. I'm so crippled.
So many
similar game left for dead. Correct.
Sorry. Oh no. No. That's a bad cow. Oh,
bad. There's bad cows.
Okay.
Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. This is a lovely
room of death.
Hey, hey, hey. So anyway, um uh one of
my favorite uh of K's tweets is the I
was worried about uh being toos
compliant with my V2 remodel and I
didn't have time to put safety shorts
on, so I just removed my butt. It's
true. It's true. I just I literally just
cut it off because I was like I could
put a void under there, but that would
actually take longer to make it not mess
up like all the clothes and everything.
Like that's that's still like I if I
zoom out I'm going to mess up the whole
camera angle but that's like that's
still there because I haven't found a
better alternative and that's one of the
fun things about working with a 3D
model. Now I didn't make it from scratch
or anything but it's like m you know you
know it's sometimes been banned for like
that's a bit of skin and I'm like I just
listen I don't want to take the risk.
That's not That's not That's not what
I'm about, you know. I just want I'm
here for a laugh, but because it's 3D,
if I'm moving around, everything can
just flip and go. Um, so there's nothing
to show. It's There's nothing there too
much if you don't have legs. Exactly.
Woohoo. Oh, so we're at the giveaway
now, right, Will? We We are now at the
giveaway. That is correct. Over here,
I'm going to figure this out.
Do the thing and be Oh, boy. Ooh. Are
you going to load? You going to load for
me? Give it away. Give it away. Give it
away now. Give it away now. Give it
away. Give it away. Give it away now.
Out of this many. We keep Thank you all
so much for entering. You all have uh
been entering consistently throughout
the day. Okay, so these are for Zoe
plushies.
[Music]
Who we got? The first of them is to not
Cromwell. Hey.
And the second of them is to
Cromwell. No. Uh, no. The Cromwell.
Uh, Rookie. Rookie.
Hell yeah. Okay, so I'm sorry if people
did tell me the answer to this in chat
and I just wasn't looking. Where am I
supposed to go? We've been here for a
while. There should be one bounce off
the next switch a few minutes ago. Uh,
back to the water line, apparently. Back
to the what? Water line. It's probably
like down in the water line. I could
also use southeast corner some more
radex if people could spare it. Or not
radex rat away. Yeah. So it's south
southeastern corner of this big
southeastern corner. Got it.
Navigation. Oh, it's under.
Oh, is it?
Oh, spooky.
No, but a bunch of mines and stuff are
okay. That's not exactly where I'm
supposed to go.
Not underwater. It's above the water
line in the southeastern.
Oh, is it just this thing? Yep. I This
is the least like coded thing to look
important.
Oh, I just like how it's raining and
there are just bodies. There just bodies
everywhere.
I love this gun. Thank you to chat for
getting this gun.
Go, go, go. Oh, so that's one of my good
wolves that is infected with the blood
worm thing. I don't know how that's
going to work. Uh, poorly. I'm going to
guess. I'm going to guess poorly.
Oh,
here. Let's do this. Let's Let's have
some fun with some here. Let's go.
Have some fun with gnarly. Get out of
here. Do not touch me.
Yeah, cow, get away. Get away. That cow
will not in fact get Thank you for the
bullets. No, cow.
Yep. Uh, you can see Matt's ammo count
right here. Uh, and this is this gun
uses 100 mil ammo and you can buy 100
such rounds for a singular dollar. Made
it very easy to keep Matt free on ammo.
If that's a thing that you want to do to
help this place,
I do like playing this game as a pistol
sniper.
It's very good. It's very good. Uh, as
we as we as we begin to look towards the
end of our unfortunately short time
together, Kate, what is coming up? So,
so we've been asking people uh tell us
something that we can look forward to
from you and something that you're not
making but that you think people should
watch, read, listen to, enjoy. So, oh,
what do I have coming up? Um, jeez. Um,
that's a good question. I I have more
Bloodborne coming up and I've been
loving Bloodborne. I've been doing
highlights of it over YouTube. It's been
great. I say I Chloe's been doing great
because Chloe is so good at making a
video. Good. She's magic. Um what else?
Um I'm going to do a song cover soon.
I've not said that out to anybody. But
now you know because it's charity. It's
charity time. I'm telling you. Woo. Um
something that I have not made or done
that I think someone else should watch,
read, play, do. Um there's a really cool
game that I have played recently. I need
to I want to play it properly on stream
soon called Axis Axyz. It's like Do you
ever play Cooler World on PS1? Oh yeah,
forever. Yeah, with the beach ball.
Yeah, it's based on that and it slaps.
It really really slaps. It's really fun.
It's on Steam. It's not It's It's a
couple of quid and the tunes slap. The
music is done by a couple of different
people. I know Pizza Hotline's in there
if anyone's familiar with Pizza Hotline,
but recommend highly recommend. Very
fun. really nice to, you know, when you
just want to zen into a game for a while
and just turn the brain off, but also
use the brain a little, just a little
bit. Great. Really recommend. Okay, good
stuff. I've got I've got some people to
thank real quick. I've got to thank
Immortal Lab for the 1192 which lasted
for mere seconds before that palm was
ruined by Kyrion 13 with a $50 donation
and Dav Techno taking us to an even
$3,300 with a
$27.70 giveaway or 70 donation because
of Matt's pro gamer clutch and play. Oh,
that was good. Thank you. I didn't hear
those donations coming in. I know. Me
either because I was 30 ghouls were
coming at from my throat. No. Well, and
and now that we're on this big scene.
Wait. Yeah. What? Wait, where did cake
go? That's cake's ragd doll. Cake is
There we go. Oh, no. I'm good. I'm good.
I'm cool. I'm sorry. I blacked out there
for a second. How are you doing? Happens
to me too much. It can happen to anyone
really. At any moment, you could just ra
at any moment. Yeah. I mean, you never
know. You have to be careful. Uh,
friendos, keep the keep uh chat busy for
two seconds. I'm going to be back in
actually a little bit less. I'll be back
in 30 seconds. What? It is
two. Um, okay. Okay. Take. He's doing
something. He hasn't told me what this
is, so now I'm afraid.
Uh, Bloodborne. More Bloodborne sounds
really cool. I'm really glad that you're
enjoying it. It's so fun. Have you
played Bloodborne? I didn't even I have
not. I don't I'm not a PlayStation
person, so for the same reason. If it
came out on PC, I'd be all over it,
right? But I don't have a PlayStation.
It's actually limited because like
there's so many people who want to play
it. Like loads of people are like I want
to play this, don't have a PlayStation,
can't play it. And that was why I didn't
play it for ages. Like I I grew up on
PlayStation, don't have a PS4, didn't
have a PS3 for years. I was like PS1,
PS2 kid, but I was like Spyro the
Dragon, Crash, Ratchet and Clank. That
was me. And then as I got older, I was
playing Nintendo and stuff. So, but if
you ever get the chance, I recommend.
But, you know, it's not going anywhere.
You know, it's not going anywhere, which
is pretty cool. Yeah. So, I just
realized I hadn't eaten since the
morning and I my brain just shut down. I
now have two bags on my desk. Some
delicious dried mango, but also Zoe's
cat treats. And I know that I'm going to
not be looking at the wrong time. They
are roughly the same size and texture
bag. They smell very different. Let's
see if Matt can tell. I'm not eating.
All right. Well, our our next guest is
on deck and ready ready to jump in. So,
Kate, here we will thank you so much for
your time, your energy, your ragdoll, uh
your lovely presence as always. Thank
you so much for having me.
Thank you so much. Goodbye.
All right. Uh and
now we're gonna we're gonna uh get our
next guest in uh who has who's actually
uh two guests momentarily. It was almost
two. It's almost two. Hold on. We're
getting you back. Ziggy.
Hello. Hello. Hello. Hello.
How's it going? So excited to be here.
Sophia, it is going absolutely
wonderfully. Um, was Ziggy just here?
Yes. I've been actively luring her uh
onto the desk with treats. So, she but
she's getting wise to it, I think, is
what's happening because she keeps like
um a dolphin leaping out of the water uh
grabbing the treat with her mouth and
then leaping away from the desk. So,
maybe we'll get her to reappear. Zoe is
currently in her fallout shelter with
her plushy. Oh, no. I got to fix it. The
bobblehead.
Oh, no.
Oh, expeditioner, thank you so much for
the
$33.33 for those who come after tomorrow
comes. Hey, thank you. And uh and Book
Dragon, thank you so much for the $158
for Chaos. Deeply appreciate that. Yeah.
Um I I I have been so good chat. I have
shut up about Expedition 33 for this
stream. I have so many feelings and
thoughts that I haven't been able to
share since we finished it on Monday
because I've been busy prepping for
this. So, I've been very good.
Excellent. Sophia, what's going on? How
are you and Ziggy doing today? We're
doing good. You know, hanging out. We
were just at PAX East last week, so
everyone's in recovery mood from that.
Um, hanging out. Um, Sophie was on our
panel about u um a Minecraft movie and
Until Dawn adaptations. Pardon me for
eating with my mouthful. Eating with my
mouthful. Talking with my mouthful.
There's Ziggy. Hi, bud. Say hi, Ziggy.
You're the loudest cat in podcasting.
Now's your chance to shine. Do it. No,
never on command. Perform on command.
Get get in stage fright. Um, it was
lovely having you on that. Um, today, as
you know, we are raising money for Best
Friends Animal Society. We have already
raised $3,334.91
uh due to chat's incredible generosity.
Thank you so much for that.
Um, yeah. So, uh, let's talk about Ziggy
for a second while I get back into
Fallout 4, which is just I would love
nothing more. Yes. Uh, how did how did
you uh come? How did you both cross
paths? What's the meat cute? what's
what's going on here? Yeah, you know, I
was a 20some girl living in New York and
I thought I could really use a cat in my
life. Um, so I went to uh animal care
centers in New York, great public
shelter. Um, and I perused their posting
online of cats and there was one little
black cat about a year old who uh had an
incredibly loud and almost obnoxious
meow and stole my heart. So, I went
pretty directly to the shelter and was
like, "Please give me this cat." And um
Ziggy's been screaming at me ever since.
You know, it's been a couple years.
She's I think four now, give or take.
It's hard to know with cats sometimes.
You know, they think she was a year old
when I got her. Um and now she's she's
mastered both the art of the scream and
the art of the silent glare from next to
the desk where I spend most of my day
working. Yes. I'm just resizing it in
our pit boy here to be the optimal size.
Here we go. This is the disadvantage of
doing it this way, but I I'll take it.
I'll take it. I I think this is going
wonderfully. This is It's more authentic
to the game. That's right. You know,
it's it's out building the world out. Um
uh this is the first time that we've
made it so that I am capable of bringing
guests in and out without Matt needing
to do a bunch of copy and pasting and
stuff. And it's worked. Yeah, pretty
well actually. I'm pretty happy with
this one. I am too. So far so good. It's
only crashed once.
Nailing it. Oh, there's the door. Not so
bad. There's the door we need. Uh, how
familiar, Sophia, are you with Fallout
4?
Uh, I've played a little bit. I was
always more of an Elder Scrolls Bethesda
RPG girly, but um I do I I have dabbled
in Fallout and I know a bit of the vibe
and the lore. Um, most of what I've
heard about Fallout recently has been
related to how much people enjoy Walton
Gogggins in the in the show, but other
than that,
10,000%.
Yeah. Was that the end of the dungeon?
Did I just get all those? That was not
worth it.
I I Well, I mean, part of it was the
experience we got along the way.
Very true. And And like what was that
like 30 ghouls that you fought earlier?
Uh, yeah. So, uh, those were not part of
the dungeon. Those were courtesy of
chat. Uh, oh, thank you, chat. Reminder,
chat, that you can too can contribute to
Matt's giant growing XP fund by spawning
things at inopportune moments for him to
fight.
Like 30 ghouls now. Be terrible if
someone did that. Would not be good. I
am so irradiated right now. Yeah, some
rata away would would go a long way. Oh,
there's a radiation storm, too. God.
Okay. Okay.
Uh, Sophia, I didn't even say I didn't
ask you to to intro yourself and what
you do. Tell all the wonderful people
all of the awesome things that you do
and are a part of. Oh my gosh. Yes. Um,
I completely forget that I have to do
this bit sometimes, but yes. Hi, I'm
Sophia. Um, you may also know me as
Indigo on Overly Sarcastic Productions.
I am a podcast producer and host of
various different shows. Um, you
probably know me from Movie Struck,
which is a podcast that moves people who
watch them. We've had Matt on talk about
Jim Katada in the past among many many
other guests of this stream who have
also been on the show. It's a small
small movie loving world out there
amongst
podcasters. Um I'm also a player and one
of the produ and the producer on Rolling
with Difficulty, a D and D actual play.
We're just gearing up for a third
campaign. Uh and we just had an episode
go up today uh from a oneshot adventure
with some old characters. So I'm fresh
off of like a 12-h hour That's right.
Dungeons and Dragons edit. Um feeling
insane. It's great. Well, welcome to
this level of insanity.
Yes. Um, lurker, I see you. I see your
comment. Who is Jim Kata? Jim M space
kata.
I was just an interesting right there
because that would be hilarious. By the
way, you were hoping I get hit with a
what? Train. Then you just cross the
tracks and get slammed by a train. It
would be the funniest ragd doll in the
history of Fallout. This is a terrifi
where am I?
Fallout 4 is the one that's in
Massachusetts, right? Boston. Right
where we just were. Boston. Right where
we just were. Um, where I went to school
for several years. Um, and also uh where
trains are pretty prevalent. If you got
hit by the Amtrak Northeast Regional, it
would be very thematically appropriate
uh to this this stream and also just
this game in general. thousand% uh chat
reminders that you can change the time
of the day, change the amount of
um uh the you can change the weather,
time of day, you can give Matt Radway,
you can spawn things. Yeah, there you
go. Like that. Oh, is that Rataway?
Yeah, that's right away. The only way
that we um the only way that we have to
give you rata away is a Radway
explosion. Um listen, I'll take it. I'll
collect I'm not I'm not above scing on
the ground.
Yeah, just it's great. The Closion
delivery method of chat giving you stuff
is my favorite, right? Especially
because like melons
uh and pie are both given in this
fashion as well. So, you just explode.
There's melons everywhere.
Very slapstick. Very appropriate. Is it
still bad outside?
Yeah, it's still bad outside.
Full name James kicking people on bars.
Katana. Yeah, correct.
Okay, I guess I'm going to make a run
for that building over there.
Seems like the only possible move. There
we
go. Okay, cleared up.
That is what the weather feels like in
Boston most of the time anyway. So, it's
pretty uh they really nailed that aspect
of the game. Wow, that was back there.
Get away from my cat.
No, there we go.
This gun slaps. You have so much time.
Now, has this been You've modded Zoe
into this, which is incredibly
endearing. Does it stress you out to
have Zoe in these dangerous situations?
Like, does it absolutely Yeah, I felt
very similar watching the movie Flo as
the owner of a little black cat. I was
like, "Oh, this is such an adorable.
They've really captured the vibe of this
this cat perfectly. But wow, that's
that's my cat and I would not want her
to be in those situations. But she also
gets rough like she like throws down in
this like Oh yeah. Uh it's funny to see
that. What kind of dog was it? Will
again the dog meat is German Shepherd.
The German Shepherd like bite and just
shake like on on with with this model
with this tiny black cat model.
It's quite lovely.
Very strong. Okay, here we go. We're
getting somewhere. I I think we just
we're just trying to get to Diamond
City, which I think we're on the outside
of right now. Oh no. Oh no. Okay, those
are mutants with bombs.
Never a good combo.
That's a Okay, that's
maybe a very good combo, actually. Okay,
when in doubt, like them. I love those
getting spawned. Wait, no, I don't. But
when they do, it is lovely because if
you hit the bomb.
Oh jeez. No. I'm guessing that they set
us up the bomb. They did set us up the
bomb.
That means older than some of our user
base, but or some of our viewing base by
the way, which is horrifying at the same
time uh as it is. Get wrecked. Ghoul.
Okay, we're okay. We survived. Uh
YouTube chat is quite excited that we
mentioned Flo. Yes, Flo is Oh, flow is
yo fabulous easily top five films of
last year. If you have not seen flow
completely done in Blender, I believe.
Yes. Yes. Yeah. Was a free software that
you could download and learn right now
if you wanted to inor probably. And if
you're a creative person who works in
making things, and I'm being the most
generous with definitions of both making
and things, it behooves you to know at
least a little Blender. Yeah, it is
beyond powerful. I actually went to um
this year at Magfest, I went to a whole
panel on using Blender for things that
Blender was never intended for. And it
is absolutely wild how far you can
stretch Blender into all kinds of
different shapes. It's insane. Uh Nick,
artist of the channel, uh Nick Dit plays
with it and has used stuff in our uh
series before. Patch, who um was just on
from Tzu, he does a ton of stuff in
Blender. Yeah. Oh, yeah. I mean, we've
all tried that doughnut tutorial at some
point in our lives and got extremely
frustrated, but but it's an incredibly
powerful tool if you if you can grasp
it. Uh, I have all the respect in the
world. And Flow is such a beautifully
animated film to be made on what is the
most accessible software for animation
uh out there. It's really phenomenally
impressive. There is something bad going
on out here.
Hi,
Dang,
that's a lot of head shot. Yeah,
sometimes you got to do it for charity.
What is this? A meat bag? What? Well, I
walked into something terrible. Probably
did because you walked around in
Fallout. Most of the things that happen
in Fallout are terrible.
Does sort of feel like the thesis of the
game. Yes. Yeah. War always stops and
never doesn't change. That's the the
tagline, right? That's the what the game
says. That's
right. Uh yeah, that seems correct,
right? Definitely. And and you know,
famously a political video game series
Fallout um just super.
You just surprised him. Supplies. Uhhuh.
Blam. Um yeah, it's great. Love it. They
told me war has changed. That's fair.
What does Ryden think about it is my
question. Hey, damn. Uh, not afraid of
mutants, huh? Okay. I love the Diamond
City uh guard because they wear umpires
uniforms. Oh, excellent. And yeah, I'm
assuming Fenway Park, right? Yep. We're
here. We made it.
That's We are functionally on my alma
mater's campus right now. Um, I went to
Boston University, which is like a block
away from Fenway Park, technically where
a lot of the campus buildings start.
Um, I I I've I've walked these streets
in various levels of sobriety before.
It's it's a familiar site. I on one of
the nights for afterparty uh for packs.
Um, ah, at a certain point,
you guys drifted quite far away from the
seapport. You made it all the way the
fenway.
There will be no explanation for this,
by the way.
We we did we didn't know exactly how far
it was until we put it into the Uber and
we already ordered it. We're like, "Oh
no." But it was a very fun party. It was
nice. I think it's better than that time
that we went to that charity party that
was sort of a nebulous dis uh who now uh
who used to be at Tiltify but now is um
uh trying to remember where I just saw
him at Pax 2. Sorry Lou. Um that was his
uh dog. Me found an enemy.
Where?
Go get him. Well, this this reminder of
Zoe Prowling right now is to remind
everybody that we are raising money for
Best Friends Animal Society. That is
what that number is right there. If
you'd like to see that number go up, you
can help us in one of two ways. One,
obviously donate through the various
links and help her hit her my
playthrough of Fallout 4 right here as
everyone has wanted to do for the last
four or five hours, however long it's
been. Or if you don't have any money to
give, that is absolutely okay. Stay hang
chat. uh just say hello and also please
share this uh stream's link around to as
many people as you can because the more
eyes we get on on us doing this thing
the absolute better it is for all the
animals that we're trying to help
I will probably
uh chat you have a new job remind me in
45 minutes the top of the hour so not at
the end of Sophia slot but the end of
the slot after um that I need to do a
socials repost cuz we're halfway
Um,
which I think is probably a good idea.
Um, yes, we got to lock pickick now. Oh,
no. Oh, lockpicking. I actually like
this with the mouse cuz all I'm doing is
this and hitting a button. Like, it's it
actually feels a little more actually
visceral cuz you're moving the mouse to
do it. Sweet.
See, this is the same as the Skyrim
lockpicking mechanic, which is one of my
favorite lockpicking mechanics in games,
just because it is very intuitive to me.
I'm like, "Okay, I understand what you
want me to do." Right. Um, I've dipped
into oblivion recently with the with the
re and that lockpicking game is the bane
of my existence. Uh, I truly just cannot
grasp the timing of all those pins
falling. Um, just quick save before
every lock I try
to blow through them.
I mean, I'll take the shotgun shells.
Thank you, shotgun shells.
Let's see. Uh, is there an entrance to
Fenway?
What is our goal right now, Matt? Uh, to
get to Diamond City. We're at We're
We're at the outside of Diamond City. I
don't know where the inside of Diamond
City is. Where's the ticket blue?
All right. I guess we'll walk are kind
of in a weird spot. They're like behind
the stadium almost. Yeah,
presumably on the inside. Howdy. Light
bulb. What combat area are you speaking
of?
Oh, the green wall apparently.
Um, you mean the green
mile? Is that the green monster? Oh, the
green monster. Green Mile is that other
is the Tom Hanks movie. The Yeah. Yes. A
phenomenal cast that I never want to
watch. Teen Inc. over on Twitch. Yes,
this is Indigo in in the proverbial
building. Hello. Yes, I uh I go by
Indigo on OSP and um Sophia everywhere
else. It's caused immense confusion
throughout my professional and personal
life. It's super fun, but either it's
fine.
Yeah. Uh see, this is confused enough
people that I have just inherited the
name Willough E credits. That's right.
Uh nice. So, you know, it's uh that's my
name now. Apparently, we have several
streamer friends to blame for that
originally, and then Matt picked it up
and now we're just here. That's just who
I am. Did I go the right way?
There was a sign. Okay, here we go. This
looks This looks promising. Okay,
there's a statue. There's some guards.
What do you mean? Raiders. Pokemon in.
Hey, I can't see who's raiding or how
many raiders for whatever reason on my
on my Yeah, I I don't know why that's
broken, but it would require a deep
dissection to fix it. Train, thank you
so much for the raid. Welcome on in
raiders. Hello. Hello. Hello.
Uh, we should do introductions. That's
Matt. I'm Will. Together, we are some
small fraction larger group that is
extra credits. And today, we are
streaming in celebration of Matt's
birthday this uh modded Fallout 4, which
you can help or hinder. who donating to
Best Friends Animal Society uh in the
crowd control link. In fact, we just got
a donation. Um hold on, let me refresh
cuz that's being that website's being
weird.
Luna, thank you so much for the $10
donation. And Copper Chef, thank you so
much for the
$5510 with the best cops for doing this.
My cat Kiki was adopted from Best
Friends Animal Society. That's awesome.
That is a really cool story. Uh, so
welcome on in everyone. Um, thank you so
much for uh joining us and being here
and doing all this stuff. No, not that
kind of raiders. No, these are these are
new friends. You wave at them. You say
hello. You do not lick them and you
don't throw grenades at them. Don't ask
about the lick thing. It's Thank you for
summoning those blood worms right as I'm
meeting uh uh Piper. Let your pet. Yeah,
totally. Uh you will find that this uh
playthrough has already gone
significantly off the rails. That
definitely got a hermit crab summoned.
You might be like, why is that a big
deal? Hermit crabs aren't that scary.
Very scary. Um, nothing scarier than the
MBTA. Support the news because the
mayor's threatened to throw free speech
in the dumpster. Yes, that's exactly it.
So, I support the news. Always believed
in freedom of the press. Oh, I didn't
mean to bring you into this argument.
That is a good that is that is a well
true good thing. No, no. I am losing my
ability to speak English. City material.
I might smell burnt toast. Great jewel
of the Commonwealth. Safe, happy, a fine
place. I'm going to spend the money.
Lots of people have been giving it caps.
I'm going to go in here. I'm going to go
a little spending spree if I can. Tell
you otherwise. All right. Get a fancy
outfit of sorts perhaps. Yeah, that's my
fancy outfit right now.
I mean, it's better than outfit that
made you look like Scarecrow. So, what?
Um I I didn't listen. Did Was he Was he
talking ish? Is he a bad man? I don't
remember. I don't remember. Chat, what
do you do? Did you ever have the ability
to hear English? I don't know. When I've
done Shakespeare on stage, lies and
everybody's happy. But if you print the
truth,
now was there anything particular you
came to our city for?
Looking for something? Just looking for
something. Oh. Um, what is it you're
looking for?
I don't trust this guy. Who would I talk
to about finding a missing person?
Well, whatever you do, don't bother
going to Diamond City Security for help.
Well, don't listen to her. Well, I'm
afraid that our security team can't
follow every case that come through. I'm
confident that you can find help here.
Diamond City has every conceivable
service known to man. One of our great
citizens can surely find the time to
help you.
All right, let's see if all that
charisma paid off. Yeah, I was going to
say, well, sure. And a mayor of a great
city must know everyone. Who can help
me? I'm sorry. I don't have time for any
more questions. I'm a busy man. Enjoy
your stay in our fair city.
This is ridiculous. Okay. All right.
Well, that's nonproductive conversation.
The real reason security always shrivels
away when talk of missing person. I've
had enough of this, Piper. From now on,
consider you and that little sister of
yours on notice. Yeah, keep talking,
Mcdana. That's all you're good for.
Diamond
City honored yet?
Look, I got to go get settled in. But
copy that, Cloudy. Stop by my office
later. I have an idea for an article
you'd be perfect for. So, I'm curious if
the mod I installed will actually let me
do it once we get through Pipe because
Piper becomes a companion
once you do her quest line. Mhm.
What? What the What happened?
Vats. Here we go. Was weird. You just
sort of like vats in. I probably
misclicked. That's fair.
Misclick. Hey everybody in both chats,
Twitch, YouTube. Thank you so much for
being here. Keep us company donating all
day. We
are almost at the halfway point.
Yep. We are 37 minutes away from being
halfway. Hot damn. Let's level up. Start
at 11. We promise we're going till 11.
Yes. And maybe
what should I level up here? I've been
ask I've been asking the uh the guests.
Yes. Out of these. An excellent
question. strength, perception,
endurance, charisma, intelligence,
agility, luck.
I mean, my go-to is always charisma
because I think it's it's always fun to
be able to just hit that dialogue option
and talk yourself out. So, I'm going to
go with go with some charisma. Let's see
what that uh you know, make some friends
in the wasteland. It's your apocalypse
and your war, and you get to make some
buddies in it. So, let's level that up.
Your faithful K9 companion, which is
technically Zoe, can hold an enemy,
giving you a greater chance to hit them
in bass. I want that.
Give the give Zoe a treat, you know.
Yeah.
Heck yeah. Yes, Cloudy. We do have the
the mod that uh lets him have uh dog
meat and another command.
There are there are very few. There is
immortal cats, cat meat, crowd control,
second companion, and that's it.
All right. What's the fastest way to get
on a quest? I don't want to go too much
into Diamond City cuz we'll be here
forever.
I mean, as long as entertain anyone is
one of those things, it's that secretary
of his her and her. You there talk some
sense into my net wet son. Okay. What
kind of secretary? Is she a saint? Hey,
kiddo.
No, I don't think so.
Every We're idiots just because we
disagree with you. I wish What's the
button to put the gun away? I hate
talking to people and being like, "Hey,
what's I know you put it down, but
that's not really helping.
That's just going to give him a
different set of problems.
There's not really OSHA violations in
the wasteland anymore. You're kind of on
your own safety wise.
Thank you. Hold our grass. Also, do you
want how to get back on the main quest
as quick as possible? I think I'll help
out Piper because I like Piper. Or I
mean, what is what? Call out chat. We'll
keep we'll keep doing what like the
majority of folks want to do. Or give us
chat. You you can contribute to this
playthrough.
I was going to ask, do you guys have a
specific goal you're going for on this
run? Uh, you trying to just like blast
through the main quest, doing any sort
of like collectibles or anything?
Before we pass out. Yeah, that's these
are sort of endurance tests as much as
they are game. By the way, we got to
thank Row Room for the $9.99. We will
not forget to pet Zoe. Zoe gets pets
quite frequently on this stream. And I
immortal for the $143 taking us to a
beautiful total
of I can totally read numbers.
$3,41143. A mere
[Music]
$8857 away from watching. You're my our
favorite cult classic film which takes
place on Skid Row and whose copyright
status expired so we could watch it cuz
it's in the public domain. Little Shop
of Horrors over dinner. We have the
original 4x3 black and white from 1960
which we're going to watch over there.
Yeah. Oh, it's going to be great. So
good. What this was in the conversation?
Yeah, that's that is that is in fact the
goal. So if you want if you want to sit
down and watch uh some little shop with
us, that's your goal. Uh and we're going
to we we got some time. But like there
are also other goals. So uh you know
this I I want to talk to Valentine
because Valentine's my favorite. That's
epic.
I love Little Shop of Horrors. Um, as a
as former theater kid, it's it's
probably my favorite musical, but great
movie as well. Like really one of the
best movie musical adaptations you're
going to get. Very any version of it.
Yeah. Uh, I we actually did a little
shop when I was a
senior. Uh, and I did tech for and help
get get people in and out of the plant.
I don't get it. I I did also did tech
for a little shop when I was in college
and my entire job in tech was the person
who built the Audrey two puppets. So I
had to design the puppet that ate people
and that was so many exciting trips to
Lowe's to just find pieces that can be
human tube safe and will also look
convincing once once painted on stage.
Such a fun puppetry is so cool. Uh
everyone should be puppets at least once
in their life. It's it's really fun to
make a puppet guy. Please hurry. Yep. It
It really is. All right. So, I know
folks were saying all sorts of combat
zone. I don't remember
um the companion we're talking about.
You get there.
We can start a bunch of quests and see
where it falls.
Apparently, yeah, there's like a whole
thing in Valentine's. And what have I
told you about? Oh my god. Remember,
just because we've started the quest
does not mean we will be finishing the
quest. Uh we will we will pick up quests
as if they are uh uh you know, shiny
pieces of candy upon the ground and then
abandon them and we forget they exist
because we both have the object
permanence of small goldfish at this
point. Uh and it's only going to get
worse over the next six hours. So, you
know, you can watch us descend into
incoherence. How close are I can't I
Hold on. I'm going to click away for two
seconds. Um you're currently $3,4132.
Oh, thank you. Okay, never mind. Um and
then uh we do need to do a revolving
door before too long. It is 4:30.
You won't believe the junk people.
I'm on it. Great. Clean the water
supply. Awesome. Potato explosion. This
will clean the water supply. Are you
happy? Eat these potatoes, kid. Wait,
are those are those tomatoes? I can't
read potatoes. I think it's either
potato tomatoes cuz it was definitely
potatoes before, but now it's potatoes
and those are all right. I'm confused.
I'm a little scared. So, Sophia, thank
you so much for hanging out. It's been
an absolute blast as per usual. Uh,
where can folks find all the good things
you do? Yeah, you can follow me at
Sophie K on Blue Sky. Uh, or you could
just go follow Movie Struck uh Rolling
with Difficulty and the Overly Sarcastic
Podcast directly on your favorite
podcast platform. um which is all of
them. They're on all of them. So, just
look up for those titles. There you go.
All right. I will talk to you soon.
Thank you again for stopping by. No
problem. Good luck with the rest of the
stream. Thank you. Bye.
All right. Uh and now we will uh we will
add to back to our illustrious company a
new a new friend are uh they are now
ready to to come on. Three, two, one,
let's jam.
Hey, Jenna.
I made it. You did? I made it. Yay.
Shocking. Actually, here's a fun fact.
Tornado just touched down in St. Louis,
which is where I live. Oh, are you good?
Are you Are you Are you mean? I am fine.
I'm not in range, but my lights were
flickering. So, if I disappear suddenly
mid word, it came for me. Okay. Oh, God.
All right. my door with a shotgun and
said it's time for well please um make
any precaution that you you must
um I will for what it's worth it's
beautiful and sunny where I'm at in St.
Louis, but somewhere outside of where
I'm at at this moment, a tornado did
touch down. I feel like that's it. It
It's so um easy, I guess. Like, it's
weird here in Maryland, right? All of
the weather is geographically bounded,
right? Cuz like it's either like between
the mountains and and you know, the sea
or it's like over on the Eastern Tour.
Like there's geographic boundaries. But
out of the Midwest, it's like there's a
bunch of flat. And so it's weird that
like it's in different zones to me that
you're like like there's nothing between
here and there stopping there from being
clouds and thunderstorms and rained
lightning. So why is it not? I'm
confused. That's Yeah. And what's weird
too is that I believe this year for the
first time in quite a long time they had
to shift where the tornado danger zones
are. So they they shifted I believe
northern words. So the the band of
America that used to get the most
shotguns has changed. Yeah, not
shotguns, tornadoes. Either way, well, I
imagine the belt that does also might
have, but that's a different phenomenon,
I believe. Uh, Jenna, we got all into
your safety from cataclysmic weather
events. Uh, can you tell all the
wonderful people watching uh who you are
and what all the awesome things you do
are? Yeah, I'm Jenna. I used to work for
Polygon, but before before what has
happened with Polygon years ago, I used
to work for Polygon. Now, I'm just an
independent person on the internet
making content. I make video essays. I
live stream. I podcast. Um, I do videos
at various places. I don't know. I'm
Jenna. Hi. I just saw one of your your
your your fun facts about Tetris short.
Yeah. Gosh. I was trying to I finally
bust through 10,000 um followers on Tik
Tok. But their rules for how you can
monetize are insane. Yeah. It's crazy.
You have to have a 100,000 views in a
month to be able to monetize, which is
truly truly bonkers. Yeah. So, I was I
was like putting out a bunch of videos
really in rapid succession trying to get
that pushed over. I think I got to
96,000 and then the time the time looped
and I didn't make it. So, that that is
specifically what that video was for.
But, I'm actually also just really happy
how it turned out. Yeah, it's nice. I
liked it. It's good. Also, Jenna will
will Jenna. Hi, Will. Uh, I I am I am
Matt's secretary and allaround keeper of
the information, which is Matt, could
you please put our giveaway from Hit
Point Press up on on the clock? You got
it. Give me two seconds. Hold on. We got
to get rid of the cat cam for a second.
We got to go in. We got to get back
here. Giveaway from Hit Point Press.
What are we giving away from Hit Point
Press, Will? Uh, we are giving away,
courtesy of our friends over at Hit
Point Press, a Humblewood digital deluxe
package. In fact, right now we're going
to give away two of them. So, make sure
that your name, email address, which
platform you're on, all that information
is filled out in the Google form. You
only need to fill it out once for the
whole day, but you can find it in the
description of the YouTube stream or in
exclamation mark giveaway over on
Twitch. Make sure your name's in there
because I'll be pulling two winners in 4
minutes and 30 seconds after Matt
probably meets a gruesome end over in
Fallout when someone summons too many
Brads. Listen, it's totally safe in
Diamond City. That's what I've learned.
Yeah, sure. For sure. For sure. But you
are outside, which means that anything.
Yeah, but you're outside. Yeah. Well, I
mean, okay. That's where rats are.
That's where rats love, right? But it's
also where hermit crabs are and
behemoths are all kinds of stuff. Um,
uh, Jenna, how familiar are you? I I
Have you done a video on Fallout 4
specifically? I No.
No. No. I did a video on the Fallout
show. I am, fun fact, hardcore Fallout
fan. Yeah, hardcore. Love Fallout. Huge
Fallout head. Probably the the like AAA
franchise I've played the most of in my
life. And I loved the show. Do you watch
it? Say again. Do y'all watch the show?
Oh yeah, I mean I have. Will you get
through it as well? No. Ah, I uh I am
this radio station. um frighteningly out
of touch with most major like shows and
AAA like big budget stuff and mostly I
watch uh lots of gameplay and uh listen
to lots of LOI in my free time just
because I'm busy making content eight
hours a day.
Yeah. No, I mean same. I was I was so
impressed with what they did with the
show, right? Uh, I mean, it was so
clever, so well written. Yeah. All
right. I I think what we're going to do
right now, and again, it's been years
since I've played Fallout 4, and it's
been absolute chaos to get to this
point. I didn't even know if we'd ever
make it to Diamond City. There it is. I
think uh I have to go find Valentine.
Yeah. Um, which I don't remember exactly
how to get to him.
Investigate the Museum of Witchcraft. I
would tell you how to get to him. Your
heart. Yeah. Oh. Oh, followed by a
you're hard and you'll get there. That's
true.
Also, I just wanted to shout out you're
really close to your goal. You're like
less than $100 away from your your is
marked now. We are at that goal. I don't
know if you were listening uh when
Sophia, who uh introduced us, by the
way, a mere week ago um at Hacks East um
uh when we were talking to her, we're
going to be watching the entirely in the
public domain. Thank you for spawning
those chickens, Copper Chef. Um the
completely in the public domain uh the
original Little Shop of Horror film uh
will be our dinner movie around around a
little bit later tonight if we can crack
uh another what the $77 or $76.98.
So close. So close. One person in the
chat could just get it done. That's very
true.
Be a hero. It's true. We do have other
uh exciting goals later on, but we we
will reveal them when it is appropriate.
and not before. So, there are more
secrets yet to come, chat. Worry not.
Um,
this is just, you know, the next thing
cuz at some point Matt and I are going
to need a break uh and to eat dinner.
And we found that it's so much easier
for us to like take a break and eat
dinner if you all have something to
watch. So, we're not trying to be funny
and eat at the same time because trying
to be funny and eat at the same time is
sort of like juggling lit chainsaws. You
can do it could be messy. I don't think
she wants to leave just yet. Yeah. How
much do people like food based prop
comedy? Cuz that's what it's going to
devolve into. Godz%. Always have to make
a All right. I just want to find
Valentine. I don't want to start a new
quest. I'd like to get us moving in the
wasteland again.
But I forget how to get all the way up
to the top of Diamond City because I
think that's where. Let me double check
that I'm actually on the right quest
here. First and
foremost, quests. Unlikely Valentine.
Find Nick Valentine. Okay, great. Love
it. It says he's 26 clicks this way, but
up. You're heading outside the wall. But
up.
It's the mayor's office, I bet. Here we
go.
We're moving.
Uh, Jenna, uh, this is obviously a
stream raising money for Best Friends
Animal Society, uh, which, uh, people
have been doing and being lovely
friendos all day. What, uh, what's your
what's your what's your pet, uh, pet
situation, pet history? What? What's uh
all the information? I'm not a pet owner
at the moment. I've got the best pet
related situation. We talked about this.
It's now remembering my brain was mush.
But please tell the public. My partner
has two cats uh named Biscuit and
Shrimps. Uh and they're absolute
sweethearts. Uh but they're there.
They're his responsibility. So I don't
have to do anything with them. I get to
roll up and pet them, give them little
forehead kisses, and touch their little
beans. and dangle cats toys in front of
their face, but I don't have to do any
of the other stuff, which is truly
clutch. That's really the best way
possible. Yep. Uh that is how my
roommate's cats are, except one of them.
Um so my my my roommate's cats are named
Marcus Desi Salonius, named after the
one of the characters in Spartacus Blood
and Sand. There's a show that a bunch of
you probably remember and wish you
didn't. Um and and uh the other one is
uh Sir Whisper Slipper Esquire or
Whisper for short. And Whisper has taken
to um Whisper likes me, which is
unfortunate because he also enjoys
waking me up. So I'm in the same
situation except one of them is far more
demanding.
Yeah. See, that's the sort of thing I
don't have to deal with cuz I'm not the
cat mom. I'm the cat I'm the cat like
stepmom at best. And it's like tells me
I will happily take care of them. I will
try to divert that kind of waking up
situation when I can. But I wasn't.
Sometimes you just got to feed the
little supply train coming in tomorrow.
Oh, of course you do. Yeah. Other than
that, I don't know. Growing up, we
always had a lot of cats cuz I grew up
in in the woods. In a house, but in a
house in the woods. Uh, and we would
frequently people would frequently This
is very sad. I'm sorry to be a bummer.
People would frequently abandon their
cats in the woods
uh because every once in a while we
would just a cat would just wander up to
our house that clearly used to belong to
somebody and was used to humans and was
not like feral and would just wander up
and be like I'm your cat now.
So, we had a lot quite a lot of cats
growing up, mo some of which we adopted
formally and some of which were just
cats that were lucky enough to find us
and that we were lucky enough to be able
to help. Uh, so I'm thankful for people
for for groups that are like proactive
about helping cats so that they don't
get to that kind of point. And listen,
Best Friends is doing a lot of work in
that. So, it's it's basically uh kitten
month from what um what they were saying
today. And uh they do all sorts of work
to get like we were even saying
beforehand. Um if we go to Oh, we have
to give away the thing. We can go back,
Will, real quick. The timer. Oh yeah.
Well, I I got two things. One, bye Ash.
Thank you so much for being here. Ash
with Best Friends is is signing off for
the much for being here and thank you
for all you've done to help. Um second,
I got to thank Sasquatch for $5 and Book
Dragon for $1.98, bringing us to
$3,420. Wow. Thank you. What an oddly
specific number. It's an oddly specific
number. Yeah. Anyway, let's roll those
giveaways.
Oh, I'll wait. Random number generator.
Where's my Every dollar helps. Thank
you, Cloudy. Yeah, it really does. Every
single dollar makes a difference. Uh,
and together we can we can do a lot. All
right,
cool. There's that many entries. And my
random number generator says that this
number person, artillery mage, is one of
our uh winners for the uh hit point
press bundle. Nice.
Um, can I type? I not. No, I can't. All
right. Great. Awesome. Um, and other one
goes to who?
Uh, Sheshmo. Congratulations. You have
also won. And, uh, a Hit Point Press
digital bundle. Uh, information will be
coming to
you. Yes. eventually. Not today, but
soon.
Game play. Oh, you spawned a friendly
angler. And Matt. Yeah, we're still in
the cafe.
I could hear the heavy breathing of your
character. And I was just like, Matt,
you're sitting down. Why are you handing
so hard? I understand. It's your
character now. Oh, it's this guy. It's
this little friendo that they summoned.
So, what game play on the wrong screen?
There we go. Sorry. There he is. Armor.
It all makes Y'all are doing impressive
with the just like the pure stream of
management. We're trying. We're We're
trying to do something good for the the
animal friends, for the kitties. That's
right. You for the puppies. Jenna, you
mentioned you stream as well. Uh what
what what sorts of things are you
streaming uh recently slashnow? Uh well,
I recently rolled credit credits on um
blueprints. Thank me. Congratulate me
for being done with the game. Indeed.
Indeed. Uh, are you are you endeavoring
to do all of the postredit stuff on
stream or are you going to be uh
enjoying that on your own time or are
you done with the game? Thank you very
much. I'm done. I'm done. The crate
curse has been lifted. I am freed.
No, that's fair. I hit my limit. I know
it's been a sort of a controversial game
and I was definitely one of the people
who was like, I can't with this thing
anymore. Um, I enjoyed it while I had it
and it's done with and now I moved on. I
moved on to Skin Beef, which if you love
kitties, Yeah. highly recommend Skin
Beef. Yeah. Heck yeah. Is a game where
you are saving uh cats. You're an
insurance adjuster. It's like an
immersive sin and you're going in and
saving cats from being in um trapped by
pirates in the future in the space.
Sorry, I'm I was I caught half of that.
This death claw is not Why are you
fighting Jack? Why are you paying
attention to me? I'm sorry. Ignore. Why?
I'm here. I need attention. Um, yeah, I
I found that blueprint. So, I'm a rogike
person. I do a weekly uh review of
rogike games. I've done um it's probably
my favorite weird subgenre. Um, and uh I
got to say as as a rogike
blueprints, right? Yes. I'm so sorry.
Uh, thank you everybody who spawned the
help. That was not just me. But then I
died.
Was not a friendly rad scorpion. And
your chest plate, your your legendary
chest plate did help, but uh to no
avail. Um I just wanted the experience
points for killing that death.
Yeah. And look at what happened.
Shouldn't be greedy, Matt. You should
run. I did. I wasn't greedy.
Sometimes you get in-game XP and
sometimes you get real world experience.
That's right. And that's true.
Yeah. Um,
but I am uh I am also of the opinion
that Blueprints has
a great deal of rough edges and a fair
amount of grit in the gears that is
preventing it from being as good as it
could be with a little bit more of that
work. For instance, I'm not angry, I'm
disappointed. Yeah. No midruns to spend
is a huge one. Right. It is. It is the
year of our Lord and Savior Satan
2025. Every game should have midun
suspend. Like, yeah, genuinely. I My
stance is if if if a run has the
potential to go longer than like 30 or
45 minutes, you just have to be able to
save and come back to it. It's it's it's
infuriating. I can't Absolutely agree.
No, absolutely agree. We we can move on,
but yes, I absolutely agree. We don't
have to.
Uh the the other one that I've I um chat
is uh very lucky that I have promised
that I will mostly shut up about today
is uh Expedition 33, which I wrote
credits on last week and is sublime in a
lot of ways. Yeah, I got that. And I'm
I'm really excited to play. I don't
really mess with JRPGs all that much or
FPGs as I guess this one is. Yes. Uh but
I'm excited to dig into it. It looks
really good. Yeah. Uh my um we were
talking about this earlier. My
definition of a JRPG has now expanded to
be any game where with any set of
control schemes or combat style, you
kill God with the power of friendship
and incredible violence. Yeah. If if
that happens, it's JRPG. Um so Halo 2
JRPG. Um all of these games JRPG. Like
it's fine, right? It's great. Settles
the whole debate over. Yeah. Yeah. It's
another good one. Yep.
Uh, can I ask what your favorite
rogueike is? Like, do you have like a
number one or top three? Sure. Um, so
Matt and I bonded over Enter the
Dungeon, so that has a special place in
my heart. Um, I'm a huge fan of Slay the
Spire. Uh, and Slay the Spire 2 is a
thing that I will uh be doing a lot of.
Big fan of Monster Train as well. Um, I
like I like the card based ones. Um, I
have played too much Binding of Isaac to
love Binding of Isaac, right? Like I
know enough about Binding of Isaac and
have played too much Binding of Isaac to
love it. I actually hate it for how much
I've played it. I'm at that point. Um
that's probably like the quick survey.
Uh okay. Of of like the Oh, and and
um the last spell which is which is the
one that I wish I had more time to play.
It's a what was it? The last spell. I
remember when you
town
building tactical
grid action point sort of XCOMish combat
system zombie defense rogike and it is
wild and impossible to stream because
the information density is too high and
uh I don't I don't have enough time to
play it in my free time but I love
All right, my buddy Nick is just
spawning cows. Yeah.
We gave we gave them the option. By the
way, chat, at some point um you will uh
hit the entity limit and then the game
will crash and everything will start
floating because in Bethesda games,
gravity is a function of objects uh AI
and when too many objects enter the game
at once, the AI stops. Everything starts
moving.
We discovered this in Skyrim. It's like
really good. I have to keep eating pie.
And I have the pit boy on an iPad right
here. So, I'm going through my inventory
while I'm while I'm doing this. That's
great. What is happening? Shut up. What
do you mean? You're getting melon. Okay.
Like, is this like when a com a comedian
goes up on stage and gets like tomato? I
think so. Attention.
All right, I'm leaving that room. It's
too much.
Got to heal up. So many melons.
I bet you we can do this. You know what?
I'm so confident I'm doing a save. Okay.
All right. I I Yeah.
Oh, thank you for that sim pack, Bob.
Oh, clutch. That was clutch. That was a
clutch sim.
Don't get greedy. Eat that. Eat that
pie.
Jenna's out here like, "No, no, no, no.
Fail, fail. I watch. Wait, there's
another one. No, it's the same one. You
just didn't kill it.
No cow.
I know exactly who's spotting these cows
and he and I will have words later. That
was so perfectly done. You got to give
it to the creative. Yeah. Yeah. The Chad
Chad gets pretty good at this after a
while. We've done um last year we did
this with Elden Ring and um one of the
options in Elden Ring is super speed and
chat got very good at making like all of
the precise platforming sections
particularly as you're uh going up to
burn the urge like going up into that
that thing called you have to walk
around the outside. They got very good
at that. Um, at like when Matt was like
about to make the turn, they'd like turn
it on uh full speed and just off the
really funny. All right.
Crowd control is so fun. It's so fun. It
makes this chaos possible through gen
Boom. There we go. Final save. Um, took
a minute. Yeah, it it is it is in my
opinion the number one way for streamers
to raise money for charities. Like it
makes it so it's just engaging. It's
Yeah, it's super engaging and it
delivers great rewards for the money
that people are donating, right? In like
a really tactile immersive way, right?
Like Yeah. visible. Visibly annoying.
Yeah. Visible, right? You get to choose
what what side you're on.
What is happening? Cows.
Last time. Do you remember the
conversation that we had?
[Music]
Sorry, Jenny, you were saying something
or I got I
uh the last time I did a crowd control
run, it was for Hades. Ah. Uh and they,
if you know the Hades, as a rogike fan,
I expect you to. Yes. There's that
portion where you're on a barge and
you're just going the entire time. That
barge section doesn't end until you
defeat all the enemies. So, if your chat
decides to keep respawning enemies in
that section, it simply won't end. And
they stuck me on that barge for 17 and a
half minutes. Wow. Good job, Chad. It
was incredible. So, I'm just saying,
chat, this is the power that you have in
your hands right now that you could
could be deploying. Abs. Absolutely. My
uh um I I loved Hades one, but my hands
uh thanked me when I stopped playing
Hades one. Um cuz I played on keyboard
and mouse which I won't be repeating as
a mistake for Hades 2. I'm waiting for
Hades 2 to exit early access uh before I
play it. But same controller. Um yeah.
Yeah. Just just I'm just going to real
quick. Hey Matt, do do you remember cast
your mind back to when we were uh
pricing all this stuff out on on
Wednesday uh and and or Tuesday? Sure.
And we got to cows and you said, "Well,
they don't really do anything and
they're neutral, so
like couple bucks, right? Yeah, I stand
by my Okay. All right. I'm just stand by
my choices. All right. Fill the room
with cows. Got it. Chat, you heard him.
He said he doesn't care. I'm f I'm fine
with it. I just He said you could fill
the whole room with cows and that would
be okay. I didn't say that. Uh that's
what I heard. So that's what I'm
choosing to believe that you said.
Yeah. Okay. So, did I do what I was
supposed to?
There's a magazine on Where was the
magazine?
Is it under all the
cows? Oh, yes. Some light
reading. Excellent.
Great. Great. Perfect.
All right. That's that's probably what
was the big thing here. I don't
I will get out of here without hurting a
single platforming game. Oh no,
I'm leaving.
I'm getting out of here. This This is
the church with the cow.
Oh my gosh. Go get You going to get
crushed by a cow? No, we're fine. Oh,
I'm sorry. There's too many melons here.
A
get
out. Oh my god. I'm just imagining like
they're marbles and you're just trying
to to slip on me.
Platform mooning segment. Platform. Wow.
Wow.
Oh my gosh. Of course, we have a channel
meme about spherical cows um that
spawned several years ago when I was
playing Final Fantasy 14 and Walker.
There's a section where you have to talk
about um packing livestock into the
moon. And so we got onto the assume a
cow of uniforms uh you know roundness
and density. And chat has never let it
go. Why we
Well, I just I love the fact that chat
used crowd control to remake the secret
cow level from Diablo. That's right.
It's really impressive.
Exactly. Good use of that. I wonder what
Fallout is doing right now. uh we go
live to Zoe for a moment while this is
happening. Well, very important Zoey
news. Yeah, very important Zoey news.
Also, y'all, uh not only will the movie
uh happen later tonight,
um uh when we meet when we meet $3,500,
but also Zoe gets another treat if that
is any incentive whatsoever to donate to
Best Friends Animal Society. Yep. Uh so,
we have let's see, what did I miss? Uh,
anonymous, thank you so much for the
$25. Book Dragon for a $47 donation.
Book Dragon calling you out as a real
MVP for keeping. Seriously, thank you so
much. And uh, Row Room for the $10. And
now we need a penny.
Literally Kenny, by the way. By the way,
absolute legends each and every one of
you for doing that. Absolute legends.
All of you. I am holding tree.
Beautiful. Absolutely no notes.
Perfection, my chaotic children. Yes,
this is what we wanted. Oh, this is
perfect. Oh, we've been trolled so hard.
We've been trolled. It's all your fault
with the $40.82 taking us to
$3,499.99. Can I get a dollar?
Can I Can I get a dollar? Can I get
No, we can get four cows. Yeah,
literally any amount of money. Literally
the minimum donation will get us there.
Can any Hey, can someone at least turn
it to be daytime so we can see all these
cows? No. No, you're stuck. You're going
to This is By the way, I want to point
out how much stability has improved
since we did this with and absolutely
obliterated Skyrim. Um,
I like that it tells me that the raider
is scar. Yeah. Well, that's his that's
his profession. He's scum
professionally. You see? Yeah. But they
never have like raider charmer, right?
You know,
right? It's not part of the raider
hierarchy, right? Oh, I see. You think
this is a class, right? Oh, so that's
his that's his scum. Yeah, I see. Hey,
thank you for setting it to 7 a.m. It's
going to get nice and bright soon and
we'll get to see all those lovely cows.
He can't outrun the cows. No, it'll be
one heck of a moo warning. Yeah, look at
this bump.
[Music]
[Laughter]
And chickens. All right, the chickens
have this house now. This is the chicken
house. It's like that the There's that
house in
I think it's Link's Awakening. That's
just the chicken house, right? Yeah,
it's in Link's Awakening. All right,
we're going this way.
Here we go.
Goodbye cows. Guard your church.
One penny to rule them all. Oh, remember
the thing at five. Thank you, chat.
Thank you. I will remember to repost the
thing. There we go. That's it. Number
achieved. Alex of Ohio. Thanks so much
for the $421 taking us freeing us 3,500
uh dollars five $5420
for the nice funny number.
Um yeah. Oh
this is how she stays here by the way.
She normally doesn't stay here. She's
been bribed. Um does she have like a
little heated cave that's being heated
from the the tower? Yes, very much so.
Um, here actually cuz she's right here.
I don't know if this will work. Uh, let
me see here if I can go in before we do
this. I'll make it a little brighter.
You can kind of see her a little bit
better. But yeah, there she is. Hey,
bud. You good?
All right, I'll lower it down so you can
sleep a little more. There we go. Uh,
and I do believe, Matt, that it is uh,
Yep. right about that time that we we
switch guests and I update things and we
do social media posts and everything
else. Jenna, it was an absolute pleasure
to make your acquaintance and for you to
be here. Likewise. Thank you so much,
Jenna. I really appreciate it. Uh please
stay safe. Uh be vigilant. Punch a
tornado in the face if you must call GL
uh uh what's his name? Um the PCO Bill.
Po. Yeah. Who wrangles tornadoes? Yeah.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
Thank you so much. I very much
appreciate it. And uh we'll be talking
soon. Yep. Bye bye.
All right. We our next guest uh coming
in momentarily.
I'm here now. You good? And there's a
voice.
Indeed there is. I got my radio voice on
tonight. It really is.
[Laughter]
Jason.
Hey, how's it going? How are you? I'm
doing well. Welcome. Nice to see you
again. It's been a while. It's been a
hot minute. It's been maybe a star and a
half or I don't even know. Something
like that. Oh my god. This is uh uh
Please uh tell tell the folks at home
the wonderful things you do if they do
not recognize your melodious voice right
away. How can they not recognize my
wonderful radio voice from not just
bikes? Yes, that is right. Welcome on in
buddy. How are you? How things how have
things been? Uh they're doing great.
Yeah. Yeah, very good. I'm finally over
my jet lag. I was in Korea for a few
weeks. Um, but I'm back now in Amsterdam
and uh, yeah, things are going well.
Good. Glad to hear it. Um, and I'm
joined today um, by somebody who isn't
normally in the studio. I've got uh,
I've got Hunter with me here. Hunter.
Hunter. Here's a look that says, "What
the [ __ ] is going on right now?" Send
help. Uh, a thousand%. Hunter, meet Zoe.
Zoe. Hunter. Zoe is currently under my
desk.
Hunter will stay here on my lap. Um, he
is never uh the cat's never come to my
studio. I think when he got in the cat
carry, he probably thought he was going
to the vet. He was freaking out, but uh
now he's still freaking out, but a
little less. Listen, I very much
appreciate you you bringing bringing
your cat to work to be specifically on
this stream to raise money for animals.
Exactly. Hunter wouldn't have it any
other way. And so good, man. Uh his
brother wasn't up for it tonight, but uh
so but we got one of them. We got one.
Two of them probably would have been a
zoo anyway. It would have been it would
have been it would have been hard to
keep track. You'd be chasing them all
over the place. Um so what we're doing
right now, I know I I gave you the spiel
before inviting you on the show. By the
way, Jason, Will, Will, Jason, so sorry.
Will is my uh my partner in online crime
and uh the technician that makes all of
these wonderful things function uh
behind the scenes. Yes. purely online
crime for the ideally not listening
right now. Only online crimes that
aren't really crimes. Of course.
Okay. But uh Hunter decided he was going
to go hang out under the desk. Sorry.
Well, actually that is literally where
Zoe is right now as illustrated below
you here. Um yeah, I built her little
Fallout shelter. We are playing Fallout
4 on crowd control to raise money for
Best Friends Animal Society. Jason, very
nice. How familiar are you with either
if you're very familiar with uh helping
animals? I could see by by uh by Oh,
yeah. We got that part down. We got that
part down. How familiar are you with
Fallout 4? And how familiar are you with
something called Crowd Control?
I'm not familiar with either. Great.
Excellent. Perfect. I mean, I know of
Fallout 4. I mean, I've never played a
Fallout game, right? Okay. So, we're
gonna need to explain that and I also
need to explain the $5,000 goal. Okay.
Yes. Let's do it. So, I'm gonna do this
real quick. So, at
$5,000, our next giveaway is a little
complicated. All day, we've been giving
away stuff that you didn't have to be
here to win, but you need to be here
when we hit $5,000 to win this because
not only are we giving away a bunch of
stuff from all of our different um uh
fantastic, wonderful partners who have
provided us with things. You're going to
get stuff from Onyx Path and Tailspire
uh and excuse me, and Bouncy Rock and
Hero Forge and Atomic Mass and everyone
else. Um uh and if you are in the US and
get physical goods, that's great. We'll
send you some of those. And if you're
not, that's okay. We won't send you
those. And if you don't want them,
that's okay. We won't send them to you
either. Um but you will also be given a
unique
chance, a special opportunity to impress
me and Matt because at $500, me and Matt
got the opportunity to name an adoptable
pet courtesy of our friends at Best
Friend Animal Society. and you will get
the
opportunity to suggest a name for that
pet. Now, it's obviously subject to our
approval and to, you know, good taste,
but
you you could impress us. We will work
with you. Yeah. Now, Jason, you're
you're new to our streams. On Twitch,
Yeah, indeed. Chad is known as Brad. On
YouTube, Chad is known as Janet.
Hi, Brad and Janet. Yeah, Brad and Janet
are a beautiful gestalt hive mind of
chaos. And so when we're offering this
to an animal that will live for
years and we years chat, we just need to
make sure that if we make it to 5,000,
we will work with whoever wins this
giveaway to ensure that everyone is
happy with the name because we can't
have think of this as an actual animal
because it is. Yeah. This uh this
reminds me my my dad used to be an
English teacher and it reminds me of
when we got kittens when I was younger
and he asked his students to name the uh
the cats. They they were actually the
dumbest [ __ ] names but mostly because
I think they were trying to suck up to
the English teacher. So it was like
Romeo and Juliet and it was really bad.
Our chat will attempt to name it Catty
McTace and when we point out that it's a
dog they will say that it is therefore a
better name to have a dog named Catty
Mcatface. the dog because that's You
can't really argue with that. Yeah, the
chat is right. By the way, we ended up
calling our cat whiskey
and uh and Scratch. Yeah. Um well,
here's the deal. Uh uh Andrew on YouTube
brings up a very good question. Is the
animal male or female? We don't know. We
have no idea. I don't know if it's a dog
or a cat. I don't know anything about
it. Could be a snake. Could be a snake.
So, we need a genderneutral name, but we
also need a species neutral name. That's
right. So, for instance, that's that's
tricky. And you can kind of play with
people names, too, or do obviously Zoe's
name is Zoe, um Hunter, and then also my
dog's name is Llo, but those are all
things that could be depending on the
pet, um
anything. Anyway, so that will be that
will be coming down the pipe. So, that
is that exciting. We should introduce
Jason to Fallout. What do you got, Will?
Uh just just so everyone's on the same
page. Remember how I said I'm running
the call? I just got the very
interesting alert that we're
experiencing severe thunderstorms in my
area until 10 p.m. tonight. So, if I
wake out of existence and the call
stops, my bad. Uh, can't do anything
about it. I'll take over. I got it.
Don't worry. Just letting everybody know
where we're at with that. Um, hopefully
my battery backup holds and it'll only
be if like the actual internet gets
fried, but no. All right. Well, we'll
keep going until until the wheels fall
off. Um, that's right. Let's see. So,
this if I can get back into
it, this is Fallout, Jason. All right.
It takes place in a post-apocalyptic
Boston. I don't know how familiar you
are. Um, I've watched the video where
the guy um followed all of the uh
electrical wires in Fallout. Oh, see
where they went. That was actually quite
interesting.
Having not played the game, it didn't
mean quite as much, but it was still
interesting to see like how that all
shook out. That feels like it's an Annie
Austin video. Oh, and what you're seeing
right now, I think it was is a cow that
people have spawned using something
called crowd control. Whoa. What?
Something just exploded. Oh, yes. Okay.
Yes, I do know about this then. So,
Bobberation just spawned another cow.
People and all the money that people
donate today, they get coins and they
can mess with my game in friendly,
non-friendly, neutral ways. All right.
I've also modded my cat Zoe into the
game. As you can see here,
And uh that's where we are.
Oh god. And now Oh god. No. I don't want
to hurt the cows. This is this is bad.
Are they sacred cows? They are to me.
They are.
Trying to to obey like the spirit of it,
right? Like it's not. But they also
summoned, as you can see, Jason, these
things called blood worms, which are not
sacred in my
eyes. regard back the worst.
I thought this was a pro animal stream.
It is. It is. This is the very You've
joined us at a very dark time.
Uh we did make We did make Zoe immortal.
So yeah, Zoe is immortal. You can heal
her. There we go. She back. Oh, hey Zoe.
Yeah, you're right there.
Okay. What is happening? Okay, that's
the entirety of this entire run has been
me screaming, "What is happening?" Uh,
yeah, that's right.
Got it.
So, Jason, you have you ever done any
videos on Boston at all? No. No. No, I
haven't. I um I typically make videos
about places I go to in person, right?
And I don't like going to the US, so uh
Yeah. Oh, why? What?
Well, there's a channel called Not Just
Bikes You might want to watch. you can
learn a bit more about that.
I was just in Boston for a video game
convention called Taxis and um I I I
grew up in and around Boston. I went to
school right outside of Boston. Yeah, I
am familiar with the way that Boston
works. Um what is shooting me or doesn't
work? Or does not work. That is a
friendly angler. Thank you, Book Dragon.
Boston was one of the only places I ever
missed a flight back when I used to fly
like constantly and literally just cuz
we were stuck in traffic for so long,
right?
Uh, I'm going to take this guy down. Um,
the Well, the the point I'm trying to
make is Boston's transit system and its
limits roadways is are famously bad. Um,
the Yeah, I mean, back in those days,
that was even during the whole big
construction was particularly bad.
That's what I'm getting to because it
was Oh, that's a grenade. I just saw
that light.
No, wrong cows, be safe. Um, sorry, I
got to I'm listening. I got to like I
got to rub Hunter's belly here. No,
please do it. I have to I'm listening.
Go ahead. I have to
uh I have to think of where my point was
while I'm trying to survive this.
I honestly don't know how you can play
video games and talk at the same time.
I've tried to do it. I have enough
trouble doing it just with like City
Skylines and Open DVD, never mind first
person. It is It is uh aptly like riding
a bike. Um it is a uh rack. There we go.
Well, I think the thing is you have to
play the video games so much that it's
like second nature, right? Or video
games. I just don't play video games
enough. Yeah. You um in fact, one of the
things I tell people, so I'm I'm the one
that does most of the primary streaming.
Matt hangs out at least once a week. Um
and so, but I'm normally the one doing
the gaming. Uh I I tell people I study
the games I'm going to play a lot of.
Like I like if it's not a turn-based
game and I have to like make decisions,
I will like study the game. I will
understand the game and I will spend
time not on stream like reading wiks and
understanding the game so that I can
talk coherently about it and talk to
Jack. Uh because that's you're right
like it you just have to do it even if
you're live streamer. It's the hardest
hardest job in the world.
I would
not I said nothing like that. I said I
studied video games. Let's not leave it
closer. I'm starting to think that it
is. Yeah. I It's literally the hardest
job in the world. I mean, you know those
crab fisherman and stuff. Not Not even
close. What we're doing right now. I
don't know. I know, right? Yeah. Oh, and
reading chat. Yes. Sometimes I forget to
do that though and chat gets upset with
me. What happened? What' you forget? For
I forget to read chat sometimes. Oh,
yeah. Oh, I'm not reading chat at all. I
should probably put that up in another I
I will also Oh, yeah. You tell me if
there's anything good. All right. Yeah.
If you got questions for Jason from Not
Just Bikes, now is the time, my friends.
Yes. You know, Matt, I'm a little
worried about these load times. Can I
petition for a save and relaunch? Sure.
Jamie brought me a thing. What is it?
It's a
smoothie. Oh, that's so lovely.
I need that. I'm just drinking water
here. No. Slummiting. Well, yeah, it is.
It is the entity count. So, I don't know
how much that's going to like help. But
I am a little worried cuz like the
length of the load time generally if it
goes past a certain point just causes a
hard crash. And I'd rather we relaunched
on purpose. Do you want me to Do you
want me to stop the game now that I've
saved? But leave the session running.
leave the session and then relaunch the
game for through crowd control. Yeah.
Yeah. Yeah. The load times, thank you
cows, are getting a little bit
excessive.
[Laughter]
All right, we're going to do it again.
Don't panic, everybody. This is a
self-inflicted stopping. That's right.
We We would rather stop than have it
stop for us. Also, um if you're over on
the blue sky,
I've heard of it.
The sky of blue. Um, you
can do me a favor and go and I'm going
to shamelessly post this in both chats.
Go interact with this uh this message,
this post over on Blue Sky uh and boost
it because that's a way that we can get
more people to show up to the stream to
raise more money for charity if you have
time and you're and you're willing to do
it. If you want to follow me, that's
cool. That's great. That's wonderful.
But that's not what I'm asking for. I'm
asking for you to go and interact with
this post and share it far and wide. do
that. Yes. No, please do. We were
saying, Jason, the one of the some of
the best ways that people can do if they
can't even if they can't uh because you
know, money's tight right now, if you
can't donate to this cause or any cause
or anything like that, time being here
and also spreading the word is obviously
uh what some of the best help that can
be done. Like the stream, people, it
actually makes a difference. You know
that liking the stream. You got to like
the stream. Click the little thumbs up.
Thumbs up. Do it now. I know you haven't
done it. I I can see you.
Click click the button. That loaded much
faster. Oh, there you go. Did Did it Did
it kill your sacred cows, though? That's
a great question. Uh I'm on top of a
diner, right? That's terrifying. Look at
that guy up there. Jeez. Uh we'll we'll
check on the cows in a second. If
they're not still in the church. Oh,
thank goodness. Someone spawned this cow
into the wall.
Yeah, good work, chat. Oh, wait. Uh I
don't I forget the chat's name. Brad and
Janet. Brad and Janet. Nice work, Brad
and Janet. Nice. Uh, so Jason, you were
saying before how you didn't play uh
many video games, but the ones that you
do or you have Oh, I don't I don't play
video games because I get super addicted
to video games and like I'll end up like
playing City Skylines and be like, I
think I'll just try playing a little
city here and then it's like 14 hours
later and I've done nothing. So, Sure.
Right. You had to refuse. But I still
also go back like I've done some um live
streams of like Open TTD which you know
I love that game. It's just so classic.
Um and and most of the most of the
people on Twitch are like half my age
and have never heard of it. So it's good
fun.
Yep. Yep. Yep. It's very true. We we are
not uh the what the Zoomer Fortniting
headshot
crowd here playing like slower games.
Yeah. Okay. That's the way it is. Yep.
Uh I've been I've been pitching to chat.
Uh I'm actually going to be playing
Final Fantasy 6 for the first time
starting Monday. Uh and they're they're
quite hyped for that. But that game not
fast. Very long time. Furious. No, it is
either of those. It is a 40-hour
turn-based game. Please look forward to
it. I found Boston Common.
Exactly how I remember it. Oh god. Yeah,
it's looking a little rough. I haven't
been there in a while, but uh Is that a
friendly? That's a friendly one. Oh my
god, you are a hero book. The swan
monster is a Okay, so the swan that that
ogre is wearing a swan those famous
Boston swan uh uh boats.
Yeah, friends, this is the time to send
me
help if you want to help me.
Well, cows are not super helpful, but
Yeah, cows help. But uh they might be
distractions. Yeah.
[Music]
[Laughter]
Oh, yeah. So, do the NPCs actually go
after the cows? Yes, they Yeah. Okay.
So, you know, there is some value there.
I'm trying. I'm trying.
I'm trying to heal myself, too, while
we're doing this.
Where is he? Uh, he's currently
surrounded by rad. Perfect. Thank you
for that. Oh my god. Did you see how
fast that HP went down?
Do not come for me. My army of cows and
radats. Rad and chanted are strong. Come
here, Hunter. Come on. Go, go, go, go,
go, go, go, go, go, go. FF6, also known
as three. Uh, oh god, the cows. Got to
go. The one that is available on Steam
as six. The one with C and T.
I believe we can beat it. I just saved.
Oh, I'm injured. That was a mistake.
That was a
[Music]
mistake. Run. Run.
Okay. My copy of your stream is too low
quality for me to see the bar as to
where we are. Oh, yeah. Will, can you
tell Jason how We are currently at a
mighty Where's that thing? Thing. We are
currently at
$3,41123 of our $5,000 gold.
just gave me power armor.
That's That's pretty awesome. That is
That is a That is a mighty gift. I'm
trying to get my gun out. There we go.
Where are we? Where is it? I'm dead. No,
it's not.
So, okay. So, explain to me what people
can gift you in the game from crowd
control. Will, can you please handle
that? Yeah, absolutely. So, uh there's
all kind He's playing a video game.
Let's not interrupt. I mean, uh, there
are, uh, I'm sort of I'm sort of the
crowd control
Somalia. There are things both large and
small. There are companions that you
could summon that would, uh, accompany
Matt for a while. Um, like big powerful
ones. You can give him ammo or, uh, you
can make melons explode out of him. You
can make, um, uh, friendly animals
appear. You can, uh, give him a gun. You
can give him health or ammo or whatever.
We did it, chat. And so everyone gives
them cows. Yes, that's correct. There
are all of these options that we spent
forever designing and chat gives him
cows. Cows. Yeah. And makes sense. Rats
we knew. I love that we did that as a
team.
That was that was pretty great. Uh by
the way, Char Fox, thanks for working
for the prime over on Twitch. Deeply
appreciate it. And now we got a powerful
fury fist uh weapon here.
Perfect. Ooh.
Swanboat
fragments, heavy leather. All right,
good. We're doing good. We're doing
good. I'm going to have to do some
management here.
Just incredibly dark. I can't see a damn
thing. I'm sorry.
Daytime. Chad, keep it daytime. So, now
that we're now that we're done um you
know, dying, uh could you keep it
daytime so we can see what's going on?
That would be dope. Thanks. Um yeah, I
want to see Boston. It's been a while. I
haven't been in years. It's not looking.
Yeah, it's not. It's not. Um, while Matt
does this inventory management, I'll be
right back. Okay. Uh, Jason, what are
you working on these days, man? Is there
anything you can you can tell us uh that
are non-secive projects? Yeah. Yeah.
Well, I mean, like like I mentioned, I
just got back from uh Korea, right? Um,
so it was, you know, I went with the
family for a bit and then um and then
the the family left and I stayed for a
bit longer. I did some filming and stuff
like that. So, I got a bunch of stuff
for for Korea coming out. Well, I put
out a short today about uh some silly
little train things in Busousan, but uh
yeah, I'm working on a video about uh
about
Seoul. Uh yeah, I got a few of them in
the works. Actually, I think I might
actually get three videos out of the the
trip to Korea. There was a lot of
interesting stuff I saw there. And oh my
god, I really have to stop doing these
trips, too, because I end up walking
like 40,000 steps in a day and just like
going all over the city and riding every
type of transit and it's enjoyable, but
oh my god, is it tiring? Oh, I'm sure.
Yeah. Did you do a step counter? Did you
like I I don't have one anymore, but I
used to have one. And I remember it was
at least 30,000 steps every single time
I did one of these trips. And I This one
could possibly be more. I walked a lot.
Uh an awful lot. Um, Korea is an
interesting place. I, you know, I I, um,
I used to go there a lot when I worked
in tech. Um, I think I've been to Korea
probably a dozen times, I would say. But
this was the very first time that I've
been there and able to do what I want
and not have to spend all day in
meetings at Samsung. And so, I was very,
very happy about that. Good. Like, you
cannot believe it. I didn't need to go
down to Suon. I didn't know need to go
to Samsung Digital City. Um, you know,
it's it was great. It was really You got
to you got to be your own your own uh
man with your own time there. Yes. Uh
and that is quite the difference from
literally every single time I've ever
been to Korea where I was like shuttled
around from meeting to meeting and um
Samsung Digital City that is that is a
place like you just you can't
understand. They have their own like
literal their campus is called Samsung
D. It's like a city um but it's got uh
it's got super super high security. Uh
you have to register your passport
before you visit. They check you. They
take away all your electronics, any USB
keys and stuff. You go through like
airport security. Wow. And when you get
inside, it's like Samsung world. Like
everything is Samsung. Like the air
conditioners are Samsung. The toilets
are Samsung. They even have Samsung
cars, which Samsung hasn't made cars in
ages. They sold it to Renault, I think
it was. Okay. But they've still got old
Samsung cars driving around. It's It's a
wild place. And they give you a badge
that tracks everywhere you go. Uh if you
go anywhere off your agenda, security is
on you within seconds. There are
helicopters landing with Samsung execs
coming in from other places. It is a
wild place. Uh but still glad I didn't
have to spend all day there. Yeah. Well,
that's good.
Uh what is happening? Is this a
good fine let him do it? Um,
yes. So, Korea, that's that's my that's
my thing. All right. So, two to three
videos. I think that's that's amazing.
That's some that's some good that's some
worthwhile time, you know, tons of steps
notwithstanding.
Yeah. I mean, yeah. Uh, the thing is I I
film so much and then when I actually go
to put together the video, I'm like, why
didn't I get this from another angle?
Like, what was I thinking? Yeah. you
know, no. And and and it's and then it's
times like what after that exhausting
day, I'm like, why don't I just be one
of those like Wikipedia summary channels
that just like takes Wikipedia, feeds it
into Chat GBT, and shows you Street
View. But uh because you're a good
person. Yeah, exactly. Because I don't
make [ __ ] content. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
But I I don't think people appreciate
like the level of effort that goes in. I
don't know. But and I love it when
people like come see my city. I'm like,
you know, I go there on like there
myself and film everything myself. I
can't go everywhere. Can't go
everywhere. That's all right. That's all
right. Um but yeah, I I was really
impressed with uh with Korea. Like I
said, I've been there before. But the
other the thing is um with some of these
places like Japan, I went last year. I
used to go to Japan all the time for
business as well. Um and uh and it's
just amazing how much these places have
changed in like the 10 years since I
since I've been there. It's like it's
incredible. The Yeah. like new metro
lines and like new pedestrianized
squares and all this stuff. It's It's
very cool to see. That's I was going to
say, especially with places if you
haven't been there in years, just seeing
the the like actual difference must be
nuts. Yeah. Yeah. Oh, yeah. It was like
last year I also while I was in Japan, I
I went to Taiwan for a few days and I I
used to live in Taiwan. Um, so that was
even more striking because I went to
like my old neighborhood and stuff like
that and could see and also like the
fact that there were something insane
like six new metro lines since 2012. Oh
my god. Like how do you do this people?
Like please teach the rest of us. Yeah,
keep building metros. I I live in
Maryland and we've been um just like
right outside DC. Um and we've been
promised the purple line for like Yeah.
since I was in high school, I think.
And they just can't get it done.
Like, and there like there's there's
plenty of room to put like a rail line
along the 50 corridor, right? Just
straight down. Uh 50 runs from Ocean
City in
Maryland all the way across the country.
Like it's a straight. You can stay on 50
and drive from Ocean City. Yeah, I've
driven on it quite a few times. Yeah.
Yeah. Um and and there's all kinds of
opportunities there and they're like,
"Nah, let's just keep it a big road."
And you're like, "Okay, sounds about
right. It's great." I will say like
Toronto was like that, just not building
anything for the longest time. But
they're actually kind of getting their
act together finally. I don't love I
don't love everything they're doing, but
they're actually doing it. the the thing
I find with like these um these big
cities in Asia is that they just never
stop building. And I think that's really
important. I know RM Transit's talked
about this before. It's like uh and I've
mentioned it. I because the thing is if
you if you haven't built public transit
in a while and then you go to build a
public transit project. I I've called it
baby's first transit project like
everybody's new, right? Like nobody
knows what they're doing. They bring in
a bunch of expensive consultants to help
them. everything is like slow and
expensive and it and it screws up. But
the thing is if you just never stop
building it like when they're in Taipei
and they finish one metro line, they
just start on the next one, right? They
got the next one lined up. So everybody
that just finished spending the last 5
years building this one, everybody there
just moves on to the next one. They all
know what they're doing. Then they bring
on a few new people who learn and
everything and and then they just become
like experts at it, right? They've
become phenomenally good at it and they
make it cheaper and they make it faster
and they just never stop building it. I
think it's kind of like in the US where
they just keep building highways all the
time. They're very very good at that.
They're very good at building highways.
They're very good at building highways
cuz they never stop, right? Maybe they
should stop being
go build metros for 30 years and then
they I won't be about it. Like god, can
you imagine? So, it's I think
it's more than
$100. It It's pretty expensive and a
whole day of
travel. No, not a whole day, but more
than it should be to get from me where I
am down by DC to Matt in New York. Yeah.
Yeah. Like, like, no. And it, God, if
there were highspeed rail, like if there
were highspeed rail between here and New
York, God, the world would not be safe
because Matt and I would get to hang out
on the regular. It would be stupid. I
personally I think they don't do it just
because we exist, right? Yeah. I I feel
like um we don't That's the most
convincing argument I've heard against
high school. Yeah. Where's that in the
comments? Um Yeah, right.
Uh Jason, we've been asking all of our
guests whenever I level up. Um there's
different stats here. I don't know if
it's too small or not, but you have
strength, perception, endurance,
charisma, intelligence, agility, or
luck. Which one should I put something
into? You're going to need some luck.
Luck. Here we go. There's a couple
different ones we can choose. Uh fortune
finder, you can find uh more wealth.
That's fine. Scavenge, find more ammo
and containers. or bloody mess plus 5%
bonus damage means sometimes things will
explode into a fiery paste of red. That
sounds awesome. Let's do that one. Uh
Mortal Lab, thank you so much for the
$4.19 book dragon for the
$3.14 which is both last three digits of
your local time and pie. Well done.
Perfect. Also, not bad. Not bad.
Something else we do here, it's hard to
see. I know on on your stream on your
screen here, but the number right up top
YouTube one to be honest. Yeah, the
number right up top right now is I
believe if I'm not mistaken, I will make
my screen bigger.
$3,51153 cents. Now what they have done,
we are team order and team chaos. I am
team order. Will is team chaos. This
number is a very orderly
number, right? It's it's it it's it's
itself backwards. Yes, it's lovely. Uh,
I think I know the answer to this, but
if you could choose team order or team
chaos, what team would you be on?
That's a good question. I feel like I I
flipped between the two of them, but I'm
going to go with order today. All right.
All right. Good. Good. Well, I like it.
Uh, no. Oh, we're going back. I'm so
sorry. It's the bottom of the hour. It's
the bottom of the hour. Yeah, this is
this is why there needs to be two of us,
by the way, cuz we cannot One uh one one
person's not of Noah Raiders, welcome.
Come on in. Welcome. Welcome. Join us.
Pull it up. We're about to We're about
to change guests. We're about to
reexplain everything. So, you're just in
time, if you're not familiar with Noah,
he does delightful variety content here
on Twitch. Please go give him a follow.
So, uh Jason Jason, thank you so much
for coming and bringing Hunter. Yeah, I
got I got to get Hunter. He's flopped on
the ground. He's kind of like rolling on
his back, but uh you know, give me a
second.
Okay, we'll go to Cat Cam for Cat Cam.
Zoe's down here. Raiders. Oh, there's
Hunter. There's Hunter. I don't know how
well you can see agree there on the
team. Hello, Hunter.
Seriously, man, it means the world that
you came on the show and that you
brought your cat to your work. Uh that's
a level of commitment that I I will need
to repay someday. And now he has to get
back in the cat carrier and he's going
to freak out. But well, it was it was
going home for his for his time. Jason,
thank you so much. We'll talk soon.
Yeah, indeed. Good to talk to you. Bye.
Bye. Good luck. Thank you.
All right, Will.
Our next guest is ready. Here we go.
Hitting the button. Three, two, one.
Oh, hi, Izzy. Hey.
[Laughter]
Was that not just bikes? That was not
just bikes. Oh my god. Mhm. I I got a
fan girl about not just bikes. Okay. Big
big congestion pricing fan here in New
York City. Yeah. Same. Same. All I think
about.
Izzy. Uh uh try. We've done a bunch of
stuff together. Have you been on one of
You've been on these charity streams
before. Yes. I've watched them, but I
have not been on one yet. I was going to
say I think this is the first for Izzy.
Long time long time listener, first time
caller. Izzy, truly could you please
tell the wonderful people uh at home all
of the cool things you do?
Um well that's a short list. No, I'm
just kidding. Disagree.
Um okay. So uh we met because I have a
YouTube channel called Be Kindre where I
talk about film history usually through
the lens of specific actresses and their
careers and what was happening with
them. I mostly talk about, you know,
20th century film. Um, so anything
before the 2000s, although sometimes
here and there I don't. Um, and yeah,
and we connected via our love of film
and we've been friends and I'll be on
your podcast. That's one of the very
cool things I do. And uh, there we go.
That's that's basically the basics.
Yeah. Izzy Will will Izzy Will I've I've
introduced many times here to many
guests today. uh is the is the better
half of our streaming duo who makes all
of this go. Uh I love it. Uh I don't
know how any of this works, so I major
respect for that. Can I tell you? Okay,
I want to tell a a quick story before we
get back to the game because it is very
important. When we booted up Fallout
today, uh we had tested everything. We
did a secret test stream that no one
should ever find because it's gone now.
Haha. To make sure that we could dual
stream uh to Twitch and YouTube at the
same time. This is the first time we're
doing that from my rig, from my home.
Normally will streams and like I'll jump
on those streams for our breakfast talk
shows or stuff like that. Anyway, it's
complicated. We ran into a problem where
the way that we're raising money for
Best Friends Animal Society today. You
people can donate and then the donations
can get changed in for coins that they
could use to mess with my game in real
time, which you will be seeing probably
a lot of cows spawn in. But when we
booted up the game this morning, the
save that I had prepared was not
latching the the mod in that needs to
make it work. This was like five minutes
before stream. And I just have to I have
to shout out Will and his uh GD Genius
here because he I was like a little bit
freaked out. You you both know me. I'm
loud and irritable. Uh Will Will
basically uh was like, "Hold on, wait.
Checking. Send me your save file." And I
was like, "Okay." And I sent it to him.
We sent it back within a minute and it
was just working. And I'm like, I don't
know, man. You're you're you're a
goddamn wizard. That's amazing. I I am
proficient in the ways of tech support,
which is to say I am very good at
getting the answers that I want out of
Google without any AI trash. So nice.
It's a skill that's becoming very
relevant recently. Totally. Yeah. Um,
I'm I'm rapidly becoming like like I
foresee in my future being the
equivalent of like a boomer not being
able to open a PDF. You know what I
mean? Like I'm getting I'm going to be
there in like 5 years. It requires
constant effort to keep up. Yeah. It's
crazy. And everything's AI. So I'm just
and I am like so paranoid about AI. So
see I I I feel like I'm just going to
end up old man shaking my my cane at
clouds until something skynets. And when
something skynets I'm going to be like,
"Ha ha, I told you so." I wasn't crazy.
I wasn't crazy. And then start wrapping
myself in tin foil, right? It'll be
great. Um, but uh yeah, no, I'm I'm
totally with you there. It it requires
The only reason I get to do it is
because it's part of the job, right?
Like I have to keep up with stuff. I
have to keep up with what the latest
Windows update screws up or how drivers
are changing or what OBS is doing or
what programs Twitch or YouTube wants. I
have to talk to YouTube. It's only talk
to YouTube. Um, so there's there's a
bunch of stuff. Uh, so all that to say,
we are using a program called crowd
control today. Um, so basically, uh, and
I'll explain for Izzy and for the
raiders who came in just before you did.
Um, so the way this works is charity
donations get turned into coins at a
rate of 1 cent per one coin and then you
get to spend those coins on all kinds of
things. Chat's current thing is to spawn
cows everywhere. So Matt is surrounded.
Well, there just Well, they're not right
now, but I'm sure there will be. There
will be momentarily and they should. I'm
going to encourage that. Absolutely,
100%. Um, and our goal is to get as far
in Fallout as we reasonably can. Um, for
a 12 plus hour stream. Yeah. Right.
We're we are going to be going tonight
until at least 11 Eastern and maybe a
little longer or until we pass out,
whichever comes first. Uh, yeah.
Those are good. See, we both right and
crazy. Not stupid. That's
uh Oh god, they summoned ghouls. They
summoned ghouls. Oh, so there's a whole
there's a whole herd of zombies now
chasing that. Um what makes this one
particularly funny is the zombies don't
spawn around him. They spawn from him.
So they're always right on him. The
Yeah, these look like they're moving too
fast. Yeah, these are these are 28 days
later zombies. Yeah, I was going to say
yeah, this 28 days later. This is not
They're also Look, they're summoning
these rats and these cows to help me.
Can the cows help you? They can help
you. Well, the rats can, but the cows
can't. Ah, scorpion. Oh, boy. Yeah.
Okay, it's it's starting, Izzy. This is
what we've been dealing. What would you
do if this happened to you in real life?
Uh, die. Die. Me, too. But I think I
would like surrender to it pretty
quickly. Like, I wouldn't struggle.
Yeah. It's just Why die tired? Yeah,
right. Or just like, you know, I feel
like there's power in being like, well,
I guess it's my choice, too. Yeah. I
chose this. You didn't do this to me.
Exactly. hopefully die quickly. Yeah,
right. Uh, Artemis says, "It's my
understanding of streaming. It's Will's
job to wrangle a bunch of software I'll
design with either confidence or active
malice."
Dragon, I see you trying to spawn
something terrible indoors. I saw that
come up. Why? Why do you have to call me
out so loudly and so accurately?
Um, we've definitely only been through a
couple of things like our giveaways, uh,
which exclamation mark giveaway you can
enter in by entering your name in that
form. All of that's being done because
YouTube doesn't have a DM system, which
in my opinion, humble though it may be,
is stupid. It It's stupid. However, it
is helpful for people making YouTube
videos, not necessarily uh for YouTube
streaming. That's correct. It makes
sense for videos, but for streaming to
think what DMs people would receive. You
could just turn them off, right? You
could just turn them off. Yeah. Uh, I
want to make after I deal with these
blood worms who are harassing my cat.
Uh, there are now two auto guts as well.
Gutsies. Okay. Where's this last blood
introduced to the blood worm? Okay.
Anyway, they spawn on the other side of
the vault door. Oh my god. I think they
spawn on the other. This is the first
vault we've found in Fallout.
Oh my god, I feel so privileged
witnessing this. Welcome. How familiar
with the Fallout? uh franchise are you
is a if at all? I would say more than
ignorant. Cool. Like yeah, almost
nothing,
but I'm enjoying I actually really like
watching people play video games. Okay.
I think it's fun. I have no dexterity
whatsoever. Like I'm bad at playing.
I can't memorize combinations. Sure,
etc. So, I I like to seed control uh and
just let people entertain me via their
own skills. Well, this is less my skill
and more chat giving me friendly wolves
to take care of problems.
A there's no and cows. Hi, cow. Oh, the
cows are going to get rough in this. Was
that a double-headed cow? Yes. Yes.
Awesome. It's called Brahman. And now
they're making villains explode for me.
Basically, Izzy, if you were expecting
coherence, I'm sorry. I wasn't.
You came prepared.
Um, yes, Lurker, I will not forget the
thing that I told you to remind me of
two years ago that you now remind me of
every time I ask you to remind me of
anything. Oh my god.
I need and I'm I'm here. Are you in like
So you're in you're looking for vaults,
but where is this? Like it takes place
in Boston.
That is what Boston looks like. This is
exactly what I was just there. This go
next. Let's go.
All right. Well, we've handled the first
part of this problem.
Let's keep diving into this
vault. Vaults are kind of like uh
puzzles a a little bit. There's some
rata away there. Yeah. I mean, imagine a
vault that's like easy to get into.
That's not a very good vault, of course.
So, this one, social sciences division,
is a message of debriefing. Vault 114
will be hosting high-ranking members of
the local state government, local
luminaries, business people, and their
families. Future members are aware they
will be uh cohabitating solely with
others of Boston's upper class. So this
is apparently a rich person vault.
However, the luxury
Yeah. Right. However, the luxury aspect
of this vault
has is that
it weird.
Okay. Okay. So, we're dealing with some
Richie Riches
here. Oh. Oh my god. Okay. So, what
they've just done here,
they've basically given me stim packs,
which are the What was that? Oh, okay.
Okay. Noah has decided that you will
perish now. That's not a friendly knife.
No, Noah gave me a friendly Brotherhood
of Steel.
Whoa. I think I thought it said it was
hostile, but uh Well, it's doing work
and it's not killing me. It's not
shooting you. Yeah. Computer. No
computer.
Okay, hold on. I need to just pick up
all of these fancy healing drugs.
Do you get bathroom breaks? Uh, I
haven't taken one yet, but I will do it
eventually. Okay, you're prepared.
You've like trained physically for this,
I
guess. I I don't know which one of these
are good are good or bad rats.
Got behemoth, super mutant, um, hermit
crab, and one more. I don't remember
what. Oh. Um, death claws can't spawn
inside. Yeah, don't worry. As soon as I
go outside, I'm sure they'll show up.
Yeah. Uh, this this is all a mess, by
the way. Congratulations, chat. You have
made a mess. Yeah, look, they're all
happy. They're Yeah. Uh, Noah, it's
letting people double dip. We don't know
why it's a problem on crowd controls and
we can't do anything about it. So, we're
just kind of rolling with it. So, just
have fun. Just have fun. We have to find
the key to get in. Here's how I see it.
Charity's still getting money. Yep.
Y'all are still having fun. We're still
making
content. Not worth spending brain cells
fixing. I am There you go. Those
bad rats.
The bad rats have kind of disturbing
spines. Yeah. Well, the good news, too.
Yeah. They're the same. Here's the truly
terrifying part. They're the same
model. Uh, but some of them are
friendly, some of them. I'll tell you
what's
that's people. It's the rats.
I was I was literally about to say this
power armor is making these rats super
easy.
Wow. But no. Um, what was I going to
say? Why? Get wrecked,
rats. Yes. distract with the chickens. I
have to leave. Um,
I must go. My people need beef. This is
insane. I just need to know which ones
are bad.
All right, we're good. We're good. And
your character has a cat with you. Yes.
Yes. You think a cat would be some kind
of deterrent for a rat? Well, so
normally it's it's dog. It's normally a
dog. There's Zoe. I've modded her
in the icon. Oh, yeah. Big fan.
her herself is also asleep up there on
the cat cam. Yeah, on the cat cam right
there. That's
I got All right. I got to thank
donations, by the way, while we're doing
all this. Do keep going. I'm just going
to space out for a second and try and
get all this info. One of the true
pleasures of my life was watching Zoe
eat.
Do you Do you want to tell it or do you
want me?
I'll I'll do my best. So, tell me if
this is how you see it. So Zoe I I watch
Zoe eat some kibbles, like dry food. And
what she likes to do is she likes to lay
down and like scoop it into her mouth
with her paw.
It's incredible. I I will see. And I
don't know if this is going to work out
cuz she never normally eats under my
desk. Um I will see if I can get her to
eat here when it is dinner time. It's
the cutest thing I've ever seen.
Yeah, it's kind of delightful. Uh, I got
to thank totally not Noah. Definitely.
Definitely not Noah. What? It's not Noah
to be clear with the $25 donation. Uh,
and Dogberg for the $50 donation. Thank
you both very much. We are We are
cruising along towards our 5,000. Yeah.
$5,000 goal. Reminder that we'll be
going till midnightish.
Whoa. Nuke explosion. These are very
good.
Oh, come on. Ah, no buttons. Why do you
forsake me? Here we go. Too many
buttons. So, these are uh pre-war sodas,
Izzy, that do a lot of uh Oh, healing
while also kind of irdiating you a
little bit. Yeah. Um like many
mid-century items. Yes. Yeah. Yeah.
Delicious. Maybe a little dangerous,
right? Yeah. Nope. Correct. Yeah. Uh you
I I still love that. One of there there
are collectors who take Geiger counters
antiquing. Oh my god.
Which is
No, you should.
Yeah. I mean it's it's wild to me. But
also I mean I feel like there I really
didn't know this until recently that
there are a lot of plates like vintage
plates if you buy them. You have to like
really research what they are because
many things that were made are not like
microwave safe. Yep. Mhm.
Uh terrifying. I'm sure I've like
already poisoned myself making that
mistake. Positive.
It's okay. The microplastics will get us
all eventually. I know. The spoon in my
brain The spoon in my brain is just
eating it up. Yeah, exactly. Um
Yeah, that's true. Bananas are
radioactive, right? Remember, if you ate
100,000 bananas, you'd die of radiation
poison. Oh my god. Yeah. So, you'd
probably die of other things first.
You ate 100,000 bananas, you die of
radiation poisoning.
Um, someone asked what we're doing. So,
let's we we'll give the spiel. Uh, cuz
it's been like 15 minutes and people
come in and out and you know, everyone,
welcome on in. That's Matt. I'm Will.
Uh, today we are raising money. That's
Izzy over there in the corner. Um, today
we are raising money for Best Friends
Animal Society using crowd control in
Fallout 4. uh much of the chaos you see
around you is not in fact the intention
of the designers of Fallout 4. Instead,
it is the intention of chat. So, chat
with their charity donations gets coins
to use uh in crowd control uh to make
things happen like cows spawning
everywhere or Matt getting a suit of
power armor or death boss spawning or
hermit crab spawning or Matt getting set
ups or sat downs or levels or whatever.
Um there's a whole list of things that
you can get with your charity donations.
Our goal right now is to raise $5,000.
We'll do a mega giveaway with a bunch of
cool stuff for a bunch of the partners
uh who have generously donated things uh
for our charity fundraiser. Um so if all
of that sounds interesting, slap the
follow button, come hang out, kick uh
kick up your feet, and uh we'll be here
for a bit. This is again for Best
Friends Animal Society. Uh they are a
phenomenal charity that is working to
make all shelters in the US no kill by
the end of 2025. And it's and y'all
they're they're doing it and this money
goes on so much to help. are also going
to be we're like preempting one of their
big pushes which is Best Friends Day. I
believe it technically starts tomorrow
but we got in a little bit early. We're
the first stream for a campaign. Every
dollar that is donated to this campaign
and I believe for the rest of their
campaign time for Best Friends Day will
be matched. So right now all of your
generosity has brought us to
$3,588.84 that will be matched by an
outside source after the fact. So you're
doing a lot of good for a lot of
different animals. Thank you so much.
And as always, we know that um we we too
exist in the world gestures broadly. We
know that money is tight and that it can
be uh difficult um to to be financially
responsible and donate to weird cool
things like this. Uh if you'd like to
help us out but don't have the financial
means to do so. Being here telling
people about this stream, sharing the
link to this stream wherever you're
watching it on social media is a huge
help. Um it brings other people in. It
helps us uh get more eyeballs on this
and if nothing else helps raise creates
awareness of the great work that Best
Friends Animal Society is doing. Uh and
you can help out with that just by
telling people that we're kind of nifty
and that there are two guys and a bunch
of guests doing some really random stuff
on the internet for like 12 hours.
That's the spiel. Welcome in. Also, S,
hello. Welcome home. All right. What's
going on? Should I get Tomlin? Should
Tomlin make an appearance? Bring Tomlin
in. One second.
Okay. Is this a
gag? It's doing the same thing. It goes
to this has and then it's nothing.
Unless Wait, is this the same computer?
Did I? Yeah. Okay, never mind. I'm an
idiot. Okay.
Yeah, I was going to say, did you circle
around because you were busy fighting
things? Wait, I don't think I don't
know. He's going to be a little squirmy
worm. Tomlin,
hold Tomlin slightly bigger in a moment.
Here. Here.
Yes. Hi,
bud. That is such a grumpy look. He
does. He does not want me to be
presenting him to the world right now.
How old is Tomlin? Tomlin's going to be
six in June. A buddy, you're you're
basically an adult now. I know. Grown
man. Yep. I recently rewatched um Lord
of the Rings, all of them again.
And I was like, "Oh my god, owning a cat
is like having Gollum around like all
the time."
You're not wrong. It kind of is. I was
like, "Wow, that's just that reminds me
of my cat." Complimentary, not
derogatory.
Thank you for this hallway cow.
Much better than a doorway cow.
Three strikes in the
Dino.
I have no time for you, Dino.
Get wrecked.
Ye. Oh, really?
You know, I bet you have a good gun. I'm
coming for you.
Get him.
Oh, hey, Scorpion. Hey, check.
Okay. Yep. This is This is pretty
consistent. And I think we we did a
pretty good job of getting this just
about right. Getting about the level of
chaos that we want.
Got to go. No way. I just love that it
didn't that say lavatory. I think that
door said lavatory and you opened it and
there was a scorpion and I was like
perfect. No notes. As the great book
says, everybody poops. Everybody does
poop. Even rad scorpions. Mhm. Where'd
he
go? This coward.
Are they shooting the chickens?
Uh, or maybe some of those. Okay. All
right. Well, apparently you're in an
open space. The chat just decided to go
out. Yeah. All right. Hold on. I got
to find where to go. I shouldn't have
jumped down. I jumped down like a
psychopath. And now I'm going to be
stuck in corridors.
Deadly. So, the scorpions aren't trying
to kill you either. No, they can summon
friendly scorpions. Yeah, some of them
are friendly and some of them are enemy.
Um, chat does confirm that you do need
to return upwards. Okay, I will do that.
Actually, can you two vamp ever so
quickly? Speaking of bio, that is
something that has not happened yet. And
I will be Yeah, I was going to say I
have I have taken several leg stretch
breaks. So, you I will turn the ominous
music off. Talk amongst yourselves. I'll
give you a topic. Oh, no. Izzy, give
them a topic. Do you guys have uniforms
on? Uh, yes, actually. So, um, so this
was a this was one of our initial goals
was to get into costume changes. So,
these are the VaultTech uniforms that
you would wear in different vaults. So,
Matt's wearing one from 33, which is the
vault from the Amazon TV show, and I'm
wearing one from 111, which is the vault
from this. Uh,
however, the the different um the
different vaults each had different
experiments that were running on them.
Uh they were all supposed to be like
shelters where you would like wait out
the nuclear apocalypse and be in safety
and comfort. And actually they were all
like highly immoral experiments designed
to like figure out what people are like
under stressful circumstances. Um
so normal government stuff. Yeah. Except
this one's done by a corporation.
Vaulttech's a company. Oh well even
better. Yeah. Even even better. And uh
and the the the little smiling guy, the
little blonde guy with the thumbs up
who's doing this. Um, that's the
VaultTech
mascot. So, he'll show up throughout
promotional materials and stuff. Uh, and
yeah, so that's that's what we're
wearing. Um, and that's why we're
wearing it. Uh, there's a Yeah, we we've
gone to some length to think of like
interesting things to like do and wear
and make this interesting and fun. So,
so you have costume changes planned
throughout the evening? Uh, no, just
this one. Sometimes we have done
multiple costume changes. Um, but this
one seemed the most appropriate. And we
can't exactly wear like big suits of
power armor, much though I would really
like to. That is a challenge. Yeah,
sure. It
was just standing there. Hello, citizen.
Please donate to charity.
Listen, whatever gets them going,
whatever compels people, chaos that does
it. Yeah. Chaos and uh and cute cats. um
and nonsense. Uh yeah, for instance, um
the last goal we passed was at $3,500
and Matt and I need to take a dinner
need to take a dinner break in a little
while and when we do that at $3,500, we
added the um in the public domain 1960
version of Little Shop of Horrors as our
dinner entertainment. Oh my god, fun. So
good. Yeah, we're going to be watching
that. It's going to be great. What are
you guys gonna have for dinner? I don't
know what Matt's having. I'm gonna
probably order Pokey, I think. Oh, that
sounds good. I have some leftover Indian
that I'm like,
I I might dig into it right after this
for sure. Yeah. Nice, nice, nice. Hi.
What did I miss? Uh, we plotted the
overthrow of uh everything. Yeah,
you're allowed to You're allowed to
participate. I mean, I'll do it. I uh
what what can I do? So, I have a suit of
power armor and an overpowered pistol
that chat gave me. Yeah, that's right.
Uh, you So, reminder, uh, we need to be
heading upwards. I just have to figure
out how to get upwards with all of our
friends down here. Too many friends.
What are the designers of this level
thinking? There's not enough room to
maneuver around all of these random
things that don't belong here that we're
totally spawned in. God. Okay, let's
see. Okay, so I'm in the main area. This
ladder does nothing. Correct. That is
That is a step ladder. And also you
would squish it. You're in power.
Uh some sometimes the power armor had
jumps, but I uh yeah, I would I would
want my power armor to have some sort of
flying mechanism. Personally, is there
jump jets in this game, chat? I can't
remember.
Feels like there would be. Yeah, we
switched your French pressed coffee with
Baja Blast. That's on you. I French
pressed my coffee in Baja Blast. Oh,
come on, cow. You're killing me. Wait,
that sounds good. Not the not the coffee
Baja Blast combo, but just Baja Blast in
general right now. I could uh go Listen,
that's it's the it's the breakfast of
champions. Which actually reminds me,
Izzy, I need you to make a very
important decision. Yeah, it's about
that time. Jamie bought me three random
Monster energy drinks. I know nothing
about them. We have this one called
Rehab
Lemonade and Tea. We have uh uh this
ultra watermelon. Does that say ultra?
Yeah, it does. Ultra watermelon.
Ultra just means it's sugarf free. And
then we have this gas station brand one
called bucked up energy blood raz. Oh,
obviously you have to go with that.
Bucked up energy.
I'm sorry in advance. When you drink
that, your kidneys will just peeking
through the corner of the the room like
an evil gremlin.
You want to say hi? You do you do refer
to you. Hi.
You do refer to your fiance as the
goblin queen. No, no, no. She refers to
refer to herself as the goblin queen.
That's true. You put that in my phone.
You went into my phone. We were watching
that. Oh, I'm not allowed to swear
this one.
Slightly confusing X-Men cartoon. And
Jean Gray just started wearing like a
latex outfit and she was like, "Hi, I'm
the goblin queen." And we were like,
"What? Why? There's no relation to
goblins." So, I just started texting
Matt that and now it's
Is that the new Is that the new X-Men
show? Tell I don't have a lot to do
today. I just keep turning up on No, you
don't. You You're getting out.
Anyway, wow. A lot of lore drops here.
This is this is by the way one of the
best parts about um Matt and Jamie
moving in together is these breakins
which are the highlight of so many
streams. Oh yeah. Lock's really strong.
Um oh there's it's it's sort of if
um you know in the best way possible uh
if we're George and Jerry uh she
fulfills the the function of Kramer.
You're so Oh my god. Not making her a
lane is like so sad. Yeah, right. Where
was that? No, like the like the the the
come in with like the great oneliner
that we just can't stop talking about.
That's fair. She never stays long enough
to be part of the conversation like
Elaine does. All right. Structurally.
All right. Structurally. Uh Izzy, she's
spirit. She's lame. Yes. How familiar
are you with Wordle? Oh, I love Wordle.
Okay, we're basically playing it right
now. Uh I with a lot of words that I can
read. You've got a debug on the third
line on the right hand side. Jesus,
Will,
Will can just look at the code. He's
He's Neo in the
Matrix. Okay. Yeah. You asked the person
with barely treated ADHD to do pattern
recognition. Yeah.
Okay. So, both tool and wish have none
of the numbers or none numbers. Wow.
Letters. Uh, it could be salt. Could it
be? It cannot be our What was that?
Wait, sorry. So, it does nor does not
have an S in it. It It So, if you look,
it's I know it's probably hard for you
to see. I can't see it. Yeah. Okay. So,
right now, the word tool and wish are
both they have zero uh correct letters
in the correct columns. Okay.
Uh where? Nope. Can't be where. Can't
be. Can't be sold. Can't be up. Can't be
work. Dead. D E A could be dead.
Dead seems on theme. Yeah, I know,
right? Uh, it could be seat. That would
make sense. It has the E and the A.
Seats, I believe, the only thing left.
It could be. Yes. Boom. All right.
Excellent. Excellent.
We We have hacked another door. Uh,
Matt, it is however 6 p.m. means it is
time for us to do a revolving door of
guests. Izzy, thank you so much. Thank
you for having me. This is so fun. Uh
yeah, of course. Uh we will be uh
talking soon hopefully. And uh yeah,
thanks. I appreciate you being here.
Please. Of course. Anytime. Anytime.
Bye, Izzy. Have a good stream. Bye bye.
All right. Uh adding to our scene and
unmuting the one, the only, the
fantastic, the powerful
Mando. Hey, how's everybody go doing?
How's everything going? It's go it's
going well. We are hopped up on whatever
I'll tell you what I'm about to be
hopped up on. Uh Nando from Nando
movies. Uh I'm about to drink something
called bucked up energy. Uh the flavor
is blood raz.
Oh, I don't know about that.
I feel like that that's like probably
mostly raspberry, but also I would hope
like blood orange or something, but even
blood orange is a good call. Yeah. No,
it's it's probably for legal reasons not
human blood. That's true. Could be.
Before we continue, Will, I'm going to
stop my video recording real quick. I'm
going to keep streaming. Just stop the
record to break it in half. Yeah, you're
going to segment it. And now I'm going
to start recording again. Nothing broke.
We're back. Look at that. Cool. Uh Hey,
who you got, buddy? I got Mormer right
here. He's sitting. I don't know if he's
like he'll be he'll be in the seat in
one second, but there he is.
That look has been ubiquitous today for
every cat. The deadeyed look of my my
paws are out straight. Why? Please,
please stop. Yeah, he's being as
tolerant as I think I'm going to be able
to get away with with this. Um, but I
did that thing where I sprayed
everything in the room pretty much with
like I don't know, some anti-at thing so
he's not going to bite all the wires,
right? Yeah. Hey. Hey, Matt. Do your
kidneys hurt a little. Uh, my kidneys
don't my kidneys don't feel better.
Yeah. Uhhuh. Uh-huh. Uh-huh. Uh-huh.
That's right. Uh, that's what blood rz
tastes like. Ando, how are you doing
this fine? It's Friday. Friday. It's
It's Friday. I'm doing okay. I am not uh
as caffeined up. Um I have been and
honestly caffeine is on my brain because
I've been watching something that no one
probably knows exists. Uh or at least I
didn't I've never heard before the Safe
by the Bell like reboot show on Oh, I've
watched it. Uh oh, you watched it? Okay.
They get a lot of caffeine jokes because
of what's her name? Uh of one of the one
of the original Safe by the Bellers. I
thought the show was fun and I liked it.
But um but yeah, so they uh they made me
not like caffeine. It was It's
dangerous. It's dangerous. You can You
can go overboard. Okay, so uh I got I
got two things to do. One, I gota I
gotta thank a bunch of people for
donations. And second, Aaron picked us
to put on while she gets her
tattoo parlor right now. What's in it?
Well, I got we got a high from the
tattoo chair.
Thank you, Aaron. Is going well. She's
getting her finished behavior. Um, okay.
Apparently we're on a tattoo parlor now.
Wonderful. Erin, Erin, not the nudest
place we've been on, by the way, but
close. Uh, for for since you you weren't
here before, Erin was our first guest.
Dr. Aaron McDonald. She is the
astrophysicist in charge of uh the
science of Star Trek. Oh, right. Yeah,
that's cool. Yeah. So, she So, she's got
a ton of tattoos. Yes. Yeah. And she's
got finished now. Some sweet Star Trek
ink. Um, and then the second is I got to
thank a bunch of people for donations.
Uh, so real quick, I gotta thank Zar for
a $111, Charox 64 for a dollar, Book
Dragon for $169. Nice. Calig for $10,
Anonymous for $20, anonymous for 250,
and Salostro for 100 with a message that
says, "Shut up and take my donation."
Thank you, sir.
$3,735.14 toward our $5,000 mega
giveaway goal. Do you know what that
means though, real quick? That means Zoe
gets a treat. That does mean
Here we go. Let's see if we can do that.
Trying to pace these. Oh, I need to
order dinner. I didn't Are you By the
way, at the end of at the end of Nando's
slot is our dinner. Okay. Break. So, if
you're going to order food, I should
order now. I mean, yeah, I'll order in
five minutes. Yeah, we have a cat cam.
That's Zoe's Fallout shelter below us,
Nando. So, every time I've seen this,
cuz I've been checking in periodically,
I just saw the black cat and went, "Oh,
Zoe doesn't want to play." But there's
like a little, you know, but I didn't
realize she was also in the shot. She's
chilling. She's realized this is where
the treats are. And now it will be it'll
be interesting to see if she leaves.
Black cats are great. I love black cats.
Love other cats, too, but black cats are
extra extra cute. And then and then you
want to do a giveaway there, Will. I do
I do indeed want to do this. Blood Raz
is brutal mixing liquids now. Yeah, it's
not it's not
great. Oh, I did. Okay. Well, great.
Awesome. Yeah. All right. I've got
multiples of these. Uh we're going to do
a giveaway in 5 minutes for some
Tailspire keys. Uh Tailspire is a
wonderful virtual tabletop that we've
used previously on the channel to do our
uh let's live plays. Um yeah, actual
plays. Uh they're phenomenal. We love uh
everything that that program can do.
It's wild. It's amazing. Love it uh to
death. Uh we'll be giving away two keys.
All you need to do to enter is either
exclamation mark giveaway over on Twitch
or find the link to the form in the
description of the YouTube stream. Fill
that out. You only need to fill it out
once for the whole stream and you'll be
entered to win. We'll get in touch with
you sometime soonish by the email
address that you fill the form out with
to let you know if you've won. And we'll
also announce those winners in just five
minutes here on the stream. But for now,
we return you to your regularly
scheduled Fallout nonsense. Boom. So,
we're going to get back into it. Uh
Nando, how familiar are you with
Fallout?
So, I've never played the game. Uh, I
have watched the show and I've watched
people play the game kind of uh because
before the show I wanted to kind of get
a sense for like what the different
vaults were cuz some of them seemed
cool, but as like a not humongous fan of
bugs, I was like this probably isn't for
me. Uh, so I've I've I in fact I don't
think I've ever played cuz this is
Bethesda, right? Yes. I don't think I've
ever played anything they've made. No
Skyrim. No. No. Yeah. Starfield.
No, definitely not Starfield. But yeah,
I uh so I've never had to look into the
eyes of the faces of the guys. Well, we
just found my favorite companion, I
think, by accident. I didn't even know
we were doing this.
This
is Now they're making chickens. Shining
on. Valentine the detective.
Oh, cool. Life and limb. Old private
eye. you. I love this. Uh,
finding uh What are you? Whoa.
What? What are you? Told you I'm a
detective. Look, I know the skin and the
metal parts ain't comforting, but it's
not important right now. The only thing
that matters is why you went to all this
trouble to cut me loose.
Uh, I need to find We're looking The
plot of this is finding your son Shawn
who is kidnapped. My son? Oh, right.
Yeah. He's missing.
He was kidnapped.
But I don't know who took him or where
they went. Missing kid, huh? Well, you
came to the right man. I got to take
that bobblehead. Right place. Up in here
for weeks. Turns out the runaway
daughter I came here to find wasn't
kidnapped. Okay. She's Skinny Malone's
new flame. Skinny Malone's new flame.
We're getting a lot of lore right now.
Oh. Anyway, you've got troubles and I'm
glad to help, but now ain't the time.
Let's blow this joint, then we'll talk.
All right, cool. Uh, I'll take this. Is
he like a zombie guy? So, he's not
actually he's not a ghoul. He's not like
Gogggins in the show. Yeah. Uh, he is
what is known as a Sith, I believe. Oh,
boy. What's exploding for me? Tomatoes.
Thank you, chat.
Just got to follow him. Oh,
God. What is shooting?
They've been spawning multiple
nightmares in here, Nando, with crowd
control. As you Oh, are nightmares what
the what the scorpions are called? No,
they're called bad scorpions. I just
don't like them. Oh, okay. Oh, no. He's
not going to be able to walk because of
the scorpion.
Can you kill that? I mean, you even if
the scorpion is a uh is a friend, you
can still kill it. Oh, never mind. He
figured it out. Nice. So, now we got to
go. They generally have pretty robust
pathf finding AI and there is like an
override where if it takes them over a
certain amount of time they will
probably just Okay, I'm supposed to be
following him. I don't right
robot man. I wonder if his pathing is
messed up because of all of the animals
watermelons. I can't imagine why the
number of animals might be beyond the
comprehension of the people who made
this. Surely they would have expected
someone to spawn because there
Oh, so can you pick it up? It seems
heavy. No.
Oh man. Okay. Okay. Okay. We can figure
this out. We can figure this out. You
pick him up and just eat him over the
edge. I wonder if I could punch him like
super punch him over the edge. Oh,
maybe. So, hold on. We're going to try
some science here. I'm going to get out
of this power armor. I can't exit my
armor here. Yes, I can.
Going to get out of my power armor. I'm
going to equip.
Oh no. No. You monsters. Oh no, it's
rats. They summoned rats to kill me when
I got out of my power armor. Like like
tactical. I love how all of this is to
try and avoid killing a cow.
Get out of here, blood worms.
fire.
Uh chat, you can also force this issue
by spawning hostile things that will
attack you if you want. Oh. Oh, yeah.
Chad, if you spawn something hostile
right here, that way I Oh, he's
downstairs. He made it. Oh, he did. That
marker's him.
Great.
Commencing deadly. Okay, let's see if he
can make it.
Oh, this will help. Feral ghoul time.
Adam says, "Damn, where did those rats
come from?" I don't know, Adam. Where
could the rats possibly? Oh my god,
there's so many
ghouls. Adam. Yeah, this is what today
has been. Yeah, it's uh it's not it's
not really organized. It's mostly
just And this is not how the game
usually goes, right? Oh no. This is all
due to people's incredible generosity
and giving to Best Friends Animal
Society. Uh even though some of these
animals are attacking me. Oh god, what
is happening?
Actually, I'll just stand back for a
second. Let this all clean up myself.
Laser beam guy is doing pretty good. And
then your friend just also seems to have
a gun. Shoot some of them. So luckily
they can all identify. Oh, get out of
here.
and melons. Okay,
melon explosion.
It just summons 30 melons. There's
another one that summons 100 pies, but
that one's more expensive both because
it lasts longer and because pie is good
enough that Matt should stop pick and
pick up every pie. Oh, so it takes
forever like in real life. Sort of
like Exactly. Or like um it's kappas,
right? where you need to
throw rice and they have to stop and
count or it's vampires. I think it's
vampires. They have to count all the
grades of rice. Oh yeah, that's true.
They do have to count all this stuff.
Mhm. Uh everybody, all that chaos was
very lovely in the other room now that
we're we're getting out of here. Blood
worms. Oh boy. Get wrecked. Blood
worms. Goodness.
Uh, I was going to say, uh, all of this
chaos and madness and harm you are
causing me and Valentine uh, is all for
a good cause. Again, if you are here or
just joining us, hello.
Did it freeze?
Uhoh. Whoa, that's a problem. Oh boy.
Let's see what happens.
Incoming hard crash.
Okay. Woo!
Got him. Uh, I would quick save right
here. Yeah, I'm going to do a regular
save right here.
That was close.
Chad, do I really want Poke? Yes. Oh, I
need to order dinner. That's all right.
Yeah, Poke's nice. Uh, what I was going
to say is this is all possible due to
your generosity. If you have the means,
uh, please consider donating to our fund
for Best Friends Animal Society. Right
now, we have currently raised
$3,760.14. In fact, while I order
dinner, very quickly, I'm going to go
back
here. Oh. Oh, we have to give away
Tailspire. That's right. Do indeed. Uh,
let me grab my random number generator
and my list of entrance. And let's We
got to get uh we got to get you on a on
a D and D game at some point. I know. I
would be pretty good or awful. Like I
would be it would be be a nightmare.
It's one or the other. I know you you
would be great.
Uh I don't uh yeah I don't have a whole
lot of experience, but I can think I can
see being pierced. Um yeah, like being
pierced like on community and just
deciding to, you know, rebel against the
group, but that all depends. Um
what do you got this? I had I had a
duplicate so I had to reroll. So this is
Tailspire. This is a virtual tabletop
we're giving away keys for right now.
Cool. Uh, our two uh, winners today of
or of this time for Tailspire Keys are
Copper Chef over over on Twitch and uh,
Xaren Lusley over on YouTube. Thank you
so much for entering our giveaway. Thank
you. Thank you. Um, real quick, I'm
going to order food for me because I
will die if I don't.
Yeah, that seems I think I'm going Tai.
It's tradition at this point.
T's nice. Yeah. Nandanda, what are you
having for dinner? Do you know yet? I uh
usually eat uh have a piece of salmon or
something like that. Oh, yeah. Baked
with some some broccoli. I'm pretty
simple, man. When it comes to eating, um
that sounds pretty damn good. Mhm.
Yeah. It's not bad.
Um, and uh, it's a thing that I think
when you know when the collapse happens,
much like in Fallout, I'll be able to
catch like a bear in a stream. Like
that's thing I think that you can kind
of sometimes I guess that's more of a
trout thing. I'll figure it out. You'll
figure it out. Maybe I'll move to
Norway. They've got a good salmon thing
going on. I was going to say, Mando, I
love your brain. I know we just met, but
like Wait, you guys have met before,
have you not? Have we not met in person
at like a thing at maybe a party or
something? It's possible, but I I very
rarely make it out of Maryland, so it
would have been a pack. Oh, okay.
Probably not. Yeah. Wow. That's why I
didn't do the Nando. Will will Nando I
for whatever reason, like Nando's been
on here times. Also, we did we did short
change Nando's overall introduction
ever. Well, I said Nando from NV Movies.
Nando, while I'm ordering food, please
tell the people all the wonderful things
you do. I make videos and podcasts about
movies and stuff. We do. Um, so videos
are about whatever. Uh my most recent
video uh this that I released this week
or last week on my channel Nandovi
Movies was about the presidents of the
Marvel Cinematic Universe and which ones
are better and worse. They're all bad,
but some are like worse than others. Um
and then uh my most recent video on the
Nando Cut, my other channel, which is
more like unscripted stuff, uh is about
the Superman trailer and what we thought
of that. Uh, so got stuff like that and
then have a podcast called Mostly
Nitpicking where each week we pick a
movie and just kind of go through it.
Uh, not necessarily trying to cinema
sense it, but trying to figure out what
the logic of it is. Like this week we
did a one that I love. Uh, Final
Destination 3, which is my favorite of
the Final Destinations. Uh, and the more
you try to figure out what the hell that
person like you've seen it, right? I'm
assuming. Matt, have you seen Very much
so. Yeah. Yeah. Will have you seen Final
Destination? I have not, but I'm not a
Final Destination kind of movie watcher.
That's okay. It's it's a fun series of
movies. Three is where it starts to get
kind of campy and silly. So, I do think
that uh tonally makes it more fun. Three
is also like where some of the more
iconic deaths uh from from the series
come, like the tanning bed scene, and
the people in this universe take like
such crazy leaps to be like, "Yeah, you
know, death just comes for all of us and
eventually it's going to come for you."
like the priest says at the funeral and
it's like you think you guys don't think
somebody did this. Like none of you saw
what happened, right? The bookshelf
closed both of the tanning beds together
and then they burned to death. Like of
course you would assume some human did
that that wasn't just a random
occurrence, but uh you know just stuff
like that is fun. Um and we do we do
like stuff too. We haven't gotten that
lines yet.
I I want to watch I want to watch your
your Superman trailer video. I'm serious
thoughts. Yeah, it's interesting. What
are your thoughts? Uh I'm currently
being eaten by rats. Thank you. Now I
can now I can now I can uh chat. I like
the rat catcher from Suicide Squad.
That's right. Yeah, another DC Another
DC hero/villain. Um Yep. I Oh god. Okay,
hold on. No one's going to let me think.
And that's fine.
It just started storming here and I have
a package that may not have been taken
in all the front. I'm going to go grab
it. I was going to leave it, but now
it's storing. So, I'm going to go No, go
get it. We'll be here. Nando and I will
hold this down as I try to put some
words together while not dying.
Yeah. So, that Superman trailer, huh?
Superman trailer.
Oh god. Trying to heal myself while this
is going on. It's not going well.
How do you heal your Oh, like you're
you're putting in like a little I have I
have my inventory on
um fishy. Um I have my inventory on an
iPad. I can just touch the healing.
That's Have you thought about taping it
to your arm? Uh so I used to have a I
used to have one and I could not and it
crashed.
Too many wolves. I seems
Wow. So, the Superman only there was
someone that could help us, but Oh, I
guess he's out getting a chair is
blocking you. Hold on. This is Okay. Uh
well, you're in the same room with him.
Just reach out and push the chair. It's
obvious how to how to deal with this.
Yeah. Yeah. I could I could There you
go. Nope. This isn't This is almost the
heavy chair. The the illusion. One of
those new sick gaming chairs made of
solid lead or something. There we go.
Hi, Will. Oh, he doesn't have his
headphones back in yet.
That's Crash, too. Oh, nice, nice, nice,
nice, nice. Um, yeah, I'm glad I went
and got it, but it someone did bring it
in, but the entire front porch is
currently flooding. Oh, god. Yeah, the
the amount of water. So, there's like a
down spout right next to the to like the
front of the building. Um, and it's
putting out so much water that it like
instead of being straight, it's sort of
like fanning out and like washing across
the front of the porch. My goodness. And
I'm sure that Chad is glad because the
cables that are in the package are the
cables so I can do the card cam when the
Final Fantasy magic set comes out. I can
do a card cam overhead Noki hacks for
everybody. So yeah, that's cool. I might
What? Do you know when that's going to
be, Will? Is it just whenever they get
delivered?
Uh, yeah.
Um, I might want to do a little game
sound. I want to live vicariously
through you. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
Absolutely.
Okay, we are back. I don't remember what
happened.
Got swarmed by a lot of wolves
kind of talking about Superman and
apparently got very loud. Yeah, that's
something that the chat has has said.
The game got loud.
Louder than I guess so. Yeah. Yeah. All
the things. Okay, let me check. Ow.
Nice. Is it still too loud? Uh washing
machines. Yeah, good. We got to the
washroom. Hold on.
Seems like the same. It probably was
just a cramp thing. Yeah, probably. Too
many all very close together causes so
many problems in Bethesda games. Um that
makes sense. Essentially, the way it
works is everything about that trigger
man or the ibot or the rat or whatever
is not a universal property of the
world, but a property of that object and
that object's AI and the way that it's
programmed to behave. And if there are
too many of them, then instead of just
doing some of them, the game kind of
gives up and does none of it. So stuff
starts floating and rules just start
getting broken and it's giant
Yeah. Okay, great. No,
we survived until the wolves came.
Good job. I should leave more
frequently.
I need to get connected to my Oh, my
inventory is not linked.
Oh no. Here we go. Here we go. Here we
go. Aid aid. Aid the Don't anybody spawn
anything in to get us. Please don't.
which would be bad to
do. Big giant monster or whatever.
What's that thing that's big and giant
and the one guy? Yeah, death claw. Those
are cool. Oh, I got to help Valentine
out. Valentine's dead.
Just tired, you know. It crashed again.
Okay. All right. It's because we're in a
vault and all of this stuff is
happening.
[Music]
Hold on. How do you get out of vaults?
We're trying to. That's the thing.
Listen, if chat wants to donate money to
crash the game, I don't care. It's still
money going towards animals. Again, Best
Friends Animal
Society. Throw throw throw some of your
your your hard-earned dull hairs towards
this wonderful cause. It will be matched
by the end of the campaign, meaning this
is doubled.
Double is a big word.
Yeah, this explains why cuz I was kind
of confused because we're uh friends on
Steam or whatever. Why I kept getting
notifications that you were playing
Fallout. He's been doing that all day.
That was after crashes. But um but yeah,
it's um it's pretty cool. A lot of locks
lock picking. Yep. It's fun. I'm just
I'm just doing it for the There's
nothing really in here that's
worthwhile, I don't think. But I just
like the
No. Okay, we just need to get out of
here as quickly as possible.
Cal, get out of my way. Okay, here we
go. We can make it.
Chickens get wrecked. Trigger man,
man. Cursed blood.
And Trigger Man's just like some guy
that's not like a Yeah. Not Not I
thought it was too when
I uh I thought it was like Oh, the
trigger. It's like trigger man. Yeah.
No, it seems exactly a trigger man as in
one who pulls triggers.
Okay. Where the hell? Okay. Thank you,
Book, for the stealth.
I just don't know where I'm going.
Shouldn't have crossed us using a
stealth boy or something. Yes. Word. Oh,
exit zone. Here we go. Ooh.
Wait, are you invisible right now? book
turned me invisible, which will go very
well for this.
All right. Pretty cool. Is Valentine
coming? I wonder if I can just get out
and he'll just be outside. Uh going to
ask, did you do Diamond City Blues? No,
not yet. What's that? Is that a quest?
We've not been doing most quests. Um to
to be fair, uh we've just kind of been
vibing, driven towards like a general
direction rather than following quest
lines. Um mostly because it's very easy
for quest lines to get very broken. So,
we're
not too concerned, I would say.
Oh, this isn't going to get me anywhere.
Uh, get out of
here. Let's see. So, that door is
locked. Do I need something else? Like,
I need a key card to get out.
Exit zone. Oh, maybe he probably has it.
That's probably it. Get up there. No,
stop shooting them before the cows swarm
us again. I know. What do you What do we
think is out here? What needs to die? Go
Withers or whatever. Yeah.
Got to It reminds me of Withers. Yeah, a
little bit.
Like that. The Withers has that same
sort of thing as
same sort of vibe.
Yeah. It's the What's that thing? It's
like this feels a lot like Boss Baby for
the person who's only seen Boss Baby.
Like I don't play a lot of these games
that don't have Iron Man in them, so
Yeah, Balderscape, you know, made a mark
on me. I just saw someone gave me some
lock picks. Thank you very much for
that.
George is pointing out that we could do
a quest for for caps. We're not worried
about caps. Uh th this is uh instead of
caps, we were using uh charity
fundraisers as the currency to go. Oh,
this is bad. That's bad. Oh no.
Is he like going to open the door right
now? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. This is bad.
I'm so bad. You know what? I'll
crack not always help. Oh man.
I saw Matt make it slow motion, but I
don't know if it actually Oh, apparently
you could go for the door. Try it. Open
it. It might be unlocked. Oh, can I go,
go, go.
All right, we got there. We got there.
Good job, Scotty. O, thank you, Scotty.
I can't see chat right now cuz I
restarted and I block it. I'm going to
pop it back in a second. I just wanted
to get out of the vault. Yeah, I know.
That that seems very fair. What are you
doing? You're coming to my house. Shoot
my guys. You have any idea how much this
is going to set me back? Who's this guy?
Oh, it's two guys. Bunch of people. Can
we talk and
cows? Oh yeah, there's a bunch of them.
Hey. Yeah. What's happening? Can we talk
to these people? Yeah. Skinny Malone.
Let's have a weird conversation.
This cow right in between us. I
can't think he's trying to do something.
Is he trying to shoot at someone or
start a fight or whatever and can't? Oh,
Darla's just Darla. Oh, over here
winging away on a rat. Darla. Darla's
just like, "Man, I hate rats." Okay,
well, that happened.
Everyone attack.
What do the cows do? Like they gum up.
They come up the works and get in the
way.
Gotcha. Okay. So, apparently you have to
talk to Skinny somehow, but it's
difficult because of all the ring stuff.
That's what the chat is saying. Okay.
So much for Skinny. Think he's lighter
with all those holes. Bullets probably
added a few ounces. I think I think
Valentine will get up. There we go. Mhm.
Well, let's see what Skinny's got on
him. Let's not have this death.
Love a formal hat as a as a, you know,
as a thing. Yeah, this is awful. Oh my
god. I'm going to save real quick cuz
I'm guessing it's going to crash any
second. Yeah, I'm guessing that
preventing addresses from getting to
their marks is like the key way to cause
a crash, but we'll see. Get moving.
Okay. All right.
Uh, is that a bad brother of steel?
I guess so.
I have no idea what's happening. I I've
lost the plot, chat.
We had the plot.
This guy is helping. Oh, no. They got
him. Never mind. He's dead. Okay, cool.
Well, we got we got some stuff. That's
neat. I need to take the fusion core.
That's what I
want. There isn't one. Dang
it. Oh,
well. Okay, we need to leave now. Oh,
we're here. Great. We need to leave now.
Yeah, the chat thinks you can just go.
Like by this point, Nick will go and
then Thank you for looking. I cannot
see. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Has the
movie happened yet? No, the movie will
be happening. Uh, actually, as soon as
we get to a good safe point, this Let's
get out of here. Let's get out of this
subway. Thank you for those nucaccas,
Gray Fox. Those are actually nukea
nukes. You need a little boy. I need a
little boy uh to start lobbing nuclear
weapons. Personalized nuclear weapons.
What a miniature nuclear. Like, let's
let's be very clear. We're not allowing
fullsized ones. I want to also talk
about the stability of this. These are
the wolves and the rats and the cows
from before we went in the vault. Like
everything Wow. Yeah. That's nuts. Yeah.
It doesn't Right. It persists. It It
doesn't like One of the nice things
about this is it doesn't have a
director. Oh, okay.
Well, he's in a wall. Um, it doesn't
have a director that's trying to like
mess with stuff, right? It's not trying
to like keep things in line. Oh no, that
was a mistake.
I think donations aren't firing. Say
again. I think donations like the the
alerts aren't firing and I don't know
why. Yeah, we I it's been weird cuz I've
seen the number go up, but I'm
definitely seeing the alerts. Okay. Um
we'll check it out. We'll deal with that
during dinner. So, we have uh Zara with
$10. Uh, MGLP from uh is $25. Uh, save
saving puppies and kitties together
anonymous with $25 a mail bag with $107
bring us to order because it's 3939.
Perfect. Nice. Thank you so much for all
of those generous donations. We do
deeply appreciate it. The load time here
is going to be insane, so just bear with
uh here. We'll go back to the big one.
Nando, uh, we're coming to a close of
our time together. Where can folks find
every wonderful thing that you do? I
tell everybody just go on whatever thing
it is, Twitch, you know, YouTube,
whatever, and search Nandovi Movies, and
if it comes up, then I am there. Uh, and
yeah, mostly nitpicking. The podcast
that I'm on is on wherever the podcasts
are. But yeah, you know, YouTube is the
main one, and we got a lot of good uh
got a lot of crazy stuff going on for
the rest of the year, like with
Superman's and Fantastic Fours and
stuff. So curious to see how all of that
plays out. And I'm definitely going to
have a lot of, you know, content related
to that in the near future, of course,
along with other stuff. Everybody,
please check out Nando stuff if you are
into um all of that jazz, as I I feel
like I I know we don't get to hang out
as much as I'd like to, Nando, but I
feel like your Daredevil series was my
like ride or die along. Like I'd watch
an episode of Daredevil and then I'd
watch your stuff. And then when you did
sort of like the three in a row, like
you kind of did three together, I was
like I went after the first one to look
and you said, "Well, it's actually the
three." And I was like, "Okay." And I
went right back and watched the other
two episodes.
It's I am much like YouTube or like uh
Netflix and all the streaming services
just putting out random numbers of shows
at a time just to confuse everyone like
three poker faces and five Andors and
whatever. Uh you never know. So it's why
you always have to check the channel
constantly. Um, amazing. By the way, you
watching uh you finished Andor? I have
watched Andor. Nando, I'm so sorry to
say this. I haven't started Andor. Not
even season one. Season one. I have. I
haven't. I I I was just uh I was flying
out to Boston for packs and I thought
I'd watch it on the plane. I could not I
didn't I didn't get a chance. Work got
in the way. Um I will hope you know what
tomorrow after these streams I tend to
crash. Like just crash. It's possible.
Andor could just be my show tomorrow.
That' be nice. Yeah. So we'll see. Good
show. Feel good show of the year. Just
kidding. But also interesting. Yeah.
Yeah. I just gonna say andor and feeling
good do not generally go together. No.
Mhm. That's more Mandalorian, but you
know. All right, Mando. I will catch you
soon. Thank you so much for stopping by.
Give my best to the fur babies. Yeah, I
will. Good night, everybody. Or good
evening. Good evening. Good afternoon,
good evening, and good night.
Later, buddy. Bye. Bye.
All right,
Will, are we at movie time? We are
indeed. We have made it seven and a half
hours to the time allotted for our
movie. So, um I So, I should quit the
game to keep the crowd control thing
open. Yes, we're aware, chat, that
there's a glitch where you all are
getting slightly more uh coinage than
you initially donated for, but because
it's not breaking anything and you're
getting more, not less, I think we're
just going to keep plowing through. Um,
and that's okay. Yeah, you you all are
getting the the value that was promised
to you, and Best Friends Animal Society
is getting uh cool donations,
so I'm happy. So, right now for for
everyone on YouTube, this is going to be
weird, I think, because the people on on
Twitch know this as we do this, uh, the
we basically because we've been
streaming for seven now seven hours. Has
it been seven hours? Seven and a half
hours. Okay. Since we've been doing
that, uh, Will and I's brains are on
absolute overload. And this is an
opportunity that hopefully my food gets
delivered. Hopefully Will's food gets
delivered where at the $3,500 mark, you
earned not only uh us to take a break,
but you to be entertained while we watch
thing while we take a break. Um, so
we're not going anywhere. What we're
going to do is basically have a movie
night with all of you. And you might be
asking yourself, Matt, the copyright
these days is extreme. How would how
could we stream on YouTube and Twitch a
film that we don't own to watch with all
of you? That's a great question. Uh the
answer is Will found a I will say not
entirely thematically correct film, but
a time period correct film that is in
the public domain. I believe the length
of this film is an hour and 11 minutes,
which will time out great until our next
guest when we go back in and see what
Valentine is up to in Fallout.
Um, yeah. So, without further ado,
actually, well, here's You know what? We
should probably change venues, I think,
will is really to make sure we can,
right? Agree. Mhm. Okay. I think it's
time to go to the theater. Um, because
it's just important.
It's important, you know, it's
important. Yeah. It's a very Fallout
theater that we've we've found ourselves
in. Uh, right here. Um, I'm gonna I need
to change our category and our cool side
note is our category onage. Is there a
way we can fix also while this is going
on uh notifications for the donations
because I haven't been able that is my
hope. So please go in uh select the
browser source for the donations. You
got it. That is properties bday tiltify
alerts. Yes.
Okay. I'm in. Uh uh. Uh refresh c. It's
like refresh cache. It should be near
the bottom. Oh, it's cut off. It says sh
cache of
current. Cash of current is what it says
to me. I don't know why. I don't I don't
need it. It's it I'm hitting it.
I just hit it twice.
[Music]
And now it plays. And will this catch up
now? You know what, Matt? That's a great
question. I leave it. Okay, so here's
what we're going to do. Because we're
going to be watching a movie, I'm gonna
move this over here for now. Yep. And
you might want to mute
it because otherwise it's going to do
that. Okay, hold on. Give me Wait, hold
on. How did I miss this one? Aaron,
thank you so much for $25. Let's go
through. Hold on. From your tattoo
artist. Amazing. Amazing. Thank you.
Thank you, Book Dragon again for that
186. Just have him go for a second.
Yeah.
[Music]
Zar, thank you for that $10.
Yeah.
Okay. I gota wait for my food anyway, so
I'm here for this. Yeah, my food hasn't
been picked up yet, which is weird.
That's okay. I mean, it is
unprecedentedly storming, so I can't
blame a deliver for not wanting to take
those. Gail, thank you again for that
25. Okay, my food will get here between
7 and 710. That might work out.
Uh, anonymous, thank you for that $25. I
promise the movie will start shortly,
right? This is like the five with Maria
Manunos. Oh my god. Are we Maria Manunos
right now? You're watching
Nuvie. You're watching Nuvie.
[Music]
Um, thank you book for the more chaos. I
think that's it. That should be
everything. Okay, great. I'm going to
mute that now. Just Oh, wait. Hold on
there. Oh, thank you, Book, for the
dollar test. That's Thank you, Book.
Much appreciated. That'll let us know
where we're at.
Okay, I think. Are we ready?
I I think we are. We may We may need to
adjust the sound volume. That's
something we can do. Yeah. Yeah. We're
going to start the movie. Tell us if
it's too loud, too quiet. Too loud, too
quiet. You can't hear it. Echoey,
anything. We tested it. That doesn't
mean it works. Without further ado, you
have earned this.
I give you the 1960s version of Little
Shop of
Horrors. How's the audio?
My name is Sergeant Joe Frink, working
the 24-hour shift out of homicide. And
this is my workshop, the part of town
that everybody knows about, but that
nobody wants to see. Where the tragedies
are deeper, the ecstasies wilder, and
the crime rate consistently higher than
anywhere else. The ecstasy is wilder.
Sounds like Diamond City. Might be. Yep.
Hey there, Jose.
[Music]
I love movie break. Movie break's great.
Trying to think of like where it looks
most natural that I'm actually cuz I am
looking at the screen. I guess it's like
this. I'll move chat over here and I'll
watch this
here. Well, Cherry, you're in luck.
[Music]
I do like that the beginning of this
film is like just a sketch.
Yeah. Well, they couldn't afford
anything else. This movie was shot on
like
nothing. The budget for this movie was
like $25,000. Okay. In 1960, which so
nothing. Yeah. I'm turning down the
movie ever so slightly, but not a ton.
If it gets to Yeah, this was Jack
Nicholson's, I believe, first film
[Music]
role. The most terrifying period in the
history of my beat began in a little
rundown floor shop called Mushnik.
[Music]
Ah, good morning, Mrs. Shiva. How's
things today? Oh, the same as usual, Mr.
Mushnik. My sister's nephew Stanley died
in Little Rock, Arkansas. Oh, what
happened? He got blown up. Who knows
how. That's nice. Well, you would like
maybe as usual some flowers for the
funeral.
Oh, hi Mark.
$8. Keep the change. Hi, doggy. You're
my favorite customer. I always give to
you all my funeral business. And maybe
you should possibly give to me a little
cartrate. Look on me, Mrs. Shiver. What
am I a fatalist? I sell on Skidro
nothing but cheap carnations. And I
should give you a cut rate. I can't even
afford water for the flowers to my
throat. I would be giving a cut. I
dreamt I d
Shut up from the back.
Excuse me, Mr. Seymour. He's a nice boy.
Why don't you let him see? What? See,
look here. I got a new customer. Brand
new in the yellow vest. I should let the
cleanup boy, but I can't even afford
chasing. That is my food. Keep it going.
Let me know what happens. Okay. Okay.
Okay.
Flower as fresh as the springtime.
Mushnik. Hello. Oh, hello Dr. Far. What
can I do for you today? Listen, Mushnik,
I haven't got much time. Send me over
two gladiolas and the fern. Excellent.
That's two dozen glads, one potted fire.
No, no, no, Mushnik. Two gladiolas and
one fern.
You want I should put two gladiolas in
the pot with the fs. No, one fern. One
piece all together. Three pieces. I need
it for my waiting room.
What? A felling. Good. I'll drill a
bigger hole. You mean you want two
crummy gladiololis and one crummy fine?
What kind of a decoration is that?
Listen, it's my flower budget for the
week.
Mushnake. Who can be a dentist on Skid
Row? All right. Excellent. I'll send
Simmore right away. Who am I to argue
it's science? Make it snappy. Uh, this
is from 1960. Now you are going to get
it. Oh, you are going to get
it. Look,
see now. Who's the director? Talking
from the funeral.
[Applause]
[Music]
Did you call me Mr. Mashnet? No, I was
calling John D. Rockefeller for to make
a loan on my Rolls-Royce. Sorry I said
it. Now look, Seyour.
You take two Gladadios. You'll cut them
nice and even. You'll take one coin.
You'll wrap them in a package. And
you'll take them to Dr. Far. Right.
Roger Corman, the go
already. Now, what can I do for you,
sir? Uh, my name is Perc. Excellent. I
am Gravis Mushnik. Oh, that's a good
one. Now, who's going to get my roses?
I'll take care of you, Mrs. Shiver. Come
right over here. You would like maybe
some orchids for a nice girl? No, I
think I'd like a couple of dozen
carnations. Carnations.
Pison can't turn around these day that
somebody shouldn't drop this. You've had
more than your share of bad luck, Mrs.
Sha. Bad luck, she calls it. You should
have so many people kick off. You would
have somebody fall on top of you, too.
What about the carnations?
What about this? Roses. Nothing. This is
all establishing that Seymour sucks and
Mushtick's not great.
Side note, I I'm eating. I don't know if
you can see it. Try to rotate. Oh, here
are your I have YouTube chopsticks. I'll
grab them for you. It's all right. I'll
eat them here.
[Music]
Why not?
Of course. What else?
They are all right. Well, I've had
better. Well, this is a small shop.
Well, that's okay. You know, I know that
guy, too. Flowers. Expensive flowers.
When you raise them for looks and smell,
you're bound to lose some food value. I
like to eat these little out of the way
places.
Such a thing eating flowers. Look, don't
knock it until you try it. Huh?
Look what happened.
[Music]
This is what I was trying to tell you
before. Look on him, everybody. Look at
the quality of his work. I ask you, when
I fired him, where is he going to get
such another good job? You mean I'm
fired? No, I'm electing you president
from the United States. Yes, you are
fired. Gravis, you can't do that. Who
can't?
I didn't mean it. You didn't mean it.
You never mean it. You didn't mean it
the time you put up the bouquet with the
get well card in the funeral parlor and
sent the black liies to the old lady in
the hospital. You didn't mean it. But
this time I, Gravis Mushnik, mean it.
Mushnik's actor is chewing scenery like
that dude's chewing flowers. Mushnick,
don't I always try to do what's right,
and I'm crazy about flowers. I like
flowers almost as much as Audrey does.
Excellent. You're fired. Why don't you
give him a chance to resurrect himself?
I give him a chance to quit. I ain't
going to quit. You're a brave boy.
You're fired. But that ain't fair, Mr.
Mushnik. You know what I'm doing? I'm
working on a special surprise plant just
for you. I'm growing a plant like you
ain't never seen before. Excellent. I
can't even sell the plants I got in my
shop. Out. You. Now wait a minute. He's
got a new kind of plant you want to look
at. I don't look on flowers, Mr. Yellow
Vest. I got ancestors in the flower
business for 200 years. But I got one
shop on Skidro. One stinking shop. I
don't even like flowers. You don't
understand what I mean. Look, I've eaten
in flower shops all over the world. And
I've noticed that the places that have
the most weird and unusual plants do the
best business. See? See? See? See? What
is this? It's a
tango. All
right, explain me more. Well, I remember
one place that had a whole wall covered
with poison ivy and people came from
miles around to look at that wall and
they stayed to buy. The owner got rich.
No, he scratched himself to death in an
insane asylum. Oh, that was my cousin
Harry.
All
right. All right. You go home and you
get this fancy schmency plant and you
bring it back here. And if Mr. Yellow
Vest F says it's a draw, you still got a
job. is if you don't you go to voting,
right? Don't worry, you'll like it.
You'll see.
Yes. But that's that that's like the
setup that we're supposed to. All right.
Cool. Great. Awesome.
All right. Seor going home.
Don't you think like I feel like we were
in Fallout and we found the holotape of
this film
that would that would be like
apparently. By the way, there's a
colorized version for old invalid. Our
next selection is entitled I don't want
it serenade.
By the way, this was already better than
velociaptor. Yeah, it's not a high bar.
But my already seen your tongue.
Do you know sympathy for your poor
mother laughing at her and mocking her
realness and she's got one foot in the
grave. Oh, I didn't mean it. Oh, you
never mean it. Now, come on. Look at my
tongue. You got some real some real look
the same to me. God, what's Willy Wonka
uh Charlie Buckets, Grandpa Joe vibes
going on right now? Not Dr. Maler. He
He's one doctor I thought would tell the
truth. He said you should be playing
fullback for the Rams. Yeah, songs. I
agree this would be in the vault. I'll
bet he's assistant coroner. Well, I got
to probably put Audrey in one of the
vaults as an experiment after breakfast.
Yeah, that's when you take those great
What? You got a little surprise for me?
Open it up and see.
[Laughter]
Dr. Slurp Saddle's famous tonic. Dr.
Slurp Saddle.
This is a fallout. Internally or
externally for pain and neuritis,
neuralgia,
headache. If hit by a truck, call your
physician. Alcoholic contact 98%
[Laughter]
Oh, Seymour, you'll never know what this
is going to do for me. By the way, that
blind. That's That's what that does for
you. It It makes you go blind. She's
just going for it, though. Oh, I can
feel Is that the face of a woman who
hasn't worked her way up to
I feel like that's what I'm drinking and
hurry back to the shop. You mean that
lousy weed out in the kitchen? Honestly,
that's probably worse for you than the
tonic.
Apparently my hearing is going out on
me. I get the distinction. Glad you got
that popcorn. Good job. Security depends
on what Mushnik thinks of that thing.
See, it looks worse than it did this
morning when I went to work. I wish I
knew what to do with it. Well, if you
ask me, I'd pitch out trash. I don't
like my house cluttered up with rotten
vegetables. Look, Mom. I got to hurry.
Can I bring you anything? Oh, yeah.
Yeah, yeah, yeah. Bring me the evening
news. They're running a a self diagnosis
contest. The winner gets to go to Mayo
Clinic.
This is dark and
every version of Little Shop is dark,
but for different reasons.
Yeah, that that's fair, but also it's
Little Shop. Like, it's fundamentally
about sacrificing your loved ones and
your blood for a chance to get rich in
American capitalism because you have
nothing. What do you think of it? Well,
it sure is different. It looks
delicious, but don't you think it's kind
of stale? Captain, Fallout is one of my
favorite games as well. We will be
getting back to it after this dinner
break to raise money for Best Friends
Animal Society. I'm going to change the
title. You You like evil skunk cabbage.
Was debating it, but now you will. What
kind of a plant is this, Seymour? Well,
I'm not sure. I got the seeds from a
Japanese gardener over on Central
Avenue. He found them in with an order
he got from a plantation next to a
cranberry farm. Fine. Fine. You don't
even know what is this plant you're
growing? Well, I gave it a name. What
name?
Audy name. You can't even mention it.
Well, I named it Audrey Jr. You named it
after me. Oh, really? That's the most
exciting thing anyone's ever done to me.
Really? I don't think it's so much I
should keep on spending $10 a week on
your welcome back. He named it after me.
I know. Oh, and if they keep it, they'll
name it Mushnik Folly because I'll be in
jail for non-payment of Texas. Are you
crazy? Who? Who? You. You. That's
probably the only plant of its kind in
the world. Don't you realize if Seymour
can nurse that thing back to health,
you'll have people coming here from all
over? You think so? You found I know.
So, you mushed it. That's all I'm saying
on the subject. Besides, I've got to get
home. My wife's making gardinius for
dinner.
Good night, you fell. Amazing quote.
I'll see you tomorrow. Yeah, besides, I
got to get home. My wife's making
gardinas for dinner. He's a nice man.
Maybe he knows what he's talking about.
Zimba, thank you for the 5967 donated.
I'll tell you what. Bringing us two.
I'll keep you dumb and $1 it back down.
You both can.
You know what that Well, actually, we're
going to hold it. That's one more treat
for Zoe when we're done with movies.
Yep. So, I can't put her camera in this
video. More. Don't waste your pity on
me, Audrey. I'm not worth it. Who says
you're not? Everybody. Yeah, I know.
I think you're a fine figurative of a
man. And I know that Audrey Jr. will be
the sweetest thing in the whole wide
world. Well, I don't know. I've given it
every kind of fancy fertilizer and
atomic plant food and distilled mineral
water you can buy, but it just gets
sicker and sicker. Don't worry, you're
sadly this does not have subtitles. I'm
sorry. Pasadena
Burbank. Good night, Seymour. Good
night, Audrey. Does YouTube provide like
slightly delayed?
It it will in the VOD, but won't live
because we needed to turn the delay down
in order to for crowd control to work.
And I done everything I could for you.
Where did I goof?
You're the first little plant I ever
tried to grow. And if you die, I don't
know what I'll do. Please don't die.
I'll get you some water. Okay,
[Music]
Belle, we're still at it.
Yep.
We're trying to raise money to help Best
Friends Animal Society save
animals. We will be here for a while.
Oh, gee, you opened up just like you do
every night at
sunset. I wish I knew how to make you
grow. Here, let me move this out of your
way so you can breathe. Ow! Ow! Ow! Ow!
Oh! Well, well, well. Hey, what
happened? How come you woke up?
Blood. You like
blood? Oh, you must be
kidding. Well, we'll see.
[Music]
Didn't he already cut himself? Does he
have to cut himself again?
Okay. All right. I don't know what I'm
doing for you.
[Applause]
I like the slurp noises. Oh, who would
have thought it?
Well, I guess there's just no accounting
for people's tastes.
It's a bland, dude.
[Music]
Fantastic with a ph there.
My boy, you are the most magnanimous
person in the whole world. Look on him.
Isn't he beautiful? Isn't he delicious?
Isn't he got the $2 raise? What happened
to your fingers? Beast stings. So, how
come I'm all of a sudden so wonderful?
Five bees, one for each finger. 10 B's?
Did you say I was getting a $2 raise?
Correct, my very excellent Seymour. 10
B's. What did I do now? Don't you know
what you did? Just look.
Oh boy, look at that. It grew. It's
almost a foot long. Isn't it empirical?
It grows like a cold sword from the lip.
Wow. Oh, hello young pretty ladies
watching Gravis Mushnik for you. Well,
we saw
your junior. So, we thought we'd come in
ominously right. That makes four people
today who have come in just to look at
it. Oh dear. How does looking make them?
Is that just too much? What kind of plan
is it? It's in theory when they come
they buy 10 bees. Well, is that all? I
mean, doesn't it have a scientific name?
Yes, of course. But who could denounce
it? You would like maybe to buy
something. There we go. Nick's got the
job.
But that's just to spend on flowers. So,
we don't have any of our own. Isn't that
a drag? You got just $2,000 just for to
spend on flowers. That's right. Who does
the Chamber of Commerce? Well, we're
from Cookamonga High School. We're
building a float for the Rose Bowl
parade, which is made out of flowers.
Thousands of them. And we're on the
committee that picks the flora and then
glues on the flowers.
Gee, that sure is a mad plant. Wow.
Yeah. Nemo here invented it. He did
thousands of flowers.
Girls damaged the culture is. Tell me,
how come you don't buy all these
thousands of flowers from Graas Mush?
Maybe I'm out. Maybe I've been out of
the dating scene too long. What's that?
But but can chat can anyone tell me like
if you're trying to like become popular
with whoever you want to date? Like is
is growing a weird plant the way to do
it or is this a a product of a bygone
era? I mean the conceits in this movie
are very thin. I got a son now. He's his
son. What Mr. Mushnik? I don't want you
should call me Mr. Mushnik anymore. I
want you should call me dead. Okay,
dead. Isn't that beautiful? Look, they
only have an hour and 10 minutes to get
through a very weird complicated plot. I
want to talk introduce at least one
character that they need to deal with
later. Look on it. Soon we got no more
into it. We will be rich. Z's got a
take. I am building for you a giant
greenhouse in which you are making
impossible flowers which I am selling at
ridiculous prices in my giant new flower
saloon in Beverly.
You're saying you've been someone's like
in the dating scene wouldn't try it and
I'd be put off by it. Gravis Mushnik in
that's how you survive little shop
hiding and we'll have an or Scott says
chicks dig plants man y'all are missing
out maybe wave his arm right but but one
that drinks blood is not I'll come out
in a probably the best call I mean look
damaging sure but I was goth once upon a
time I kind of went back a little bit
for
Pat you know I can see it
my uncle's brother just passed away New
Crazy. Tell me, how much are the
carnations today? The carnations are
$600 a dollar. Why are they letting him
run around loose? Please, please excuse
my son, Mrs. Shiver. Just point anything
in the store and it is yours. I mean,
that's right. The cash register, maybe.
Huh? Wait a minute. Here. Here are
several dozen carnations on the house
courtesy of Gravis Mushnik De Bloom
Tycoon. That's my dad. Thanks. I don't
know. I don't know why I wasn't paying
attention, but I kind of want to try to
grow Mushnik's beard. Not only did my
uncle I feel like it's a very Monos
Hands of Fate beard. Yeah. It like it
comes down and it goes up. It starts
under the chin and then cuts back onto
his cheek. Like it's very Romulan,
right? Like it's it's got that like
weird like extra point that like they
was very big in early Starship where
they were like we want this person to be
inhuman beard. No. And it was so
beautiful just a few seconds ago.
Excellent. Just a few seconds ago I gave
away dozens of carnations free to Mr.
Shiver. I didn't mean it.
He's not growing a plan. He's proving
you provide financially. He's growing a
red flag. That's true.
But everyone in this film is a red flag.
Uh David, thank you so much over on
YouTube for hanging out. Appreciate you
being here. Rest in peace in Arabic. Oh,
you've got to give him another chance.
You promised me a week, Mr. Mushnik.
I'll sit up all night with that plant.
It'll be healthy in the morning. You'll
see. I promise. I promise.
[Music]
Oh, what a horrible night to have a
curse.
Artemis says, "Absolutely. Growing weird
plants is attractive, especially if it
drinks blood. I have bad taste in guys."
[Applause]
Oh, man. You like how that's clearly
just the stage box that he's sitting on?
Me.
You said that. Thank you so much for
101. You got a talking plan. Say it
again. Been me.
Oh boy. I never been to college and I
ain't been around much, but I'd have
been willing to bet there ain't no such
thing as a talking plant. But I'll take
your word for it. Gee, Junior, I' I'd
like to feed you, but I used up all my
fingers.
I don't I think this this is the
earliest recorded version of Little
Shop. There have been two other recorded
pieces, but I don't know if this is
another stage version. I think it is
because this doesn't have the music,
right? So, so the did the stage blade
turned into a I can do more. Well, the
80s version already anemic.
Feed me more.
Gun to give you anything I got, but I
got to keep a little blood for myself or
I'll be in worse shape than mom. H I'm
sorry, Junior. Well, I'll go for a walk.
Maybe I'll think of
[Music]
something. Okay, it's night time on
Liquor Lane. Yeah, it's Skid Row.
[Music]
Is that a random creature? Movie wasn't
a musical and then it went to Broadway
as a musical.
[Applause]
[Music]
Oh man, just walking down the tracks. If
Jason was here, he could tell us how the
infrastructure was.
[Music]
Who amongst us hasn't gone down to the
railard to throw rocks and
[Music]
think
[Music]
His reaction to murder you
[Applause]
guys. Oh, he's fine. He's fine. He's
totally He's totally fine. He's
[Music]
There's a lot that could happen in this
time,
man. That is the most
1960s got hit by a train scene I think
I've ever seen. That's better. It's
better than special effects and veloc.
That's not saying a lot.
Okay. Okay. A MOA. That's right. That's
right. It's not a murder. It's a maida.
I like how Roberto is is like he was not
in fact fine.
Okay, he's got there's a convenient bag
full of what I assume is person. Yeah,
keep the person parts in the Uh-oh. This
Oh yeah, I can't stay there. This the
shadow nose.
It's the right arrow of film, too.
Daddy, somebody else.
Hey, funeral. No
parking. Wait. Okay, he got scared of
the corpse, but he's carrying half a
corpse.
I know. Look, Seymour's not very smart
in any version of this story, to be
fair. New guy asked, did he chop the guy
up? No, the train did that. All right,
the train imploded him. It's like when
you get hit by something in TF2 and you
get gibbed everywhere. It's that but
with a training. Eat
me. Eat me. Look,
childhound. Don't bother me. I got
remind me to use iPhones and game. We
had to make our own by committing man to
somebody else. I'm hungry. I don't care
what you are. Well, is that how you're
feeling right now? Where's your food? Do
you know you have any idea? Uh, it is on
the way and has been here. Think it's
fun to haul around a sack full of 15 to
20. Oh no, Junior. What kind of guy pick
up the next stop? I'm starved.
Well,
maybe just a snack.
I did just bring this this bag of corpse
parts.
That looks great.
[Music]
Gross.
Now that is what I call a salad. What do
you call that salad? Nefarious.
Well, before the next course, I think
I'll have a nice cigar. All right. You
would like maybe a
cigar cigar. What am I thinking about?
Where are the matches?
Oh boy. You know what I found? What? I'm
looking for the matches and I found I
left the money in dollar suit.
Here's your mock chicken legs. You don't
have any money?
So, what else is new? All right. All
right. I made a mistake. After all, a
man is entitled. Go on. This is your
story. I'll wait for the punch. Don't
get smart with me, Gy. I'll have you
know that in my shop in the cash
register, I'm having the total day's
receipts, which is summing up to more
than $9. You'll bring the rest of the
food, then I'll go to the shop and get
the money. You're playing my favorite
song. Now, look here, Buster. One of you
is going to go down right now and get
the loot while the other one stays.
Who's going to walk in on Seymour feet
to plan a bunch of body parts?
Oh, fine. In this fancy schmency
restaurant, you are holding hostages,
right? Right.
Excellent.
You eat up, Audrey. I'll be back in a
flesh with the cash. Bye, Gravis.
[Music]
Anything could be happening. Anything
could be happening right now.
[Music]
singing Christmas carols.
Mushnik shouldn't really care.
[Music]
Mind your business, Mushnik. Who knows
where he got that disembodied foot? It's
fine.
Yeah, you're hallucinating, Mushnik.
Too many cigars.
[Music]
You're flushed now, right? Welcome home,
J. Bring me whiskey, rum, wine, gin,
bourbon. What? Scotch, rye, tequila,
saki, manache. Did you bring the money?
Don't bug me with the money. I got to
get drunk now. What flipped him? I don't
know. Look here. Here. Take it. Bring me
anything. Bring me everything. Creme the
mint. Everything you got. Okay. Wow.
She's still bringing him the food. I'm
with S on this one. Don't ask. Why get
upset with the ra? Let him go. And she
literally waits the entire time. Why
don't you tell me? Maybe I could help
you. Help? You couldn't try and eat
something. It'll calm your aggravation.
His what? In my own shop. His who? His
You wouldn't believe it. Exactly. Break
out and tell me. All right. I'll tell
you tomorrow right after I am telling
the police.
But didn't tell the police. If he had,
that might have been the finish of the
unhappy story. It was
not. We're currently watching the 1960s
little shop of dinner. Oh, that's so
fun. Yeah.
Say hi to Say hi to Chad. This isn't
This isn't Steve Martin, is it? No. 60s.
Hi, Chad.
[Applause]
Hi, Gravis. $85 with business already
and we barely open.
What did I tell you? I like that there's
just palm trees around it. Yeah. I like
that the guy who eats flowers and they
said we could use your fire on the float
eating a flower that's Audrey Jun right
on top. Can't you just picture it? I can
picture. Oh, won't the people just eat
it up? Eat up the people. And we're
going to have the big part of it open so
she can sit in it. The queen with her
crown of scepter. She'll be so cute. Oh,
you could just eat her up. Eat up the
girl. Oh, there's no
Eat the whole thing.
Don't put it back. It's I mean, Chad,
it's Skid, bro. Nothing ever happens.
Okay, my food is
now took a wrong turn. Suddenly, Seymour
food is almost beside my subject for the
plant. The plant is great. It's It's
four times bigger than it was yesterday.
I saw I saw. How come the plant is now
so big? I don't know. How come the plant
is now so big? Look at all them people
out there. This is a question on
everyone and a half hour. We already
done $70 worth of business. 85 Duke
Seymour.
You gave this plant a fancy name, Audrey
Jr. But I want to know right now, what
do just people call it? Well, it's a
cross between a Butterworth and a Venus
fly trap. Venus fly trap. And what are
the habits of this Venus fly trap? Well,
the book says it eats insects. It eats
them three times in its life and then
it's full grown. Excellent. And how many
times is this one eat? Well, once or
twice. You don't remember? Well, it's
kind of an unusual type fly trap. That
is a possibility.
May never eat again. I don't see how it
could get any bigger. Then you think it
don't need any more flies? Yeah.
Air quotes. flies. My tooth is flies.
Yeah. All right. Excellent. You're I
love that they just load the dentist
like in the first scene and then Thanks,
boss. Gravis, we've got to order more
flowers. Tons of them.
Oh man. Now, now there is conflict.
Look, he's coming
around. It's fine. Could have been
anyone's fault.
This is an allegory for capitalism. How
many people must die in order to fuel
[Music]
profits? Please don't. Oh, please don't
hurt me anymore.
The representation of dentistry is
that'll teach you to keep your bill up.
Not necessarily the best.
American Dental Society probably not a
big
[Music]
go ahead and run you. Run. I'm glad I
heard you. I'm glad. I'm glad. Seymour.
Seymour. Got a bad tooth, huh? No. I
thought this was the man's real, come
back here, you bad dog. You get in
there.
So, you are the young man who ruined my
gladiolas. Huh? Sit down. Come on.
This won't end well. My tooth stopped
hurting. Yes, I know. Sick. Shut up and
open up. Uhhuh.
Now it's good.
Does that hurt? Good. Will food's here
when the dentist starts. You should have
over here. Seymour, who was the dentist
here? You or me? The dentist is mean S
because apparently Seymour ruined his
flowers. So he's going to cause inep
irreparable damage to his dental work.
It's going to be an easy one, Seymour. I
won't even use It's a fair trade. Oh,
you broke the mirror in my mouth. Well,
don't tell me about it, stupid. Just
swallow it.
All right. Yes. Let's see now, Simo. You
told him to swallow the beer. I'll have
this one, and this one, and that one,
and I have to have this one, one, two,
who is the dentist here? You or me? Are
you practicing dentistry without a
license? No. All
right, let's
see.
[Music]
Oh, don't be
A
look at that is the noise canonically it
makes when you remove it too. I didn't
know you were an elk.
You know I can't afford an assistant. So
I get this ready instant mix. It doesn't
last very long but it tastes good.
[Applause]
All right Simon stay away from me.
See me a duel. Aha.
Amazing.
Yeah, Seymour has now gone full
sociopath. Before it was an accident,
but now that Jack Nicholson is on the
scene. Jamie, look at Jack Nicholson.
It is. It's his first movie.
I see it is
still looks Yeah.
You can come in
now. There goes. I'm just here to eat
some. That's fine.
My name is Wilbur Force. Wilbur Force.
What? Just Wilbur Force. My first name
is Wilbur. My last name is
Force. I don't have a middle name. Well,
you have an appointment maybe Facebook.
No, but you were very highly recommended
to me by one of your patients, Mrs.
Esiva. I do a lot of undertaking for her
relatives. Yeah, new guy. You're right.
You can see I have a customer now and
I'm all booked up for the rest of the
day. So, you'll have to come back
tomorrow. Oh, I couldn't do that. I have
three or four abscesses, a touch of
porrhea, nine or 10 cab because it
sounds it feels like something you find
out and I'm in terrible pain. Well, I I
can't help you today. Oh, that's all
right. I'll I'll just wait outside.
The magazine was titled Pain Nova.
The patient came to me with a large hole
in his abdomen caused by a fire poker
used on him by his
wife. He almost bled to death and gang
green had set in. I This has nothing to
do with the chance, right? There were
other
complications. The man had cancer,
tuberculosis, leprosy, and a touch of
the grip.
I decided to operate. My My patient just
left. You You could come in now. Oh,
goody.
I didn't see the other man leave. Well,
he went out the back door.
Oh, yes. The famous dentistry back door.
Most people don't like to go to the
dentist, but I rather enjoy it myself.
Don't you? I mean, there's such there's
a real feeling of growth of
of progress when that that old drill
goes in. When did this turn into I'd
almost rather go to the dentist than
anywhere. Yeah. Uh about five five
minutes ago. It dulls the senses. Also,
that's Jack Nicholson. I hate you more
than it is me. Oh, goody goody. Here it
comes.
[Applause]
Oh my god. Don't stop now. Well, I made
a lot of holes and now I got to fill it
up with this here silver stuff. Well,
aren't you going to pull any? Aren't you
going to pull any? All right, I'm going.
All right. Bye, Jamie. Well, your mouth.
[Music]
This doesn't This has nothing to do with
the plan, right? No. Well, other than
this guy's probably Yeah, he's gonna
die. Favre, it's been quite an
afternoon. I can truly say I've never
enjoyed myself so much. I'll recommend
you to all my friends. Thank you. Bye.
Bye. Yeah.
So, this movie is only an hour and 11
minutes long.
It just spent a good three to five of
those minutes. That is correct. Just
giving Jack Nicholson a a gag
before Jack Nicholson was talking. Yes,
that is correct.
Yeah. Zero. I I totally see that why he
was cast as a joke. Jamie says he must
have had a friend.
Yeah, there you go. You can kind of see
how that character was consolidated. You
may have been a crummy, but you were a
nice fell. I never meant to kill anybody
in my whole life. I've killed two in the
last two days.
Well, but you asked for it coming after
me with that knife and
all voyage, Dr. Far.
You want anything else?
See you in the morning. You want
anything else? Can I Can I get you
anything else? Oh, dessert menu perhaps?
No.
And up our teeth. Coffee with dessert.
Of course. Uh, will hold down the fort.
I'm going to go uh bio and put some food
away and clear off. I have so much stuff
on my desk. So, we're going to clean.
That is the other part of this chat is
that we're also uh performing human
maintenance. Yes. I'll be right back.
Hey Joe, come on in. Frank, how's the
wife Frank? I mean, if you ever seen
like the musical version of Little Shop,
it's it's way more obvious. How'd that
happen?
The whole plot with dentist is is much
more a strange one here. Railroad people
say they lost one of their best
detectives the other night. Oh yeah.
Down with the yards. He's watching the
refrigerator cars. Refrigerator cars.
Ice thieves. Oh yeah. What happened?
Don't know. Vanished. Blood on tracks.
None. Anything else? Thank you so much
for the many months missing. Thank you.
Clothes in office 21 ideas. None. Check
it out. Yeah.
I mean, this originally showed I believe
at a French art at a French art film
like festival. Now we were on the case.
Officer Frank Stoie and me. This did not
have a traditional path to like Joe
think I think
[Music]
Morning Mr.
Mushnik. Oh boy. Look at that. Hi
everybody.
Oh my gosh. Ain't it something? It's
It's monstrosities.
Yeah. And just think that you did it.
She's got some aisms in her uh You don't
have to kiss in her vocabulary. Don't
you like me to kiss you? Yeah, but you
don't like to kiss me. Why shouldn't I?
Nobody else ever did. Well, I do like
to. You do? You really do. You like to
kiss me? Sure I do. Would you like to
kiss me again? Okay, that plant.
Best romance in any movie. By the way,
that scene, I guess I just have a good
kisser. How did it Would you like to go
out on a date with me some night when
Oh, sure I would. Seymour anytime
tonight. Okay. Oh, boy. How about that
plant? We got the last of flowers for
the float for the rose parade. I can't
talk to you now, girls. Talk on Audrey.
Yes, for the float. Okay, let's take a
look at it. Okay. All right. What's
cooking? Look at my plan. My What a
large one. How many deaths did I miss?
None. He missed the shortest whirlwind
romance in all of cinema. Okay. Where
Audrey kisses Seymour and uh that's the
first time that they've had any romantic
interaction. Now they're going on a date
tonight. Great. Oh, that's too bad.
How'd it happen? He was playing with
matches.
Buy maybe some flowers. Did you answer
the question Patrick asked in my plan?
I'm looking. Uh, yes. I would rather be
Jack Nicholson. Yeah, probably. That
part demonstrates range of being
absolutely gravis. That's my name. Just
want to ask you a few questions.
Questions? Ask me. Just want to ask you
a few questions. I didn't do it.
Sorcerer, thank you for that $50 for the
kitties and puppies. Why are you so
nervous on a break, too? Thank you very
much. I never see this man.
4,5 $52 and one. My dentist should uh
maybe did something. We should give away
a couple things when we get back. As we
get back and few spare parts that Dr.
Farb is murdered, is he? Who knows? Not
me. What do you think?
He doesn't know anything. Okay, Mushnik,
if you hear anything about these men,
call our office. Sure. I'll be glad to
cooperate with the police.
Isn't it terrible? What happened to your
boy Frankie? Example of police work.
Yeah.
[Applause]
All right, Seymour. Now, you tell me if
that plant is finished all grown up.
He's finished all growing up. You
wouldn't kid your father? My father came
home. Me, idiot. It's a finger of
speech. Now look, I can't stand anymore
that plant. It's growing me out of house
and home. Well, it ain't going to grow
anymore. I promise. How can you be so
sure? It ate three times already. Who I
mean, what did it eat this time? Well,
about about a million Japanese beetles.
So, don't eat no more.
It's full. Grab
it. There's a lady from some kind of a
commitment outside. I think it's
important.
Excellent. Bye. The buy. I understand
you want to take Audrey out on a date
tonight. That's very good with me
because I am staying to keep an eye on
that Mishuga plant.
Where are we going to go tonight?
Semour, where are we going to go,
Seymour? I just remembered I don't have
any money. Well, that's okay. We could
take a walk along the ocean or
something.
I got a great idea. We can eat dinner at
my house. My mom's a great cook. Well,
that's well. Oh, boy. I'll call her
later and tell her. Okay.
Oh, that's remarkable.
You like
I neither like nor dislike anything. My
goodness.
I happen to represent the society of
silent flower observers of Southern
California. How about that? Tell me who
created this magnificent bloom. Okay,
called it magnificent. That kind of
means it let you like it.
And what might your name be? Trevine,
thank you very much for the birthday
wishes. Kellboy. Kellboy. Raised it in
the coffee can.
This Well, tell me, Mr. Krello, is this
a freak or or can more be raised from
the seas? We should live so long. Well,
I don't think they're going to be
anymore. Miss uh Fushtwanganger. Mrs.
Hortense. Pushwanganger. I think this is
going to be the only one. Mrs.
Fishwinger. Push twanganger. Push
twanganger. Well, it's probably
indigestible anyway.
At any rate, still concerned about
eating the I have the honor to tell you,
Seymour Crowboy, that you have been
selected to receive the annual trophy of
the Society of Silent Flower Observers
of Southern California. A trophy? Me?
Such is justice.
Tell me, when do you suppose those large
buds will open? Well, according to what
the book says about the plants that I
crossed, they should open day after
tomorrow at sunset. Ah, very well. I
shall return at that time to present the
trophy. Good day. Good day.
Remarkable. Such is justice.
Oh boy. I'm going to get a trophy. Oh,
I'm so proud of you. Oh, a real trophy.
A real trophy. Yo, Rose Parade. Oh boy.
From the Society of Silent Flower
Observers. The real trophy. Don't look
at me. I'm a terrible psych. You've got
a trophy that proclaims you the second
handstropheing very well lately. Audrey,
this is my mood boy. Ma, this is Audrey
Folk. She's my girl. Hi Audrey. Are you
hungry? I sure am. I could eat her. Dan,
that's how that character was
introduced. I'll go get the first
course.
Yeah, Dan, you missed the beginning.
That is his whole art. Is that that man?
Take your sweater.
Yes.
I'm sorry. Are we watching Are we
watching How I Used to Date Now? Is that
Is that what's going on?
It tastes like cough syrup. Dr. Flem's
cough syrup. A toast. Oh my god. Audrey
Jun. No. So Audrey senior.
Ah, they were supposed to be drunk at
that. She was already supposed to be
feeling the effects.
Okay, Mushnik, what are you up to?
He was in
a lot of films. Tonight I keep an eye on
you. I don't let nobody get near you.
Yeah.
Tiny Tim. Yeah.
Okay. So, wait. What's What's he Is he
just eating out of a paper bag and
watching the plant? Yeah. What's the
plan? He's just going to sit there all
night and watch this and I quote sugar
in a plant.
G Audrey, you sure look good by candle
light. Oh, do I really see more? Yeah.
Here we
are. Amazing.
Sure smells different. It's different.
Some kind of oil, isn't it? God. Liver
oil. It's wonderful for the colon. And
that sulfur powder on the top.
Audrey is a saint. Feed me.
[Music]
Isn't he supposed to be keeping an eye
on the plant? I'm hungry. Yeah.
[Music]
Open it. This feed me.
I didn't hear it. Feed me? You heard? I
heard it. I You heard it. I want food.
A talking plan for I'm hungry.
No hungry and other fine kettle and
fish. Who would you like to have
tonight?
You look fat enough. Wow. Wow. Wow. We
not only got a talking plan, we got one
that makes with smart cracks. Will you
listen to me, you botanical bum? Food
you wouldn't get. Not from Gravis
Mushnik. I'm starved.
Excellent. You would unpopulate the old
Skidro.
Well, you can forget about it. You
wouldn't get fed from Gravis Mushnik
tonight. Good night. You'll get yours.
[Music]
Did the plant say you'll get yours?
[Music]
I kind of like this chain.
That's a great question. Zero. voice
made of Chinese herbs and it's flavored
with acroas and epsom salts. There ain't
another cook in the whole world like my
ma. That's what your old man said before
the lounge ran out on me. You know, if
you're going to be married, you got to
be a good cook. Maybe you could teach
me. You think you're getting married?
Well, he hasn't asked me yet. Who
hasn't? Seymour. Seymour's too young to
get married. Look here. A boy's got to
go out and play around a little bit. Go
out on the make and have a ball. See Mo,
I don't want to have a ball. I want to
be with Audrey. Now look, Seymour, you
promised you wouldn't get married until
you bought me an iron lung. You've been
breathing for years, Ma. Well, it ain't
easy. It ain't easy, son.
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
[Applause]
Uh uh someone uh named uh uh let's see a
voice artist in uh in film and
television. Levi Stubs played Audrey.
[Applause]
All right. You who is not credited by
the way in the original credits. Don't
shoot mister. I'm old and sick. I would
not even
apply. Come out in the light where I
could see
you. Man, please don't shoot. Please,
please. I'm only Gravis Mushnik. You
wouldn't want to kill me. Where would
you hide the body? Don't worry. I'm not
going to shoot you. Not unless you try
something. Try something. I never tried
anything in my life.
You want my money? Take it. You mind? I
should go out and find some more. That's
all I do. I'll do it. Kind of got the
Thank you very much.
I like your brand of hospitality.
You'll excuse it there's more. I'm only
a poor flawless. Yeah. Yeah.
Oh, in the 1986 movie. Come on now.
Where's the rest of it? I was in here
this afternoon. I saw about 30,000
people in here. They must have spent
some money. Where is it? There ain't no
more money. They came in to look on the
plant. It's a big attraction. Audrey Jr.
the plant. Don't try to snow me, Jim.
30,000 squares didn't come in here just
to look for a plant. I don't credit
that. I don't got no more money. Honest.
Believe me. Okay, let's try this. One,
two, three, four. Now, I ain't got no
more money. Honest. All right, try it
the other way around. Five, four, three,
two. All right. All right. Already,
Charles B. Griffith. Big bad. Where?
Where are you finding this? In the
PL. In the plant. The big plant. Dory
Jr.
Oh, it's him. Inside the big leaf. Oh,
this actor plays the Yeah, that guy. How
do you get it open? plays Audrey Junior.
Just knock. It's just the last credit
and he's uncredited.
[Music]
Look at all that money in there.
[Music]
In there. In there.
Inside. In the bottom. I don't see
anything way inside.
This can only end from afraid. Yeah,
this is only
[Music]
awesome. What I did
Chad, while we're filling one activator
back, don't forget to fill out the
giveaway sheet. I am no more sitting up
with that no good plant.
But gee, Mr. Mushnik, you don't have to
sit up with it anymore. It's all grown
up now. It's all grown up now. Guy, how
do you know it don't be hungry no more?
Well, because tonight you are staying.
Then tomorrow they're coming and they're
going to give you a trophy. And then
after that, we are getting rid once and
for all for that plant. Getting rid of
it? Why? Don't ask why. Why? The end.
Into the garbage can. Aloha. We're about
15 minutes out from going back into
Fallout and having you spend all this
money you're donating for charity.
Y'all, dinner is almost over. We got
more guests and prizes coming up. I know
you will. And this has been very
helpful. Oh my god, my brain is like
back. Yeah, we're going to a place full
of beautiful flowers. We have to stay
here. Yeah. Well, never mind. We'll have
a picnic. It'll be just like going to
the country. Oh boy. 3,000 pinkelas for
the arbor and the 9,000 yellow moms for
the for for the border and the the roses
for the front. No, around the back.
What do you mean you're going to a
picnic at night with that full cord
girl? Don't you like Audrey, Ma? She's
out after your money. I don't have any
money. Oh, she's a smart one. She'll
latch on to you until you get some and
then goodbye fortune. But Audrey's an
honest girl, Ma. Yeah. Never trust a
woman who's too healthy. But Audrey had
a bad cold a couple of weeks ago. Oh, a
cold. A puny cold. Why don't you get
yourself a real female with something
decent like Monama ukiosis or or
gallstones? Well, maybe she could catch
something like that. The only thing
she'll catch is you. And she'd take you
off to some shady sanitarium and leave
me to chiropractors and faith healers. I
know when I'm not wanted. Oh. A Jew,
don't feel sorry for me. I'll just find
a nice wet alley somewhere and curl up
and wait for the end. Oh, please don't.
That makes total sense. You have been
I'll take care of you. I'll always take
care of you. I promise. Stalward
companion in this. Thank you both.
Deeply appreciate it.
Gee, Audrey, I never tasted food like
this before. The peanut butter and jelly
sandwich. Peanut butter and jelly. What
does that cure? Nothing. It's just a
food. What good is it if it doesn't
clear up pimples or shrink your sinus
tissues or something? You're just being
silly, Seymour.
Seymour, what do you want to be? Well, I
want to grow things. If I had a lot of
money, I'd go to the South Seas where
they grow the most fabulous plants in
the world. Well, that sounds exciting.
Yeah. I'd like to go to the South Seas,
too. There's no reason why you couldn't
go.
Would you take me with you, Seymour? Oh,
I couldn't very well go without you,
Audrey. Why not? Well, because because
I'm in love with you, Audrey. Oh, I'm in
love with you, too, Seymour. Well, this
is convenient. Eat me.
What'd you say? I I was just kidding.
I'm hungry. Seymour. I didn't mean it.
Why did you say it? Oh, food.
You didn't even say that. Oh, yes I did.
I said it. I said it. Oh, I'm looking
right at you. I'm a ventriloquist.
You're what? A ventriloquist. Feed me.
You are you feel all right? Well, I
don't know. I'm not sure. Well, then
stop all this nonsense and kiss me.
I'm dying from hunger. All right. If
you're so hungry, eat something. But
forget about me. I'm sorry, Audrey. Give
me to eat. If you can't control
yourself, I'm going home. I need some
chow.
This is the shortest relationship.
Stomach. That That was a roller coaster.
Audrey, please wait. Listen to me. I've
listened to all the nonsense. I want to
hear, Seymour. You're a nut. You tell me
that you love me and then you act like a
complete idiot. Please listen, Audrey.
I'll be able to explain everything soon.
Why can't you explain now? Because so
many things are so important. I want to
marry you, but I got to take care of
mom. Well, that plant in there is going
to make it all come true. Tomorrow,
they're going to give me a trophy and
I'll be famous. I'll be a big botonist.
And then we can go to the South Seas
just like we planned and all. But that
doesn't have anything to do with what
went on in there. When you're ready to
come to your senses, Seymour, then I'll
talk to you. Good night, Seymour.
I am confused. I'm getting pretty tired
of you. I need food. I don't care what
you need. Look what you've done to me.
You not only made a butcher out of me,
but you drove my girl away. Shut up and
bring on the food. Don't tell me to shut
up. You shut up. Who raised you from a
bunch of little seeds? Who fed you all
them high class fertilizers and sat up
all night with you when you were sick?
Nobody else would have done that for
you. Do you think anybody else would
have brought you human beings to eat?
You're darn right they wouldn't. Well,
I've helped you and you've helped me.
Now, shut your trap and go to sleep. I'm
tired.
What did he say? Close your eyes.
You are asleep. Oh, open your eyes.
Now you will do as I say. Do you follow
me? Yes, master. You will go out and
find me some food. Yes, master. I did
not see this coming and waste no time.
This is the best way this could end.
There's only 11 minutes left in this
movie. Where is going?
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
idiot. She can move pretty
quick. Yeah.
[Music]
There it is.
My name is Leonora Clyde. How's the rain
on the rhubarb?
Master is hungry.
[Music]
[Applause]
Okay. Okay. the phrase, "How's the rain
on the rhubarb?" "How's the rain on the
root?" I got to write that down. That's
a good one. We're gonna That's evocative
and completely docsil at the same time,
[Music]
right?
[Music]
No, they don't. Uh, Audrey doesn't
hypnotize people more
divergence, which is kind of the point.
I got to find food for
master. Food I got to find for master.
What is this woman doing? Master, I got
to find food.
Maybe I can help. Who are you? My name
is Leonora Clyde. That's right. I love
you.
Master wants food. Let the old goat
wait. The night is young and so are we.
Master doesn't eat goat.
Well, what kind of food does he
like? That's more like it. Kiss me.
What's the matter? Don't you like me?
Too bony. Too bony? Nobody ever told me
that before. Beef is better than ve
[Music]
You're such a dodo. What do you call
this? Chopped liver.
[Music]
Master would like more fat. Speak for
yourself, John.
My name is Seymour. My name is Seymour.
That's my name, too.
Are you interested or you just wasting
my time? I never thought anybody. This
is We're running out of film and we need
to wrap this up. Sure I do. All right.
If you sure you want to volunteer.
All right. My place or yours? I don't
care. Well, flip a coin. I don't have a
coin. Flip anything, silly. Well,
there's a rock.
Wet or dry?
Wet. Veloc.
[Music]
And we knew that soon. Yeah, right. No,
not that we had any more clues than
before, but we had to tell the chief
something. I had that feeling in my
bones that the mystery was drawing to
its climax, and I was determined to be
on hand.
All right. Out, out, out. Nobody is in.
Today we have a special occasion for
Seymour Krellin, which has invented the
big plant. So, I want everybody should
please stay out of the way. We want
Seymour. We want Seymour. We want
Seymour.
The most famous botonist who's about to
get a trophy.
I tell you, this business is worse than
being a conductor in a revoluting door.
I'll be glad when this day is finished.
What's a celebration? They're presenting
my son with a trophy. Yeah. What do you
do? Run away from home? Please don't
look at me that way, Audrey. I want to
talk to you. I'm sorry, Seymour. I just
don't understand you. I'll explain
everything after the ceremony. You
police. What are you doing here? Heard
there was something going on here this
evening. Just thought we'd come by and
keep an eye on things. Look, we don't
need no eyes kept on. Anyway, the
Society of Silent Power observers has
arrived and sunset is almost upon us.
Welcome, lady and gentlemen. It would be
our honor for to have you. Still working
on those disappearances. We think they
were murdered. Hey, look here, young
man. The the cop on the left kind of
looks like Ben. Let me see your tongue.
Just a little. Yeah, it's the glass.
It's the shape of the glasses.
I know. I had it back in 09. Better have
that looked into, Frank. Whatever you
say, Joe.
Mr. Crabbo, the sun is going down now.
And uh you do think those buds are going
to open? I hope so because if they
don't, Mr. Kellboy, we shall just have
to present the award at another time.
Oh, it's starting to open. It's Mark.
Oh, look. The first band is open.
[Music]
Isn't that the railroad cop? Look at the
rest.
[Music]
What do you think, Frank? They're all
there, Joe. Yes, you're right. Mr.
Crawlboy, how do you explain this? I
didn't mean it. I didn't mean it. That's
right, officer. He didn't mean to kill
them. Steo, you promised you'd explain.
Looks like they're getting away, Joe.
Yes, you're right. Let's catch them.
Right.
Oh, now the float will be perfect.
[Music]
[Applause]
Yeah. Amazing. really chasing by the
way. No, no, no, no, no. Don't try and
explain it. Hold on. Maybe this will
help. She won't.
Why are there children?
Oh, because this movie is being played
by crowd control and people are donating
and spawning random stuff into it,
right? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That would
actually make more sense than the idea
that someone presented this as a
complete thing.
[Music]
No, it says no trespassing. What? How we
Okay, I I you know, murder and feeding
to plants is one thing, but I draw the
line at trespassing.
[Music]
Now, everyone needs to step in that
puddle.
Meanwhile, at the tire factory.
Yeah, this is prim. This is prime. You
have ghosts in your blood. I should do
cocaine about it. The movie.
Also, what locations can we get for
free?
Now we're just shooting at him. I mean,
he's murdered all these people,
obviously. And as cops, we don't need a
trial. We can just shoot him. Yeah.
Maybe it's no trespasses like they're
wondering.
Or, you know, if maybe it's no
trespassing. Ah. But what you should do
tonight, go home and rest. No
trespassing, right? Yeah, exactly.
Why is Mushnik chasing him?
Yep. Just take a take a breather,
Mushnick. Too many cigars. That's right.
Uh, this is officially called Shop of
Horrors in parenthesis 1960.
I think I realized why the flower shop
wasn't doing well. And it's because it's
by this giant tire graveyard. That's
right. What in the Scooby-Doo chase?
Correct. Also, how long is this?
Hey, we got 2 minutes left.
They both trip and Seymour
jumps. Man, I hope Seymour makes it.
[Music]
I was watching a bad infomercial. Oh no,
we can't climb over these tires.
Firearm safety. What is it? No. No.
Don't. No. No. Don't. It wouldn't look
like a junkyard, but like they just
Let's go back.
The kitchen sink room.
Yeah.
[Music]
You dirty red plant. You messed up my
whole life.
feed me.
I'll feed you.
[Music]
I'll feed you like you never been fed
before.
[Music]
Better to give up, gentlemen. You
wouldn't find him tonight. Look, the
door's open. Frank,
[Music]
he was such a good boy.
[Music]
Seymour.
I didn't mean it.
[Music]
Okay. Okay. Let this be a lesson to all
of you to shoot your shot. A reminder
that that movie, that movie right there
went on to become a famous musical that
is enjoyed by millions of people around
the world. It's been on Broadway, right?
a reminder that it's been made into
other movies with like actual actors
besides Jack Nicholson, who's was
probably the best actor of that entire
movie.
Um, shoot your shot. You nothing to
lose. Shoot your shot. If that can
become a cult classic film, you can do
whatever. Just believe in yourself. Of
course.
That was that was fantastic. Uh, yeah,
the end. Amazing. I recommend Creature
from the Haunted Sea, 1961. Another
Roger Corman. Uh Patrick, is it is it in
um is it public domain? Because like
we've done other things before, but one
of the problems is that when Twitch
abandoned the watch party feature, yes,
we stopped being able to do that. And
mercifully too, because it wouldn't work
on YouTube, right? Um so we're looking
for public domain stuff to do things
like this. Is it when we when we have a
break at a charity stream, not like you?
Right. Yeah. Yeah. Um, I have a
question, Matt, and I I am afraid of the
answer. Okay.
Is Mono's Hands of Fate in the public
domain? I don't know. Hey, we have we
have seven minutes before we're getting
back to raising money for Best Friends
Animal Society uh and and welcoming our
next guest. Should we try to do some
rapid fire giveaways for people that
watched all of that movie?
Yes, absolutely we should. So, um I've
I'm checking off I'm checking off what
what I've I've done so far. Hey, let's
do let's do some stuff. Uh some physical
stuff. Okay. So, um we've
got Let me make sure I got this right
before I say words. I think I know from
Atomic. Yeah, from Atomic. We have some
ARF troopers for Star Wars Legion
donated to this stream from Atomic Mass
Games. Right. So, I have to do a weird
sort real quick. So, I'm going to I'm
going to sort this. So, everybody, make
sure that you uh get your entries in.
Make sure you're in the giveaway thing
and make sure that you have checked
whether or not you're in the US because
this is a US only giveaway. So, we're
going to run only three of these. Uh and
then we're probably going to
run, I think, one of a couple of other
things. Sure. Let's uh we're gonna run
Yeah. So, so, so take a quick second. If
you haven't filled out the giveaway
sheet, if you showed up during uh
dinner, go ahead and fill that out. Make
sure you only fill it out once. Uh and I
will uh be back with all of you
momentarily. Zoe is still uh here, I
think, since it's it's she hasn't eaten
dinner. I Oh, she's she's having a
dream. She was having a little dream.
You can see her little tail twitch. Um I
think I'm going to
um go get her some food and see if
she'll eat it down there. So, I'll be
right
back. Okay, okay, great. Awesome.
Uh, chat, how are we doing? How's
everyone feeling? I know this has been a
long a long a long stream, uh, but I
hope you all are enjoying it. Um, yeah.
Everybody stretch. Everybody take a
break. If you've been here the whole
time, I encourage you to step away from
the computer for a bit. Um, because I've
been here the whole time and I need to
step away from the computer for a bit.
There you go.
Eddie.
So, uh, I have now, yeah, I've now I've
now sorted that. Okay. Um, so, uh, get
those in. We'll put five minutes on the
clock and we'll run we're going to run
the ones for the atomic mass and then
we'll probably run a couple more, uh,
just because they're easy to do. And I
need to get these prizes out the door.
Need to get them out. I need to get the
stream back over here. I need to move
some stuff around. Put it out of movie
mode. Put us into Fallout
mode. Heck yeah.
Yeah, Zoe's getting dinner. Uh, rated uh
draw. Oh, there we go. Anise is coming
in with uh her crew. Welcome on in.
Hello. You you caught us just as we're
finishing up with our dinner break. I
need to move this back over. Uh Zoe is
just starting dinner as you can
see. And Ace, I know you'll be joining
us
shortly. Hope your stream was good.
Okay, this is So, check it out. See what
Zoe's doing? She paws one kernel out at
a time and then eats it. She will keep
doing that for the entire bowl. I mean,
that does keep. And she's not displaying
a dominant paw, which is weird. No, she
goes back and forth. Oh, you started
Blueprints and Ace. That's great. Yeah.
Uh, blueprints is a ride. We can talk
blueprints when you get on. Um,
how we do it? Uh, oh, you're sorting
right now. I am. I am updating titles
right now. Okay, we're going to get back
to Fallout momentarily. It is loaded. I
am back. Get ready to spawn and destroy
or help my life. Book, I know you have
some coins left and I know you got to
get to bed soon. Uh,
[Music]
Charity and I might as well watch Zoe
eat. Yeah, sorry chat. My brain is
uh you know we're in marathon mode so
I'm conserving energy. Uh
Matt has diagnosed a problem via webcam.
I did.
Okay. Okay. Okay. Great. Let's go over
here. Zoe is awesome. Zoe is my stalward
companion uh both in the video game and
in real life.
Wow. Uh, and ace, we will get you in
here momentarily. We are updating
things. We just got off of our movie
slash uh our movie slash uh food break
because we've raised
$4,521 for Best Friends Animal Society.
Uh, and we are not done yet. We are here
for at least
another three hours. At least three
hours.
Good. You're good. Yeah, we've been
going nine
hours. We're going to see how long we
can go. Okay, great. Awesome. That's
done. All right, copy that. An ace,
we're on it. Uh, yeah, you're good. Um,
in fact, I think that is enough time to
let everyone Do I need to resort this?
Do I need to resort
this? No, I don't. All right. Uh, can I
get a drum roll, please?
That did not bother Zoe at all.
Excellent.
I can do a rim shot.
Okay, great. Awesome. Uh, first up we
have, uh, Charox 64. Congratulations.
Uh, you've won. I'll be in touch about
that. Uh, this is a Oh,
wait. Next up, we have Uh
uh Fen Longpaw, Fen, we will be we will
be in touch with you uh over the weekend
as
well. And last one, but by no means
least, we
have BJH squared. Congratulations. Uh
now, a reminder, um
these will be coming to you via email
later this weekend. Every is going to be
coming either later this weekend or or
Monday, Tuesday. Will is basically
keeping a sheet and we will be going
through them as we hit them. Yep, that's
correct.
Val, thank you so much. Uh Dana, okay,
cool. Val and Dana got it. Val and Dana,
thank you so much uh for those $40 for
animals. Real quick before Anace gets on
here, I want to remind people sort of
why we're doing this and what it is. Uh,
Best Friends Animal Society is a
phenomenal charity and uh, all of your
donations go to so many different
things, small to large. These are just
some of the things that Best Friends
sort of brings up that your money can go
toward. $5 gets a new wand toy for a
cat. $10 gets a snuggle toy for a
kitten. We got $12 is a session of
physical therapy or hydrotherapy for a
pup. $15 is an enrichment or food puzzle
toy for a dog. $20 is one week of
prescription food for a cat in need. $30
gives newborn kittens full bellies for a
month, which don't quote me on this. I
think that's as long as a cat is
considered a kitten. I could be wrong.
$50 can provide foster tool kits for
kitten parents who are fostering
animals. It makes it so much easier for
people to foster and give cats temporary
homes. And $100 can care for one dog,
their special needs or cat for one
month. It is phenomenal work you're all
doing. And because we're part of Best
Friends Day, this
$4,921 by the end of their campaign is
going to be doubled. They have a matcher
and therefore uh y'all are doing some
amazing work for animals in need
especially and thank you so much. I we
know how much uh how money is tight
right now and we really appreciate all
of your donation and generosity. And
also if you can't donate, just spread
the word, send the link, hang out, talk
with us, watch all the chaos that's
about to unfold.
That's correct. Hey, uh Matt, we should
do some more giveaways real quick. Okay,
more giveaways while we're waiting on uh
an ace. What do we got? What do we got?
We are going to be doing some Tailspire
keys. I have a whole bunch of these. So,
I'm going to be giving away two
Tailspire keys. Reminder, Tailspire is a
wonderful virtual tabletop uh that we've
used on uh many of our actual plays.
It's fantastic. It's great. It's a
wonderful way to play with friends at a
distance. Uh so, do
uh be there. Do the thing. Put your
name. Tail Spire. You get caught up in
the Tail Spire. And while people are
putting in their names, that's not
actually there. That's not No, not Oh,
it's not theirs. Whatever. Uh, real
quick, let's get an ace in here when you
have a moment. I do. I I will indeed.
Uh, let me add an ace to that scene and
then press this button and then you may
bring an ace in.
Bam.
Hello.
Hello. Welcome on in.
It's so good to be here. I never thought
I would be in the extra credits main
room. Here we here we are. You are on
officially Zoe's pit boy. Anise, please
tell the the all the wonderful people
who did not just come from your raid uh
who you are and what you do. Uh well,
hello everyone. My name is Anace Rhymes
with Face. Uh I'm also a a YouTube
nebula person. That's true. Like both of
you. So I run the YouTube channel Draw
Curiosity. I also stream on Twitch and I
always say, you know, I make videos
about things you didn't know you wanted
to know. So most recently, I made a
video about everything wrong with
Bemovie. I am currently making one about
that new color Olo. I managed to land an
interview with the scientist and in an
upcoming one, Matt is a cameo in it
which is called In Defense of Wasps. I
just been dragging my heels and posting
it, but Matt appears in it. Listen, I
you said wasps and I was there. And as
as great lovers of the Be Movie, um not
for any of its intended purposes,
uh you know, I'm glad I'm glad to hear
someone is is is, you know, doing the
real the real work that needs to be done
about the Be Movie. Um I've never seen a
YouTube comment section so fervent and
united in the hatred of the common good,
which is the existence of Bem Movie.
That's fair. It's valid. Amazing. Um,
all right. Well, Will, should we roll
these two giveaways and then get back to
the madness that is Fallout? Uh, yes.
Let me roll both of those Tailspire
giveaways real quick. Uh, I will explain
exactly what's happening here. And then
I'm looking for this many of these now
because I can include the people who
aren't in the US. Oh,
was I supposed to install a game for
this? No, you were not. No, do not
worry. I got very No, you're fine.
You're here to keep us company andor as
sane as we possibly can be while we
raise money for Best Friends Animal
Society. Are you actually Will, let me
know when you're got the names and we'll
Yes. Uh I have winners and those winners
are Dog Bert and uh this one Paul Dyrion
uh congratulations to both of you. Uh I
will be contacting you sometime in the
future that is not now. Heck yeah.
Tailspire, you will enjoy it very much.
Uh it's the it's my favorite virtual
tabletop. You can play all sorts of cool
games. You could build so much cool
stuff with your friends. It is
absolutely phenomenal. Um, okay. Here we
go. We're gonna get back into the game
here. Let's make sure it actually is
running. Any second now. Boom. Okay.
Anise, how familiar with Fallout are
you?
I've literally never heard of it. Great.
Okay. So, what you're going to see is
nothing like the game is intended. Uh
because we are playing with crowd
control, people's donations can just
spawn random things. And people have
been waiting through a movie while we
were eating and and and hanging out for
a second. Okay. And now is that a
twoheaded cow pig? That is a cow pig.
Oh. Oh god. That's a death flop. That's
a death flop. Okay. Here we go. That
legendary one. Don't die. Don't die.
That's a legendary deathclaw. So that
deathclaw and ace is not supposed to be
here. that that claw is uh is is
something that one of our viewers from
their generosity uh you're in power
armor. Quit whining. Um uh decided that
Matt should face right now. So there's
Matt that's like a behemoth and like
it's fine. Probably Matt's probably
going to die here, but he really wants
to not boost. Yes, correct. Will, can we
turn up an ace a little bit? I know it's
a little bit odd here. Yes, we can.
We got the same duck as everyone else.
And not
the game got real loud. I can fix it in
a second. Wait, where's the bad one?
They can also make melons explode for
me, which you're witnessing right now.
You can just
Yes. Well, yes. It's one mod called
Crowd Control that allows uh basically
people's donations to cause all of this
chaos in a normally not this chaotic
game.
Okay.
cuz you know the the games I've played
recently, Blueprints, Undertale, I now
question everything about any game with
uh that's pretty great. Um yeah. Uh so
how
do those are both what we would consider
sane games. All right. They're they're
they're like reasonable. They're a
little weird at points. Like Blueprints
is significantly unhinged the further in
you go. Um I just walked credits on
Blueprints uh last week. So, right there
with you on that one.
Um, this is not reasonable because chat
gets to participate. Normally, this
would be a sedate walk in a very weird
sort of scary wasteland, but now it's
sort of like a terrifying jungle of
monsters. Oh my god. Wait, someone
spawned the crab somewhere. Yeah, not
the crab. This I need to show you this.
This is insane. If I can actually find
where it spawned. Do do you want to
pause while everything uh loads and fix
volume? Well, what? Fix volume. Oh,
yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
It is too loud. Get down here. I was
going to say this does feel like Doom
but in nightmare mode with like extra
spawns. Which also the fact that Doom
doesn't have crowd control yet. I'm very
glad. Yeah, right. Uh yeah, that's
correct. Oh no, things are spawning in
and dying, which might which means Oh,
did the crab spawn in and die?
Yeah. Okay, so we're going to have to
we're going to have to give people some
crab. Yeah. Okay, so chat, hold. You've
officially reached the entity limit.
Um it can't handle it, so it's just
killing stuff, I think. Okay. Or the
crab got squished. But either way, we
owe you all a hermit crab. So, we're
going to work on that. That's not That's
not the ultimate crab evolution. Not
dead. Oh, it is. That one wears a bus.
Yeah. If I I want to show you if I can
get in here from all the It's It's shell
is a
bus. It's a lobster grill
truck. Okay. Uh Chad is just raging on
me. I I I I think this is all backed up.
Hey, can you fast travel? Like nothing?
Uh, that's a great question.
Hold on. Bad things we can break so bad
we run Doom on crowdcontrolled Fallout
4. That's probably true. We could
probably run original Doom on
crowdcontrolled Fallout 4. There's
probably an arbitrary code execution in
here somewhere. Yes. I'm going to fast
travel to Hubris Comics and pray for the
best. Uh, yeah. And then we'll go back.
We're just trying to get out of that
thing cuz if he's in that thing, he's
going to get crammed and then bumped and
then it's going to crash. Also, this
will take 9,000 years uh to load. Yeah,
Chad. So, worry not. We're going to go
back and deal with the mess that you've
created. This is an anti- crash
procedure. Uh and ace, we've been asking
everybody who who comes on here. Um I I
can't remember, did you say you did have
pets or you didn't have pets currently?
I don't have pets currently because I'm
kind of temporarily in the US. So, I'll
look after everybody else's pets, but I
did used to have a giant African land
snail. Wait, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa.
Okay, we were talking about snails with
Patch from Tzu earlier. What is What?
What?
Help me out here. So, back when I lived
in in Malaysia and
Singapore, these are an invasive species
of snails. So, they're actually illegal
in the US. So, you're not allowed to
have them here. But, they're very big.
They eat everything and they grow like
nobody's business. Okay. And I remember
it was about across the road and there
was a giant snail the size of my hand
next to my foot. So, of course, I had to
rescue him or her or them off the floor.
Uh photos. There are photos on my
Instagram. It is the size of my hand. Oh
my god. I called him because it was
after snail and Roomba because it would
just hoover everything up in its path.
That is amazing. I was talking about how
I've been always fascinated with snails.
Thank you. Uh legits, thank you much for
the $25. Ye
legits, thank you so much.
Let's see. Okay. Okay. So, by the way,
we we have officially reached the point
of absurdity, right, chat? So, like
everything is broken. Nothing will ever
be the same. Not many people knew. I
hope you're happy. We found this lovely
I can tell you that right now. Yeah.
Let's see.
Your secretary Ellie, she sent me. So,
uh Anise, for this game, there is a plot
that that that we are willfully
ignoring. Uh, our son Shawn got
kidnapped in this post-apocalyptic
Boston in an alternate 1960s history.
That's where we are. This is a synthetic
man who is also a a 1950s detective. Uh,
and we've tried to find him so he can
help us find our son.
Understood. I'll meet you there. One of
your chat people, Artis Ghart, asked if
snails even have different sexes. They
are an Aphrodite. They have a a penis on
their head and also they lay eggs out of
their head.
Well, there you go.
What's happening? I promise you, chat,
anything you think is like weird in
sci-fi. Someone looked at snails.
Something that lives in the benthic zone
beyond where or uh not the benthic zone,
the the twilight zone below where light
reaches in the ocean. um something that
lives in a place where there's very
little oxygen and mostly sulfur. Um
something like that. Uh they they looked
at something on Earth and went, "Yeah, I
can make that into a weird monster." I
promise you it's weirder than you think.
Yeah, it's so it's all so weird. Also,
we've been asking people as they come on
stream uh to help me level up in
whatever way that they think would be
fun andor silly. So, I give you the
option because I have a level now.
Strength, perception, endurance,
charisma, uh intelligence, agility, or
luck.
Okay. Well, you're you're already maxed
out on charisma and intelligence.
We can also do like perks with them,
too. Like, for instance, since we've
maxed out, I can go down to um like
inspirational, which is one that you can
only get if you have eight stars in it,
which I do, which is lets your
companions do more damage in combat and
they can't hurt you. Uh but there's all
sorts of stuff. I'm not trying to to
move you in any direction, but even
though I'm maxed out, that doesn't mean
we couldn't take something in that
category. I just saw Lady Killer, which
which sounds kind of scary. I kind of
like the idea of animal friend. I like
the idea of
inspirational. Cap
collector feels appropriate, but you've
already collected a cap. Sure. Animal
friend commune with beasts.
Okay. Between animal friend and
inspirational, which would help you the
most in your in your quest? Animal
friend might work on um hostile mobs.
Yeah, let's do it. Let's see how that
goes. Animal friend, we're doing it.
Except Oh, wait. I also have I have
three levels. Okay, let's do this. Let's
max out animal friend. That's the Yeah.
Confirm.
Can I do it again? Oh, requirements
requirements. Oh, I need uh you have to
do level 28. Level 28. Okay, then I'm
going to take inspiration or
inspirational speaker if I
can. Great. And I got one more level.
Um,
book dragon, thanks so much for the 214
book. Thank you. Thank you. Let's do
this. Better cripples. Uh, Scott, we're
not looking to do optimal. Oh, no.
Optimal is out the window, everybody.
Right. This is not We're not attempting
to be good or or or any of that. Um
someone dolphin did a pie explosion. You
know what that means? Nice.
Pick up all of the pies like a vampire
picking up rice. Um it's
a uh we found that this is the best way
to deliver items to Matt. Um it's not
putting them in his inventory. That's
boring. Uh because then there's just a
number that goes up. No, it's more fun
to have them all explode out of him and
then he has to run around and pick all
of the perfect pies up off the floor.
Thank you, Nick, for setting the the
night time to make it harder for me to
find the pies. And you were just given
an entire lock. Oh god. Oh, what's
happening? Oh god. Well, there's a
behemoth, so run.
Also, you might want to quick save. I
did. I know you're I I Okay.
Here, I'll do a regular save. Uh, just
so we're we're safe.
Uh, and I do reserve the right to spawn
that hermit crab at a time that is
incredibly inconvenient to you.
The way we work, this works is, um, I
also have control over everything. So,
if something like that hermit crab
spawned in a tunnel and died because it
wasn't ever meant to be in a tunnel, I
can spawn a backup hermit crab when
Matt's not expecting it. Um, I get to
pull all kinds
of levers and buttons. Crowd control and
extra control. Yeah, that's right. And
they just spawned 30 zombies, which I'm
sure will not end in tears for me.
Absolutely not. It'll totally be fine.
All right, we're going back in so you
can witness whatever carnage is
happening here. I won't be
afraid. Oh
god. If only I had my inventory open to
eat those pies you gave me.
Why didn't you open your I'm out of I'm
out of bullets. Hold on.
Hi.
Okay. Uh, okay. So, now you're
invisible. Great. I have no I'm trying
to find a gun I have ammo for. Yeah.
Immortal Lab, thank you so much for the
$299. Uh, taking us to $4,122.14.
Thank you. Thank you. All right. I have
a submachine gun. It's not going to be
great. Nucaccas got to pick them up.
Awesome. Okay, great. Awesome. And I'm
so sorry that this is chaos and you're
coming in. Whoa.
Can you do wield those? I don't know. I
think I had that one, but it's
okay. Pick a sec. Uh, there's a
legendary Gutsy there, by the way. Where
is it?
Where is the Oh man. Oh, you you have a
friend.
I'm so confused. I'm so confused. The
thing next to you. Okay, so you have
multiple followers and they're what's
murdering everything and I think it's
fine. I think it's fine. It's totally
fine. This is not supposed to make
sense. I want to make it very clear. I
know we threw you in the deep end of
Fallout and crowd control, and I
appreciate you rolling with the punches.
I'm just glad I don't have to I don't
have to shoot any of these monsters.
This sounds This sounds like a mess.
You'll have to deal with Yeah. And this
I do have to clean this up. Also, my
power armor is almost out of juice.
Yeah. Uh so, uh I have I I will I will
entertain an Asent chat with questions
while you get busy doing all the thing.
Um uh Anise, uh you said you started
blueprints. Uh how many days in did you
get to? Uh I have completed day three,
so I'm very very early into the game.
I'm very much I don't want any spoilers
or anything. No, no, of course not. No.
Even though the more I progress, the
more I'm wondering if there is sort of
big things to spoil. Anyway, I'm sure no
one That's a wonderful question. But
I've been having I've been having a lot
of fun. It actually is a game that
appeals to me a lot. I love puzzles. I
love the idea that you sort of start
over and have a whole new map each time.
But I also had some people come into my
chat saying it was like
day 40 for them. So it doesn't sound
like a game that's going to be completed
anytime soon. Uh I will um smile and nod
at a great many things. My chat's our
chat is very good at not spoiling
things. Yes. Um they're very very good
at this. Uh we they they we created a
channel in our Discord um for when I
started playing where they could just
scream all of the spoilers and like oh
my god why isn't he doing the thing? um
and not bother me with it, which was
great. Uh yeah, it's it is a heck of a
ride. And yes, uh day 40 is um I think
I'm on I'm in the mid-40s. Uh and I have
completed the credits and there are
things past the credits is all I will
say. Um and it's Yeah, it is it is quite
a ride and I do hope that you enjoy it.
Uh my only I guess
um are you mostly a puzzle gamer or do
you play rogue lights? Because those
tend to be the two kinds of people,
right? So, either puzzle gamers or
rogike gamers, and some are actually
puzzle and rogike gamers, and most
people tend to be the ones that it like
hits right on where they're at. Um, I
feel like my my chat would probably be
better. Also, oh, I got a subscription
to you guys. Thank you so much.
Uh, subscription. I feel like my chat
would be better at answering that for
me. So, I'm not a huge gamer. I do a lot
of educational science and technology. I
play Pokémon TCG Pocket, which I guess
trading card game is sort of strategy. I
was attracted to blueprints for the
puzzle aspect.
I think I've played rogike games. I'm
still sort of rogike is where you do a
level and then the level respawns, but
you have more knowledge or more items
and you get to it can be try it again.
So, in the same way that um every day in
blueprints, the house is
different, but you know a little more
about what rooms do or what's in a room
and the contents of the room might also
be different, right? They're um uh
depending on any number of factors. Uh
it rogue likes tend to be like that. So,
we you start the run over at the same
place, but the run is different and
maybe you have more power or you know
more and that's the that's the big
advantage. So, um, that blueprints is
definitely unique in how much it's
player knowledge and also what we call
meta progression, right? Progression
that stays between days. Um, yeah, but
it's it's very good.
All right, I'm leaving that chaos behind
for now, except for this friend who's
coming with these two companions. Yeah.
Uh, chat, Matt needs uh it would be 10
mil, but Matt's, I think, full up. Um,
we could use some way to get more
damage, by the way. Like, cuz to be
fair, the gun's cool, but you're only
doing so much. You're right. If if
people want to get nuts,
there there are there are ways that
people can get nuts. Additional
Remember, you can pool for additional
levels if you want to just give Matt
levels. Um, I could go full strength. I
could go
What gives you What gives you gun
damage?
Uh, that's a great question. Well, hold
on. You just got a level so you can you
can check.
Okay. Uh, so I believe affects weapon
accuracy in VATS. Is it
agility?
No. What is is there? Oh, here we go.
Uh, pistols. Non-automatic pistols do
20% more damage. Perfect. Well, uh,
isn't I guess it's not auto. It's not.
I've been clicking like a crazy person.
Okay. Yeah, then. Yeah.
Hey. Oh, my boy Feric with the $25.
Thank you. That's my buddy Matt. Uh
Freeric was his Strod character for four
years in my game. Oh, that is very cute.
Uh let's see. And then I believe we have
uh uh $5 from Joa Gang. Thank you so
much. And Book Dragon, uh thank you so
much for the 1286 uh for your last
donation um before you go to sleep.
Thank you so much. I know it's very late
over there. Book so much. Thank you so
much for all of your generosity. It's
been wonderful. Seriously, thank you.
Book is a champion of micro donations to
make the number funny or weird. Um, one
of the things we do hear a lot is Team
Order versus Team Chaos, right? Because
when people look at numbers for
donations to like decide to donate to a
worthy cause, right? Like Best Friends
Animal Society, they have to decide how
much. We make that really easy. We make
the number lumpy so that if they give a
weird amount of money, it'll become a
nice number again, right? Uh, and that's
the job of Team Chaos is to like make
the number a weird number. So, they're
like, "Oh, yeah. I can give like
$842 to get to like an even $10." Yeah,
I can do that. Right. Um, also, I'm
curious, Dragon Lady, if you're still
here. Did you spend all your
uh I believe Dragon Lady's hermit crab
is one of the things I Okay, cool. We'll
get that back. But but I can't do it
while you're inside. And even if I could
do it, I wouldn't in good conscience
because that just kills you.
[Music]
Oh, well, I live in this bathroom now.
I I would be pretty concerned if that's
what the lavatory looked like.
Let's hope this never fuses with
blueprints. Yeah, right. That Oh, that's
right. Yeah, there was uh Dragon Lady
did buy a permanent stat increase as
that was one of the the the things in
there. Uh oh, yeah, that's true. And and
there's the po the point refund glitch.
So, Dragon Lady is having a good time
with her points. Dragon Lady, you have
more than earned it. Uh yeah, uh earlier
in the day and a uh dragon lady uh very
kindly uh revealed that uh she'd been
saving up for a whole year to donate
during Matt's charity stream and dropped
a very large generous donation and has
been causing absolute pristine nonsense
since then. Uh it's been great. Um
that's really what we want, right? Is is
we want people to be having fun and uh
funding charity and chat's been doing
cows. Uh, didn't we thought it was going
to be rats, but um No, people want the
cows. Cows. Well, they don't do
anything. Oh. Uh, okay. The luck is at
max. So, Matt's luck and charisma are
both uh maxed out. So, so please, please
do keep that. I need to figure out how
to lock pick better.
Blueprints with crowd control. Dear God
above, no, no, no, no. I think not. I
suffer enough with that game. point.
Yeah. Yeah. Here we go. Locksmith. I
want locksmith.
Cows. Yeah. Cows make glorious noise.
Cows get in the way. And you all have a
cow emote. So, it makes sense. I should
have anticipated this. I do apologize.
All right. Hold on. Let's see here. Simp
packs. Now I have to stop and pick them
up. Uh, this is perfect. You're also now
level 17. You have perks to spend and
all kinds of stuff. You can increase
damage and do all those things. Uh,
while Matt is is fumbling around like a
vampire counting rice, um, we're going
to Yeah, that's that's right. Uh, while
Matt's doing that, I'm going to be
giving away Let's do some Zoey plushies.
I got to show you this real quick once I
get to this. Oh, so close. Exclamation
mark uh giveaway here on Twitch or in
the link in the YouTube description. You
can go and enter the giveaway will be uh
these are codes for the Nebula store for
a a free Zoey plushy. Uh you can choose
either the bombastic side eye or uh
straight on eye version uh with free
shipping. So please uh do look forward
to that and I'll be drawing those in
just five minutes. Oh, I should put up
the timer. Reminded me I need
to I got the extra the extra history
calendar, but I forgot to order it.
Well, I'll tell you uh they are still
held. So if you go through Did you Did
you pledge? Is that what you're saying?
I I pledged, but I forgot to place the
order. It's still It's still in the
warehouse for you. So, throw it on in
there. You You Okay.
All right. Let me get a timer up
here. We'll go back into
game. There we go. Timer is uh No, Ryan,
I said I version. V E R S I O N.
Version. We're in the Boston Public
Library right now, everybody. That seems
great. Uh, there is a Lord of Steel
somewhere, just so you know. Or
Brotherhood of Steel friend. Unpause.
It's probably behind you.
Security breach near.
Oh no. Okay, hold on before we do this.
Oh, wait. There's a lot of grenades.
That's a lot of grenades. I'm going to
identif
Oh my god. Yeah, these will protect me.
Oh no. Okay. Well, it's been fun.
Let's make a last stand down here.
Uh, a blade of melons. That's true.
Maybe they're shooting the melons and
not you. Yeah.
Also, we need to do um
I'm dual wielding my
iPad and re shooting.
Think that's the friend? No, I don't
think it
is. Thank you for that
heal. How did we live? Oh my god.
Quick save. Yeah, I was gonna say thank
you. Uh, Nace, uh, we we've been Oh,
well, wait. Oh, god. Well, no, no, it's
fine. It's fine. Uh, I was gonna say
we've been asking everybody, and I know
our time, uh, is short. Uh, we've been
asking everybody, what is something that
you're working on that you can talk
about, which I think we already did.
Uh-oh. See, this is the problem.
We saved right before you got mulched.
Let's see if I can get away.
Stuff that I'm working on. Yes, you got
How did you manage to say frame? All
right, I'll deal with it. For Twitch
folk, uh, I have my streaming
anniversary in two days on Sunday. So,
I'm doing a fun cosplay stream.
And it's going for the whole day, so
hopefully it will catch whoever wants to
make it regardless of time zones. That
will be starting at midday Pacific time
in Los Angeles time. probably going for
eight to 12 hours depending on on how
things go. Um although things have been
known to go on for later. And on
YouTube, I'm currently working on a
piece about this new color called OLO
that some people got to see and I
managed to interview the lead
scientists. Oh, really? So I I have
exclusive exclusive knowledge and and
content and maybe even the blueprint of
how one could see that color for
themselves if they want. Awesome. So
this is my current.
I love it.
These chickens keep freaking me. How
many Brotherhood of Steel? Whoa. Boy, so
many. All right, we got to get out of
this hole. Uh here real quick.
Pause. back to the back to the coffee
shop. All
right, and thank you so much for joining
us and for that wonderful raid. Thank
you for sending on promise to take good
care and not indoctrinate them into the
ways of Gremlin 2 too much. Um, I don't
know how how gremlin is your community
on a scale of 1 to 10. How gremlin is my
what? Sorry. How gremlin is your
community on a scale of 1 to 10? I think
they're pretty I think some of them are
pretty gremliny, but honestly, I'm
probably out gremlin. There you go. Just
don't know it. That is the way. That is
the way. Uh Anace, hopefully I'm not
sure if I'm making it out to VidCon, but
if I do, I'll probably see you around
there, right? Yes. I'll be I'll be in
town, so if any of you are going to be
in LA, please say hi. Also, I don't know
if the next guest is public or not, but
please say hi to her from me. I will. I
will. We've been keeping them surprised
as we go. Oh, yes. There we go. All
right, we'll catch you later.
All righty. Thank you for having me on.
Bye. Bye.
All right. Okay. And we have
officially swap guests. Okay. In three,
two, one.
Hello.
Happy birthday. Hello. How are you?
Hello.
I'm doing great. I had a great chill
day. Uh yeah, up to What are you guys
doing? Yeah. Yeah. Uh we uh we we we
broke our brains uh raising a bunch of
money for Best Friends Animal Society,
which is now up to $4,165.
[Music]
And that will be matched uh based based
on their Best Friends Day promotion. So
that's technically double whatever that
number is that I said. So, holy [ __ ]
Well, community showed up. Maggie,
Maggie, this is Will. Will, this is
Maggie. A pleasure. Um, hello. Uh,
Maggie, tell everyone all of the
wonderful things you do if they are not
yet familiar, though they should be.
Oh my goodness. I mean, hey, you know,
at the end of the day, I am just uh the
gal who feeds my own kitties uh who are
staring at
me. Uh, but yeah, I have a I have a
YouTube channel. Uh just my name, Maggie
Bay Fish. Um and yeah, we do uh media
analysis. Um we have a little show
coming out uh on Nebula soon,
y'all. I'm very excited. I'm very very
excited. I hope I'm hoping I can come
out for uh Premiere Time. Uh but we'll
see. Yeah. Well, I heard that. Okay, so
you might not be in town for VidCon.
Yeah, maybe. Maybe not. There's a lot of
There's a lot of up in the airs. Uh we
can talk later.
Okay. All
right. We'll chat. Uh we'll talk off
air. Uh but if you don't come, I'm going
to be so mad.
I got to go. Hold on. I'm going to quick
before anyone gets really upset at mad.
I'm going to do a quickly place
distraction, which is I'm I've rolled
our giveaways. They're ready to announce
the winners of our Zoey plushes. Like
that Zoe plush right there. That Zoe
plush right here. I'll go down here cuz
Zoe's not here in the cat cam. Give me a
sec. Yeah.
Whoa. Wow. Okay, great. So, now that
Yeah, that that plushy. Um, so the
winners of that plushy are uh one Luna
Lurks and uh over here on Twitch and uh
Jojo Gang 13 over on YouTube.
Congratulations. Both of you will be
receiving Zoey plushes with free
shipping uh from the Nebula store.
Please look forward to it.
Okay. All right. Nice. Maggie, important
question. Mhm. How familiar are you with
Fallout?
You want to know? Honestly, zero amount.
I know the concept. Uh, and I know there
have been many games and there is a TV
show that I still have not watched. But
I have never I don't think I've seen
gameplay or if I have, I've not been
able to distinguish it from any other
game that I've seen like it. Well, uh,
don't plan for that distinguishment
distinguishment distinguishing to happen
here because with this with this charity
stream, all of the generosity that
everyone has donated to Best Friends
Animal Society turns into pure chaos
because they can use the coins they
bought for the charity to then mess with
me while I play the game. So, for
instance, there should not be this many
cows. No. So, right now, there are all
of these things. It is a nightmare out
here. I'm leaving.
Uh, just just fire a n just just doesn't
matter if it's friend or foe at that
point. Yeah, they can they can play with
themselves down there. I What do we got
here? Oh, they keep summoning cows.
Those cows. Those cows. Yeah, those
wolves.
Um, so work. Yeah. Uh, chat chat is all
about the chaos here. Um, and uh,
through that chaos, we we've had a a
wonderful time. Um, I want to be very
clear. This is not how the game normally
is. I I was going to say no one sold it
to me that a bunch of cows were going to
be yapping around. Otherwise, maybe I
would have picked it up sooner. Uh yeah,
these cows are not a common occurrence
indoors, I think. Like never. Um we made
the cows too cheap. Okay. Uh yeah, that
was that was my bad. My bad. Although
every cow is a dollar forwards charity.
So, I mean 5,000 cows.
I mean, there's like what, like 15 right
here. Like, okay, the nucaccas are
flying every Wait, stimpacks. So, these
are the healing items they can make
explode from my body, right? Cuz we
can't just give them that. That would be
boring. We have to make them make him
pick them up uh off the floor. Yeah,
lick it off the floor,
right? Okay, great. I'm glad you're so
immediately on board with the chaos. I
really appreciate that. uh especially at
this hour of the night. Um just uh for
anyone joining us uh who hasn't looked,
we are 10 and a half hours in. Uh so
Maggie's energy and Oh yeah. No, we we
signed up for this. Uh we are 10 and a
half hours into this. Um and it is it's
journey that we are on together. Uh
chat dollar a cow keeps a doctor a cow.
What? Stop. All right. They spawn 30
ghouls from my body. Let's get to
punching.
Okay. There's a super mut that might be
your friendly super. I don't know. This
is not going to go well. Okay. Oh no.
Got to go. Got to go. Are you like what?
One punch man. I was trying to be uh
There's now a potato potion. Uh you were
in a corner. Okay. Wow. This is the most
uh this is the most exciting gameplay
I've ever seen from this game. Right.
Yeah. No, it's great. As far as I know.
If if you're wondering why Matt, by the
way, is looking off screen. Matt has a
uh there's an iPad app that actually
works with this game um that lets you uh
manage your inventory and like use
healing items and such from your so he's
got his inventory up so that he doesn't
have to pause the game and like do
inventory stuff. Um the inventory system
is boring um and we want to keep this
interesting. We actually removed one of
one of our defining criteria. This is
barely all. This isn't opposed to all of
the things that this um mod can do. Uh
but we went in and we went, "Okay, how
many of these are boring?" Removed all
the things that might be boring. We
removed all the things that were boring.
And this is add cows. More cows. More
cows. All of the cows. Mhm. Mhm. Uh I
don't know what is a friend and what is
not a friend. If it's shooting at you,
it's a foe. Okay. The astro guties are
bad. Yep. That's right. Take cover. Oh,
that cow went away. The astrogasses are
bad. I'm wondering how could any of
these be good. Uh oh no, Ma got
E. And that's Fallout. I feel like Wow.
Yeah.
Oh god, we're back. Exciting. Uh Maggie,
talk to me. You have pets, do you not? I
do. I do. Oh, I do. Whom are you the
steward of?
I am uh the the humble assistant of uh
two great tabies. Uh Murphy and Lewis uh
are their names. Uh named after the
Robocop characters. Perfect.
Uh-huh. Uhhuh. Uh they are very loud.
They meow all of the time. Uh, one has a
very high pitched, screechy kind of
meow. Um, the other one a very low,
raspy, hardly there. You want to have
both. You want both. Exactly. They're
perfect. One is very tiny and round. The
other is very tall and skinny. Uh, now
what are these attacking you? Are these
blood worm water? But don't worry about
it. Keep talking about
Okay. Okay. Honestly, my that's what my
brain labeled it as. And I was like,
surely not. Surely those are not
intestine slugs. It's it's it's kind of
like Have you seen trappers?
Yes. Yeah. It's kind of like ahu
only instead of desert it's flesh. But
don't think about it. Don't come here.
You want to come say hi? Say hi. Please
come say hi.
Uh
a god. A ghoul slayer. Oh. Oh,
baby. Hello, Chad. There's a baby. Baby.
All right. Bye-bye. Oh, she's bored.
Whatever. She's bored of me. Well, my
cat left. Zoe used to be in this Fallout
shelter, but now she's she's not even
there anymore. She's She stayed for
hours, to be fair.
Abandoned you. All right. I want this.
Does 50. This ghoul slayers meat hook.
I'll take it. Oh, that could hook so
many worms. Yep. A worm on a hook. Then
he could go fishing. You got it. We'll
show you one of the things that we can
go fishing for in a bit as soon as Matt
gets outside cuz I'm not allowed to
spawn the thing inside. I need to get
outside. Okay. That's the goal right
now.
Yep. Do you Do you Do either of you have
any non furry uh animals? I do not
currently, sadly. Uh, I I grew up with
um hermit crabs and uh Okay. I actually
grew up with a noot named Mona. Mona uh
was with a bunch of other uh nootes
named Tony and Angela. And uh my mom
used to be a kindergarten teacher and
she brought them home after some of the
teachers brought them in and we're just
going to like throw them outside after a
lesson on the letter N. Uh and she's
like absolutely not. Like you you you
know this is you can't do that. So we
brought them like the the other teachers
are committing crimes. Yeah, I think
they just a Wow. Okay. The my my point
behind the story is the other two NES
lived the life of a normal noot and
passed away in a normal time, right? Uh
Mona turns out Mona is still alive. Mona
is a Japanese firebelly n and is alive
right now in my childhood bedroom. And
they live to be I think something like
60 or 80 in captivity. She's this big.
What? Insane. That blows my mind. Uh,
right. I I have no pets of my own, but
currently we are um we are petating a
little betta fish called Dashi um who
owner is unable to take care of him
right now. So, uh we are we have a
little beta on the on the um on part of
our kitchen sort of counter where the
cats can't get to it because we do have
two cats who are idiots and will try and
get to it. And the the worry is not that
they'll get to the fish. The worry is
that they'll do something stupid and
damage the tank because right a
mentioned they are idiots. I love those.
They're idiots. Sorry. Absolutely.
Get outside. See the cool things. I
know. I don't know how to leave. We're
in the Boston Public Library right now.
Yeah. So, you got to go out the um the
way you came in, I think. No, that's
through the subway. There has to be
another
another thing. Hold on. There might be a
map. We haven't looked at the map once
in this game.
You could also just
What? Say that again, Will. So, you
could also just fast travel. You I don't
think you can from interiors, but we can
try. Huh? Especially when there's combat
happening. Yeah, you can't do that from
interiors. Um Yeah. Uh dragon lady, I I
don't know what you were trying to
spawn, but if it's big enough, it can't
be spawned inside. Hold on. We're going
to get out of here. I promise. There are
rules against that uh for reasons.
Okay, that's the way we came in. There
has to be a way out. Yeah. Uh chat, if
you want, there are uh let's see. Hold
on. Is it just this front door? Let me
look at this. On the other side. It's
chained on the other side.
Oh. Uh yeah, there's a big boy. Uh which
is a nuclear missile launcher. You can
give him that. Uh there's an alien
blaster. You can work on that.
Um, let's see. There's a weapon called
the final judgment. So, do with that
with what you will. Um,
let's see where. Okay, I keep just
coming back to the cow room. There has
to be another way. I'm going to add some
stuff. Don't worry. Don't Don't worry
about it. Oh, good ghouls. Add some
stuff. Oh, this won't be bad at all. Oh,
here we go. Like these guys. All right.
I'm going to be
I found the way out, but people spent
money on these ghouls, so I will fight
them for charity.
A fighting ghouls for charity. Um, I'm
doing it poorly, but I'm doing it.
Oh. Oh, god. Okay. Okay. Okay. So, I
need to live through this or else it
needs to give in again cuz I know this
is expensive, right? Yeah. Yeah. We
We'll make sure you get a final
judgment. Okay. So, I'm going to click
this, but I'm probably going to die
right afterward. You're doing okay. Uh,
let's see. Here we go. I can't Oh. Oh my
god. Okay. You're doing okay.
What does this do?
Ow.
What
the Okay. Are you doing anything? Seems
like you're just standing there. All
right. We'll we'll make sure we we will
make sure that you get a final judgment
back from NASA.
That was a very generous large weapon
you gave me. I could not do a dang
thing.
Let me get out of here.
I'm going to the back bay. Don't follow
me. Kuya Koy, thank you for the $25.
Lovely to say your name again.
Thank you so much uh for that donation.
Give me give me just one moment. You got
it. Uh upon spawning in chat, please
hold
hold
hold. Oh,
okay. There's your final judgment. I
will now
save. I have to reload. So, here's the
question. It looks like there's only one
Oh, no. There we go. 500. Oh, okay. It
it it gives you 500 shots or 500 units
of firepower per one fusion core you put
in it. So, this thing is a touch on the
expensive side to fire, but So, I I'm
told, and Will, you could you don't have
to do this right now, but I feel like
Maggie might want to see
uh the crab that is owed. I feel like I
was I was getting ready. Uh
[Music]
Whoa. Oh, god. Well, this is just a a
mutated bear, but we took care of it
pretty quick.
be with the the sound of a cat.
It's wearing a bus.
It's cello. It also
Yeah. Oh, yeah. No, no, no, no. This is
not okay. It's just so many kinds of not
okay.
Um, so yeah. Uh, I believe you are
hitting the lamp post and not Yeah. No,
I know. I'm also trying to clear the
floor because it just keeps Oh, god.
Reload. Reload. You're out of ammo. Oh
gosh. Okay, that did not work. Oh,
that's a lot of judgment days, huh?
Yeah. Yeah. Uh, yeah. Run. I'm trying.
It won't let me. It's not uh chat. It's
not fusion cells. It's fusion. Why are
you walking away? I can't. I was trying
to get to my other weapons. So, fusion.
Uh, yeah, those work for like laser
stuff. So, um, but listen, I'll use
righteous authority. That seems
fine. Back. Thank you so much for the
3222 taking us to 42222.
appreciate that support. Thank you so
much. All right, I'm going back to take
out this ram crab. Or is it coming to
me? Do it. Yeah. Yes. It smells you. It
It really does. Mhm. Uh you also of
course cannot shoot it in the bus. No.
Because the bus is not a part of the
hermit crab. So if you if you miss and
shoot it in the bus, you're just kind of
out of luck. It also spawns little
babies as as pick away. Yeah. Don't
Okay, so now they're friendly rats.
These are these are our uh these are
summoned by chat. They're little a
little friendly army of rats. I was
going to say yeah there there are rats.
Yeah, look at them go. Well, so we call
chat Brad.
Um chat on on Twitch is Brad on on
YouTube is Janet. So Brad and Janet and
our silent partner is of course Rocky
over on Nebula because there are no
comments on Nebula. Yes. And so that's a
friendly death claw. That is a friendly
death claw. Okay. Oh, hey you killed it.
And you got several level ups by the
way. Yeah. You are now level 22.
Wow.
The detail on the carropus, right? Yeah.
Oh, yeah. It's It's remarkable. Wow. I
did save. I don't know what just killed
me from the back. Yeah, fusion cores are
very expensive, chat. This is Those are
not like ammo. Fusion cores are uh big,
expensive, cool items.
This is Is this just one rat that's
messing with me right now after you took
down? Yeah, that's correct. There are
good rats and bad rats. Maggie, is this
is this making any sense at all? No.
Good. No. Excellent. Does it need to?
No. Right. Yeah. Is it Is it enjoyable
nonsense?
Absolutely it is. Thanks. The check's in
the mail. Yes. The check is in the mail.
Oh, wink. Oh, wink. I am fascinated.
What makes something a What makes
something on your side versus attacking
you? Uh, chat does. Yeah. So, um the
Okay, there are uh essentially what what
occurs is in the game you can
Oh, they summoned the nuke guys. I hear
them beeping. Yeah.
Uh these guys have handheld nukes and
they run at you and blow. Um
there they are. There's one of them.
Uh the modules let you determine whether
something's friendly or not. Yeah, no
big deal. There's still one left.
What was that?
What was that? Okay. Hopefully he just
grunts out of juice. I'm waiting for him
to scream. We go together. Okay. Okay.
Are we That was a lot of chaos. I'm
going to level up now. Maggie, I need
your help. Okay. Mhm.
You need to tell me out of out of these
out of these things, strength,
perception, endurance, charisma,
intelligence, agility, or luck, what I
should take uh points in. Okay. Okay. Uh
my gut is telling me either charisma or
luck, cuz those kind of feel like um
Okay. Actually, maybe the most useless,
but in a fun way. Okay, let's see what
the top luck ones are. Let's see here.
Um ricochet. What goes around comes
around. And an enemy range attack will
sometimes ricochet back and instantly
kill them. The closer you are to death,
the higher the chance. Yes, no
questions. Yes. So, whammed. What else
we got? Add to the chaos. Uh, let's
see. Fourleaf clover. Each hit in vats.
We haven't been using vats much. Let's
see. Grim Reaper. Death becomes you. Any
vats kill is a 15% chance to restore all
action
points. See here. Hold on. Got to go
through some more luck based things.
This is all VAT space. We could start
using VATS is when you slow down time to
actually take shots like more clean than
me running around like the cameras. We
could also do the um what's the pistol
one? Oh, the Oh, the one that keeps gets
ups my pistol damage.
Or what's that one? Automatic pistols.
There's one. Uh oh, that's an agility
one. We could take We could We have a
bunch of points. I think we want to up
that because we've been using that
pistol a
lot. And then we'll go back into luck.
That was what we were choosing.
Yep. Okay, let's go here. See what about
Oh, mysterious stranger is fun. Maggie,
I hereby dub the mysterious stranger uh
Maggie Mayfish. So, you will now
randomly show up when I am in trouble
and take a crack shot and then
disappear.
Oh,
wow. That is my friendship style.
Let's up this a lot. I'm gonna put the
rest of them into friendly stranger or
or mysterious. Uh, can't meet it. Not
high enough level. That's okay. Uh, I
love I really I enjoy the soundsscape of
this game. Yes, it's very It got a very
particular um era that it's trying to
pastiche even though it's like far
future, right? So, it's like what if the
50s had laser beams?
Mhm. More or less. Where was I
going? You know, Matt, where are any of
us going? Really? Uh, here's a question,
Maggie. How familiar are you with
Boston? We're in Boston right now. Oh,
you in Boston? Yeah. Uh, wow. I never
never been. Uh, but I have a lot of
friends from Boston. Uh, and I really
want to go, but they tell me don't
bother. So, I've never made the trip.
Wow. It is actually a fun town. I was
just there last weekend, actually, for a
convention. Also, you are now in a
restaurant. Just just for for note not
noteworthy, you are now in a radiation
storm. I'm going to go inside. Uh
anyway, we're at Fenway right now. This
is Fenway Park. This wall. Oh, they've
made a city in the post apocalypse
called Diamond City.
And I think we have to go there right
now.
Get out of here, cows. Is that my buddy?
We're going to Diamond City. Parker Tro
is my buddy Nick who has been spawning
cows non-stop for the
past god six hours and I love him for
it. Thank you. Is that it? Beautiful.
You're a real one. Nick's a real one.
Fox be my nightmares tonight.
All right, we're going into Diamond
City.
Yes. I'm sure nothing will go wrong with
spawning. I just love how like it's like
like there's like this nice rhythm to
the cow spawns and then occasionally
it's the chicken spawns in there, right?
The five cluck clucks and you know it's
just great. It's
really the music of the city if you
think. Yes. Yes. The chat is making the
music. That's right. Yes. Uh Miss Witch,
it has been hours of this. This has been
since uh 4, let me say 4ish is when this
started like really picking up. Well,
hold on a sec. When were Oh, hold on. I
can tell you when it was cuz I know
whose fault it was.
Um, now it's been closer to since
2:30ish
uh when Ben and Adam were on together.
And Ben and Adam are lovely individuals.
Lovely, wonderful individuals who when
placed in the same room sort of act like
the two halves of termite and just
ignite everything on into chaos. Um,
just they all they've done this twice
now and I I can no longer believe it to
be a coincidence. They do a fantastic
job of riing chat up into this this
exactly this.
Wow. Green stuff here.
Okay.
They're supposed to heartfelt reunion.
You're trapped. What are you going to
do? I don't know.
[Music]
Hey, Will, while this game crashes,
should we run another giveaway? Yeah,
let's run another game. I have I
completed it. You see? Good
job. Good job. I have uh for your uh for
your giveaway uh perusal from our
friends at Hero Forge uh two uh copies
uh to two lucky winners of a color mini
plus shipping. Uh, so that'll be a 3D
printed color miniature out of P4's
excellent line. Uh, with shipping to you
and we can do international. So, um,
please, uh, make sure that your name is
in the exclamation mark giveaway sheet
in, uh, Twitch or in the giveaway link,
which you can find down in the
description of the video over on
YouTube. Uh, I will show very briefly
what this is. So, people who are not
familiar, uh, this is an example of it.
This is one of the 3D miniatures that
Oh, I'll zoom in that Jamie uh my my
fiance. Uh basically you can actually
this comes out of the printer uh like
this like it's actually for a lot of
browns on this character. There's like
the detail on it is sick. So you design
your own mini for D and D or whatever
game you're playing and uh then they
ship it to you in the colors that you
design. It is dope. Uh, and uh, if you
are someone who also enjoys things like
Tailspire, there is a way that you can
import the minis out of HeroForge and
put them in Tailspire, which is so cool
because Tailspire is a virtual tabletop,
but you can design a 3D mini in Hero
Forge and put it. And Fen also brings up
a really good point. Uh, you can also
design your own models for free. So, you
can just design whatever you want just
to play with it, and it's very, very
fun. It just costs money when you
download the STL or whatever, but this a
little bit. Free color shipping. There
you go. Yep. Cool. Maggie. Wait, quick.
Oh, you're going to wait five minutes.
Is that what it is? Will Yeah, I was
going to say. So, we're going to put
five minutes on the clock and then we're
going to uh Yeah. And then we're going
to talk to Maggie about stuff and then
we're going to throw to our next guest
because time doesn't stop. Crazy. Uh
Maggie, I had a question because we're
talking about D and D minis. Have you
ever played any of the Dungeons and or
the Dragons or other tabletop RPGs?
I have. I have played. I've dabbled. I
can't say I have friends who play all of
the time. I'm more a dabbler. Uh but
yeah, I enjoy it. It's a blast. We We
are uh large fans here at some point.
Mhm. You know, in all of our infinite
time, I do want to not for content, just
for funsies, I want to run some oneshots
for for all the Nebula folks. Uh I've
actually I would love to I ran a game
for Dave uh Ulia, Patrick Williams, and
and my uh fiance Jamie one time, and it
was an absolute blast. Uh I've also Oh
my god. Uh Ben and Adam and their
partners also play it. I try to like
whenever it's around, so if there's ever
a time that I'm out there or you're out
here, uh if we plan long enough ahead, I
I I go nuts. Oh, okay. Great. Let's do
it. Excellent. Excellent. On the books.
On the books. Uh on the books. We we'd
ask everyone this as a sort of sendoff.
What's something that you want that
you're making that you want people to
look at and something that you're not
making that you want people to consume
as a piece of media? Ooh. Oh, I love
that. Uh, okay. Something I'm making.
Uh, I already talked about Yeah, Amy's
dead and Dreamhouse will be uh a nebula
in a little more than a month. So, we
got some time. You guys put your feet
up, relax. Mhm. Uh, and then something I
didn't make but I think people should
see is uh I saw the movie Friendship
uh Tim Robinson. Yes. Yes. Yes. It's
good. I I won't say anything about it.
Take it away, but I will very much
recommend it. Whole wholeheartedly. Two
thumbs up. Hell yeah. Full recommend.
Hell yeah. All right. Um uh I was going
to say uh everyone please also check out
uh Maggie's episode of Abolish
Everything. We've been talking about
Abolish Everything a lot, but Maggie uh
Maggie slayed it in the episode. Uh uh
if mine was two weeks ago, then yours
was I think maybe a month ago. Is that
right? Yes. Well, I was excited when
mine came out because uh that only meant
that yours was on the way. Uh oh, that's
very sweet. Was so so yours was Oh my
god. I mean, Maggie, when you did Can I
spoil what you what you abolished very
quickly? Is that all right? Oh, yes.
Yes, please. So Maggie abolished slow
walkers and the cut of the episode is
excellent. It is well beyond the worth
of your time. However, the amount of
slow walking that Maggie did to get to
that stage in the room was the most
beautiful like like literally like beat
the horse and then resurrect the horse
nine times. It was it it set your stage
so perfectly. And while I love the cut,
I I appreciate that I was in the room.
I was like, "Yeah, you felt it." And
then the next day you texted me and was
like, "You know what? Today I walked
behind a slow walker." Uh,
that's what a cherry on top. I I can I
can think of no more glowing
commendation than this. Uh, if you see
if you've not seen Maggie May Fish's
videos, you have the perfect chance to
meet one of your new favorite channels.
So, excellent, excellent, excellent. All
right, Maggie, thank you so much for
hanging out. I hope you have a lovely
rest of your day and weekend. You and uh
hopefully we'll talk soon.
Yeah. Bye, guys.
All right, Will, we're trucking through.
We're We're really We're really moving.
And that's not just the bucked up blood
raz talking. No. What do we got? What's
going on? Tell me what's happening,
Will. We have another guest. You push a
button.
Are we ready? Yeah, we're ready. Push
the button.
Oh my god. What's up, dude? Happy
birthday, man. How are you? Thank you.
Uh Jay, please tell everyone uh at home
uh who you are and all the wonderful
things you do. Uh well, I'm I'm in a pit
boy currently. But this is awesome. This
is this is a great setup, guys. Uh I'm
Jay. Uh I'm from Second Wind, the the
collective with the independent media
games media kind of outlet, previously
The Escapist. Um, and I personally host
a show called Design Delve. Uh, which is
a game a game a show all about game
design. Um, that's hosted by me and my
wonderful dog, which I shall grab. Where
is Oh, yeah. Get Ludo.
Ludo, where are you? Come here. Jay and
I uh I I'll give Jay and I's history. We
met on the internet uh uh during a uh a
overly sarcastic charity stream and then
we bonded over There's Ludo. Oh. Oh,
she's she she likes to cuddle, so she's
gonna look like she's leaning into me.
Amazing.
Yeah. I wish stream, right? Yeah.
Uh and we bonded, Jay and I bonded over
our shared love, as you can imagine, uh
based on uh his dog's name uh over
Labyrinth. Yeah. Our our mutual love for
Labyrinth. And then we got to hang out
at PAX. Yeah. Yeah. you like clutched
you clutched me a a late badge cuz even
though I live just outside of Boston, I
just completely blanked on it happening.
So So Matthew really came through
um got me in and we had a wonderful day
together. It was really really good. It
was pretty cool. Well, thank you for
being here. I think we have a giveaway
now is what Will is trying to tell me.
We do. Sorry, I'm doing all Yeah, a
million things at once. Go for it,
brother. Correct. Uh all right. Uh, this
is for a color printed Hero Forge
miniature with free shipping. We're now
rolling two winners. The first winner
is Far Too Many Lemons over on YouTube.
Congratulations to Far Too Many Lemons
uh for winning that Hero Forge giveaway.
I will be contacting you sometime soon,
TM. And the second one of them is going
to Aspen Fox over on Twitch.
Congratulations, Aspen. I'll be in
contact with them also in the near
hereafter, you know, sometime in the not
now, in the soon to be. When will be
now? Soon. Great. Um, also, okay, great.
Awesome. Anonymous, thank you for the $7
and something cents donations. That was
very kind. Uh, I didn't. And now we're
at an even number. Oh, good. Oh, so Jay,
I feel like we have to get everyone up
to speed on this. And chat's heard it a
million times, but that's why they're
right. I love how every guest is
essentially very different and unique,
but all the same, and that we're
explaining how stupid and weird this is
to a bunch of different people, and
that's what makes it interesting. Yeah.
Yeah. Yeah. So, there's team order and
team chaos for us whenever we do charity
streams. So, right now, you'll notice
the number that chat has raised for this
wonderful cause for Best Friends Animal
Society is at 2,00 sorry,
$4,230, which is a nice even tidy
number, I would say. Um, meaning that uh
team order, which is what I represent,
uh that I got defaulted into, uh, is is
really kind of raining right now where
Will is team chaos.
Oh, Brad. That guy. Brad, mess him up.
What? Mess him up right now. Nope. I
want a series of donations. That's the
Unix time in uh converted into yen and
then into dollars. Like, hit me up,
chat. It could be small. It could be You
just got to mess up the number. That's
the trick with charity, right? You just
got to Yeah. Right. Exactly. Pter game
is is Exactly. You're my target
audience, right? It's not the people who
are going to mess it up. It's the people
who are going to give just a little bit
to make it a nice even number, right?
Because we work together. We're in
beautiful harmony here, right? That's
right. You give a little bit, mess it
up, somebody gives a little bit to make
it even. And we go back and forth, back
and forth, and pretty soon, you know,
we're at $5,000 and giving away a giant
bundle of stuff. I've I've got like an
insider cuz Pretty Grim Games is next to
me right now. They're my partners. Oh,
really? She's She's perfection. I've got
an insider. I can control the
markets. So, whichever side of the fence
I land on, I can uh I can manipulate
this. The order is coming from inside
the house. That's right. Uh so, the
order in this room now. Is it with us
now? Yes, it is. All right, enough talk.
More talk. Jay, what we're doing right
now is a uh run of Fallout 4 that has
been pure chaos. Yes, I've seen due to
crowd control. So, you you're all caught
up. I don't need to give you the spiel.
Mhm. Great.
Okay, let's get back in here. So, if
everyone could just hold before you
spawn cows in here. Thanks. Thanks for
that. That was That really
Maybe this will finish. Okay, I'm going
to push. Okay. Am I at the door? I just
need to be by the door so that when this
quest
Yeah. When this when this quest clicks
and says it's done, I can just exit.
Okay. Completed. Go to Valentine's
Detective Agency. Great. Got to go.
talk. Now you have to talk to Ellie,
unfortunately.
Oh, but there's going to be like 100
cows in there. So, I have a suggestion.
What? Isn't she immortal because she's a
named NPC? That's I love that. The first
thing I see is the cow.
Jay, we made the cows too cheap. Yep.
Clearly. S, thank you for 11. I I I I
think we may have married ever so
slightly, but I I feel like, you know,
huh? Did we though at the wall? Okay, so
you're saying I should just blow up
things in the room.
I'm leaving. I think I think you should
walk into the room and frag out to see
if you can get to Ellie. Okay, we'll try
it once. I I I don't I don't know that
we have a better option for completing
that quest if you want to complete that
quest. If not, we'll just move on. Yeah,
right. The quest can't be dead-ended,
right? We don't Like we're trying to get
to an ending. Oh boy. We need to talk to
Ellie. Ellie. Ellie.
Alan. Alan. Alan.
Win again. Uh so while while Matt's
suffering um that this is Matt's job.
Matt's job is to suffer and my job is to
entertain our guests. Um okay. You were
talking about Design Del. Uh what game
that uh is upcoming this year that has
not come out? Are you most eager to see
a weird design element to talk about?
Oh, that is a that is a really
interesting question. Let's not come out
this year. I cuz that's come out is too
easy and might spoil upcoming content
obviously because probably already
spoken about the weird thing in it.
Right. Yeah. cuz we can talk about
blueprints or expedition 33 or uh you
know how Oblivion is a love letter to
the original while being refreshed just
enough to not be terrible or like any
number of things. But what's upcoming
that you're looking for? H I Okay, so
does it count that it doesn't currently
have a release date but it's to come out
this year? Sure. Uh probably Silk Song.
I'm
really looking forward to see what
what's going to happen with uh with
Silkong. If I had my patch vest, um I
have like a nerd colors patch vest. Um I
have King's Brand and uh on the back I
have the Vuvian moth and like the um
Wait, wait, wait. I'm just going to walk
two steps to the right and grab my
partner's hoodie. All right. Oh, is it
the Yeah. Okay.
I I I will give you muddy chat that
Yeah. Okay. Yeah. Okay. Yeah, there it
is.
I've won through one of those. Uh I wore
it to death. Um I uh I am so looking
forward to it. And my hope my hope is
that there's a design component that I'm
really looking forward to and an
industry component. And my design
component I'm really looking forward to
is I'm really looking forward to how
they make Hornet how they design the
world while making Hornet still feel
like Hornet cuz Hornet is so much more
acrobatic and much more graceful than
the Knight is, right? Mhm. Um, and then
the industry component is I'm so looking
forward to them saying nothing, shadow
dropping it, and being like, "We took
our time to make a game, and it's the
best game that any of you have played in
a very long time." Uh, and then I will
drink I will drink the salty tears of
all of the unfortunate AAA games when
the game of the year is a head-to-head
matchup between Expedition 33 and Silk
Song. And I will just sit here living
the good life for buying both of those
for less than the cost of a AAA game.
Yeah. And supporting extremely
passionate devs. Right. It's uh Oh,
yeah. For sure. Oh, it's it's going to
be super interesting. I think one of the
designs I'm I'm most looking forward to
is exactly what you're saying of like
trying to keep uh the fluidity and feel
of Hornet, even though we've never
played as them, there's this kind of um
implied race to what their gameplay is
going to be like. And I think one of the
ways they'll achieve that is through
levels of verticality and having um a
lot of the platforming be way more
vertical than it is horizontal like in
Hollow Knight. Uh the H in Hollow Knight
actually stands for horizontal. That's a
little bit of design knowledge for you
there. Um
and the the H in hornet stands for
vertical. Yeah. Okay. Great. Yeah. Yep.
We're on the same page. Well, because
like moth wing, the moth wing flutter is
so very specifically designed, right, to
be to not really give you vertical, but
it gives you ever so slightly a little
bit of vertical. Um, yes. And I and I
have to imagine that her grapple, which
I will obviously ride if they don't put
in the game, um, will do much more for
that. Oh, yes. And because of that, the
like the entire flow of how they did
level level design before will need to
change. And that's why I think uh it's
taking so long. One of the one of the
things is it's second game syndrome.
They had one of the biggest games of all
time drop as their their first thing. Um
and how do you follow that up? Like I do
not envy them for that. And and um Jeff
and I have talked about this on our
design show, Design Club. Um, one of the
interesting and important things is that
they don't have a problem which a lot of
other studios have, which is they are
not under financial pressure to release.
That team was teeny tiny and clear their
debt with all of their contractors in
the first 10 minutes that night started
with big. They have made we will release
a second game when we want to and not
before money which is perfect for the
art of it but heartbreaking for the
people who want a definitive timeline
right that's that that is one of like
the the the pressure of running out of
money is a thing that drives games to
release and cuz otherwise there are
plenty of uh auto devs who will
take forever and make it
perfect and they'll overdo it, right?
Oh, yes. Like it would have been fine at
99% perfect and you spent 3 years making
it 100% perfect. You could have released
it 3 years ago and no one would have
Yeah. And restrictions restrictions in
development be that you know uh
individually in the engine andor
development cycles needing to be quicker
because of budget constraints or the
publisher forces the devs to think
creatively in a way that they wouldn't
if they had infinite time. And this
doesn't mean a con like a restricted
constraint game will always be better,
but it will at least be doing something
a little bit different. I mean, I say
that or they could like cheap out and
rush things um like we've seen with a
lot of AAA games. AAA games tend to go
in that direction rather than the let's
get creative and do something weird.
Well, and then we some of the things
that we um I guess love about some
series come out of those limitations,
right? So, um, I was talking to someone
who's relatively new to the franchise
about Fallout, and they mentioned how
they hoped that Fallout would get rid of
that, right? Because it wasn't needed
anymore.
Because from their perspective, it's a
um, it's compensating for a problem with
aiming, a problem of fine control, a
problem that is solved through doing
this model, not. From my point of view,
it is both uh grounding Fallout in its
identity as a RPG and now an iconic part
of the series. Like we were just looking
at the luck um special um traits, right?
That you get all of these things that
relate to that. So it that may have been
true that it was born as a technical
limitation to increase the ability for
players to do fine aiming in a system
that wasn't ready for fine aiming, but
now it has grown into an identity. And I
think that that's um that those are some
of my favorite things I guess. Oh yeah.
When those grow and are like we get the
natural conclusion we don't need them
anymore but we keep them because we want
to. Yeah. 100%. That was beautifully
put. Uh an amazing example of that in in
motion and how like you said those
things can become uh like the design
identity or the IP identity of um of the
things we love. And the these stories
are numerous. Like uh when we're lucky
to get to sit down with the the people
who made our our favorite things, um I
remember when I first started out on
YouTube back in the day, the first
videos that ever did well for me were on
my personal channel, not Second Wind and
The Escapist, uh were videos on Prince
of Persia, and I love the Prince of
Persia franchise. And um I speculated a
lot about the level design of uh War
Within and all these uh things. And then
on a documentary trip that I went on, I
got to meet uh coincidentally the lead
level designer of that game and I got to
ask him all of the questions that I had
like posited like and um some I was
right, some I was wrong, but the most
fascinating thing and I can't say
exactly what cuz some of it's to do with
the publisher and uh stories like that,
but it's a lot of them were I thought
things were done intentionally like
either out of um like intentionally
neglected or intentionally focused on.
And it was usually the opposite.
Something would have gone wrong and that
was an attempt to fix the thing that
went wrong. Um, and it makes it so much
more fascinating.
I'd like to thank you both for having
cognitive cognitive I can't even really
smart things to say while I'm trying to
just move the quest forward.
Chat, good job. Um I I I totally agree
that the um there is one of the
interesting problems is ascribing intent
when it is unknown particular to things
that we love, right? Like
um when when someone loves something and
and we run into this of course all of
the time with fandoms, right? We run
into this all the time with fandoms
where they go, "Oh, of course the thing
that I love must have done this thing I
think is excellent on purpose." not
realizing that it was all just a happy
accident or not realizing that it was an
unintended consequence of something that
they hate, right? Or, you know, any
number of things. Uh, and I find that
that's that's always a really
interesting um Yeah. And narrative and
story as well. There's a lot of games
where people uh extend excuses for gaps
in narrative as being intentional and
they must have a purpose or this must
mean something. Yes. Whereas a lot of
the time devs are because of the the
segmented nature of how narratives and
games are delivered, a lot of the time
they're kind of doing the Mel Brooks
thing and they're chucking everything at
the wall and hoping something sticks in
your mind. So yeah. Yeah. Which is why
like um Expedition 33 coming out and
being so acclaimed. Now the pedigree of
the developers that there's a lot more
to Expedition 33 and how it was set up
than I think a lot of the public is
ingesting into the narrative. We don't
need to get into that, but it did
show up as the first thing that that
group had publicly built together under
this name. And that's a very specific
series of words. Um, and and was such a
success. Uh, and that's why it's weird,
right? Cuz by every right it could have
just sucked and it didn't, right? And
that's that's another interesting like
part of it. We we I guess we inject a
lot of survivorship bias into the way
that we think about development, right?
because so many small games or because
enough small games succeed. Surely all
small games will succeed. Yeah, which is
uh unfortunately not the case.
Gentlemen, I think we've fixed uh
Diamond City. I don't think we need to
be here anymore. I know. I think leaving
here is a good idea. Agreed. If you can.
The cows haven't now. I'll just do a
different quest. How about that? Yeah,
fixing is a strong word, dude. No. No.
Listen, if anything, we've made it
better. Um, that's very true, 100%. Um,
by the way, the
cows. Um, thank you all so much for this
continued uh, generosity. If you're
coming in and you're wondering what in
the name of all that is good in Bethesda
is this, welcome to our charity stream.
All of the chaos that you see before you
is
funded thanks to your donations to Best
Friends Animal Society. You can do that
through the crowd control links which
can be found either below the YouTube
stream or in exclamation mark CC or in
the extension here on Twitch. You donate
to uh Best Friend's Animal Society, you
get some coins, you pick a thing, you
make life Matt's life just a little bit
more interesting in a way that's not
necessarily the
great spawn 30 ghouls. Let's go.
Although I will say the the damage
upgrade on that pistol is making this a
lot easier.
A legendary feral ghoul. That's not
good. I mean, it could be. It could
drop. Do you think I'm going to find the
body in this? That sounds like your
problem, buddy. I love Is it part of the
mod that it's set up to play the sound
effect? That's that's that's uh No,
they're spotting chicken.
But like I'm I'm I'm surprised that it
it must be part of the mod that when
they spawn, they play their sound
effect, right?
As a dev, I wouldn't have triggers for
sound effects on spawn
cuz when is the player going to see
something spawn, right, right, right.
Yeah, I I believe you're correct because
each each mob has a spawn each many
mobs, the neutral ones for sure, have
spawn sounds. Um, which is very useful
because uh often they they spawn
from the player's model out of their
line of sight. Usually, not in not
always, but usually. I think it prefers
out of line of sight where there's like
a baked in sound signifier in a way.
Yeah. Yeah. Also, uh I know we give
Bethesda a lot of ish for Jen. Uh we are
breaking this game and it is survival.
Yeah, correct. We uh we did um uh we did
several years ago um break Skyrim with
this methodology by spawning too many
crabs, which caused all of the AI to
crash. And of course, in Bethesda games,
gravity is tied to an individual model's
AI, which means all of the crabs simply
floated away. They had to reset the
glass safe. He also killed God because
there's a scene where you talk to a god
and remember Yeah. You fly up and you're
floating and you're talking to the orb.
Do you remember that in Skyrim? Yeah.
They summoned enough crabs that they
attacked it and moved that character
away and then we were just stuck in the
sky. Yeah. And that's how we ended. Uh
it's great. Chad is Chad is an
instrument of chaos. The the floating
crabs is like a sheer agor like Yeah.
Yeah. joke.
I saved in the middle of this chaos cuz
I enjoyed it. Uh you have 94 frag
grenades, Matt. Okay, let's Okay, let's
uh Oh god. Oh god. Uh Jay, uh while Matt
is busy attending to his life, um uh
next question. What game have you been
most excited this year to play for your
own enjoyment purely with no thought
given to making content out of it? Oh,
that is that is a tough question. I need
to I need to look up a list of
uh games to release in 2025 because my
mind has gone blank. So, let me see what
2045 has been like at all right now.
Yeah. Yeah. What?
Big boy. Now we're talking big boy. Oh
god. All right. And then Boston became a
radioactive wasteland. I had to survive
long enough to equip it and get moving.
So, I'm going to run. Yeah, do it. Okay.
I Okay, I think potentially for me run.
It's too heavy.
You forgot to turn the comfort spot on,
you fool.
Okay. Well,
all right. Wait, that's one way to end
it. Get back and get away and we'll deal
with it. Yep.
So games for me I would probably say the
ones I'm most forward looking to play
for myself probably be Death Stranding
2. And this is going to sound like I'm a
Kajjima fan which I'm not. I've not
played a I'm like I've been teaching
gamedev and been a gamedev YouTuber for
a long time and I've never played a
Kajjima game really. Um but not out of
like I don't think that for me. It's
just I've never started. I've watched
hundreds of videos on on the the topic
of all of these games and I digest them
secondhand, but I've always intended to
sit down and play all of them like in a
row. Like I want to digest and I want to
be enveloped and the I think the release
of Death Stranding 2 is going to be the
catalyst for me to be like, okay, I need
to start that journey. So, it'll be a
long time before I get there, but I own
the director's cut of one and have not
touched it. Okay. Okay. Uh, that's
that's a good one. I um I'm in a I'm in
a very unique position. Um, chat, you
get some unique knowledge
here. So, chat convinced me. They
convinced me, Jay, against all of my
wishes that I needed to play Final
Fantasy 6 for the first time. I just
needed to do it. They convinced me,
which means I conhat into telling you
that I should play Final Fantasy 6,
which I've been wanting to play on
stream. So, that's the game for next
week. Uh, so that's that's my that's my
upcoming one. It's going to happen to be
content, but really I just wanted to
play another Final Fantasy game. Uh, and
the Magic Final Fantasy crossover is
sort of enough of an excuse. Oh, that's
enough. Yeah. Right. Yeah. Especially
cuz I'm Yeah, those two things together
for me
are a lot. Uh, the the stars aligned,
right? Yeah. Right. Well, I play Final
Fantasy 14 like daily. Uh, and it's my
daily MMO and I've been playing Magic
since I was four and it's how I learned
how to read. So,
it's it's it's for you. I think they
made this toy. No, it's it's literally
for me. Hey, Matt, can we can we get you
somewhere so I can give you a toy? I'm
trying I'm trying so hard and and
fighting so far. Hold on. But in the
end, nothing really matters. Doesn't
really matter. Okay, I'm So, we're going
to head up here because we haven't done
it. Let's go to the Museum of
Witchcraft. Oh, I haven't discovered it.
Dang it. Okay, let's go the college
square.
You learned math from poker cards. Not a
big
deal. Press F to doubt. Doubt. Doubt.
But that's also lurker. So Jay, uh,
after you left, uh, uh, packed for the
day, I was
introduced a I will save a lot of this
conversation for when they were on the
stream, but a friend of mine that will
be on later uh, introduced me to what I
think might be the next big sort of uh,
party game. Is that the game we were
looking to buy when we were walking
around? I think it might be. It's called
The
Gang. Uh, it is co-op. Okay, I have to
drop some stuff here. Uh, it is
co-op. I'll let Jasmine tell it more on
stream later. It is
co-op silent vibe based Texas. Hold
them. Yeah, that was the one we were
trying to find. Yeah, I was really
really excited. No, we're playing Gibb.
Give to me. Yeah. Okay, so how much?
Okay, I have 31. I have to ditch 30
pounds so I could use this thing. Uh,
let's see. Can you sort things? Sort by
weight. Sort
by There we go. There you go.
I don't want to get rid of final
judgment. I can get rid of this thing.
You have a second wastelander's friend.
Yep. I like the power fist.
The scattered laser rifle and regular
laser pistol can probably go. Yeah, we
can get rid of that shock baton. I'm
never going to use bottle cap mine.
Maybe 140. I got to start throwing more
grenades.
Um, let's look at apparel. I can ditch
this chest piece. I can ditch the
three-piece suit. I'm keeping my tuxedo
until you pry it out of my cold dead
hands. Um, don't need a vault 114. Yeah,
it's it's I uh It's one pound. Sure. Uh,
what did I just drop? I dropped
something important.
I don't think it was important. No, it
was I think I was wearing it. Hold on.
Can you drop stuff that you're wearing?
I absolutely can. Oh, Tux jacket on.
Yeah, there it is. Oh. Oh. Oh god. This
is a bad time. There we go. Running.
This is chaos. Okay, hold on. I need to
get my head back in the game. While
Matt's doing inventory, Jay,
unfortunately, our time together has uh
though though amazing uh been been very
brief and must soon draw to a close. So,
we've been asking everyone to do uh the
following thing while Matt Matt, go do
your Okay, I'll do the thing. I'm sorry.
I'm sorry. I just wanted to be polite.
Your your brain is is full, buddy. Um
we've been asking everybody to do uh to
do us a combined pit. Pitch just
something that you're working on that
you want people to check out and pitch
us something that you're not working on
that you think more people should uh be
watching, looking at, listening to,
reading, any of that piece of media
you've enjoyed that you have not made.
Okay. Okay, cool. Uh I've got kind of
one for myself and then I've got uh if
it's okay, two for the other one. So one
will be a who' have thought my stuff. Uh
if you like game design and you like uh
little animated shows, Design Delve uh
is for you. Um it's lighthearted. It's
used to um teach people about game
design um in a fun way. Hopefully, I
hope. Uh and for stuff that I'm not
making that I think more people should
check out. One would be a musician
called Andosan who is this unbelievable
mixture of like Prague rock or Prague
metal guitar with rapping over the top
and it is the most unique thing I've
ever heard. Like I'm a big progue metal
dude. Um I like lots like lots of
different um genres of music especially
when they're genre bent together and
Andoan is someone who I think does not
get enough um coverage or viewership for
his stuff. And for the second one, it
would be another second win show called
Storycraft, which is a new show of ours,
which is effectively about the the
narrative design of games. And it's a
new show starting out, and I think it's
really really good and deserves more
views than it's got. So, uh, if you
haven't checked that out, go check that
out. Hell yeah. Excellent. Excellent.
Uh, cool. Thank you. Thank you so much,
Jay. I'm going to pause for a second.
Yeah, I was going to say now, now you
are good. Thank you so much for coming
on and hanging out. Uh, it's been an
absolute blast. I feel like we've been
spoiled getting to hang out as much as
we have in the last week. Yeah. Right.
Uh but yeah, it's been absolutely lovely
and uh yeah, man. Hopefully we'll talk
soon and have a lovely weekend. Yeah,
have a wonderful time everyone in chat
and thanks for having me, guys. And I'll
speak to you guys soon. All right, bye
bye. Bye, Ludo. Bye.
All right. Uh our next guest is already
up and and ready to go, so please bring
them on in. Three, two, one, let's jam.
What up, Chris?
Oh, you're muted. Wait, you're muted on
your side? On your end,
baby. By the way, by the way, stop the
clock. It's been 11 and a half hours and
this is the first, well, second we've
had How about now? Okay, there we go.
There you go. Welcome, Chris. Hey, how's
it going? We're doing okay. If you're on
what, hour? You're on what, like hour
seven? 11 and a half. 11 and a half. Oh,
that's way worse. No, that's not right.
That can't be right. Is that right?
We started at 11:00
a.m. to 10 and a half, I guess. Sorry.
Our our call our call is longer because
it's when we set up. So, it's So, it's
10 and a half. Oh, well, it's just We're
fine. Chris, we're fine. Chris, tell
everyone uh in chat who you are and all
the wonderful things you do. Uh I'm
Chris. I mostly the way that you know me
is I work for Dwarf & Forge company that
does modular tabletop terrain. I'm head
of marketing over there. Uh and then I
do a bunch of other random stuff. I done
some D and D shows. Uh I have made some
YouTube stuff. Probably most relevant to
what you're playing. I did ASMR roleplay
Todd Howard seduces you in the bathroom
at a Fleetwood Matt
concert. Uh, which is
the You probably heard this. Nope. I
don't want to know. I don't want to
know. Keep going, Chris. I had questions
and then my brain stopped itself for my
own preservation. Do continue. Yeah. Um,
so yeah, so that that's that's getting
that's getting another wave of views
right now because of the Oblivion stuff,
of course. Uh, and yeah, so I've done a
lot of just kind of random things. Uh,
but I think I'm Yeah. Yeah. Uh, Matt,
show us the game. So, Chris, uh, have
you been have you been following along
with our nonsense, Chris? By the way, I
don't have it. You need to do it again
because I got killed if you don't mind.
I was listening a bit to the uh to the
last section. I heard you talking about
Final Fantasy 6 a little bit. That's
exciting. Yeah. Uh, heard you talking
about Death Stranding and I got very
excited to talk about Death Stranding.
Uh, and uh, yeah, I don't know what
they're able to do. I haven't seen crowd
control stuff for Fallout 4 before, so
I'm not entirely sure what they're able
to do to you. The list is long. Chat,
uh, Matt Chat points out that you're
carrying 70 lbs of grenades. Oh, is that
what's doing it? It's 70 pounds of
grenades. Okay, give me a second. Can I
just drop how Okay, good. I guess I
probably only need 30. That's Sorry,
excuse me. It's 50 pound. Uh, they're
Yeah, they're half a pound
each. You dropped 30. Wait, what? Oh,
you dropped 30. So, you need to drop 84.
You had 114 grenades. Yeah, they've been
they've been generous but also
encumbering me. Yeah,
correct. Um, yeah. Uh, welcome on in
everyone. So, uh, so Chris, the the the
variety is great. We can summon hermit
crabs. We can summon death claws. We can
summon all kinds of stuff. We can give
map
weapons. I made brahins too cheap.
Um, so, uh, they can they can summon a
Brahman. Uh, they can summon chickens.
There's some cheerleading, uh, brahinss
over here. Correct. Someone just did a
pie explosion, right? Um, if you think
that there's coherent gameplay
underneath all of this, you're wrong.
Well, no, it's a Bethesda game. Well,
so, oh no, it's starting. Um, physics is
stopping. Uh, can
you can you do me a favor real quick?
You got it. This is a safety maneuver.
Um, we make uh so um weirdly it's
crashed a grand total of three times
despite a lot of grief we've given it.
We've given it like inability to proceed
quest because of number of cows. Um too
many monsters fighting each other. Uh
spawning hermit crabs in all kinds of
places. Um,
you ever eat so much? You ever so much
pie that reality turns off? Exactly.
Yep. Got to go. Also, you have multiple
level ups. I have what? Level ups. Well,
I have to survive first. There's a
legendary enemy, by the way. Great.
Did I get him? There was a legendary
enemy there.
So, are you actually trying to make any
particular I That's a great question.
Thank you for asking it. I was trying to
make progression on Valentine's quest
line and then chat said, "No, how about
we fill Diamond City with cows?"
Are the cows aggressive? No, but they
block you from doing literally anything
if you fill a room with them.
Because they do have collision.
Uh yeah. Oh. Oh, hey, that's a crab.
That's a crab. Chat summoned a crab.
Good job. Oh, that's dragon lady
summoning a crab. Great.
How did that not kill the hermit crab?
Uh, it's the bus, Matt.
We're fine. Everything's fine. The
fundraising has been going pretty well.
It has. Uh, Will, can you please say how
much we've gotten because I need Yeah,
sure. We're at
$4,23242 of our $5,000 goal. We've got a
mega giveaway planned with a whole bunch
of fun stuff um sprinkled throughout uh
that we're going to be giving away. Uh,
a reminder, you can enter to win all of
our giveaways by going to exclamation
mark giveaway here on Twitch or in the
uh description down below here on
YouTube. Um, clicking on the thing that
says giveaways, giving us your username
and an email address so we can contact
you and I'll be passing out rewards
later, not tonight. Um, because uh this
is our first time we're doing combined
Twitch and YouTube giveaways. Also,
chat, for nothing, how are you feeling
about that system? Feedback, especially
if you've been here for a while. Is that
system working? I know we could be doing
more giveaways, but there's also a lot
of guests and a lot of chaos. We're
trying to balance it all. Um, is the
system itself a good one for giveaways?
Do do you feel like it's doing the
thing? Uh, you hit um
hit tilda. Yeah, you hit tilda. You're
in console. Thank you.
Everyone's changing the time. I need to
level up at some point. Okay, hold on,
hold on, hold on. That's correct. Uh,
chat is answering the question, "What
happens if you summon a boatload of
cows?" That is true. They are scientists
after all. Um, yeah. Uh, chat likes that
it doesn't clutter chat and like the one
time entry. Okay, cool. That's good to
know. Yeah, those are the primary
advantages. There are some disadvantages
like you're just kind of in and you
don't really get to pick what you
win, which is a little like if you
already have something um but if you
already have codes or whatever, you can
pass them off to your friends. You
already have the thing. Uh, find a
friend and give it to me. I need to get
out of here. And it's also not letting
me equip my favorite gun. There we go. I
wanted to sort of do uh favorite and put
it on number one. There we go. And I
have the big boy on seven. Great. Okay.
Hey everyone, real quick. Since Chris is
here, uh, Immortal Lab, thank you so
much for the $1.82 taking us to another
palendrome. That's right. I love these
palendromes and sadly I'm going to ask
people to keep it going. If we can get
to let's
say
4,000 What's a weird number? 400. All
fours. Oh yeah. If we can get to all
fours, I believe Chris has brought uh a
a gift from his friends at the forge.
Yes. Excellent. Wonderful. So chat, you
you heard the assignment. All fours.
That's $4,144
to do that. Yeah. Um, we'll let you go
over, but you know, it'd be really cool
if you could hit it direct. What is
that? It has to think of my nightmares.
I need to get out of here. Thank you.
Uh, uh, whoever is I'm caring too much.
I'm caring too much. Caring too
much. We might turn off.
They are literally causing the problem.
do that.
It's a sound effect trigger.
This is rough. It's been a lot. Mhm.
It feels like it feels like it's been
kind of turned into a bullet hell a bit.
Yeah. Um, so we could turn off grenades
because it's the number of grenades are
the only thing that has weight that they
can give you in meaningful content. I
think we turn off grenades. I I'm sorry
to say. Yeah. No, no, no, chat. It's
just making the game unplayable and Matt
stopping to inventory dump grenades
isn't fun. Here's a question. How did
Oh, that's my hit points. I got it.
Never mind. Uh, that is very funny. And
you have found the Achilles
heel.
Correct. Goodbye, Frag Gate. Well, well,
let's
see. We'll drop 20, 22, whatever. Who's
counting? Uh, Chris, how has your day
been going? What's been going on? Feel
me? I feel like we haven't played Lancer
in forever. Uh, how are how are things
going in your life?
Uh, there's a really cool thing
happening with trade. Uh, that has made
a good portion of my life a lot more
difficult. Uh, can't imagine what that
would be. It certainly wouldn't rhyme
with um, how did I put it earlier? Uh,
nationals.
Yeah, something along those lines. Yeah.
Nothing nothing that has to do with
that. Uh, yeah. That's that's Yeah.
Working in a working in a it's a weird
time to be in the tabletop industry.
Yeah.
Uh, but yeah, all all that, you know,
all that all these cow noises and Mhm.
chicken noises are the most distracting
thing in the world. Yeah, a little bit.
Uh-huh.
Um, honestly, I'm pretty happy with like
how we're we're handling it, though.
Like,
we're we're we're getting through it.
So, that's been that's been nice.
Outside of that, like I don't know if I
ever Has it been so long since we've
played Lancer? Yeah. Gi Star is asking
that I hear Lancer. Yeah, Matt and I
played Lancer together. Uh that's the
majority of our interaction. It really
is. We've we've seen a movie or two and
we did a a show at the botanical gardens
once.
Yeah. But for the most part, it is uh
well, you know, so we we got connected
because you like Spor forge and you
reached out uh because you did that
collaborative episode with us for extra
credit and then since then we've kind of
just done some stuff around uh uh around
portion now. And then you came in while
we were doing our Lotion campaign to
like play with types and stuff. Yep. Um,
but they mostly were just like we really
wanted to put a Lancer group together
and we just like it seems like Matt
would probably be into that and that
ended up happening. Um, I don't know if
I it genuinely I don't think we've
played since I got a kitten. No. So,
let's talk let's talk about your kitten
who you got from where? I got this
kitten from best friends. There we go.
Yeah. So, I thought it was I thought it
was interesting. Uh yeah, that was the
charity for
uh that was the charity you were doing.
Literally, she's hiding
behind a curtain right now. So, I'm
going to see if I can get her to come
over. Yeah. How does she uh what is her
name? UhQatara. Qatara.
Yeah. Okay.
She's I love all of the pets have had
nerd names like all day%. Like there are
no pets with like this is mittens. No,
there's no mittens here. There's Ludo
andQatara and you know Yeah. No no no
like no like typical pet names. Yeah.
But uh but we do I also am currently
fostering a cat as well and her name is
Bailey. Uh so we we got her from uh city
shelter because she was on the like at
risk list. Oh hello. There we go. This
isQatara. Qatara. Oh my gosh, what a
cute pile of paws.
You look at the screen. Oh, hi Chris.
Uh, and I'm gonna turn off my cat cam
for a second cuz I best friends for a
second. She has she has no tail. Whoa.
She's a
All right, which was the main. How did
you get connected with best friends? Uh,
we So, okay. So, the last I think two
times it was on the stream, uh my cat
Sally uh popped in and uh she she ended
up passing away late last year. I'm
sorry to hear that. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It
was uh you know, it was she was she was
older and
uh cancer happened and it was just uh
yeah, rough time. Uh so then my partner
and I were kind of looking around trying
to figure out what we wanted to uh you
know like what do we feel like getting a
cat again? How long do we want to wait?
Like still recovering from all that.
Yeah. Um
and in that time we just got very we
were just looking at like a lot of stuff
on social media basically. We were
started following a lot of cat rescue
groups. We were looking at a lot of
shelters and Best Friends is one of the
ones that kind of came up there and we
just over the next couple months we'd go
into the city and if we were close to a
shelter we would stop at and just kind
of like look around, right? And we
actually had decided that we weren't in
a place to be adopting. So, we went to
Best Friends to say goodbye to uh one of
the cats that we like had been looking
at there. Sure. Uh, and
then we just kind of like looked around.
We went into the kitten room and she
happened to
be there and she had just like the
perfect personality. Like we opened the
we opened her little
cave. It seemed like she had just been
waiting for us. Basically, like these
cows are just
Sorry, Chris. This is not We're trying
You're telling a very sweet story about
the charity that we're raising money
for. Yeah. But we I can make them go
away for you and me, by the way. We can
do that, which is great. Oh, I don't I
don't I don't hear it anymore. Oh, so
you can just No, I I can make the I
still have it, chat. You're causing me
damage. Keep doing it if you give I
still got it. But But Chris and I are
free, so you know, that's cool. Oh, so
you could have just made that up at any
time. Uh yeah, I didn't think about it.
My brain's also fried, but mine's fried
in different ways. Uh I'm currently uh
tracking all of our giveaways and making
sure that I have everything that's fair
squared away. Um because there's a lot
of
uh a lot of sub damage.
You have many. You should save. You have
many level. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay.
Okay. Okay. Okay.
Am I at level 42 yet? Not yet. Uh let's
see here.
Not doing any stealth. Stealth is not
happening this run. No, it is not.
I'm just going to up dog meat uh or cat
meat as Zoe uh wherever Zoe
is. Um what was I saying? Um did you
also get Zoe from Best Friends? No, I
got Zoe from the ASPCA. Um but uh that
was forever ago. I uh I didn't know
about Best Friends back then. Zoe will
be 12 this uh Halloween. Oh wow. Um I
should go get Zoe at some point. She has
not been on set uh for a while, though
she was here for the first six hours,
which is technically what her union says
she's supposed to be here for. Um, but
she's got her mandated 5 hour break.
That's right. Yeah. In cat unions, it's
weird. Uh, it's actually it's actually 6
hours on, 18 off. Um, so we can't really
do much about it. Um, hey, real quick
though, I know we're having fun and
we're trying to do good things. Uh,
everybody, all of your money, I just
want to say if you're joining us right
now, also I saw someone left. Colt left.
I hope Colt has a good night. Uh, Best
Friends, as Chris can attest to, does
great work for uh helping uh not only
help save animals, but also like uh
maintaining homes until they can be
adopted. Uh, one of the things that uh,
Best Friends does, uh, and maybe you
experienced this, maybe not, but if, uh,
for instance, a $50 donation, some of
the money that we've gotten right now
can provide a foster toolkit for kitten
foster parents. Basically making it
easier for people to take care of cats
in their home. Um, any amount that you
can uh, give helps. Obviously, like toys
for cats is around $5. Snuggle toy for
kittens, 10. Everyone's probably heard
this already, but 12 is for physical
therapy for a pup. We got enrichment
toys or food puzzles for dogs. We got
one week of prescription food for a cat.
Or you could actually help a special
needs uh cat or dog for one month with
$100. Um so please, if you are able, I
know we've been going for a long time.
Uh open open your hearts and wallets for
this lovely cause, Best Friends Animal
Society, and you can cause as many cows
and chickens and nonsense that I can
hear and the guests don't have
to. That's my pitch to you.
pretty good. I will I will of course be
turning it back on in solidarity. Uh but
but it was you know it it is distracting
to our guest. So I if I could listen to
it and make it so the guest didn't hear
it, I'd do that just for you chat. But I
want to make it very clear Will also
controls the tech. So I I I'm just I'm
just saying that. Yeah. I the problem is
the way I'm listening to it is the same
way the guests listen to it and I don't
have a way to split before before anyone
thinks I'm just I'm just popping out on
it. And again, a reminder, we do have a
giveaway. We have two giveaways coming
up. One at all fours and one at 5,000.
Matt, you need to be back on game. Oh, I
know. So sorry. So sorry. Ah, there's a
death claw. I'm so sorry. They spawned a
legendary alpha death claw. Uh, you have
a little boy. I don't know why. Or a big
boy. I don't I don't know why there's a
question. I don't know. It's not letting
me equip it and I'm I can't Hold on.
Okay,
hold on. Um yeah, no. Uh outside of just
being like a shelter, yeah, Best Friends
does do just a lot of uh just a lot of
good. I I think they do a lot of
advocacy. They work with a lot of other
groups. Um and they also like they they
partner with a lot of other shelters
around the place. Like Qatara actually
came down from Florida. really. Uh yeah,
they they had just set up a
uh a partnership I guess with a with a
uh with a shelter down in Florida where
you know they were over capacity and so
now they've started doing a thing where
um they're they're just getting the cats
there and they're bringing them up to
the city where they can find more
adopters. Um and that's where she came
from. She came from Florida. Yep.
they're bigger or not. And yeah, it's
it's a really good it's it's a very good
organization. Yeah, we were talking to
Samantha actually about those
partnerships and how that's one of the
ways that they're hoping to eliminate
kill shelters here in the US is
essentially moving cats out of places
where there too many cats and into
places where there aren't enough cats
and just sort of flowing cats around to
to sort of make sure that every that the
cat delivery system is working
appropriately throughout the entire
country, which I got to imagine not a
small feat. Uh, no. It's wild how that
stuff works, too, cuz like um after we
had gotten guitar like a couple weeks
later, speaking of the cat distribution
system, um we were walking home and we
heard a cat like yowing in a way that
we're not used to hearing street cats
yell in the street. Um, and we found
this uh little black cat just hiding uh
in the bushes in front of our building
and we're like, "This is not like this
is not an outdoor cat, right?" Um, and
so we It took us like an hour and a
half, but we managed to trap her and she
actually wound up uh so she stays with
Tyler now. Oh, really? Yeah. Yeah. Tyler
now has a cat and we managed to like
track her down and figured out like
where she came from and Yeah. She had
been an indoor cat who had been
abandoned and
uh Tyler ended up keeping her and he's
very happy. So it's there's a lot of
cats out there that need help. Yeah,
absolutely. I'm trying to survive here.
Yeah. While you're doing that, I'm just
going to thank some people. You you keep
doing that voodoo that you do so well
and I'll uh just running and nuking
things. Yeah, that's voodoo. I'm down
with that. Uh, new guy, thank you so
much for the $50.20 taking us to
$4,2944. So, we are a mere $150.
Yes. $150 away from that special
giveaway. Uh, Chris, tell them entice
them with your wares.
Are you Are you Kajit? Do you have
wares? If we have coin is that digital
wares. Uh we've got a $100 digital gift
card uh that you can use to get pretty
much anything in our catalog. That
that's that's most of like a starter
set.
Uh the people who have been here a lot
have have heard me uh ad nauseium
talking about Dwarf & Forge. Uh uh you
don't see it now, but most of the room
I'm in has it in its drawers. Uh, it is
a wonderful mod uh modular terrain
system uh for your tabletop RPGs or war
games. Uh, it is some of the most I I
I'm not saying this just because Chris
is here. I think Will will actually uh
back me up on this. It's my like most
prized possessions.
That's true. there the number of times
on breakfast where Matt's been like
where we talk about like what we're
doing over the weekend because it's
Monday morning and that'll bring up like
oh I spent an entire day building a
dwarven forge set for a D and D thing
that lasted two hours is like here you
know what this is very high I'm going to
bring this up because Chris is here so
this is me Chris you've seen this
apologies this is me building with Dwarf
& Forge I built the swamp of Berez from
um from uh Curse of Strod so This is a
full table. This is a How big are the
mats, Chris? The the texture mats? Uh,
they're 2 by two. Two by two. So,
there's a Yeah, this is a what? 4x4 at
that point. I can't do math. Yeah, cuz
it's four of them. But basically, I
built an entire um swamp uh setting in
the Curse of Strod campaign with a c uh
you can see on the corner there, that is
a um a ruined manor house there. Uh in
the back corner that is a basilisk hill
where actually I have one of the dwarven
forge basilisks right here. This is what
they were fighting over there. There's a
bunch of stone uh stone warriors over
there. Um and uh that is a bog witch uh
the Baba Lazaga's hut on the far right.
Yeah, this you can do a lot with this.
And this is the this is your uh this is
some dungeon castle and mostly swamp uh
terrain sets here. You can't you can't
have that like specific ones because
it's my swamp. Anyway, wow. Uh but uh
and and uh Valendana uh I hope I said
that right again. I correct me if I
didn't. Uh apparently won that last year
and they say I could pull this up even
though it's going to block my thing. Uh
won that last year. Made my dungeon of
themed uh magic campaign. Fantastic. So
there we go. Mad mage. Yeah. Dungeon the
mad mage. Yeah. Yeah. Uh, that's really
awesome. Yeah, it's it's it's really
good stuff. It's a high quality product.
We really like it. We hope you do, too.
So, if you can I know Chris Chris has
six minutes left. If we can What do we
What number did we say? I don't
remember. All fours.
$4,444 near
$150 from that. Uh, chat, if you can
pull together and make it happen, we'll
give away a$100 US uh gift card. Uh,
it's funny. I'm I'm a little too proud
of of this swamp as you could see from
the photography that I did. Yeah,
wouldn't you be? You did. You put in a
lot of work. You You talked about that.
You talked about that build for a while.
Yeah, cuz I had to build it three times
cuz I can't keep it like that with my
dining room table. Anyway, all right.
That is uh the Dwarf & Forge pitch. Now,
back to the
chaos. Meanwhile, in the wasteland. Yep.
I hate doing this so much, but the the
best time for me to step away is in the
middle of a guest because uh
thank you so much for the $557. Oh,
look, it's team. No, it's Team Chaos
Goblin taking us to $4,300.
[Music]
The
one behemoth incoming. Yeah. Um I hate I
hate doing this, but the the best for me
to step away because I have to
facilitate guest, which is in the
middle. Chris, I'm going to leave that
in your capable hands. Uh, please cheer
him on as he attempts to not die to this
thing. And if he does, tell him he did
his best, cuz I'm sure he did. Nope.
Dead.
This is This is a lot, dude. Yeah. I'm
uh I'm losing my mind. Every We've done
this a bunch of times, Chris, and I have
to say this is the most mentally taxing
game uh I have attempted to play with
crowd control. Like I think last year
was Link to the Past or uh last year was
Elden Ring. The year before we did seven
Zelda games uh that we switched at
different intervals,
right? I remember there's Yeah, Zelda's
are fairly easy.
Even Elen Ring is like slower paced. I
think it's just like how fast you have
to constantly be swiveling. You have to
constantly be firing. Yeah.
Uh that's why I'm I'm going so slow
right now. I'm afraid to get out of my
power.
Is being in the power armor? I'm
obviously being in the power armor is
fun. I haven't played for it is so
that's why I haven't died. It's Look at
this. Look at this shootout we got going
on. Uh it's because I have this
um what's it called? I have this armor
that I'm not dead. It it reduces damage
so much.
I think I have to get out of it cuz I
can't play the game. Power armor.
Whoever gives it to me, I don't
remember. Thank you so much. My brain is
mush. Here I go. I'm saving. We're going
to get out of this armor.
They don't have any way of giving you
power. They do. It's expensive. I don't
know who has what.
Okay. So, they can give you another
power core. Uh I will go back to it if
someone gives it to me in the next
couple minutes.
Did he die? Nope. No, he didn't. I had
to lose the armor though. Yeah. Oh, the
the power armor. Yeah, that makes sense.
A legendary bloodworm larva. Never seen
that before. I mean, they're they're
very unlikely to spawn enough bloodworm
larva. the average playthrough to create
a legendary bloodworm larva to get that.
But I don't I'm going to go look up what
causes legendary by the way. Uh uh yeah,
I'll take that auto stim. Oh, that heals
me automatically. I need to equip that
yesterday. Uh let's see
here. Auto stim. So this automatically
use a stim pack while health is less
than 25 once every 60 seconds. Let's go
gamers.
Yeah. So, it turns out that you've uh
what what's been occurring here is that
as we've leveled you up and because so
many have spawned, we've been rolling
the dice against an increasing
percentage as we've been going. So, the
odds of you ever seeing a blood worm
that's legendary are very close to zero.
Okay, gotcha. But be but because we've
been rolling so many times uh it became
more and more likely. Uh which is kind
of cool. Well, Chris, I I I know Chris
is um is only here for so long. How
close did we
What is this Tesla left arm? Hold on.
This is enemy damage. Uh we are we are a
mere
25.
Sure. $29. $129. Can we do it, chat?
Chat, can we can we do it? Uh was that
max int amount of rataway? Maybe,
possibly. I don't know. I don't know
what's going on over here, but I don't
like it. Listen chat,
you we're in hour 11 now. Uh
so maybe who who is to say? Uh for your
amusement and uh everything else, please
do consider donating to Best Friends
Animal Society uh so we can do this
giveaway. Otherwise, we'll do it later
and you might be asleep. It'll still
happen. Yeah. Chris, uh we're running
here. Let me pause this. Let me get back
to where we were.
Oh god, my brain. Brains are Yeah. Yeah.
Uhhuh. Yeah. This I don't know. I don't
know how you hold any conversation while
very carefully. Um, also, do I look um
uh on edge?
It was probably the what was it called?
Bucked up blood raspberry.
Yeah. Yeah, that's what that was. Uh
Chris, it's got deer antlers on it.
Chris, it's like gas station. Yeah. No,
it's got it's gas station brand energy
drink and he just drank it and Jamie was
like, "Here, I don't know what this is,
but you should drink it." And he was
like, "Okay." Yeah. I think I think
between that energy drink and turning
Fallout 4 into like a survival horror
game. Uh yeah, you're probably not doing
well. My eyes won't close. If we get to
$5,000 chat, I will crack out the
Martinelli's. I swear on all things
apple juice. Um Chris, I also have
Martinelli's. Oh, there we go. Uh, thank
you so much for for stopping by and the
generous donation that I'm sure we will
hit by the end of our time. Uh, where
can folks find all the good things that
you do? Uh, man. Uh, so Adust on YouTube
is where I do some stupid silly stuff,
some more thoughtful, insightful stuff.
Uh, I'm also, if you like D and D actual
plays, check out Tabletop Notch. Uh,
which I do actually with one of your
friends. Uh, that's right. someone I I
went to to college with. We randomly
realized this when I watched your actual
play. I was like, "Holy crap." Uh that
is very very fun. Yeah. Yeah. Awesome.
Chris,
no. Go ahead. Oh, I was just going to
thank you for being here and thank you
for being awesome and uh yeah, hopefully
we can play Lancer soon. Yeah. Thank you
for having me. Me, me, too. I need to
check in on that. Yeah, we'll we'll
we'll we'll we'll herang Tyler. Yeah,
he's got a lot going on. I know. Later,
buddy. See you. Bye. Bye, Chris. Bye.
Next uh our next guest not yet here yet.
Uh let me check the schedule very
quickly. There was a modification pray
it does not modification further. I did
I did see that there was one name for
this times in gray. Yes, they cannot
make it. Sadly, there was a um a um
here's something interesting though also
the next guest. Can we ping that guest?
That's a late edition I believe. Hold
on. Yeah, let me see here. Yeah. Chat,
how you doing? Yeah. Yeah. So that's
happening. That That one's happening.
That one's here. That's not here now,
but that uh Yeah, here. So that's great.
So we'll have a we'll have a guest in a
half hour. In a half hour. Um and uh
let's run another giveaway. Yeah, let's
I got But not the dwarf & forge yet. No,
we're not doing the dwarf forge yet. I'm
I'm trying to keep count. Uh, this is a
problem that I did not foresee, which is
I'm trying to keep count of everything
because normally I give away the codes
as we do this and now I have to keep
them all like I have to keep how many
we've done. Um, okay. So, uh, we're
going to do two $20 gift certificates to
the Nebula store. So, you can enter that
by uh going and entering the uh giveaway
link in the description of the YouTube
video or exclamation mark giveaway here
on Twitch. It'll put your name into a
raffle for the prizes and indeed for all
giveaways for the rest of tonight. Um,
so please look forward to that. Uh, I'll
be contacting winners later this week to
see if I've won. Nebula is the fantastic
store where you can buy extra credits
merch. You can buy merch from like more
than half of the people you've seen
today are all Nebula creators. Um,
Nebula's a fantastic group of just the
most interesting people who all happen
to should probably be in a actual play
together. Um, like one giant Oh god, I
have a terrible idea. A giant Nebula
West Marches game. Jesus, don't don't
we'll think you're gonna have to run.
No, that's fine. I'll just broadcast.
I'll I'll I'll be in charge of producing
and we'll find some sucker to to to DM
that. But yeah, um it's it's a really
cool group of people. They make all
kinds of content for all kinds of
entertainment, educational,
thought-provoking,
um, evocative content. So, please, uh,
do, even if you don't win this, go check
out Nebula. If you do win this, you get
20 bucks to the web store to buy merch
uh, from those creators that I guarantee
you there's at least one there that you
like if you're here. Yeah. Right. Even
if you don't like us. If you're here and
you don't like us, then you'll probably
like them. But if you're here and you
don't like us, thank you for supporting
the cause that we're raising money for.
Even if you don't like us. Yeah. Also,
snacking respect. Um
uh what was I going to say, Will?
Um I had something and I lost it. I lost
it. Um, I'm just going to revert back to
um busking for Best Friends Animal
Society, which we have been raising
money for for their Best Friends Day
campaign for the
last 10 and a half hours, 11 hours, 4
minutes. Great. Yeah, that number. Uh,
my caffeine level has never been higher.
Uh, and we've been doing so. We've
raised
$4,315.35. uh and and in and and in this
I will say turbulent economic time that
is that's far more than we ever thought.
Um I Yeah. Also it it really does mean
the world like we know like trust us we
know. Yeah. Also uh this is an
interesting thing. Uh Mail Perr Nebula
has a lot of great uh creators in many
areas. I just wish they uh had a way to
create playlists. I don't know if that
is coming down the pipe, but I do know
that the the engineers who run who have
built and run Nebula are top-notch. I
don't know if that is a feature that is
coming, but they are constantly working
on making it uh even better. And you can
kind of see it in in the the again, it's
also not VC funded. It is all
subscription-based. So, uh the the
creativity is grand, but the progress uh
is incremental is basically how that
works. I also want to bring up something
uh from Caro. It says, "Love you guys,
so I don't have anything to give."
Wrong. Incorrect. You are giving us your
time. You're giving us your attention,
your view, your energy here in chat. You
are uh you are a part of a big community
that's doing this. Uh and that's that is
actually a lot, right? I swear it's like
it sounds like an empty platitude.
Psychologically, it's true. No one gives
money to charities where the stream is
empty and people aren't having fun.
Yeah. No, seriously, it it means a lot.
people here and you're doing uh laugh
when I die over and over and over again
to 100 cows and share on your socials if
you think or you know of anybody who'd
be interested in coming in and doing the
same as you send it their way. Um,
absolutely. And and but just because
you're here, you can enter for the
giveaways. Like you don't have to
donate. I don't know if we've said that
implicitly in this stream in 11 hours.
You don't have to donate to enter the
giveaways. You just have to go. In fact,
donating doesn't improve your chances of
winning because if we did that, it'd be
illegal. That's right. We can't actually
we can't actually do that like legally.
Like you're all just allowed to enter.
Please, please, actually, if you're
here, please, in compensation for your
time, the least you could do is enter
the giveaway. Um, to to to maybe get
something cool. I and I I very much
appreciate it so much. In fact, I think
I'm never going to close my eyes again.
I I feel so caffeinated, Will. It's It's
been a minute since I've even had any
caffeine. Jamie and I thought this might
happen, so that's why I shipped her a
horse tranquilizer. Oh, great. Oh,
sadly, Jamie is not here. Is Jamie J.
When you're done, she'll be back later.
Don't worry about it. She's not here.
She left me alone. Me, Lazlo, and Zoe.
Okay, here's what I'm going to do. I'm
going to go refill my water, get the cat
andor dog to put them I think everyone
deserves a little cat cam in their life.
So, Yep. And and I will uh and Oh, there
there is a Zoe. Zoe's in the cat cam.
Oh, is she? Yeah. It's down there. I
didn't even see you, girl. Yeah. um uh
which shows you how locked in Matt's
been to the goal of we don't even know
what our goal in Fallout is, but living
living as long as possible against
insurmountable odds. Um we'll be rolling
that giveaway here in just 15 seconds
for those two $20 Nebula gift codes.
Matt's going to go refill his water.
We're going to leave on this scene with
a cat can while I do some giveaway
stuff. Uh and we will uh deliver you a
winner there momentarily. Look at all
those new entries. Thank you all so much
for entering. Give me a second. I'll be
right back. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
Absolutely.
Um, did I resort? Oh, I did. Look at me.
Past Will. Past Will doing the smart
thing. Um, chat, again, this is the
first time we're doing the giveaway like
this. So, uh, I am going to be emailing
a bunch of people later uh, this weekend
or early next week uh, in the soon here
TM after.
Um, the reason for that being that I'm
not going to try and do it when we're
done tonight because I'll have been up
on on stream for like 13 hours and that
that ain't happening. All right. Uh, our
first winner of a Nebula Code
is Alex of Ohio. Congratulations, Alex,
for for winning Nebula Code. Uh, and the
next winner is, drum roll please.
[Music]
Kyle. Kyle. Kyle. That That's what I got
for a username is Kyle. So, Kyle,
congratulations. You've got it. Uh, it's
coming your way later this weekend. Uh,
along with all of the other fine prizes
that I'll be giving out to other people
this weekend. Thank you all so much for
entering. And, uh, back to the game.
We'll have another guest here in 21ish
minutes. Let's see if we can make any
progress before they get here.
instantly hit with a Stingwing.
You know what I haven't been doing,
Will, and I really should have been.
Throwing grenades.
No, this game has a bat system. Bats.
Yeah, I was going to say
get back.
Oh man, I'm
getting
eat. What's happening? Do you control
what's happening?
Where is this bug?
Right to your left.
You
cannots explosion.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Uh yeah, we we we
ditched a bunch of stuff. Most of the
radioactive stuff that we ditched was
because
um it was going to just be like rad away
or die. Yeah. After a certain point,
right? Cuz you all can double down on
the radioactive stuff and then just
being near it is bad. So we decided to
not Yeah. I think you need the I think
you need the carry weight.
Unfortunately, it's okay. We're good. We
are good. We're so good. We're so good.
We're, you know, we're we're
fantastically good. Here we go. I'm I
think I'm going to expansion content
right now. Oh, thank you, Copper. Thank
you so much for making this visible.
Yeah, daytime is great, chat. If you're
looking for little things that you can
do with your coins to help make the
stream go smoother, daytime, clear, uh,
stim rata away. Those are the big ones.
Uh, and they are cheap for a reason. You
can also keep Matt filled up on ammo.
Um, but he's currently maxed on 10 mil
and I think he might be maxed on mini
nukes, but
thanks. Thanks. Oh, those are the
friendly rats. Uh, yeah, I think
we're bonkers amounts of rata away. That
is true. Thank you, Nick. You beautiful
monster.
Feel like Nick deserves a beautiful
monster award. like and again okay again
okay again okay again okay again okay
again okay again okay again okay again
okay again okay again it's uh it really
is the the people who have been um
they're there everyone has contributed
to this I just want to call out um
Nick's little like constant just like
essentially pushing all of Matt's
buttons gently Nick is one of my best
friends he knows exactly how to do it
right yeah exactly perfect um uh book
dragon uh when they were here doing
small donations and reminding people
that the donations exist right again
trying to get 44 $444. You can do that
uh giveaway for um Dwarf Dwin Forge uh
Dragon Lady for big generous donation
that you know everyone can chase after
and also uh for doing some very big
ticket items like spawning hermit crabs.
Um and all of you together for working
on things like getting Matt a big um a
uh a big boy. That's a that's pretty
big. That's that is that is a big that
is a big boy. 3D print a beautiful
monster. You could with the hero forge
giveaways. That's true. You could do
that.
Oh god, they're they're too close. I
can't nuke them.
You could just danger close and launch
straight up. That's a terrible idea, by
the way. Do not do not do that. Do not
danger close and nuke. We're okay.
There's actually like a whole bit about
that uh in um
so much XP uh in
that actually did a lot of work. It did.
It turns out nukes effective at clearing
crowds.
Wild. Uh, you've actually eaten in the
Big Boy restaurant. There's not many of
them left. Bob's Big Boy is the name of
the restaurant. And I remember when when
my family went on a cruise to
celebrate my
dad's retirement from the military. I
don't remember what it was. It was
something. Celebrate dad's retirement.
Uh we we went on a cruise and there was
a big boy on the cruise and that was
like a big camera.
I think these withered ghouls aren't the
ghouls that came out here. I think those
are from the area. I believe that is
correct. They will always be feral
ghouls if you summon them up there or
something. Also, your right leg is all
busted up. You're right. Stimpack
time. Oh no, that's the armor.
The armor's right leg is all busted up.
Who's this?
Get out of here. Commonwealth justice
for you. Hi everyone. Are you friendly?
Heard you talking with my paw. Mom still
thinks she can straighten stuff out with
him. What? I wasn't talking to anybody.
Oh. Uh, what happened? What happened
between them? Well, they've been at it
for years, but this last time may have
been the breaking point. The Forged
moved into the Iron Works not long ago
and started recruiting. At first things
were fine, but recently they've started
raiding. Jake told us he was thinking
about joining them. You can probably
guess how well that Sorry, I know this
isn't really your problem.
All right. Optional. Bring Jake back.
You know what? Hey, let's bring Jake
back, y'all. I think if we could do one
thing in this game, it's bring Jake
back.
What was it called?
[Applause]
Out of the fire. Okay,
just make sure we're going the right
way. I believe that is the right
way. We're bringing Jake back.
Save the Jake. Save the world. Exactly.
# come home Jake. Exactly. You got it,
chat. This is our mission now.
Nothing matters but Jake and raising
money for Best Friends Animal Society.
Is this not emblematic of open world
games? We've lost sight of the main
quest so long ago. We've just been
wandering around having a good time. And
now, no. No. Okay, we didn't lose sight
of it. The main quest was buried in cows
so deep we couldn't get to the main
quest. But
like we lost sight of it through a wall
of beef. Um
uh and now we've discovered an objective
that we do want to chase after. So we're
just going to chase after that. Problem
solved, right? Open world
games. Bring Jake back and give him a
huge herd of cows to keep him there.
That's a good idea. Let's put him in the
house and then cover the house in cows
after Jake is home.
Okay, I have a
feeling that tonight's going to be a
good night.
I'll just start singing the days of the
week. Okay, so Dragon Lady, you're
right. The main quest was the friends we
made along the way. It was also that
$4,315.35 we have raised so far for Best
Friends Animal Society. And we still
have an hour and change and three guests
left to go. So, please look forward to
it. Please do um you know, call your
friends, tell people. Yeah. If if if you
know anyone who's looking for some
taxdeductible charitable giveaways.
Yeah. Uh if you're in the market or you
just want people who are here for this
absolute nonsense. If you're like, "Wow,
that's I can't believe that that's that
they're doing that then like Yeah.
Oh, is that how this is going to be?
Molotov cocktails."
Mhm. Okay. Okay.
stuff to me.
The grenade button is hard.
I have a solution for the
problem. Mine's bigger.
It was in fact.
Did I saw that? Go back to go back to
big boy real quick. Yep. You have 111
mini news. Why are you using literally
anything else? Because Will, I can't
close range this. If I used that when I
was in there,
I keep switching back and forth.
Hey, level up. I think you have multiple
level ups to spend, by the way. So,
let's Did we attend to that? Just the
one.
Feel like you shouldn't use a nuke
launcher while on fire. Again,
cowardice. Raw rank cowardice. That's
all I'm hearing.
All
right, we have to bring Jake home. Uh,
am I familiar with the shadow run
mechanic known as the chunky salsa rule?
Isn't that where if you use an explosive
below its minimum intended safe
distance, you just turn into chunky
salsa? Or am I thinking of something
different?
Yeah. Yeah. Crow crowd control is having
a time. Uh, chat, we may uh Is it not
triggering things? We may need to
restart session. This is one of the
longer sessions we've ever run.
It's grenades indoors. Oh, great.
Awesome.
Um, in fact, this is actually the
perfect time to do it when we don't have
a guest on. Yep, I'll do it right uh in
a second. I just got to I think this has
the Jake information. I'm processing
because brain no work. Brain very tired.
Yeah, that's that's a very good point.
When was the last time we saw a cow? You
know what? That's a really great point.
Thank you so much for making it,
partner.
Okay, hold on. Uh, let's do this. I'm
going to save
We're gonna stop the session. We don't
even have to stop the game, right? We
just stop the session and start the
session. Uh, maybe save just in case, I
believe. Okay, cool. Okay, so I'm in end
I'm going to end session. No one hit any
buttons. I'm going to end my session as
well. Okay, now you start a session. It
says ending session still. Okay. Oh, no.
Now I'm still in it. End session.
It says it's ending and then it doesn't
end. How about
this? I just saved. I'm going to quit.
Go back here.
[Music]
We got this. And then actually Will,
let's give it a quick
break. Uh, and I'm going to go bio real
quick. If you could just chat with folks
whilst that happens. That's cool. That's
cool. Chat, we are we're holding. We are
in a holding pattern. Um, we are
some 11 hours 20 minutes into our third
of the hour stream. We promise to go at
least 12. We're going a while. Uh if
you're new here, hi. I will that uh
taking a bite break is Matt. Um together
we run most but not all the content here
on the Extra Credits Twitch channel. Um
you may notice Matt's uh voice is the
voice of all of the narration of Extra
History and Extra Credits. Uh he does
all those things and is also the
showrunner. Um I do all of our live
streaming stuff. So, if you see us do an
actual play or a charity stream or a
weekly uh podcast shows here on Twitch
and YouTube or anything like that, it's
probably got my handprints all over it.
If you don't see me on screen, I'm
probably behind the screen. Um, we are
raising money today for Best Friends
Animal Society as part of Matt's
Birthday Bash for Betterment 2025. We've
been doing this for six years now. I
think we started in 2019, 2020, maybe
might be the fifth, sixth, something
like that. Uh, every year we try and do
uh some good for Matt's birthday. Uh,
and I'm happy to to tell you all and
we'll talk more about this on Monday.
Um, we've officially cracked another
major milestone in charitable giving
from you all uh that we want to
celebrate. Um, we'll talk more about
that later, but that's an alltime
um number. It's very it's a very big
number. It's a humbling number really
for the the generosity that this
community has shown over the years. Um,
so yeah, uh, we're we're do we are doing
our real best here. Uh this is this is
probably the biggest stream we do all
year and we thank you all so much for
showing up. Again, if you have money to
give, great, awesome. If you don't uh
and uh have money to give, that's okay,
too. Tell your friends that there's two
idiots on the internet doing stupid
things with too many cows and rad
scorpions and rats and nukes and
whatever and Fallout 4 and that it's
funny and they should come watch. And
either way, you should of course enter
for the exclamation mark giveaway or the
giveaway link down in the YouTube uh
description there to get uh some prizes.
Um,
so that's the never ending session.
Yeah, that's right. It's just like
never- ending story. A story which by
the way is so much darker than the
movies. If you watch the movies and you
were like, "Wow, these are really dark.
I can't believe my childhood like
sustained this." I highly encourage you
to read the books as an
adult because the movie was the light
version of the story because it gets so
much worse in the books. Uh so please
please you know do look forward to that.
That's my media recommendation. Read the
never- ending story um in um and this is
weird not on an e-reader unless it has
text in color. The original printing uh
in English um has colored text to denote
which part of the story you are reading
and it's a key feature because it
becomes more and more important as
things begin to overlap. Um so there is
color important differentiation in the
text. So do find a version that
preserves that immortal app. Thank you
so much for that donation. We are now at
$4,322.34 aoy and receive. Thank you so
much for that generation generous
donation man. And I just combined
generous and donation into
generation. Maybe I need a bucked up
energy
drink. The sequels of never ending sort
of do get vastly worse in the other sort
of worse. Yes, that's correct. Uh that
is very true. Um for instance, it Yeah,
it's not. We talked about never ending
story in Matt. Great. I'm going to
launch the game. My eyes haven't shut
since I've left. I think this is a
problem. You just blinked. Did I or did
you
undercuts your
thing? Thank you for that dollar.
Keeping it moving.
Keep keep No, for for real though, those
dollars add up. If if all you have to
give right now is a dollar and you want
to give that dollar, that's all you have
to give to a charity and you want to
give it here. We are so humbled and
thankful, right? Like technically that's
$2. Technically that's $2, right?
Because all these funds are being
matched as part of Best Friends Day. um
on the on the Best Friends Animal
Society uh side of things. Um so yeah.
So, okay, it says crowd control is
connected, but I didn't start the
session. Maybe the session never ended.
Let's let's try something real
quick. The game will come back. Someone
try something. Oh, hold on. No, no, no.
I got it. I got it. That don't do
anything because I can do it from
here if it's working.
I don't think the bad session ever
ended. I don't think it did either, but
yeah, it still says session is 11 hours
and 25 minutes. I have start a session
for test to test effects. I show it not.
Did you close crowd control? I didn't. I
just closed the session. I'm a bad rude
man. All right, let's fix this. I think
I think you need to close crowd control
entirely. Working on it. Working on it.
He's still showing his no session in the
Okay, I got you. I got you. All right,
we're closing out everything. Yep. I
want to close everything. Give it a
second. Give it time. Let's hang out
with Zoe. Hey, Zoe.
Zozo.
Hi. You got You should have put your
head somewhere people can
see the light. Your your your face is
enclosed in shadow like you like it.
It's like stop hitting me with your
foot. Fall out of shelter. Okay,
let's By by the way, I I gotta
say, Matt, I don't know if we talked
about this. I don't think we have. I
don't know. So So we joined when we when
we started this on Tiltify. We joined
Best Friends um
day event over on on Twitch. A reminder,
it officially starts this weekend. We
got to kind of do a an early in kickoff
thing. Sure.
Do you know that their goal for that
event is $10,000? And really, yeah, we
tonight have raised
$4,323.34. So, we are already setting up
this whole campaign that's a big part of
Best Friends Animal Society's year. We
are kicking it off in style in a good
way, right? Cuz just like Team Order and
Team Chaos, right, the best thing you
can do to a tip jar that's empty is put
in a dollar. Yep. Right. because nobody
puts money in an empty tip jar. So, you
got to seed the tip jar with a dollar
and that's what we're doing for this
donation campaign. So, again, you all
are doing fantastic work in all the best
ways. Yeah. Seriously, thank you very
much. All right, let's see. What do we
got? It's loading. It's taking its sweet
time.
Let's just show you what we're seeing in
a moment.
Okay. Okay. I can start a session now.
Give me a moment.
Session should be
active. Okay, let me let me let me try a
thing. Chat, before you go off, chat,
chat, chat, chat, behave,
[Music]
behave. Oh, that's right. You can also
now claim freak coins. Oh, cuz it's a
new session. This is a new session.
There we go. We're back, baby. Away.
Jet, you may resume your gremlining.
Okay, we have to find Jake.
That's right. We have to find Jake. All
right, there are the cows. There they
are. There they are. It's like they
never leftbody.
Uh we do have uh Matt, I regret to
inform though we just got back into the
game. We do have an illustrious guest
whose presence we do we do need. So are
they here now? They are indeed here
right now. Okay. Um here we go. Ready to
jump into this absolute pile of
nonsense. Much though I think she
probably is looking at this and going,
"What have I gotten myself into?" Uh
everyone, please welcome our next guest.
You bring her on. Princess. Hi. Hey.
Lola told me I had to come otherwise she
was going to poop everywhere. So,
spoiler alert, she still will. Just not
as much. Yeah, exactly. Oh, Princess,
thank you so much for coming. This is a
lovely surprise because I know uh your
schedule was all uh was was busy, but
I'm so happy you could make it.
Literally, as soon as I realized I had
the time, I was like, do I have and I
saw 10:30 and I was like, perfect. The
beginning of my day. There we go. Ah,
well, your your vampirism is
appreciated. Also, yeah, I was going to
say I see you also hate the sunlight.
Um, the Jar is trying to kill me. Uh,
Princess, uh, please tell the, uh, folks
in chat, uh, who you are and all the
wonderful things you do. Oh my gosh. Uh,
my name is Princess Weekes. I am a video
ASAist here and on Nebula. I do videos
about pop culture. I just did a video
about the legend of Kora and the
problems with it in a nice, respectful
way. Of course. Uh, of course. And I, of
course, the only way to do so. I mean,
it's a it's a great show. Uh, and then I
also, uh, do work for PBS where I host
their book readers club. And then I'm
also just a huge fan of yours, which is
the biggest job and the most important
of all. Well, oh, that's very, very
sweet. I know about that. Uh, but thank
you. Um, so we today, we'll recap for
you and everyone at home raising money
for Best Friends Animal Society. Um, we
have raised Oh god, my eyes. $4,323.34.
There we go. We're doing work. And Best
Friends is matching that. So,
technically,
uh, or someone is donating through Best
Friends to match that. Therefore, uh,
that is double that number, which we
can't do cuz we've been going for 11
hours and 30 minutes. Not that anyone's
been counting. Yeah. Um, definitely not
you. Definitely not. No. No. Um, so, uh,
I I guess while Matt gets us back into
the game, I'll I'll take on the
questions that Matt normally does.
Princess, how famili Oh, we got to bring
Princess back onto this. Oh, no. Bring
her back. There we go. Oh, there I am.
Yay. Yeah. Okay, cool. Um, how familiar
are you with Fallout as a franchise or
Fallout 4 specifically? Everything I
know about Fallout I learned when they
did the crossover with Magic the
Gathering, which is not a lot, but
enough to know that there is
uh what is it? Um, you guys can get
sick. There's like uh radioactivity.
Yep. Yep. I know there's a hot skeleton
man on the show cuz I did see the Walter
Goggginsness of all of that. You I
swear all of the fans of the show who
are like into Walter Gogggins just need
to get a hear me out. Um,
uh, and there's so many versions of him
to hear you out from it. to him and that
him and the righteous gemstones him and
invincible, you know. Yeah, absolutely.
Um, so that's that's a good start. Um,
PS are now going to immediately divert
us from Fallout into um I'm a huge Final
Fantasy fan and have been playing Magic
since I was four. So, this is a great
time for you cuz we're doing the
process. This is a great time for me.
Uh, are you as excited as I am that they
gave the card instant ramen flash so it
can be an instant? I'm so excited. It's
I'm honestly really excited for this
set. As soon as I saw the Tifa card, I
was like, my my wife is here and I'm
going to and um it's so funny because
ever since that set came out and the
previews were done. So, I have one of
those like little emulator games that
look like a Nintendo SP, which I still
think is the peak of gaming, of course.
Okay. Um, and I've been playing Final
Fantasy Tactics Advance on it for the
last 72 hours. I have lost so many hours
of sleep. I would like I'll just I'll
just be in there and be like just one
more one more mission. You know, how
long could it take? Yeah. How long could
it take? 15 minutes. And then, you know,
now all of a sudden it's 4:00 in the
morning. Um, and I should have I could
have edited a video in that time, but
instead I um I got out of XP. So, it's
been a blurry. Would you would you like
would you like the the flimsy
rationalization I give to myself? What?
So, our job as content creators is to
bring something interesting to the
content, right? You can't just We were
talking earlier about like people who
just straight out read Wikipedia and
call that their content, right? Like you
got to you got to you got to bring
something to the content. You staying up
till 4 in the morning playing a game
that you love is part of the you that
you bring to content. So, you're making
better content because you did that
thing, right? And like that means that I
can stay up until 4 in the morning
playing games on Steam or grinding to
mythic or whatever because that's part
of my content that I've research. It's
research. You can write it up on your
taxes, you know, like I which I, you
know, I do them all properly and within
full
parameters.
I'm all of us. I'm totally not doing a
pack cracking uh and commander deck
opening of Final Fantasy on streams like
right away. Which which deck are you
get? Did you get Yes, all of them. Okay,
good. Uh, correct answer. So, uh,
actually Monday I'm starting my Final
Fantasy 6 playthrough because I've never
played through six. I know enough about
10 and I've watched Matt play seven and
I remember a lot of the original seven
both from watching my friend play it and
from like playground lore essentially to
like remember that. But I know nothing
about six other than um, Kefka from 14,
right? because I've played all of 14 and
love 14 with my entire soul. So, uh I'm
I'm going to be all caught up and ready
to go and super excited. I'm so excited.
It was funny because I have a weird
relationship to Final Fantasy as in I
have only played one game which is
Tactics Advance. However, I have watched
every I have watched every playthrough,
every like seven hour video about the
all of the history of it. Like I
followed all the drama about lightning.
Like I know all and I played Kingdom
Hearts so you know that. So there so I
know everything. Yeah. Yeah. Absolutely
100%. Uh and I feel like it's great that
we can um we're actually talking with um
Ben and uh Adam earlier
um about how video games are so weird
like that because it's impossible to
consume them all. Yeah. Right. Like you
can consume a whole movie or a whole
book or whatever, but like it's just not
feasible anymore to like unless you make
it the project of a year. Yeah. To play
all of the Final Fantasy games, like to
the extent that like you know them,
right? Like 14 on its own
is sort of an outlier, I will fully
admit. But like the main story of 14 is
over 400 hours long. Yeah. If you don't
skip anything, which I think is
exciting. That's actually like I always
tell people like there's sometimes like
with the God of War games when they
first came out I was too young to play
them. Sure. So like when the reboot came
out I was like well now is my time so
now I can finally play the game. And it
has been a great experience but I'm also
just like wow I have to go back. So I
ended up watching like a very long video
breaking down all the history of the God
of War franchise and I'm like this is
almost as much fun for me as playing the
video game as being like uh-huh uh-huh.
I'm ready now for my next date. When
someone's like, "Do you know the God of
War lore?" I'm like, "Do I know the god
of war?" Do you know it? Yeah. I was
there when it was written. Exactly.
Yeah. Data boy is phenomenal. It's such
a good game. I I need to play um
Ragnarok. But that is uh a project for a
year when we don't have con of new brand
new really amazing games coming out
constantly like Yeah, that's a lot of
zombies. Yeah, they've been spending
their charity bucks. Well, damn. Yep.
Also, the glitch is fixed, chat. So, you
do actually have your your totals are
being corrected by the the app. So, uh
you know, use them all, but be aware
that they are now fixed. Um that's so
cool. I love watching this cuz again, I
don't I don't know anything, but I know
the point and shoot. I had a brother, so
I know how Halo works and everything is
like it's either a Halo or a Final
Fantasy. And so, we're on that side. Oh.
Oh. Oh, I get to pitch you this. I'm so
excited you made that comparison. Okay,
so um are you at all familiar with
Expedition 33? Yes. Okay, so Expedition
33, lots of people making the joke that
it's a JRPG except it's a French JRPG.
So, it's an FRPG or a, you know, RPG or
whatever. And I said, we're making this
too complicated. It's very simple. JRPGs
are now any game where with any kind of
combat in any kind of world, you kill
God with the power of friendship and
overwhelming violence. If you do that,
it's a JRPG. So Halo 2 JRPG. Final
Fantasy JRPG. Problem solved. What does
JRPG stand for? It doesn't anymore. It's
its own thing. It's just all the same.
It's like how everything can be a um
what is it called? A dating sim if you
really put the effort into it. That's
right. Exactly. Yeah. You're 100% right.
Yeah, Boulders Gate 3 really weird
complicated polyamorous dating s
especially when you get the patch
because then then it then it gets less
complicated. Thank god because I I
remember the moment it happened. I was
on the show Oh, sorry. Should I be quiet
for this? No, no, no. We're Listen,
we're missing the Rich Jake lore. I
don't give a crap about it truly.
Uh I remember like my eye was on the
prize the entire time I was playing
Balders Gate 3 and the prize of course
is Shadow Heart. I wanted her and I was
going to get her, right? But then all of
a sudden, Lazelle was feeling me and I'm
like, "Okay, kill him, Jake. Well,
dabble." But then I realized that if I
dated her, I could not date Lazelle. I
couldn't date Shadow Heart. I have never
gone back on a save so quickly. I was
like, "Absolutely not. It was not worth
it." And then Will wanted to flirt with
me. I'm like, "Will you're I love you."
No, not Will. Gail tried to flirt with
me. I'm like, "Absolutely not. Get away
from me." But now I crown the patch and
now I can date everybody. There you go.
Everything is okay. Yeah. Uh Do love it.
Do love. Like, why are we choosing? It's
It's Why choose? It's D and D. Yeah.
Wow. That dude missed that jump so hard.
Wait, I don't want Jake to die, though.
Oh, I heard a cat. That is a cat. That's
Zoe. I botted Zoe into the game. Oh,
okay. Thank god. I was like I was like,
"All right, let's do this." He's good
now. Okay. We rescued him by murdering
all his friends. Sometimes it happens.
Yeah. Yeah. Can I get this power? You
got to do that.
Uh Bob says
JRPG Rona pill god. Yeah, that's right.
Yeah, exactly. That's JRPG. If I only
could J.
Right. Yeah, it would be fine. Um Jake,
get up. So, uh we've also been talking
about people's pets. Yes. What What's
your what's what's your pet history
like? What tell us about your your
current pet who hopefully will not poop
everywhere that you've come on the show
fundraising for pets. I know. Um, so I'm
a firsttime pet owner. Her name is Lola.
Uh, so during, of course, like during
the pandemic, everyone got cat fever.
And my partner at the time, uh, decided
to adopt these two cats, uh, Brigadeun
and Hanakaco. And they were really cute.
And I was like, I like cats. I think I
also want to partake in this. But I knew
I wanted to get an older cat because I
know that older cats are not often
adopted. And so I went to my local like
cat rescue center and the girl and the
woman there was like, "There's a cat I
think is right for you." And something
important to know about me is that one
of my favorite movies, unironically, of
all time is Space Jam. Um, and so she
shows me this picture of this little
tabby cat that had that was from a
bodega that had a really bad burn injury
on their side. And so they were taken to
a hospital, got all their stitches. Um,
and her name was Lola. And I met her and
she let me pick her up and it's been
we've been together ever since. Uh, it's
been about almost 3 years since we
became bonded and I love her so much.
It's really silly. Like I used to always
wonder about the like people going back
for the pet in a horror movie. I'm like
what are you doing? But what but now
that I'm a mother I'm like I've already
prepared escape routes to get her into
the thing. Of course. Right. Yeah. No,
it it it goes from we got to get
everyone away to where's my machete and
combat boots. zombies get away from my
cat, right? Like, it's like I keep my I
have like a Trader Joe's bag that's like
the perfect thing to put a cat in right
by my door in case I can get her into
her actual carrier. I'm like, no matter
what happens, the hard drives and the
cat are leaving with me. That's right.
Top priorities.
And um she It's It's so funny because
when um I adopted her, everyone I read
up all the time about like when cats
first come to your home, they're going
to be nervous and timid.
Lola is such a champ. As soon as she got
out of her carrier, she walked all
around the apartment, sniffed
everything, found the little bed that my
mom bought for her and just laid down in
it, and it's just been her home ever
since. She's like so easy, adjustable.
She all she really wants to do is eat
and sleep and poop. And who can argue
with that? You know, so I I love her.
She's also when I adopted her, they told
me that she was 5 years old. And I was
just like, "Okay." I took her to the
vet. I'll wait for you. And they were
like, we would say somewhere
between 9 and 11 years old. So, she's
just very tiny because of living on the
streets. So, my baby has lived a hard
life and now she lives a soft one. That
listen, it sounds well earned. Yes. I
don't know. And the streets are gross.
So, I don't know what the hell happened,
but she has no teeth,
so I don't have to pay for dentist
bills. So, I think that's in it in
itself a win. Yep. Cuz them things are
expensive. Looking on the positive side,
right about it. And I just I just love
my old lady. She's the best.
Well, speaking speaking of Oh, go ahead.
Oh, I was going to say speaking of uh uh
pets and and loving them, I just noticed
the number that we were at right now is
4323. Wait, hold on. 4 3 2 33 34. The
closest we can get uh in the current
order of like a dip in the same numbers
and going back which team order uh I'm
team order Will's team chaos. I feel
like we're we're that's a nice happy
number. Sure. Yeah, totally. Or chat,
you could just donate the current time
donate today's date in yen in dollars.
Obviously, right? I don't know why. The
fact you get to tell them that is really
Yeah, I know, right? The Unix time in
sense. Like, come on. Come on, Chad.
Right. Or pick some number of digits of
Unix time in sense. Like, it doesn't
matter, right? The the weirder like do
some real random number generation.
That's what that's what you're all
about. And a reminder that in a
[Music]
mere
$2110, I can do math. I'm not exhausted.
Um, we we will be doing a giveaway for a
$100 gift card to uh our friends over at
Dwarven Forge. So, bless you. So, do get
those donations in uh and we'll we'll do
that raffle as soon as we hit it. Yeah,
we're not Yeah. No, we we never kid
about at least 12 hours. And the really
amazing part is we have
had one open spot and it's an open spot
where someone had real life stuff and
couldn't be here and then we were going
to have an open spot now and then
Princess stepped in. So we've had one
empty half hour except for the half the
the hour and a half we blocked out to
watch a movie and eat dinner and we've
had friends pouring in and to talk to
all day and it's been the best. Uh the
movie uh Princess was the original 1960s
Little Shop of Horrors because it was
thematic with the sort of tone of this
and it was uh the copyright went out.
Oh, amazing. We love that. Have you ever
seen the 1960 version? Yes. It's I love
I love how terrible it is. It's so bad.
It's so It's so wonderfully bad in all
of the exact right ways. I love it.
That's amazing. Uh it's been a while
since I watched it, but I definitely
want to check it out again. Oh, I have a
question related to this game. Sure.
Who's the blonde kid? The blonde? Oh,
that's Vault Boy. So, the the blonde kid
in in the blue jumpsuit being Miss Yeah.
Yeah. is the corporate mascot of
VaultTech. Vault-Tech is the company
that makes all these vaults that
supposedly were supposed to save a bunch
of people, but in actuality was running
a bunch of horrible experiments. You
know, imagine that. Yeah. that a giant
mega corp would um do a bunch of lies
and unethical experiments on people in
an emergency situation. Yeah. What?
Imagine cuz surely we're imagining,
right? It's between all the dystopian
books and dystopian video games, you
really wonder how people manage to find
their voting records. You know, like if
anything,
if we've learned one thing for sure, two
things for sure, it is that Lex Luthor
should not be president, right? Yeah.
No, it it's it's always really funny
when people are like video games are
political. I love apolitical video games
like Call of Duty and Fallout Bioshock
and Bioshock and we're like,
can you Yeah. Can can like No, for real
though, like what are we are we watching
the same I mean it reminds me of the how
I feel when I first started watching
Star Trek Deep Space 9 and I was just
like how do conservatives watch this
show? Like I like it's like a thing of
like can't and then it's like they like
the military stuff of it. I'm like it
must be it must be nice to be so easily
I guess. Yeah. Yeah. Have you watched um
Avalon 5? No. It's on my list though. If
you liked Deep Space 9 and like a com
the political commentary in Deep Space
9. Yeah. I love it. I think you'll
really like four and five because um
they informed each other a lot and they
both pushed each other to be more, be
better, do more. Yeah. Um and I I Stand
by Avalon 5 is one of the best shows
I've watched. Uh yay. All right, I'll
check that out cuz I I want to finally
watch Stargate. I want to watch Babylon.
Um, and I need to finish the rest of the
Trek shows because I I started every
time I start watching Star Trek, I meet
a man and then they ruin it for me and
then I have to take a break,
you know, reasonable. Yeah, it's really
it's it's really frustrating. But I I
have loved like I started watching Disco
and then I and then I was like I don't
understand why people dislike this show.
And then I watched Espace 9 and I was
like, "Okay, I understand a little bit."
Right. Y because it's like if you don't
know Star Trek, Disco is very
accessible, but then when you start
learning stuff about Star Trek, you're
like,
"Oh, now I understand why they were
upset, right?" Yep. Not always
reasonable, but I do understand the
gripes cuz the whole twist at the
beginning with the Cllingon thing, I'm
like, "Oh my god." And someone was like,
"They did that in like the first
series." I was like, "Well, I didn't
know that." So it was a shock to me.
Yeah. every everyone's coming into stuff
at a different point, right? Entering
franchises happens all the time. And I
think a lot of um entrenched and
infranchised veteran fans don't realize
that every new thing that comes out is
an opportunity for someone new to enter
the franchise. Yeah. Like the the thing
that has the biggest problem with that
is Kingdom Hearts, right? Like as an
example, right? Like if you just play
Kingdom Hearts 3 because the thing
that's out on the current console that
you've got, you do not know what's going
on like at all. Like you're just
screwed, right? You got to go watch like
12 hours of YouTube videos of different
people explaining the different parts of
Kingdom Hearts 4 to have like a prayer
of grass, right? Um I feel like
Discovery did a good job.
Yeah, I I think it did that. I think
that it kind of loses the plot in the
way I think like a lot of modern shows
just aren't able to because you think
about it. Star Trek had 22 episodes over
like five plus seasons for all their
shows and everyone I speak to is always
like skip the first three seasons of all
of those shows. And I'm like that's
crazy. You don't even get three seasons
of television let alone 22 episodes of
three. Like that's Yep. 60s something
episodes of TV. They're like yeah just
skip it. Insane. You'll figure it out
sometimes. Correct. Yeah. I mean, I I
feel like a lot of shows that are
destined for syndication um sort of get
that way, right? Like Stargate has
Stargate has some rough stuff, right? I
do I love I love the antithesis to Star
Trek that Stargate is, right? Star Trek
is we can't there's the prime directive.
Stargate is all of your gods are false.
Take these guns. We're going to
overthrow them. And I'm like, yeah,
okay, I can get behind this, right? Like
that's great. I love that. Crime
directive there is the second amendment.
It's like
Yeah. And and I do love that it doesn't
take itself too seriously, but there are
definitely some rough spots in gate. Um
yeah, that's what I've heard. And I'm
like, but you know what? I one of my
favorite little like weird space opera
shows was Killjoys. Um and I feel like
it was also like a very weird like
ragtag group of space. It felt very
Firefly inspired but less obnoxious. And
I really enjoyed that. And I also really
enjoyed Defiance, which I felt was like
such a weird I don't know if anyone
probably like two people know that show,
but it was like a really weird sci-fi
alien show. And I missed that genre of
like weird budgety alien shows that take
you on adventures and give you like a
really cool group of characters and you
just vibe out. You know, some of the
best Star Trek episodes I've watched are
like the vibe episodes of like, "This is
a fun idea. Let's just do an episode
about it." Like, you can't do that
anymore. Uh, Doctor Who. Yeah. But
that's also like such a legacy show.
Yeah. And it is very like for better or
worse, it is attached to that. Yeah. And
there's so many like I feel like I'm
going to throw up. Here goes nothing.
Rules and um expectations and things
that are like bound to it. And then like
Mhm. I don't know. I feel like they've
been getting better at telling people
who are like too deeply entrenched in
like who the doctor needs to be or more
precisely, let's be very honest, who the
doctor needs to be played by um and
telling those people that they can
um stick it where the sun don't shine
that you know this the show's been
improving. Uh also uh Azriel Raiden
Ivers uh thank you so much for the
lovely compliment. Also, uh Nick, I do
know that the uh cows are stuck. We will
restart momentarily. I feel like there
has not been enough chaos cows. The cows
are stuck. I'm going to get through this
quest. It's cuz I'm going to use this
glitch to my advantage. Neither of you.
You'll both be It's a cow farm. There's
got to be cows there.
Push this uh this piece of software to
its limit. Yeah, but we'll see. Let's
see. I just want to get this quest
through. like a child. Jake, your father
and I have been out there and we know I
also like in Fallout there's like
there's there's a bunch of voice actors
but they keep reusing voices. So like
the Mama Murphy voice is this guy's mom
got it from either of you. So help me.
Optional. Bring Jake back. I did it.
Nice. Okay, cool. We've rescued Jake.
We've done one thing in 12 hours. We did
one thing. But it's great. It was a good
thing and that's what matters. You
reunited a family. It balances out all
of the want and murder, cow destruction,
nuclear bombings, all of that. We We
rescued one person. No one asks Luke
Skywalker how many people got killed on
the Death Star because at the end of the
day, that's not the point. How many
people he saved by blowing up the Death
Star is really the question. All right.
Uh I should quit uh uh I can't even say
names anymore. I should quit and then
restart
everything.
Okay. Oh boy. Oh boy.
Okay. So, I'm going to close my session.
You need to close not stop the session.
You need to close your crowd control
entirely. You got it, Mcruber. And then
do crowd control game. Let me boot mine.
Yeah. Although, I will hold off. Tell
you what, I'm going to hold off booting
mine because we don't need mine unless
something goes wrong. Right. Right.
Princess, I feel like Zordon watching
you guys. I'm like, "Yes, Rangers,
reboot the system." I I Princess I I I
we I I
I was this close to buying Power Rangers
Dice back in the day when you were you
were going to run a uh uh a TTRPG game.
I know. I still have to do that. I have
Power Rangers Dice for that purpose.
Amazing. I what I kind of want to do for
the big 35 because I feel like by 35 if
we still have a planet Sure. and a
country, I'll have finally had time to
plan it out. I want to just have people
bring in
whatever brew they want to use to make
their characters and just do a crossover
episode. Like everyone just come with
like whatever they want to play as from
whatever game just like cuz it's all the
same really. Yeah. And just be like and
I'm just like we're just going to do one
a crossover episode and I will be Zordon
as as is my No. As is appropriate,
right? You are in fact an allseeing uh
alien in a tube obviously. But oddly
enough, not evil. Like that. I was
waiting for that to happen, but it never
did. Yeah. Although I feel like it's
weird as Rangers went on, Zordon
remained like one of the best like
Rangers, we need your help figures,
right? Cuz like so many others got into
like
like weird interpersonal dynamics with
the team. And I was like, that's not the
point. The point is that like you're an
adult. That's what your point is to be,
right? Well, and and like sometimes like
uh what was it in
Ninjastorm, the the lead is one of the
Rangers dads except turned into a guinea
pig because it's Power Rangers. Sure. Um
and like that's a weird dynamic to have,
right? I stopped watching after Time
Force, the last great pink Power Rangers
season of the show cuz I was like as
soon they were like, "Oh, we only going
to have four r three rangers.
I got to get out of here. I I need a
full ensemble. I need I need the whole
set. One girl. I can't live like that.
Did they? It was like four R. They they
shorten shrank the team down and then it
was only one. It was Ninjastorm. Oh, was
it Ninja? Actually, yeah. So, Ninjastorm
they started out with three and then
they added two more bad boy Rangers
except they were navy blue and maroon.
Great. Like uniform colors, right? But
it was like navy and I think they called
it like crimson or something. And then
the the girl was the blue ranger. Uh and
then they had Yeah, they had a sixth
ranger who was the green ranger again.
They brought the green ranger back
except he was a samurai in a whole bunch
of ninjas. So it was like five ninjas
and a samurai and they were like this is
the thing. Although you should be very
glad you bailed before they got um what
is
it? Spell force where they had I'm not
kidding. I'm not kidding. The conceit
for the season was that there are
morphers were also magic wands and also
communication devices called and I swear
to God I'm not making this up. Spell
phones that you had to dial I'm not I
swear I'm not making Will you used to
call me on my cell phone right? Yeah. No
that you had to like dial spells into
and they like added spells to their like
contact. Everything you're saying
everything you're saying is bad. Stop.
What I'm saying is you got it at the
right time. Good job. Oh my god. You
bailed. You bailed successfully. The
vibes went rancid and you dipped and
that's, you know, props. Oh my gosh.
Okay. Crowd control should be going. All
right. Okay. Let's see.
The session is live. Okay. Gameplay
scene. Okay. Hold on. Will they do it?
They've done it. Maybe. Yes. One cow,
please. One cow. Just a simple cow.
Give me that cow.
Oh, there it is. All right. Great.
Awesome. Uh, blessed be the cow.
Philosophy question. Assuming we accept
the premise that good and evil can be
objective, would you say that one of the
better metrics for good being how deep
your capacity to consider and mitigate
cascading harm of solving problems and
evil being an end to justify the means
simplistic problem solving approach.
Part of the problem is
that all of those questions about
outcomes depend on superhuman knowledge,
right? Like I catch what you're
throwing. There is a problem where like
you would need to know what all the
consequences of the thing were to some
extent, right? And that's part of why
good and evil aren't objective by any
stretch, right? They're not they're not
like not preaching moral relativism
here, right? that there is a more
nuanced understanding which is why
ethics is still an important class
that should be taught is taught but STEM
but STEM is the real answer because they
took the A out of STEM and they were
like but it's STEM now and I was like
no I think that question is always funny
and I'm just like well according to Paul
Madi if you ingest the enough
information and tap into your male and
female fellow ancestors, you will be
able to see the golden path and make the
right decision and decide if the ends do
justify the memes. So, just do that. Can
we just agree that that white boy was
the worst thing to ever happen to the
people of Araco? Oh, absolutely. That
white boy went crazy. But, you know,
some people don't believe that when you
say it. They're like, "What do you
mean?" It it is the media literacy like
falling off the charts when people are
like, "Paul's such a cool character."
And I'm like, "You don't. You are not a
and we're not we're not watching the
same movie, right? Like he takes the
people who want to transform their world
into a paradise and convinces them
instead to go on an endless crusade to
justify his existence as empire cuz they
killed his daddy, right? Because boys
will go to any length rather than go to
therapy. Yes. And it I mean it doesn't
help that his mom does encourage it.
Usually, you know, we really have to
look at the leaders in the community. Um
the Ben Jesuit really uh Oh yeah. No,
you want to talk about evil. They're
just very evil. Yes. They're like
manipulating people and like doing all
kinds of weird morally dubious at best
underhanded stuff to try and uh maintain
control through eugenics. Yeah.
Which everyone agrees is bad, right? The
bad movies. Yeah. No, they they all do.
They all agree that here or we're going
to have a problem. Um, uh, there's a
lighthouse out here. I'm I'm trying to
get to of witchcraft. Okay, wait. Where
the bunny deserette are. Yes. Yes.
Duncan Idaho and his boyfriend Gary
Indiana. I hate you and I love you at
the same time for that. That was
beautiful. That name is always so funny
to read cuz it's like it's like Paul
Jessica Duncan Idaho. And then it's like
okay then there's a little chie thrown
in there. Oh yeah.
Yeah.
I think this must be the Museum of
Witchcraft we're coming up to.
Uh Cer, it shouldn't be. If it is, it's
by the smallest it is by the smallest
margin possible. Um so part of it is
that those two the two platforms
[Music]
um do their um do their encoding
slightly differently. Um, but they
should be as close to together as soon
as humanly possible, but there will be
some different lag because we are
sending the same signal to two different
injust servers which are sending it to
you. So, if you've got them side by
side, they'll never be perfectly in
sync. Um, but we're doing eliminate
that.
Don't I don't know. Stop. Not my
eyebrows. Yeah, I know. And that made me
think about my eyebrows. And I'm
Jokes on all you. I never think about my
eyebrows and that's a problem. Jamie is
always like, "You have one hair that's
just like and it's it's brutal."
The privilege of being eyebrow blind.
Uh, Princess, I know uh our time our
time together uh fantastic though it is
is of course drawing to a close as our
as our half hour uh finishes. But I
wanted to ask you a question that we've
been asking everybody who's on and I'm
rather proud of this because I came up
with this question today and it it's
been a good question. I'm ready. Can you
please pitch us one thing that you have
been making and one thing that you
haven't been making but you think that
people should read, watch, listen to,
enjoy in some way. Okay. So, one thing
that I that I have made and one thing
that I am making. Well, one thing that
you're making and one thing that you
didn't make that but you're enjoying as
a content creator. Okay.
So uh wow this is so hard because I hate
I'll start with the other one. Sure. So
right now I have been watching if you
are a fan of say a period drama but you
also want something that has a little
bit of air of mystery and a female
character that really hits that tickle
of being a little too cool for school
but still kind to everyone. The
Apothecary Diaries, which is currently
streaming on Netflix and also on
Crunchyroll, is one of the best animes
I've watched. It's up for anime of the
year, I believe, as well. And it's about
this young girl named Mao who is at
first kidnapped and brought to the
palace where all of the like wives of
the emperor kept. But she uses all her
knowledge as an apothecary to kind of
essentially solve crimes around the
palace. and she gets caught up in all of
the intrigue, but then it's also really
beautifully put together. It's got a lot
of emotional depth and like all good
anime, it's only 22 22 minutes long, so
you're in and you're out and you get a
little fun music intro and outro. All
right. Okay. And what about you? We're
not going to let you off the hook. What
you make so many cool things a cool
thing you've been doing. Okay. So, I
recently went to Scotland because I had
a question
about whenever you pick up like a
romance novel and you have a mysterious
Duke or something like that, he's always
from Scotland. He's never from Ireland.
He's never from Wales. And one of the
most popular shows, romance shows out
right now is Outlander. So, why are
people so fascinated with Scotland as a
romantic point? How has Outlander
changed the relationship between
Scotland and the wider world? Well, I
went there to answer these questions for
uh myself mainly and also for anyone who
cares about sort of like the weird
history of Scotland as both a colonial
um part of the colonial experiment but
also a victim of British colonialism at
the same time. So, it's both like an
analysis of a pop culture show, but an
examination of a culture that we have
synthesized into the most acceptable
little bits of it. So, yeah, that's
coming sometime this year. Hell yeah.
Awesome. I I can't wait. That sounds
really cool. Matt, could you please take
us to the cafe for our next guest is
ready. And it is unfortunately time that
we say Princess, thank you so much.
Please, let's hang out. Let's play some
magic or get a coffee or something soon.
Yes, absolutely.