Matt. Matt, you have death claws. Matt,
you got to wake up.
Matt, you got to wake up. It's time to
do breakfast. You got Well, it's like
it's Saturday. No, buddy. No, no, no,
buddy. It It's Monday. What? For the
second time? Like, I didn't do this
already over on Twitch. That's correct.
It's like we didn't do this bit over on
Twitch. That's
Wow. Good morning, everybody. Welcome
back. Yeah, it is. It is in fact time.
I think it is in fact what? What? What?
Time. Time. There we go. It's a matter
of time. Yeah, it's only a matter of
time. Welcome to the pre-show. I can't
wait to see you again. Yeah, there you
go. Welcome to the pre-show of games for
breakfast this morning. We are uh what's
the word I'm looking for? Uh, I believe
the technical term is hella pooped. Um,
from our stream, which we'll talk about
a little bit more, knackered, uh,
exhausted,
uh, sleepsies, uh, all of those things.
But that that's not going to that's not
going to stop us from bringing you the
best breakfast and gaming mashup content
of your entire GD lives.
I don't know what that is. I don't know.
It's a chocolate chip oatmeal bar. Oh,
hell yeah. Great. What did you find it
on your desk? What? You seemed very
surprised about it. I did. I thought I
was out of them. I lost one on my desk
during Friday's show. And you found it
right now. I found it right now. That's
pretty great. It's a breakfast miracle,
Matt. That's true. That's true. I I
think everyone in Brad and Janet uh
clapped hard enough and found you
sustenance that will maintain uh at
least you listening to me scream for the
next two hours. I'm not going to scream.
I'm going to speak
loudly. Um as we're walking exuberantly.
Yeah, exuberantly. I'm Listen, we'll
talk about the stream when we when we
start the show proper. I uh am so excite
that um
the the the stream went so well and uh
now we're back to we haven't done a
breakfast in two weeks. Uhhuh.
We haven't eaten breakfast in two weeks.
Which reminds me, will
um did we run the bumper before we
started? Perfect. Perfect.
I ran it before you joined. Okay, that
makes sense. Yeah.
Well, let's see. Let's see if all the
old haunts work. It was great to meet
you uh at PAX East. Who said this? What
happened? Thomas Thomas Guzma said, "It
was great meeting you at PAX East." Pax
East. The PAX East also happened. We'll
talk about that. The PAs of the East.
Yeah. Uh, thanks for thanks for uh
saying hi. Yeah. Uh, Yuri says they
missed us. Oh, well, we missed y'all
too. We we missed you so much that we
spent around 13 hours with you on
Friday.
I hate the duality of this where like
part of me is like, "God, I'm so glad
that's over. I can sleep for a whole
weekend now." And then I didn't sleep
for a whole weekend now and I'm still
tired because I didn't sleep for the
whole weekend. not there was no sleep
that occurred during the weekend, but
instead I was awake for any part of the
weekend when I wanted to be asleep. Um,
and and the other part of me is like,
man, I wonder how I can do something uh
that that tops all of the technical
shenanigans that we did for my birthday.
We can do it. I believe we have the
technology. I mean, we do, but turns out
that uh being on two incredibly powerful
streaming rigs makes a lot of things
possible. A lot a lot more things a lot
possible. Turns out being on a medium
power rig that is haunted by the ghosts
of my enemies. Also makes a lot of
things possible. That's true. That is
Yeah. Mhm. I still I'm real glad that we
didn't have to like get the holy water
squirt bottle for your PC because like
man I don't I don't know what we do with
that. Well, we made it and we'll talk
about it. Is there anything else?
Weirdly, uh it's the end of the month so
I know this the pre-show could go a
little short. We could just get into the
show. That's true. Uh we could indeed
for there there is no hype to be had
over on Twitch. That is not an
invitation to hype. That is an obation.
There there is no hype. Uh yeah, we can
we can do that thing. Um, so because I
have this whole carffe ready and I feel
like I'm going to need it. And by car I
mean French press. Yeah. Which I guess
is also a carffe.
I don't want to think about it. All
right, we're going to go to black. Then
we're go back and we're do a show. I
think all of our and Will's energy will
grow three sizes. Is this is pre-show.
Will wait. Whoa. Wait. Hey everybody,
wait till you see regular show Will. I
got I got splinters under my fingernails
from digging at the bottom of the bottom
the bottom of the barrel this morning.
Just it's going. We We can do it. I
believe in you. I believe in me that
believes in you.
That makes one of us. All right. Great.
We'll be right back.
[Applause]
[Music]
Good morning, Matt. Oh, good morning,
Will. Morning to all of you. Welcome to
Games for Breakfast, the only internet
talk show we talk about this week's
gaming and tech news, but that also we
get to announce a very, very happy thing
that happened last Friday. For any of
you that were not here, that is right.
We, the colloquial uh Brad, Janet, Will,
myself, a load of special guests and and
giveaway partners managed to raise
$5,000 for Best Friends Animal Society,
which due to their Best Friends Day,
which I believe is going on right now.
That 5,000 actually is matched. So, we
raised
$10,000 in a span of around 12 plus
hours on Friday playing a crowd control
uh run of Fallout 4, which was absolute
madness. And I have been over the moon
the entire weekend because of it. Um it
was it was pretty amazing. In fact, uh
Matt, I did I did some digging. They
have a best friends
uh day big overarching combined thing. I
don't know what you want to call It's
not an individual campaign, but it's
like a it's a group campaign. It's an
event over on Tiltify. And their goal
for the entire event was to raise
$10,000 before matching. So, we set them
halfway to their goal on day zero of
Best Friends Day. Uh so, you know, I
feel like we did we showed up. We did
pretty good. We showed up. We showed up.
Uh I'm over the moon. I'm super thrilled
and thankful and thank you for everyone
who came and hung out and donated and
all to all of our partners who gave us
giveaways to give away and all the
guests that stopped by. We had a full
docket. I think we had like 19 guests or
something like that. It was a a little
bit a little bit wacky. Also, uh Andrew
has the vibe.
So many Brahman spawn. I wish we could
find out how many Brahman were spawned.
I believe we get Oh god. I'm not going
to dig it up now. Don't dig it up now. I
think it just be if I have the answer by
the time we uh do all of the YouTube
after action stuff tonight, I will post
it in the YouTube uh thing. But if
you're over in the YouTube VOD right
now, post your guess how many Brahman
responded on Yeah. How many Brahman were
spawned on Friday? And I will post a
pinned comment with both a link to the
fundraiser if you want to donate because
it's still live and how many Brahman we
spawn on Friday if I can find out. And
if I can't, I'll tell you that I can't.
Um, also Twitch chat is over here
being just their normal ornery
counterproductive selves by starting a
hype trade after we told them that they
were too late. Show's already going.
Hype train can't survive. Hype train
can't survive. Can't do it. Not for for
this side on the YouTube side of things.
We will end up uh we have a a a hype
train graphic that will I think you
mentioned we might be able to make work
at some point. Yes, that is a thing that
is on my list of things to do now that
we're not trying to get all of the tech
for the birthday to work. Um, so for
those who are unfamiliar, I changed
PCs over the winter break, and we've
slowly been adding more things in that
I've wanted to do, but the old stream PC
just didn't have the horsepower to do
it. So, we're slowly adding those things
back in. One of them is dual streaming
to YouTube. One of them is
um some of the the new stuff that we do
with guests. Some of it is a bunch of
other things, but one of them is this
really cool crowd uh not crowd control,
hype train emote.
Um so which we'll which we should be
getting working. Also, side note,
anybody who was at the stream on Friday,
um how did it look overall? I we didn't
hear of any technical issues on the dual
streaming stuff from my rig. Um, granted
we were playing Fallout 4, which is an
older game and still checks out. Uh, but
we also kind of broke Fallout 4 a bunch
based on the crowd control and the
spawning of 900 cows or whatever it's
going to be. I'm just curious if people
who were here actually uh Yeah, from
everything I from everything I've seen,
it looks great. The the
only the only thing I've
noticed is that we could have tweaked
volume levels slightly more and turned
the game down more, but that's mostly
because we did not realize the volume of
sound that crowd control was going to be
generating,
right? The amount, right? We could have
we could have turned crowd control down
more and or uh the game down more and
you up more, but that that like minor.
Also, we did notice that on the VOD,
just as a call out, if you want to go
back and watch the chaos, leave it on
during the day, hang out, whatever. Um,
the
uh we get cut off at 11 hours 55 minutes
and 1 second or something, even though
the stream went I think almost 13. Uh, I
did, as in the um description, I put a
timestamped uh element of the Twitch VOD
uh basically there. So, if you get to
the end of YouTube and want to continue
to the end, you can click right there
and it will take you to that point in
the VOD just in case. We learned, you
know, one of the things I'll be doing
tonight or this week sometime uh is uh
doing a permanent highlight of the event
so that that
last hour and five minutes isn't lost um
to to the to the Chronicle. Matt, did
you know did you know I found this out
from our community who found out uh
because Pirate Software did science. Do
you know if a stream goes longer than 16
hours, the whole thing just vanishes?
Oh, really? The whole thing just to the
goes away. Yeah. So, in the future when
we do long uh when we do long charity
streams, what we'll probably do is we'll
do a planned break like six hours in.
Sure. Uh, and we'll we'll have we'll
like segment the YouTube VOD and we'll
be
like take the whole thing. Here it is.
And we'll put a link at the end of one
of them to the next one and we'll do it
with an end card and everything. I have
to do end cards and tags and crap for
that. All right, it's fine. Lots of
stuff. Yeah. Uh, I was also thinking uh
we could go through if we wanted to and
um uh in all of our infinite time maybe
put time codes when guests pop in on the
pod.
Oh, you're lucky you're pretty. You're
lucky you're so pretty. You're so
pretty, Matt. It's the glasses. It's the
glasses. It's just Yeah, the the glasses
make uh uh the everything better. Um
Yeah. Uh what was I going to say?
There's one other thing before we get
started and move away from this. I don't
know. I was uh so happy with it. Um oh,
and yeah, Copper brings us Well, six
years first of all, NX, congratulations.
Also, that seems like it was yesterday.
Uh but uh Copper brought up uh some of
the volume was inconsistent with the
changing of the guests and that's
something that if we're ever doing
something with so many guests is sort of
there's no way like I would everyone on
the back end of the charity stream
worked for not a little under a month
getting it all moving. Uh Jeff with all
of the um the giveaway stuff and talking
with our partners, Will figuring out how
all of this would actually function on a
rig that he he's controlling a lot of
it, but not on a computer that is in his
home. Um uh and myself uh uh sort of man
also Nick Dit who did all of our art uh
having time to do that and um myself I
was sort of the one wrangling all of the
guests and trying to get everyone in.
And it it I think anyone who's ever run
a tabletop RPG before knows how
difficult it is to get five people at
the same place at the same time. Uh five
adults.
Uh wrangling 20 21 or whatever we ended
up with with the with the duality cuz I
know we had doubles up sometime. Um it
just takes a long time and there was no
way we'd ever have time to do like full
audio tech tests with everybody. So I'll
own this. I don't think a lot of people
know this. I was auto I I was manually
adjusting the audio for every guest by
ear without access to levels, without
access to a volume leveler
as they joined. So, I know it wasn't
perfect, but I am also going to pat
myself on the head and say I did a
pretty dang good job getting it dialed
in pretty quickly with no access to like
actual data. I did that all by ear. So,
yeah, I think so, too. I know some
people if we had if it's funny will if
we had one other person we probably
could get them in a a preview place
where that person like sort of moves
their levels to be good before they come
on. I've seen other things I've done but
that requires one more person because
you are also on the stream right we yeah
essentially you you have them join what
amounts to a digital green room and then
you adjust their stuff against a known
volume level there and then
go from there. But uh there is no such
third person. That person doesn't exist
for us. So um so we do what we can and
it doesn't and look it we we hit our
goal. We did what we wanted to do. Yeah.
No, for sure. I do want to point out
that that is why I'm not in tabletop
games that we run. Um that that exact
reason that you're talking about is so
that I can just handle all of that.
Which is actually, by the way, in case
anyone's wondering, I really enjoy that.
I do. I am ever so slightly occasionally
bummed that I don't have to that I don't
get to play. Um, but also I get a
special kind of joy about being the
Gremlin behind the scenes that like gets
to do all of the cool tech wizardry
stuff. So, pay no attention to the man
behind the keyboard. Uh, and pay
attention. Also, uh, as as Thunder and
Grass are saying too, uh, yeah, Zoe does
not count coffee. Uh, big up to the mods
for for hanging out and and
and basically keeping the the stream uh
up and running and safe for the entirety
of the uh of the nonsense. We know that
is a big and we doubled their workload
for no additional pay by adding YouTube.
Although YouTube was pretty good. You
YouTube was pretty good. I think a lot
of people were
confused maybe, but overall the data
says it was a net positive. Yeah. Uh so
um
there so so uh what I we we'll talk this
we'll talk this a little we'll talk
about it like a little more and then I'm
going to do this. Aren't there tools for
helping normalize volume? Yes. However,
all of them
depend on a person doing something. So,
we have to determine how what the
trade-off is
between getting people in quickly and
having it right immediat. Like, there's
a trade-off, right? Like, we could spend
forever getting it perfect, but that's
not good because we we only have a half
hour with each guest, right? So, it
becomes a negative value proposition. Or
we can do it fast and loose and it
sounds bad and we need to find somewhere
in the middle where it's fast enough and
good enough. And here's another
interesting side thing that I didn't
plan for, but it's it's whenever we have
sort of these things, I'm like, well, is
there a positive to the bad way we do
it? And the one positive that I can
think of is
um especially for a stream that's 12 13
hours long um at moments where the audio
gets loud suddenly
as long as it's not hurting people's
ears. Uh that is a moment where people
had it on that where you like people
will look back because there's a new
louder voice. Yep. Uh that was not by
design. That was just something I was
like oh well maybe I can turn this frown
upside down a little bit on that. But
anyway, absolutely. Uh, and David, we're
real glad that people found it because
it was on YouTube. Oh, hell yeah. Yeah,
we uh we are trying to include YouTube
in all kinds of our special events and
stuff. And when when we do further
special events, um I'll be there. Also,
last note and then we'll we'll move on
to our to our proper to our actual show,
our stories. Yeah.
[Music]
U giveaway winners, you should be
getting emails sometime this week. Um
I'm not going to commit to a day this
week. Just get it done during the We're
just going to get it done this week
sometime. Um, so please look forward to
it. Uh, as they would say over uh in
Square Enix. Okay. Uh, Matt, are you
ready to dive into all of the news of
the week? I think so. Yeah. Uh, first
off, first off foremost uh before we
begin, did you have anything you wanted
to share from PAX? Because we didn't
have a show last week because of PAX.
Did you have PAX news? PAX was dope.
Panel went well. the oh uh the audio uh
of the the adapter die panel featuring
uh uh Sophia from Movie Struck who
Indigo on on uh Overly Sarcastic
Productions. Also Jeff Cat and uh
Jasmine that bronze girl Bular is and
Shahir Dow my my podcasting partner is
up on the only podcast about movies uh
RSS feed right now. You can uh do the
commands and figure that out or just
search the only podcast about movies.
There's only one. And if you're watching
this later, it'll be in the Well, yeah,
we'll put the link there. Uh, but yeah,
you can actually um we we and by we, I
mean the live studio audience uh decided
which was a better adaptation, the
Minecraft movie or Until Dawn. It was it
was spoken. There were there were there
were bows thrown and friendships ruined,
but we got to the bottom of which is a
better adaptation, not which is a better
film. Um, so we will Yeah, I mean, one
of them has a top has a record-breaking
top 100 charting single and the other
one doesn't. So, and the other one has a
random crypted in the woods. Look, uh,
we don't know. Uh, I'm sorry, not
crypted,
Kaiju. Um, aren't Kaiju just big
cryptids?
Yes.
Anyway, check that out if you're
interested. Packs overall went great.
Uh, met a lot of great folks out there,
some of which just spoke up in chat
right now, which is lovely. um was
really really fun and it's always great
uh just to packs and cons in general
feel lovely just because you get to kind
of like I don't know see people you get
to see once maybe twice a year so it was
it was really
nice uh yeah all right cool cool cool
cool cool let's talk about studio
screwing up so uh first up this week
Bungie Bungie recently released a
marathon trailer and was like hey this
is what it's gonna look like this this
is cool. This is great. Every everyone
was like, "Ah, it looks cool." And then
this artist spoke up and was like,
"Hey, hey, for nothing,
um, you took a bunch of stuff off of
work that I did in 2017 and I'm not
credited anywhere and you didn't ask,
and you plastered it all over the world
with Marathon, and Bungie went,
"Yeah, that's our bad." And good to them
for doing it. Yeah. uh go to them for
for for owning up and uh they have a
bunch of u their statement and we got
this over from IGN uh links in the show
notes but basically uh they said they
are they were launching an investigation
to see how it worked. They were looking
at previous artists and workflow and
they're going to try to prevent similar
issues in the future. Quote, "We are
conducting a thorough review of our
in-game assets, specifically those done
by a former Bungee artist and
implementing stricter checks to document
all artists contributions. We value the
creativity and dedication of all the
artists who contribute to our games and
we committed to doing right by them.
Thank you for bringing this to our
attention. So I I I will say like Bungie
as an organization, right? Um this is
kind of a problem. Okay. So,
um, how do you
verify that someone who you say, "Hey,
we need you to make some wall
decorations, some futuristic looking
wall iconography that we can use in sort
of like a haphazardly plastered way all
over this world to make it look like
there are signs and, you know,
directions and weird alien languages and
whatever. We we need we need you to to
do something like that." And how do you
verify that they have actually done that
themselves versus just grab something
off the internet, right? Like like for
something that is this
um straightforward, right? There's no in
progress for this, right? There's no
like it's essentially a couple of vector
drawings. Right? Now, that's not to say
that there isn't like that the work
shouldn't be respected. It absolutely
should be, but there's very little. It's
not like a a full uh big illustration
where you can see the roughs and you get
feedback and everything. This is like,
hey, I spent a couple hours doing this
vector and it's totally my own original
work, TM.
Right. Right. So there there there is an
understandable part of it where like how
do
you how do you check? Right. And it
sounds like there was an artist that
they caught doing this more than once
and that person no longer works at
Bungie. That's the subtext that I got
out of the message that Matt read. So,
uh, I I am at least somewhat sympathetic
to the notion that they didn't know that
this had happened. Yeah. And also,
Shirro brings up according to Pirate
Software, the art director of the art
team had been had been following the
artist for months. So, I don't think the
investigation was needed. Uh, it's
funny. So,
uh, what was I going to say?
Basically, I have no doubt that many of
the artists followed that person. You
know, they probably were. They're
probably if it the artists that weren't
directly ripping them off were also
probably looking for inspiration places.
Artists follow artists. That's whatever.
I think uh and this is not this is not
handwaving uh what what Bungie did
because this is a serious problem. And
but what I'm saying is a lot of
companies when when stuff like this is
brought to their attention don't have as
a robust as a like oh damn our we we did
wrong. we are working on not doing
wrong. Now again, whether or not uh they
make good on that promise, we'll have to
wait and see. Um but a lot of companies
don't even bother doing that, saying
something publicly about a mess up. So
that's what I'm I'm hopeful here that
this moves into a positive direction
because they seem like they are taking
accountability. Granted, they are to a
couple people point in chat, they are
taking accountability in a very
corporate speak uh way that seem that
probably has to be done for a lot of
legal reasons. Um, but again, a lot of
companies don't even do that and I know
the bar is low. They're hitting that bit
of a low bar and I think uh hopefully
they'll make good with this artist and
uh pay more attention to their art
pipeline and make sure that stuff like
this doesn't happen again. Yep.
Okay, let's talk about something
happy. This this segment we now call
will nerd out about MTG Final Fantasy
for like a couple minutes. Uh I saw it
at packs. Yeah, they were pretty cards.
They're very pretty. They're very, very
pretty. Uh not the mo like weirdly the
most powerful card that I've seen so far
or the most impactful card that I've
seen so far is a card called Suplex.
Um, and lest you worry, yes, the ghost
train is in the set and suplex destroys
the ghost train. You're welcome,
internet. They they've got it 100%. Um,
also speaking of suplexing a ghost
train, you're interested in Final
Fantasy, uh, I will be starting Final
Fantasy 6 immediately after this stream.
If you're watching it over on YouTube,
part two will be playing again on
Wednesday and Friday of this week. So,
um, you know, you get to watch me suplex
a tra I've been given strict instruction
that I'm not I'm not to defeat the ghost
trade in any way other than suplexing it
and then using a phoenix down on it.
You're welcome. Um,
so the one of the things that I think
has been really interesting is that the
preview season here has
gone very interestingly in a way that I
think is like they're finally hitting
their stride with Universes Beyond.
Mostly because I think that Final
Fantasy is a better crossover than a lot
of the other Universes Beyonds they've
done, right? more than
um certainly more than the Marvel ones
that they're going to do. Um it's it's
been really it's been a really good
preview season. It's been a lot of fun
and it's been really nice to see a lot
of people getting super interested in
the not competitive side of Magic,
right? Like there's been a lot of
preview seasons where people like, "Oh,
this is super busted." Or, "Oh, I can't
believe they did this or whatever." And
this has been a lot of joy, a lot of
fun, a lot of seeing different
characters represented that people
really love. Like if there's a named
character that you love from one of the
Final Fantasy games, they probably have
a card in this set. And they've been
doing a really good job of making those
cards interesting and not super
overpowered, which I'm I'm kind of a fan
of.
So, I was looking at what these what the
the pre
um what the what the the commander decks
cost like retail and it's a little bit
crazy at this point, is it not? It is
higher than normal. So, that that is the
downside is that um the because of the
license there's a frog in my throat.
because of licensing fees um that go
along with this. The cards are more
expensive than normal. That is true. Um
they the some of the commander decks are
more expensive than normal. The premium
commander decks are in the this is
stupid price range, but they're premium
they're full they're full foil commander
decks. So they were always going to be
in this this is stupid price range
because you don't need them and you
probably don't actually want them
because the foils curl still. never
really fixed that. Don't buy them. Um,
the one that's really getting me is that
the comm the collector boosters sure
currently selling for double
MSRP. Normally MSRP is between like $3
and $400 and they're currently selling
for $800 for a box of collector
boosters, which is
yeah, wild. I do worry um I mean this
isn't by any means the the
the thing that's going to knock the the
tip over the tower or whatever. But like
I do worry that Magic is already sort of
nickel and dimming a ton. And as as
successful as this set is going to be
with the extra 20 or 30 bucks for a
commander deck or whatever it is, like
I'm I'm worried that now they're going
to think this is like the the this is
the way. And like there's only so many
properties that I think will support
this level of fervor. and the ven
diagram of crossover of lovers of both
properties, Magic the Gathering and
Final Fantasy, right? Like yeah, I I
think the literal only
other the literal singular only other
franchise that would generate this level
of
fervor in a
crossover they're probably never going
to get because it's got too many of its
own card games and that's Star Wars. I
literally think the only other IP like
they're never going to get Pokemon and
they don't want Pokemon. Pokemon TCG is
their main one of their main competitors
um I think the only other franchise in
the world that would generate the amount
of fervor that Final Fantasy has here is
Star Wars and I don't think they're
going to get it. So I don't think I
think this is going to be an outlier,
right?
Like I don't I really hope you're right
that they don't try and like you know I
mean they're gonna like I I think
they're when does the when does the full
Marvel set come out? Uh so the next
Marvel set is Spider-Man. Spider-Man.
And it's later this fall. Um I bet you
they're going to try to charge the same
amount for Spider-Man. Oh, they are.
They already are. We the the the
universes beyond price is different than
the in universe's price pretty firmly at
this point. Yeah. Uh League wouldn't do
it. Uh I don't I don't think League does
it. I think the I could be 50/50 on
that. Why don't you think League would
would would off would be a thing that
would bust people over. Um couple
reasons. One, League already had a card
game and it didn't do well,
right? and they have a new card game and
it's not going to do well. But think
about that. Think about it. Why the
reasoning why it didn't do well is I
mean it could have been multiple
reasons, but it probably was because the
gameplay loop was not as fun as say
other collectible card games. I think
that's possibly it. I also think there's
a fair chunk of it that there's not as
much overlap between League players and
card players as Final Fantasy players
and card players. Yes,
possibly. Well, for one, Final
Fantasy for the most part, again,
someone's going to tell me I'm wrong,
blah blah blah, is
turn-based, right? And so there's that
turn-based overlap. You're actually
going deep. You're you're saying because
the majority of Final Fantasy games are
turnbased systems
that you think it would it it matches
better to people that like turnbased
systems. That's an interesting
read. Yeah. I mean, I think there's
other things to it as well. I think
demographics, age groups, the length on
IP has been out. Weirdly, I I I feel
like when did Final Fantas when did the
first Final Fantasy drop? You don't want
to
know. I think it's 87. But this is
important. Okay. Yeah. 87. December
18th, 1987. And Magic the Gathering.
That's great. Uh 93 92 93. So we're
talking about Yeah. 93. August 5th,
1993. So um we're talking about a a
difference of six years, but then
proliferation since their release. So
these are two considerably ancient IPs
that are coming together here. I think
that's why they think Spider-Man will
work because Spider-Man obviously is
older than than both of them. Yeah. I I
think that that um yes, these are both
also progenitors of their genres. Final
Fantasy is one of the main progenitors
of uh turnbased JRPGs, aka by the way
any game where you kill gob with the
power of friendship and
um magic is the progenitor TCG,
right? Yeah. Like it's very hard to
argue that Magic isn't the OG TCG in a
meaningful way. So, um I I think that
like that is part of it. I also think
that just the the mechanical synergy
here is so
strong. I also think, by the way, this
is another one. The lore matches the the
the lore matches up way better. Like the
the Final Fantasy feeling matches up way
better with the magic feeling than like
Spider-Man's webs slinging around. Like
what? Are we going to get New York City
as a as a card? Like, are we going to
get like New York City as a town? That
feels weird. Like, that's a land that
you can play. Like, turn one, New York
City, turn two, Spider-Man. Like, whoa.
Okay. Like, there's more dissonance
there than there is with Final Fantasy.
Sure. Um, there's a lot of reasons why
the ven diagrams of these two IPs work
very well. I just and again I have been
long out of the like actual
collecting magic game. Um I still play
on occasion at conventions with friends.
Um but the this was the first set where
I was like oh like for instance if there
was at packs commander decks available
to buy. I don't know if I would have
done it for like
$89. I I feel like I probably would.
Okay. So so okay there I do want to
clarify there are two commander decks.
Well, there's four, but there's two,
right? There's two there's two flavors
of commander decks. Yeah. Um, the black
commander
decks are the premium
ones that are
all foils. The white commander decks are
not. And the price the white ones I
believe are the $89 ones from what I've
seen. Unless I'm reading it wrong. I
absolutely could be. Well, I pre-ordered
them. I didn't think they were that
much. They could be. I love Will just
blind buttons it. Maybe I'm wrong. I
know the other ones were in the
three-digit. We're in the triple digits.
Okay. No, I've got it backwards. The
white ones. The white ones are the the
the other ones and they are currently
going
for and the problem is and this is the
other problem. Wait, what's the number
you threw up in your mouth a little bit?
the number I'm seeing to pre-order these
all surge foil commander
decks, all four of them, a package of
all four of
them. And this price, I cannot stress
this enough, is not set by Wizards of
the
Coast, $1,424.94.
Well, Wizards does set the price. This
one's a market price. This one is set by
an aftermarket seller.
that that price is not the wizard's
price. Um, you know, Matt, that's a
really great question that we don't have
time to get into. We could do an entire
episode on why Magic supply chain is
stupid. This is stupid. Yeah. But no,
what what tell me how much one of the
nonfoil pre-order commander decks cost?
Same problem between 90 and 140, but
that's not the MSRP. And you will be
able to get them significantly cheaper
because that's the pre-order price and
because the supply chain is stupid right
now. So, if I go to my friendly local
game store two weeks after these are
released, I'll be able to get these
commander decks at a normal commander
deck price is what you're assuming?
Hopefully, yes. That's that's my hope.
Again, what one of the big problems and
this has been Brooklyn Strategist.
They'll see in three weeks or whatever
it is. Uh, did I know that one of the
major MTG distributors is going
bankrupt? Yes, you're talking about
Diamond, right? Is Diamond or Alliance?
One of the major TCG distributors is
going bankrupt and there's a big
problem.
Um, yeah. Uh, do these have
MSRP? Sort of. Not really. So weird. No,
it's it's extremely weird. It's
extremely weird. It's extremely bizarre
and it is one of the major weaknesses of
Magic. Which is
why I cannot stress this enough. If you
are not diehard into Magic and are
thinking about playing Magic and playing
for the Final Fantasy set and seeing if
you like the experience and you're like,
"Oh my gosh, I love Final Fantasy. Maybe
I'll actually like Magic the Gathering.
Please, for the love of all that is good
and unholy, play on Arena. Just play the
freeto-play experience on arena. Maybe
buy some packs there. Maybe spend a
little bit of money. But please do that
before you wade knee deep into the
wretched hive of scum and villain that
is the Magic the
Gathering
MSRP fluctuating surge pricing thing. um
in physical uh Agarero says 70 for
non-foil commander decks is roughly it
but it that is also still more expensive
than a normal commander deck right again
I don't buy them a lot yes it yes it
also depends and again yes it dep how
much more expensive depends on which
level of commander deck because there
are multiple
level of commander deck they there are
some that where they'll do like a set
and two commander decks and those are
generally cheaper than the ones where
they to just four or five commander
decks like on their own or like the big
commander decks for a year. They've done
there's been a bunch of stuff they've
It's all gradations at least they
eliminated the set booster so now it's
all play boosters. There used to be two
kinds of booster packs. Now there's only
one again. Thank you. There's a reason
why I there's a reason I don't actively
play Magic. Uh and there's a reason just
like there's a reason why I don't
actively play Destiny. getting on board.
As someone who plays Magic daily and who
loves Magic and who absolutely crashed
out over Tilt last night because I had
an hour. I played over a dozen games
over the course of an hour and I went
first twice. I had 10 games where I went
second and two games where I went first.
And currently in the standard meta game,
that's a massive deal. Um, win rate
variance is about 10% on go first, go
second. It's real bad. Um, yeah, but I
actively play Magic. Don't like save
yourself. I like big cuddle
monsters. I actively play Magic. I do
not actively buy Magic products. I think
that's kind of that's kind of where I'm
at. I have decks in the apartment that I
like playing on occasion. uh just you
know or and al and also uh drafts at at
conventions and things are really fun.
Yeah. Yeah. Paying for the experience of
doing a thing is very different than
like paying to like sit on packs and
hoard them. Um totally unrelated for,
you know, reasons. If you want to get
the vicarious experience of opening
packs without actually spending money on
packs, I'm currently working on getting
my card cam up and running and I'll
probably open some of the stuff that I
get for Final Fantasy because it's too
late for me and I'm trying to help you
save
yourself. It's too late for me, Matt.
I'm gone. It's too late for Will. We've
lost him. That's right. If you'd like to
watch him fall endlessly into the void.
That's right. Yeah. Yeah. come on back
when you want to watch me fall off of
the door raft at the end of Titanic and
just fall into the ocean of Magic cards.
Um, that's cool. You can do that. That's
That's entertainment, right? Um, oh, RC,
that's a great question because I've
never used it. Um, does M I mean, I'm
sure it does. There are a plethora of
ways that you can play without owning
the cards, but yes, it it translates
reasonably well into tabletop simulator.
There are tables set up. There are game
files you can download that let you play
in tabletop simulator and you can
download card or a deck into tabletop at
least. Yeah. Cool. Yep. All right. Well,
will I look forward to watching you
spiral? Yeah. When is it when does it
release? Uh the pre-release is on June
6th. The actual set is out June 13th.
Great. Um
also my favorite card Oh, I did want to
slip this in. My favorite card is that
there's now a card called instant ramen.
Oh yeah, you'd mentioned this. Which has
flash, so you can play it as an instant
and it's ramen. That's all. Doesn't
matter what it does. Doesn't matter what
it does. It's an instant called ramen.
It's amazing. That's all. There you go.
All right. Next story.
So, this is a steam valve hack.
Yeah, it's good. I I Googled
it. that the pipe is hacked in with a
with a with a steam valve in the pipe.
You just so good. Okay. So, there was a
report that was going around last week
that some amount of valve data had been
compromised and the sourcing on it
wasn't great and uh the the the reason I
took it seriously was that there was a
website uh XDA devs that posted it and
they have been reputable in the past.
Also, regardless of whether or not it's
true, here's a good practice that you
should get into. Every time it sounds
like someone's stuff might have been
compromised, change your password.
Just like it takes it takes moments,
just change your password. Like even if
nothing actually got touched, even if
nothing was compromised, you're not
changing your password enough. I
guarantee it.
Unless you are one of the people who is
like and you know who you are if if you
genuinely don't need that advice. Like
there's a group of people who like
change their passwords monthly and use
like extremely long secure passphrases
and like all that jazz. Sure. If you're
not one of those people you're not
changing your password enough. Change
your passwords. Change your passwords.
Change your change your Steam password
because your Steam passwords like all
your stuff. Yeah. Change your password.
Uh it's funny. I guess Team Zone
analysis, this is coming to us from IGN,
says it was a leak of older text
messages, the one time like codes, the
SMS, like the SMS things you get sent.
So, like it's just it's not anything to
worry about. But to that point, it's
always good to bring up for all of the
reasons that Will just said. Yep. Also,
enable Steam Guard. Steam Guard's great.
You can scan a QR code to get in from
your phone.
Uh, okay. Yeah, 2FA big and clever, but
not text message to FFA. Text message
2FA sucks and is
useless. Anyway, um okay, Matt, this
one's all for you, buddy. What did I do?
What?
[Applause]
[Music]
All right, we're not going to say we
told you so. Oh,
but we did though. Oh,
y'all. Max. You all know Max, right?
Your boy Max, right? Premium streaming
service Max. That is both a human name
and the thing you'd put in front of
something else to make it seem bigger,
not its own thing that would be a
streaming service, right? Um, yeah. Who
is Philip? Philip off. Who is Max? Who
is Max? Dark
Wasp. That was all Matt's part. Uh, hold
on. Chat's moving too fast. Told you
what. So, a while ago, Yep. uh HBO
became HBO Max and then I listen I don't
know if it was Zazlav or not. I have no
idea who made the call, but as as
Discovery was merging with HBO and all
of the premium Discovery shows were
being brought on to HBO Max, they
decided why not in the slurry of
content. HBO being the uh home box
office known far and wide. This is a
sign that I modified of course that like
you used to put like in hotel room like
it used to be like a big deal that HBO
was like free in in a hotel room, right?
Because it was premium. The whole the
whole thing the whole understood
property of the brand HBO was that it
was premium content. It was better
content than you could get on cable. It
was better content than you could get
anywhere else. It was the home box
office anywhere else in your home, I
should say.
um for for uh television shows and
movies. Now, about two years ago, they
decided, whoa, well, hold on. What's the
most important part of the brand? HBO.
Great. Let's get rid of that and call it
Max. And I don't know if I know anybody
who actually called it Max. Like, it was
always
HBO. Uh, recently announced, now that
I'm done laughing and giving a history
lesson, recently announced, uh, Max is
changing its name back to HBO Max.
Warner Brothers Discovery announces.
Now, the the statement here uh, and
we'll have the link to the again the IGN
article in the description is choice.
Um they uh announced how does because
they started with saying how
great Max is doing. How phenomenal Max
is doing. Is it though? Uh well it it it
I imagine it's probably doing very well.
They have great shows. Like they truly
do with the mashing up of Discovery.
They also have a lot of slurry of
garbage. But I think here's what I
think. I think they are on they could
see a path to profitability if they know
that their name can be sort of matched
again with quality. And so now they're
throwing shade at other streaming
services that are doing the same thing
they announced they were doing up until
this very moment.
Um, there's a quote that says, "Thanks
to the enormous amount of hard work,
investment, and refocusing the strategy
of the programming that is working best,
like HBO, recent box office movies,
docky series, certain reality series,
and max and local originals." I don't
know about any of those. The depp
prioritizing of other genres that drive
less engagement or acquisition is is
paramount.
Um, and they said they they were trying
to show that because people associate
the HBO brand with quality content and
content that is worth paying for in a in
a sea of options, which again we've
talked about in the past. It's not
enough in this space to have the most
stuff. You need to have a few things
that people cannot live without. They're
doing that roughly and live without is
you know I'm being facitious but like
their their slate is that where
especially when thank you guy paramount
is a different company
uh they now are seeing I think the
writing on the wall that the slurry of
content is not enough between series to
make it feasible to maintain like you
can constantly have signups but your
churn I bet you their churn when they
turned to max got way harder.
uh even if they had saw more signups for
things like The Last of Us or or House
of the Dragon or any of that stuff,
White Lotus,
um when those shows end, if you don't
have other quality things, stuff that is
up to that level of of polish and
instead you just have a bunch of reality
shows, people don't stay. Yeah.
Um, returning to the HBO brand, they
continue uh into HBO Max will further
drive the service forward and amplify
the uniqueness that subscribers can
expect from their offerings. Uh, it it
it is also a testament to Warner Brother
Discovery's willingness to keep I I love
this. I flipping love this Warner
Brothers discoveries willingness to keep
boldly iterating its strategy and
approach leaning heavily on consumer
data and insights to the best to best
position itself for success. They're
boldly going back two years where no one
has ever gone before but them two years
ago. What a boneheaded move. And if it I
mean two years ago. This is putting
things back on track. Yep. Um there is
talk, just so we're clear, and people
might I've been ranting for a minute.
People in chat might have brought this
up. Um there was a rumor, and I have not
dug enough to know how true this is or
not, so take this with a grain of salt,
that the reason that they did drop HBO
was they were worried about various
contracts on higher level prestige shows
having the word HBO, if it's playing on
HBO, that means X, Y, and Z in a
contract. So they changed the name. I
don't know how much that would hold up
in court, nor do I know the validity of
that accusation. It does seem like
something that could happen. Again, I I
do not know. But many but some people, I
won't say many. There was a couple folks
that popped up online were like, "No,
they're doing it because X for Y."
Because there's no other logical reason
why they would change it to Max from HBO
because HBO has the brand clout and Max
is uh the word that comes before
headroom. Yeah. I was going to say
Goofy's kid, right? Yeah, you know what
I mean? Like, so, um, there there very
well could be that and maybe with, um,
all the lovely deregulation that's just
coming down the pipe, depending on where
you're coming from, uh, maybe they're no
longer scared of that. Who knows? Again,
I am I am reaching here. But at the end
of the day, I'm glad HBO is back in the
title of the streaming service that does
offer good stuff. Now, the name matches
what they do more. Again, this has been
the equivalent of Will ranting about
Magic, but about a old premium cable
service that is now a streaming option.
Back to you, Will. We both get one
today. All right, next up.
I don't know. Hold on to your butts.
Hold on to your butts. Hold on, Will. I
want I want to call something out very
quickly. You put in the show notes,
there's going to be a Madden movie. Why
though?
I have no problem with there being a
Madden movie. I don't either, but I
don't think it's going to be profitable.
Like, I don't know that there's enough
clout left in the Madden name
specifically with the new generation of
people who play Madden
to make this movie profitable. Like,
that's that's my that's my genuine
concern, right? Like it makes sense if
Madden was still a thing that people
that was
like much more recognized, but I don't
Madden hasn't even cracked the news
cycle for a while. You're thinking about
video games only though. John Madden in
the realm of
football is
is incredibly ubiquitous. It's why he's
the video his name is the video game.
Right. That's fair. Reminder for
everyone not in the US, we're talking
about Hand Egg. Keep going. We're
talking about hand. Nice. Um,
yeah. You throw Nick Cage and Christian
Bale in as uh John Madden and Al Davis.
Uh, and and look, this is the other
thing. You know why it's not going to
make money is because it's a movie. I
think that
uh I imagine it's going to be released
on Prime. Um, I'm not quite sure, but uh
Amazon MGM is unveiling their first look
at at these two. like they're they're
making this. It if this is a movie that
goes into theaters, who knows? I have no
idea. If it just goes uh
onto Prime unceremoniously and then sort
of disappears, it will go the way of
Electric State. That's right, Electric
State. The Millie Bobby Brown, Chris
Pratt vehicle that cost $240 million
that no one has talked about once before
now. Um, also great graphic
novel, just apparently not something
that cracks the zeitgeist because things
get released on Netflix and streaming
services to again in a sea of other
nonsense and your your value prop is way
less than say something that you know is
in theaters because it is premium and
you can only see it there for a limited
amount of time. I I just like uh
Andrew's suggestion. It's going to be
Madden Max. Wow. And then Furiosa can be
the QB. No notes. I'm in it. I'm in it.
Better. Better than whatever they're
gonna else they're going to come up
with. Let's do it. Yeah. I don't I think
I I I just I genuinely
don't I don't see the profit happening
if it goes to theaters.
Probably not. I imagine this will go
straight to streaming. And also, this is
the this is the most depressing thing
I'll say. I hope all day. uh
profitability on a single movie like
this doesn't matter when it goes to
streaming. Yeah. And it sucks because
the people that make movies, any movie
that gets across the finish line is an
absolute miracle and you want them to
succeed and do well, but like it's just
one of those things that will happen
because they have a budget to make a
thing and then that thing is made and
then that thing is up for however long
until it disappears and doesn't get a
physical release. Yep. Like so maybe
like and again I have no I have no
problem I think to be perfectly honest I
know I know nothing about John I don't
follow football so I don't know anything
about John Madden's life. I also really
loved for instance the Tetris movie
which talked more about the acquisition
of the rights and the story behind it. I
would love to learn the story of how
Madden went from a a football legend to
uh uh uh you know coaching through
through Super Bowls into being the face
of one of the largest video game
franchises of all time. Madden Max is
now called Madden HBO. There we go.
Yeah. Yeah. Again, it's a bonus. All I
can think of, by the way, right now is
and his name is John Madden.
No, I I
um
I his name was Robert Pollson. Um I
Robert Paulson I don't know. I I'm a and
maybe maybe I'm being a softy on this
because I'm just a sucker for anything
Nick Cage is in. Um and I think Nick
Cage would probably make a really good
John M. Like this picture gives John
Madden like even though it is very
clearly Nicholas Cage. Yeah, absolutely.
Yeah. Wait, hold on. He's also the man
who popularized the Turduckan. All
right, now I got to see it. If they
include the Turduckan story, then I'm
all over it. Right. You got to If if
movie contains Tuckan,
uh, look out my You should probably exp
No. You know what? No. No. Google
Turducken. I'm not explaining Turducken.
I'm not explaining it. We're so far
past. Turduckans are too far away from a
breakfast food. That's right. That's why
it's not in our purview here. That is
That is a holiday dinner. Yeah. Uh, no.
Okay, cool. Great. Anyway, eternal
eternal I'm glad you asked your two
internet dads. Go ask wherever your
internet moms are. That's right. Yeah,
we don't. No, it's No. All right.
Anyway, moving along quickly before this
turns into an introduction
conversation.
So, I love I love the internet so much.
All right. So, recently, as you may or
may not be aware, Pocket Pair and
Nintendo have been slugging out in court
over whether or not Pocket Pair uh
violated patents. patents, not
trademarks, not copyrights, patents that
Nintendo put in place based
on largely, but not exclusively
Pokemon's Legend
RCS
after after Pal World was released. And
because Nintendo has all the money, uh,
and the Pokemon Company has even more
than all the money, they've been kind
of,
uh, beating the absolute crap out of
Pocket Pair and Cord. And so, as a
result of that, Pocket Pair patched out
a bunch of mechanics in PAL World that
Nintendo claimed were infringing on
their patents in order to sort of like
make this go a little easier. So they
removed the ability to choose a PAL that
helps you that you glide on because that
was one of the things and now it instead
you pull out a glider and the PALS give
you bonuses to gliding, right? So they
like they very quickly hacked out as
much of the things that Nintendo claims
are infringing on their patents as
possible. Cue the internet who said,
"Man, that's really
stupid. We have all the files from the
way the game used to be. What if we just
made a patch that said nah? So they made
a patch that says nah and now there's a
mod that lets you put all of the things
back in that battle world took out. To
be very clear, they don't put everything
back in the way it was. I believe what
happens now is like you still
mechanically need that glider item in
your bag and now you can glide like you
used to do. Also, you can't throw the
ball to summon your pals anymore. you
now can like look at the direction where
because what how they patched it was
your pal would just appear next to you
instead of you throwing the ball to the
place now the patch lets you look to a
spot and the pal will appear there.
Yeah. Um so it's it's not just like it's
it's trying to get back as close as it
can to the native way it was done but it
is not onetoone correct accurate. Yeah.
Absolutely. Of course, it's it's not
going to be like exact one to one, but
it is really funny to me that the
internet's response is that's stupid, so
we're going to undo it. Oh, sure. Right.
That's the funny part to me is that like
and this is sort of the problem that
Nintendo's going to run into, right?
They can try and stop it, but it's out
there and it will continue to be out
there and they're never going to get rid
of it. They're just going to make it not
profitable, which is I think is their
goal, right? Yeah. the we also have to
remember that like I don't think that
Nintendo
N cares terribly much about PAWorld as
an individual but it believes based on
legal precedent that if it doesn't go
after Pow World for doing these things
more and more will pop up and they will
lose their right to do so like it it it
feels like an opening volley to try to
make this not happen again and so
they're going to keep it going I think
um listen people keep modding, keep
doing stuff. We'll see. It's It's
curious because at what point, and I am
not uh a legal enough scholar in this or
any space to know, but at what point
does Nintendo
start like clamping down on like they
won't clamp down on the game's mods, per
se. Well, and we have pretty hard
evidence of that. There are two
incredibly successful, wide ranging,
currently expanding Pokemon mods for
Minecraft. They're not like Pokemon like
Pal World. They are direct IP
infringement. They are you can catch all
of the current Pokemon in Minecraft.
Like you get to choose a starter and
it's called Pokemon and it uses all of
the same designs for the Pokeballs and
you can do all the things that Power
World just got told that they can't do,
but they're in a mod for Minecraft. And
so far Nintendo's been like, "That's
cool. You You keep doing you." I feel
like because the game is intrinsically
because Minecraft as a game is
intrinsically different than Pokemon as
a game, even though you could do things
in Minecraft that Pokemon does where Pal
World
essentially, again, I have I've played
10 minutes of Pal World. Will, you've
played more, so correct me when I'm
wrong, but like Pal World,
didn't you play a little bit of it? Oh,
I'm thinking of Temptem. Wow, my brain.
Yeah, you're thinking of tempam, which
was then then Brad and Janet, correct me
when I'm wrong. Pal World's gameplay
loop,
not not what you can do about like base
building and like, you know, assigning
jobs and things, but the gameplay loop
is fairly similar to Pokemon, right?
Like what you
do, that's what I think they're kind of
going
after.
Um, again, could be wrong. Yeah. Yep.
Uh,
okay. Good
news. Up the
Union. Uh, we have two Union stories uh
this week. Uh, both of them in my
opinion. Good. Uh, number one, the
Overwatch 2 team unionized. Good job.
Good. Good job. That's a big team in a
very big front-facing part of Blizzard.
That's like that's a large team. And
they're, by the way, Overwatch nearly
200 developers. basically anyone who
doesn't have anyone else reporting to
them. Yep. Uh Overwatch 2 also is like
on the rise. They did come out with a
new game mode that's doing pretty well.
And by pretty well, I mean it's wildly
popular. Have you heard about this,
Matt? No. There's a new It's It's like a
stadium mode where you earn points by
doing your job. And in between rounds,
you use those points to upgrade your
hero. And they're adding more like each
hero has specific upgrades. So, like I I
watched um someone play like a couple
like a half hour of it and like Mercy
can split her healing beam as an example
or Moira can get longer range on the
little tether thing or so so it's a MOA
kind of. Okay.
It's got it's got some mobile elements
and it's it's kind of interesting. Why
am I blanking on the the the shadow
dropped beta game from Steam? Deadlock.
Deadlock. Thank you. So, they saw
Deadlock maybe.
But what if we take little bits and
pieces? Deadlock is also sort of in a
very interesting place. We haven't
talked about it for a hot second.
Deadlock radically continues to change
itself up like that they they are the
the reason that it's still in a beta is
that Valve is like ah we didn't like the
way this is working so we threw this
whole thing out and redid the whole map
again like or whatever right so
um so yeah I I think it's uh I think
this is good for Overwatch. I I hope
that it it brings them much uh
negotiating success with Microsoft and
Blizzard. Good job. More unions. And
also, this is a very, this is a very
big, very forward-f facing, very public
company and IP that's unionizing, right?
This isn't like
one department of a QA company that
handles QA for one thing. Not that those
people shouldn't unionize. They
absolutely should, but like it's harder
to point at them and be like, "See,
they're doing it. You should, too."
Here, the Overwatch 2 team just
unionized. Why doesn't your studio have
a union? because they certainly should
because if the Overwatch 2 developer
team can unionize, everyone should
unionize.
Yeah, I like I I I want nothing more
than to be invested in Overwatch again.
Uh so hopefully I mean again I I I truly
believe that when uh your people are
taken care of uh you make better work.
That's basically what it is. So Matt,
what do you got? Will what? I have
sinned. What' you do? My brain is so
tired. I forgot that ads were happening.
Oh no. Oh no. Indeed. So, uh, as as a
mayulpa for for my sin, we can do we can
do some ads now that everyone will see
now that we're back from proper ads
because I somehow missed the bot
announcement that there were going to be
ads.
How dare. I know. My bad. My bad. All
right. Well, as penants, you will now do
the first ad. That's right. Here you go.
You ready? Yep. I got it. You can't buy
this.
That's right. You certainly can't buy
awakeness. That's right. You could buy
caffeine. You could buy sleep and you
can buy all kinds of things, but you
can't buy the concept of being awake
because I would pay a lot of money for
that. Someone sell me awakeness, please.
Just I hear woke is big in the the news
media right now. I would like to buy
some woke because I need to get woke up.
It's not It's not happening. Um, I I
deeply desire to be more woke than I am
or more awakened or however you kids say
it. But please, please, I'm so tired.
Chat, please. I'm so tired. I beg of
you. Give me your sleep now. Please.
Thank you.
Wow. Okay.
Okay.
Also, also, also, this might be one of
my favorite follow-ups to a story we've
done. I've searched what a duck is.
Feels like a violation of some core
tenant of the universe. You're right. It
is. Congratulations. Now, you know, and
you can't unknow it. Also, before I do
my ad, speaking of missed announcement,
Matt missed me sniping his resub about
45 minutes ago. Thank you, Daft. It's
become I I can't keep up. I can't do it.
And because you know what? No, this is
what happened. This is over on Twitch
that people snipe and sub my Twitch
account to the EC
channel. It's because it's during
breakfast now. I need to get it out. I
need it to go away from being in
breakfast and then I'll pay attention to
it a little bit more. All right.
Um, wow. Wow.
Oh, I love it. Yes, that is that is it.
Both wakefulness and wokefulness.
Hey everyone, Matt Credits here. Listen,
my cohort Will was just talking about
how he really wanted to be more woke.
Getting awake to make sure that he is
fully functional and ready for the day's
breakfast or streams or anything else he
has to do. Well, regular woke won't do
anymore. In fact, that is why I bring to
you Woke Max. That is right. There is a
gentleman you can hire named Max who
will come over to you and wherever you
are, shake you violently until you are
awake, giving you the maximum amount of
wokeness that you can possibly take. And
making sure you're being awake lasts all
day. By the way, we just changed the
name. It's now just Max. I hope you
don't mind Max coming over.
Perfect. No notes. All right. Great.
Awesome. uh this advertisement for
subscribing to the channel so you can
see those advertisements every week
brought to you by I can't read.
Uh our second union story is that
the VFX workers for Marvel and Disney
ratified their first union contract.
That's another that's another very and
like the contents of the contract are
important but not the main thrust of why
I wanted to talk about this. The cons of
the contract are great and important and
wonderful and I'm glad that it's
ratified. Again, this is another big
case of this is not little itty bitty
mom and pop 10p person union. This is a
large union with big high-profile
projects that are handled under it.
Good. More of this, please. Right? If
you could be like, "All right, Marvel
and Disney movies are made with union
labor."
It's really hard to be like, "But we
can't make profits if we have a union or
whatever the current excuse is, right?"
Um, so I think that that's just another
really good win for for unionization in
the industry, especially for VFX
artists. Um, especially for that. Yeah.
That needs more and more and more and
more and more and more and more. Yeah.
And more y 100%. Uh, one one I know we
have a few VFX folks in uh in our
regular community as well, so hopefully
this will be also like
um Woke Max. Did you mean John Oliver?
Yeah. Yeah. All right. Great. Uh
welcome, welcome, welcome.
That's what he screams at you when he
comes over to your house. That's right.
Uh okay. Next up, uh Elden Ring is
getting new DLC, and it's probably the
Switch 2's fault, which is kind of cool,
actually. So, Elden Ring Tarnished
Edition is going to be the edition
that's available on the Switch 2. Cool.
Good. Excellent. Obviously, it's one of
the bestselling games of the past couple
of years. It's going to be on the
Switch, too.
Um, the cool part is that there are
going to be new classes and some new
cosmetics, and it looks like those are
all also coming to PC as well. New
classes just feels like a good easy lift
for DLC. Your classes don't do any like
like you you spiral out of your class in
Elden Ring and any of the Souls Borns uh
so quickly. Uh, it doesn't truly truly
matter.
Um, the here's here's I I Okay, I love
that the Switch 2 is getting it and is
getting little little bonusy stuff.
Okay, I I I might be in the minority
here. I actually don't want them to sell
these extra things to other places. This
game is if they gave it away for
free, I'd be totally fine with it. But
what I think this
is I pray that I am
wrong. I think this might be the
beginning of horse
armor in From Soft Games. Funny you
should mention that, Matt. Part of this
DLC is cosmetics for Torrent. Great.
Which is fine. Again, like I like that
there's a special edition for the Switch
2. Uh I let me rephrase. I both like and
dislike that. But if it's happening,
then I I I because the game is an older
game that's now being published and you
get the expansion thing and it's all
sort of in the in the in the Tarnish
edition, I just just give any anyone who
owns Erd Tree and Elden Ring, just give
them this stuff. Just give it to him.
Yep. Like and I I I do worry, especially
with And again, please don't get me
wrong, I am so GD pumped for Night Rain.
Like I think Night Rain is going to be a
phenom in that space, but I think one of
the reasons everyone was so psyched for
it and the reason why they gave it so
much, no pun intended, grace was that
they said like straight up that this
game was going to be a complete package
that you pay for basically once and then
you will get to play the game, right?
And that's not to say there wouldn't be
an expansion like a full DLC, but like
this was not going to be a cosmetic
nickel and dime fest. And the second
that these games start to do it, uh, I
feel like you're really going to go full
um, god a Morton Joe with this and be
like, you know, do not become addicted
to water for you will regret its
absence. I feel like once this happens
and they see how much money is able to
be
made, pieces of this are going to be are
going to be chipped away in order to
make more money and sell things in a in
a less complete package than we're so
used to games fromoft doing. I and again
I really hope I'm wrong. Yeah. Like they
and and and truly
everybody gets one. Fromoft has really
been standup through and through
throughout my entire fandom of them. And
if they do this and they sell this
oneoff thing and it's whatever and it's
fine and I'm wrong, great. You got your
one. Like cool. I just precedent is a is
a [ __ ] Like it's just it's it's it's
it doesn't feel good. I don't know.
Maybe I'm being too No, I think that's
fair. That's kind of why I phrased it
the way I did, right? that like they're
using the Switch 2's release as an
excuse to try and get $10 to $20 out of
the 30 million players who already have
Elden Ring. Yeah.
Right. Because the current projected
price according to um Kotaku is
somewhere between 10 and $20 for the new
DLC which completely optional mostly
cosmetic. Like you can do that if you
want, right? But like
like I'm more likely
And this is stupid from a financial
perspective on my part. I'm more likely
to buy the Tarnished Edition on Switch 2
than I am to buy a $10 expansion for my
PS5.
Yeah. And I'm not buying it for torrent
skins. I'm buying it so I can play it on
the go on a Switch to like, you know,
but like it feels like it's included as
part of a larger purchase. But also, I
don't know if I'll buy a tarnish edition
because I don't know if it's actually
been said that it will be available on
like if it's actually on the physical
card or if you download it based on
owning the card. Yeah. By the way, there
is a there's a story that I want more
info on before we do it. Uh, imagine
this that I'm waiting for more
information that suggests that one of
the reasons that the
um there are so many game s like the
game key cards is that Nintendo is
currently limiting the size of cartridge
that they're sending out to people or
that they're giving to developers and
that many games won't fit on that
cartridge. That story needs a lot more
verification, but there there there may
be more to that story. And I just bring
that up as like a, hey, that story may
be more complicated than people don't
want to put their game on the cartridge.
I would be very curious to hear more
about that considering I have I'll say
this I'll say this publicly. I don't
have a Switch do pre-order yet, but I
did pre-order um I wanted to vote with
my dollars uh Cyberpunk on it because
Cyberpunk is entirely on the card. Yeah.
And if they can fit Cyberpunk and
Phantom Liberty onto the card,
I have a feeling they might be able to
fit a couple more games onto that card,
too. Yeah.
Um I Yeah, because both versions I have
Cyberpunk on the PC. Uh I don't own
obviously a physical copy of it, and I
think it's really cool to actually have
it on the cart. Yeah.
Um anywh who um and someone brought up I
want to bring this up. Um, I I'm so
sorry. I don't remember who, but someone
in the pre-show brought up the story
about Nintendo sort of side eyeing or
sides sliding in some information about
being able to remotely brick Switch
Twos. Yeah. Um, I have not done enough
research on that. I heard whispers into
it. Maybe that's something we'll talk
about as the Switch 2 becomes uh the
release starts coming more. But I did
get the email that I am in the pool to
get my pre-order. That's cool. Oh, did
you? Yeah, that those emails went out on
the 16th. We were tired. Wait, so you're
in the the pool that will get access at
some point. Oh, I have that one. Yeah.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I I I got another one.
Was it on the 16th? This this weekend?
Yeah. It's like, "Hey, we know you're
here. You don't get one yet, but we see
you." Yeah.
Anyhoo. Yeah. Uh Okay, cool. Let's talk
about this week's main story, which is
Fortnite has given us a fantastic case
study in why letting the internet
interact with a public facing generative
AI is a terrible stupid idea.
So, Fortnite got
the legal nonsense handled to bring the
Darth Vader James Earl Jones voice AI
thing, which to be very clear, James
Earl Jones did sign off on. This is
James Earl Jones signed off on it. His
family has signed off on its use. I
believe he was paid very well for his
voice likeness rights and that is
everyone's right to do with their voice
if they would like to. Correct. So
that's not the issue, right? There's no
there's no issue of legality in in doing
this or compensating an artist or
getting an artist permission, right?
Okay, cool. Great. Awesome. But then
they let it talk to the
internet and then they had to pull it
down and patch
it because people were getting it to
slay like to say like some pretty
horrendous slurs in like minutes. Like
not hours, not days, minutes. Time to
slurs,
minutes. And this is sort of a thing
that I feel like is probably again one
of the highest profile examples of like
well what did you expect to happen? Like
did you not expect this? We have other
cases of this where like people have
done like AI driven VTubers with like
Vocaloid sort of like TTS kind of stuff
and they've been tricked into saying
slurs as the streamer on Twitch and
getting banned. Like this is not new
news, right? But the fact that Fortnite
did it and then screwed up and thought,
"Oh, surely this won't happen." is sort
of the big deal.
I have a theory. Sure. Um I think they
knew exactly that this would
happen. I I I don't think this I think
this was always a possibility and I
think that then they get news stories
about it. Now it is air quote fixed. Um,
I I just think that's kind of what it
is.
Like I guess here's my because otherwise
let's say this didn't happen. Let's say
that a Darth Vader talk to you AI was in
Fortnite and it worked fine and it had
the safeguards for this children's game
uh in place.
Right. Cool.
What?
Look, show of hands, Brad and
Janet. Who wants to talk to an AI in a
video game? Like, have a conversation.
Like, verbally just chat back and forth
to it. It I'm not saying in other
elements. I'm saying like in a game of
Fortnite or or or a shooter or or I
mean, Fortnite is a million things, too.
Let's be very clear. Like,
why? Like and and if and seriously if
you do I would love to like this is not
a call out. I I can't fathom a reason
why this would make this particular game
better or more
immersive at this point. AI bots like
this all do from a from a grammatical
structure uh thing kind of all sound the
same and a little less than human and
you can kind of and that's not to say
that it won't get better, you know, all
that jazz. Uh and this is my point. This
is actually
uh ifix says I want to break it as fast
as possible because why not? That is the
only reason I can think about to have
this in a game right now in a game like
Fortnite. Because it's fun and memeable
and silly to break it. Now, there is a
joy to that. I'm I'm sure.
Um, but I just don't get unless the the
point
was like getting people to say silly
things or outrageous
things. Ice Ice brings up a point. To be
fair, the AI might be more polite than
other players. Sad but true. Um, but you
can bl like this is the thing actually
actually that I that brings up a great
point. I agree. I think it I bet you
this AI is way more polite than a lot of
Fortnite players. The difference is
other Fortnite players are players
interacting with the property. This is
something that the property is
progenerating. Yeah. Proen generating.
Yeah. Putting out there.
Um, yeah. Actually, TAC brings up a
great question too. Some of us older
gamers don't want to talk to real people
cuz they're terrible. Why would we want
to talk to a clone on internet behavior?
Yeah, it's all it is is paring what
people would answer back in these
situations.
So in truly until AI becomes legitimate
AI, like something that's actually
thinking and not just scrubbing
uh artificial scrubbers, um ass uh would
be what it would be called.
Um, sorry I keep getting distracted by
everyone's lovely comments. No, these
are great. I guess even if the
guardrails worked perfectly, Darth Vader
addressing you as Sabrina Carpenter is
kind of inherently funny. Yeah, you're
not wrong. U, I just other than having
sort of memeable moments, which again is
a form of marketing, which again is what
I think this whole thing's point was. I
don't think they were terribly worried
about what would happen because what
they get to do is be like, "Oh no, so
sorry." Wow, that's crazy. We fixed it
and they'll patch it as as use cases
happen, but those things still get
through.
Um, I don't know.
Like I I sorry if I'm sorry if I missed
anyone saying that they that they liked
this.
Um, yeah, a dark has it kind of guys
that nailed that. Like I kind of want
AI, not AP. If if we're talking about
conversational, like if like I would
love it I because that's you're talking
to something else that can talk like a
person. Uh, also Aspen brings up a great
point too. I don't want AI to be a
companion. I want AI that does all the
mind-numbing secretarial work that my
ADHD brain can't handle. Sure. Correct.
Valid. Yeah. like it.
Okay, what do you got? Will this feels
like the force trainer, which seems
appropriate. Okay, so who knows? Okay,
so they had this toy for a really long
time, and it might still exist, and I
don't know if they still make them,
called the Jedi Force Trainer. And it
was a headband that you put on, and then
you could focus on making a ball
levitate. And the I'm not kidding. The
headband would do some kind of telemetry
analysis on your skin conductivity or
whatever is happening inside the
headband, right? And it would make the
ball like it would turn on a little fan,
the ball would go up, which is kind of
cool as like a novelty toy thing, right?
But it also isn't fundamentally doing
the thing that it claims that it's
doing. It's just a stupid party trick,
right? Like you're not actually gonna
get to like get wisdom from Darth Vader
or like anything. It's a stupid party
trick. The difference between the force
trainer and this is that Star Wars fans
who want a stupid party trick and they
get the force trainer buying money for a
piece of technology that people have
actually hacked to do some pretty
interesting things based on the
telemetry from the headband. like people
have hacked it to do other stuff versus
this which is just lighting rainforest
on fire. Like the problem isn't that
it's a stupid party trick. Star Wars
fans are very used to stupid party
tricks. The problem is that it's a
really stupid stupid party trick that
costs a lot more and is much more
destructive than the stupid party tricks
that Star Wars fans are used to.
Yeah. Does that make sense? Like that's
my primary critique. Like it was never
going to be like lots of people want to
be a Jedi or a Sith. They're like
whatever and buy like spend way too much
money on a lightsaber or like a Jedi
robe or like Jedi merch or whatever.
Like there's a reason Disney makes an
absolute crap ton of money off of the
little kyber crystal things where you
can like maybe get a black kyber crystal
and like that's a whole deal, right?
Like whatever.
Um the problem with this one is that
it's worse than those and more damaging
than those. Well, and also if they
like tell me how you know this wasn't to
make an actual like character of Darth
Vader without telling me you actually
know this wasn't to make an actual
character of Darth Vader. Like if you
were going to put an AI Vader in a
game and you wanted to be true to the
character that you were
being, I don't think Darth Vader would
actually talk to most people. I think
Darth Vader as portrayed in all of the
films that he was portrayed in would
have someone talking and saying
something ridiculous or trying to prompt
him and just force choke him and move
on. Like this is not true to the
character. This is Darth Vader getting
into a banter a banter session about
Baja Blast. Darth Vader would not do
that. And therefore you're you're
breaking the immersion already and it
becomes more to Will's point of a cheap
parlor trick like that is like oh isn't
that funny? It's a meable moment. Darth
Vader's now talking about Baja Blast,
but also like talking about how it would
be uh the the official drink of the
Empire or something. Again, nothing that
Darth Vader would say. And if you want a
great example of characters having
inworld banter that doesn't use this,
look at rivals. The number of pairings
of different heroes and rivals that are
continually getting new voice line
interactions when you're in the waiting
room to start the match is going up and
up and up, right? And like they could
have just done a bunch of Vader lines
for all of the different Star Wars
characters and some funny ones for
different people and given work to one
of the two voice actors who have taken
up the mantle of being Darth Vader, by
the way, without using generative AI.
There are now two voice actors who are
considered the authoritative voice
actors for Darth Vader, and they didn't
give either of them work. They gave it
to an AI instead. Also crappy. Um, like
it doesn't it doesn't do the thing. Like
Vader's never going to do the coolest
line that Vader's ever done, which is in
the comics, by the way. Uh Vader gets
surrounded by a whole bunch of uh
rebels. Um and the rebels are like,
"Give up. You're surrounded." And he
says, "All I am surrounded by is fear
and dead men." And then kills all of
them because Vader is just a stone cold
awesome like bad guy. And I'm not
talking like again, I want to make sure
I'm not like I I have lots of pros and
cons to Fortnite as a property. We've
talked about it on the channel in both
these live episodes. We've talked about
it in uh the my Skeletor wants your
wallet episode thing that we did uh on
the animated side of credits. Um the the
thing that I am talking about here is
you are now taking skinning a character
running around in a funny shooter that
includes Jar Brinks, Sabrina Carpenter,
um uh Subzero, and uh I don't know who
the hell else is in it. the to the
talking banana guy. Um, you're you're
you're putting all those together.
They're normally just skins. This is
making something that is supposedly
supposed to be like the character
interacting with you here. And that
because because it fails intrinsically
on the
like I would have similar issue with
the I would have less issue or my issue
would be lessened if this was say on
Deadpool.
Yeah. In a world Ryan Reynolds sold his
his voice and let people do whatever
they want. I pray he never does. But
let's say that all happened and this was
a Deadpool that is talking to you. Yes,
that at least makes narrative sense and
you could argue an art a crappy but
still artistic reason as to why you are
doing it. Doing this for Darth Vader is
ridiculous. Yeah, and I agree that Ryan
Reynolds wouldn't. However, what I do
think Ryan Reynolds would do would be to
get a Deadpool skin and go into Fortnite
and yell at people as Deadpool. Sure.
Himself. Like anyway, um by the way, I
do want to point out that the the Brad
and Janet are merging brain cells
because back to back over on Brad, we
got correction, Darth Vader could fill
his back to tank with Baja Blast and at
the same time Tac over on Janet said
Baja Blast back to tank. So, we're all
on the same page. Everyone's on the same
page. Everyone's on the same page.
Anyway, this is just an interesting
thing. Uh
it's the occurrence is bad. The
implementation, I think, was not careful
on purpose. Again, I don't think it was
malicious. I just think that they knew
what would get people talking, like
ourselves, talking about it. Uh, and,
uh, we're going to see more of the stuff
continually in our gaming space, uh,
moving forward. Um, it's kind of
interesting. When we played Fallout 4,
when I was prepping the Fallout 4
character for the charity stream, I
mentioned to Will when I when I prepped
my character how amazed I was. And I
remember being amazed back in the day
and it still gave me a sense of
amazement that I put my name in as
Matthew. And when you're talking to um
Cogsworth in the beginning of the game,
your AI, your your robot butler in
Fallout 4, they recorded up to like two
or 30 hundred common names uh for
Cogsworth to say and speak to you. And
so he goes, "Mr. Matthew." And like I
jumped like I was like, "Oh, cool." But
then I thought about it and I was like,
"It'd be so easy now to do that with
AI." But once it's This sounds weird and
I I want to bake this idea more. I'll
just say it here and then we can move
on.
Um that moment is special to me because
I know how much actual human work went
into making it work. Yeah. A voice actor
recorded a ton of lines. It wasn't just
a quick thing. There was like actual
effort and dare I say sort of like even
the soul of speaking someone's name.
Um, and that still felt special to me to
this day. If someone in for if an AI
Vader said my name in Fortnite, it would
not have that effect. Yeah. Because it's
not serving the story, the plot,
anything. Y um, and I just find that
interesting that a game as old as
Fallout 4 uh, gave me the feeling that I
think some of the designers of this
might have wanted if it was more uh,
cohesively gelled together as the
experience you're getting. Yep. Agreed.
Okay, that brings us to dessert.
Speaking of Baja Blast, the ultimate
dessert drink. So, uh, there will be no
spoilers for Expedition 33. Save the
exist of a character who is in all the
promo material, so don't worry about it.
Okay, cool. Great. Awesome. Um, the
developers of Expedition 33 have asked
people to be on the lookout for fake
offers for SEA plushies because SKA is a
very cute, huggable character who's in
the game. We will say no more about
anything. Just this character exists.
Great, awesome, cool.
Um, and
so they have said, "Please be on the
lookout. You know, people are offering
fake ones. Also, hang on to your money.
We're totally making a real SDA
plushie." which is great because I very
much would like to hug an SA plushy. I'm
very I'm looking forward so much to when
I have a I I need to finish Final
Fantasy 7 Rebirth before I grab
Expedition. I just I need to for my own
I can't have
two to two to I know they're different
style games, but they in my brain they
fit in the same like slot and I need to
finish one before I get there. I'm very
excited to to get into it. It's going to
be really good. I'm actually considering
um I found out that I missed something
in the prologue, which means I can't
100% a run. So now I'm considering
playing the whole thing again on expert
mode off stream now that I've rolled
credits on stream. Uh and I got to tell
I got to tell y'all the number of games
that I've actually considered doing that
on is very small. I normally cannot do
that. My brain just won't. It starts
screaming at me. Yes, but here I might.
Who knows? So, we'll see. Um, yeah.
Okay. I've been thinking about doing a
stream before before um Oh god, why am I
blanking on the new house marquee game?
Uh,
SOS. SOS. Uh, the the spiritual
successor to Returnal. I'm debating
doing just a series of streams on my own
will. I won't drag you through here. um
uh to try to actually platinum Returnal
because I I would like to platinum
Returnal before uh Saros comes out. Um
I've been wanting to do I haven't tried
I haven't platinum the
game since Dante's Inferno on the
PS3. Um I picked it because it was easy.
Yeah. Um and I think it'd be very very
fun to do. So there's something to be
said about like going back into a game
and trying to do all the things,
especially when there's a game that you
love so much. Yeah, correct. Um, and the
and the other reason uh is that is this
comment um like Hami says, "Yeah, I
missed a lot." Of course, I missed a
lot. I'm playing on stream. Yeah, I
cannot overstate how hard it is to get
everything without bogging the stream
down to the point that people stop
watching.
Yeah, because I could play methodically
and no one wants to watch that. We
already had problems with people not
wanting to watch because I played too
early, right? But like again, one of the
problems with enjoying the game is that
making it into content is a huge
struggle, right? Particular for
something that's as spoiler heavy as
Clare Obscure. Um I did I loved I saw a
streamer post a tweet that they were
getting into the act one and they
couldn't wait to do their lore through
and they had a whole notebook for
lore and I was like, "Oh, you sweet
summer child. You need like three
notebooks." Um I'm I'm super Yeah.
Anyway,
uh so uh that's that's really cool. Next
up also um Tekken. Two desserts. You get
two desserts because you didn't get one
last week. That's right. Uh yeah, two
desserts. Tekken. Everybody knows
Tekken. Everybody knows Tekken.
Everybody knows Tekken. Everybody loves
Tekken. The devs of Tekken have said
that they are trying to cross over with
a famous franchise and they're having no
luck contacting this franchise because
the franchise isn't really one who does
crossovers. Um, and that is that the
devs of Tekken 8 think it would be
really dope if you could fight in a
Waffle House. Um, and I salute them. I
salute them. You know, here's to you
real Tekken devs of genius. Real Tekken
devs of genius.
Yeah, right. They're correct. I do want
to have a Tekken fight in a Waffle
House. And I won't be satisfied until I
can suplex someone through a table as
king in a Waffle House.
Like perfection, right? That's it's what
I I need it. I need It's so good. It's
such a great like this is all win. I
love this idea. Anyway, hopefully it
becomes a big enough story where Waffle
House listen. It's interesting and we we
we uh in we ran into this two years ago
or whatever when Baja Blast became a
channel. Not Baja Blast when um
Martinell Martinelli's sparkling cider
became a bit of a meme here and I was
like man I I can't I really want to be
sponsored by Martinelli's and that's why
we have on Twitch one of the tags is not
sponsored by Martinelli's yet.
Um, but it Jeff actually got a hold of
them, I believe. And it's just something
like the way that like different places
like a Martinelli's or a Waffle House
are just not set up to do cross promo in
an efficient way with something like a
YouTube channel or a video game, right?
Like especially older older franchises
or older businesses. Yeah. Uh so it's
funny that this tweet has blown up a
little bit. Yeah. Um because maybe
someone at Waffle House will uh will see
it and be like that could be pretty fun.
Yeah, absolutely. I I 100% agree. I'm
I'm very I'm I'm hopeful. I you know, I
haven't played Tekken in a very long
time. I would probably get Tekken just
to do this. Tekken Tekken 8 seems really
lovely. I watched some of the some of
the tournament at packs. Um and I I
don't know. I it's just I only I only
have so much time and it really is
Mortal Kombat for me. But I uh I think
Tekken has offers a lot of cool stuff in
the fighting game space. That's where
I'm at when I'm not busy tilting out. Uh
I am currently trying to get to mythic
and standard on arena and that takes a
very long time because you stop getting
real good win streaks once you hit
diamond and people start like actually
knowing how to play their decks. Sure.
No, no shade to people below that, but
like the level of interaction in Diamond
is significantly higher than the level
of interaction below it. So, um yeah,
and sometimes like Kyle uh Kyle brings
up sometimes these companies apparently
Arby's had an amazing social media run
on gaming which is cool. Like when they
get it, they get it. Wendy's obviously
goes hard. Um but not every company has
that. So a and a social media account is
different from an
integration. You know what I mean? Like
so who knows? Maybe we'll we'll have uh
Paul versus King uh in a Waffle House
one day, but it will not be this day.
Yeah, absolutely. And that dear friends,
I almost made Matt go away. That would
have been bad. Why? Because I was Oh,
cuz I have meetings and I have to do all
the work that I didn't do last week. A
thing and I almost made you disappear
instead of that. I see. Um friends,
that's going to do it for our show
today. Thanks everybody for joining us
for uh the returning breakfast edition
of Games for Breakfast. Yeah.
Uh I guess the only thing left, Will, is
our is our patented ending that is the
same every time we do it, right? Well,
yeah, I got to I got to real quick I'm
going to pitch this because I'm super
excited about this. I know I'm real
tired. I'm so excited to play Final
Fantasy 6. Genuinely, if you're a Final
Fantasy 6 fan, please come hang out. We
we're taking um we talked about this a
bit last week. It's a bit of a risk
because there's no directory for Final
Fantasy 6. It's just people who love the
game coming to see someone who's brand
new to the game play it. Please consider
coming play and hang out. Right. I could
be So that's starting if you're watching
this live, that's starting right after
we get off here on Twitch. If you are
watching on uh the VOD on YouTube later
or if you are watching uh via Rocky on
Nebula, hi everyone. Uh if you're
interested in watching, we'll do that.
And I'm sure the VOD for that will also
be over on Twitch even after the fact.
So yeah, come hang out if you'd like.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Cool. So So that was
that was my only pitch and now now we
can now we can do the ending. Yeah. Now
we can do the ending. Jokes on you.
That's the part of the ending we do
every time. It's always the same. And we
do it to to garner community to make
sure that everyone feels like they are
together in this um wonderful uh
smorgish board of of of content uh that
we all come together to make including
you Brad Janet and Rocky. So until next
time, stay waking, rousing, stirring,
arising,
uh opening one's eyes, perhaps maybe
realizing there could be something or
emerging from ignorance perhaps. All of
those things you really do need to take
to the max.
[Applause]
[Music]
Yeeha! Yeeha! Nailed it! Yeah!
Yay! We did it. We did it. We did
indeed, Chad. We did. I was impressed
that we managed to do a not um
loose fit loose fit show after a stream.
Yeah, I was more awake yesterday than I
am today. So, I had the energy yesterday
to do the planning and today I'm I will
admit I am much like a small dragon. Um
nice and that is that is okay. Uh well,
you go forth and enjoy Final Fantasy 6.
Uh I will go forth and enjoy Final
Fantasy meetings. Um is that enjoy?
Yeah, we'll be fine. I'm I to be
perfectly honest, I'm looking forward.
This is the first week in a while where
I think and there's a slight chance that
I'll be jinxing this even by saying it.
It seems like it's just a regular work
week. Yeah, that that is kind of the the
vibe. So, here on Twitch, it's going to
be a regular week. We have design club
on Thursday. Uh Janet, I'll have the
thing up. I'll have the pre-stream thing
up tomorrow when Jeff and I decide on a
topic. I've decided I'm going to hold
that till Tuesday when I know what the
topic is so I can tell you what the
topic is when I put it up rather than
putting up one that's a placeholder.
Um, and yeah, it's other than that it's
scheduled pretty much as as normal.
Thanks. Thanks. It's been a pleasure.
Cool. Uh, speaking of, let's say bye to
Janet. Goodbye, Janet. We'll see you all
Thursday or next Monday or whenever we
see you. Also, the VOD is up for the
stream if you want to watch it and then
Oh, for the the stream when the Yeah,
VOD ends. Sorry about that. Watched this
hour and 45 minutes and thought, man, I
would really like to see Will for
another 13 hours. Just me. Not Matt.
Just me, apparently. Did I not say both
of our names? No, you just said me. Oh,
well, we're the both there. Okay. Along
with like a ton of other people. Yeah.
Go check out that VOD. And uh you
listen, you can still donate to Best
Friends Animal Society VR link if you'd
like. If you missed it, uh any amount
will help more animals in need. If you
want to know exactly how, there are
multiple times in that VOD that tell you
exactly where your money goes. Yep.