Good morning, Matt. A
>> good morning, Will.
>> Good morning to all of you.
>> Welcome to Games for Breakfast, the
internet talk show. We talk about this
week's gaming and tech news, but we're
also I have played a hell of a lot of
games to get to this point, and I only
have one more. The last one, the one I'm
driving to right now, the only one left.
And when I arrive at my destination, I
will unal alive Bill.
>> See, it just doesn't work.
>> It doesn't really work.
>> It doesn't. No, it doesn't.
>> Huh.
Anyway, we're going to get to that
story. Will, how are you, my friend?
>> I'm tired, but good. We We were
discussing this a little bit in the
pre-show, but we are both a little
Thanksgiving com.
>> What are you talking about? Absolutely
not. I am exhausted. Uh, a lot of
travel, lot of traffic. Uh, who knew?
>> Yeah.
>> That would be the case.
>> Yeah, back back me up on this one. Uh,
chat and uh and and you know, YouTube
comments.
>> Thanksgiving is one of the holidays that
just generally always makes you more
tired.
>> Sure. It I I don't get me wrong, I had a
lovely Thanksgiving,
>> right? Yeah. No, no, no. It's not like a
bad thing, but it generally just makes
you more tired.
>> Yeah. Right.
>> I want to give I want to give a shout
out to to Jaime's family who I go to
their Thanksgiving. Now, I come from a
very small family. Um, and Jamie comes
from a rather large family and I uh get
to now have in my in my redacted year of
age get to have a really nice huge
Thanksgiving with like eight dogs and
like 13 kids and like a bunch of people
and it's just like it's like Home Alone
like that size family like you know it's
it's it's huge. It did. It did make the
cut, but uh McCauley Kulkin is on the
record saying he would like to return
for another Home Alone movie as Kevin,
but Kevin all grown up. And I think we
should do that for reasons that are
definitely not me just wanting to watch
the world burn.
>> Also, Munition Man, heck yeah, Snow Day.
Let's go.
>> It is indeed.
>> Oh god, that's the best feeling. That's
the best way to kick off this this
Holland month of the winter. the winter
festivities with a nice crisp snow day.
>> Yeah. Uh the Midwest uh got a lot of
snow over the weekend. They got their
first really big snowstorm. I know
people who are plow operators. I know
people who are snowed in. Uh yeah,
there's it's a lot. It's just a lot.
>> Well, I need this a lot.
>> That That's No, that's fair. I'm
probably going to tell you to vamp for
like 30 seconds at some point while I go
get more caffeine because I'm
>> No, that's totally fine. Um well
actually I I you know will over the last
week where I was gone I actually
overindulged quite a bit in caffeine
where I was.
>> Uh yeah is that possibly because you
were uh listening to Will's 321 rule of
con preparation.
>> What is that?
>> Uh you need three hours of sleep, two
meals, one shower every day.
>> Yeah, that's about right minimum.
>> Uh I was at PAX unplugged. I was about
to say West. That's not true. for packs
unplugged in Philly uh this last weekend
uh and I didn't get back till late
Monday, which is why there was no games
for breakfast last week. Thank you so
much for uh for waiting for for us to
come back. Um it was a wonderful show.
I'd never been to PAX before, but I was
invited uh due to our friend uh Jasmine
that Bronze Girl uh to be on this panel
we designed called OneHour Ones OneShot
and uh that was with Ify Waterway um and
um and uh what's it called? I'm pulling
up my nonsense here because my brain is
toast.
uh myself and then of course uh Maya
Baron of
um of Dispatch fame uh one of the voice
actors over on Dispatch and we played
Pen Dragon. The idea was basically how
do you train your friends to play a game
that you love in order to in a quick and
contained setting so that you can
convince them to play a longer one. Cuz
you know like when you sit down with a
friend, it's essentially like
um
you have all these rules in your head of
a thing you want to do, but you it's
you're excited about it and maybe you
don't pitch it the right way or
something like that. Well, Jasmine did
an excellent job in the Mo Man Theater.
I think we we filled most of it. It was
like I I I don't know if anyone who is
here now off for these shows on YouTube
or Twitch was there. Um but it was a
excellent turnout. It was streamed
though. I haven't been able to find the
stream of it yet. I know because uh I
have pictures of them filming us and uh
and the different cuts of the actual
like what was being put on the um on the
projector. But um it went awesome. We
actually finished the adventure in like
45 minutes. It was super clean. We got a
real good gist of the pen dragon system,
which was super fun. And uh then we got
to do sort of a Q&A a bit about uh with
the four of us talking about all of our
GM kind of tips and tricks for doing
something like this. Uh and it was a
lovely lovely uh excuse to get up to
Philly unplugged. I know it's many
people's super favorite convention of
the year. It's all board games and
whatnot. And it was awesome. It was
great. Um I ran into a bunch of people.
Will more than one person came up to me
and said they loved games for breakfast.
I'm just throwing it out there. I think
we've I think
>> two two
>> four
>> four. There are four of you at PAX
Unplugged and you all found Matt. That's
Wow. That you know that's ridiculous.
>> Yeah.
>> Um uh yeah, I think I had one or two the
last time I went to Magfest.
>> Yeah. Yeah. No, it's it's nice. Four.
Let's go.
Four. Um,
and then, uh, what's it called? Yeah,
exactly. RC, I couldn't figure out.
There was no link. I was trying to get
it out there, too. I couldn't find it. I
thought it would be on the pack site. It
wasn't. I'm wondering. They do have a
ticketed version of a thing, which I
don't think is I mean, I I won't tell
people what's worth something and what's
not of like a a digital ticket, but then
like normally they stream their entire
main stage anyway on Twitch, so I was
like, I I don't know what if anyone's
ever done that, let me know how it goes.
Yeah.
>> Um anyway, I uh it was great. I'm very
much looking forward to going back next
year. I had a blast playing with these
folks. Uh Maya was also in particular,
who I I did not know, uh was an absolute
delight. Um I believe, God, I should
look this up. I want to look this up and
give a proper shout out. She uh and and
uh her her folks are doing a and I kid
you not, a Kingdom Hearts deep dive lore
podcast.
Uh,
I'm looking up now.
I will find it. I will find it. I will
find it later and I will post it in the
show notes. Um, oh, wait. No, I found
it. I think I think I found it. Yeah, I
think it's called Simple and Clean,
the Kingdom Hearts podcast. [laughter]
So, please go check that out wherever
fine podcasts are sold. Um,
uh, yeah, I don't know. I I very much
enjoyed meeting all these folks. And,
uh, also Jasmine and if he slated on a
Inc. as per usual. Mercer was there.
Mercer was and they and they shifted a
Inc. to Daggerheart, which was super
interesting. I never fully understood
like I I think that was the final like
thing to understand the system of
Daggerheart. Like watching it actually
be played for like 3 hours live. I kind
of like everything clicked for it which
was very very fun and nice.
>> Correct me if I'm wrong. It is a much
more storytelling focused system than a
crunchy system.
>> Yes.
>> Yeah. So it's much more like um powered
by the apocalypse or forged in the dark
system which are both much more about
telling a story and using dice to help
guide that experience rather than D and
D which is a war game. Right. And that's
not a bad or good thing on either side.
It's just a difference between them. Uh
there are reasons to play both.
>> Also, Nova, I'll figure it out. I'll
make sure that that podcast link is in
the show notes.
>> Um but anyway, yeah, PAX was great.
Super fun. Would go again. 10 out of 10.
Uh if you were there and you said hi,
hello back again. And it was so lovely
meeting uh so so many people. Uh I feel
like I feel like extra history and extra
extra history and games for breakfast in
particular. And um the magic thing the
the magic thing over on wizard site
there.
>> Oh yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I mean that also
makes sense for unplugged, right? Cuz
like you're you're in the target
audience.
>> Um it's it's really really nice. So um
and yeah, just a lot of cool games and
stuff to check out. The um I played
actually for the first time uh Pirate
Borg which was very fun. uh which is
just it was sort of like a naval combat
thing which isn't usually my jam but I
wanted to take the spirit of this 1hour
oneshot panel I was on was like let's
see how other people are trying to get
people to play these games so I tried a
few others and they did a great job
>> so yeah
>> cool awesome I think unfortunately that
means that all that remains is for us to
dive into a thing that we're going to be
totally normal about
>> totally normal
>> very normal
Um,
>> records scratch.
So, I believe on the 30th, just in time
for your trip to Fan Coma to subside,
um a collaboration between uh the houses
of Fortnite and Tarantino commenced and
there is now a Yeah. And now the two
blorbs have kissed and uh there is a
cinematic endeavor you can watch on
Fortnite called Yuki's Revenge in a
Fortnite After Dark uh thing. Uh this is
essentially a 9-ish minute film uh
directed by Quentyn Tarantino starring
Uma Thurman reprising her wrote her her
role as Beatatrix aka the bride from the
uh seminal 20 2003 and 2004 film uh
which is going to be released again in
its in its entirety called uh Kill Bill
the whole bloody affair which I have
already bought tickets for. It's 4 hours
and like 45 minutes or something. Uh
there will be an intermission. Um
>> Oh good. I was going to say that's
>> so lucky. First question, great
question. Is it canon? Yep. This is
apparently something that was in the
original scripts that Tarantino cut out.
Um, and you can kind of see the elements
of that original piece of Kill Bill uh
sort of in there still through the
dialogue. You know, it's good or bad.
It's very Tarantino, like it feels right
at home in the Kill Bill universe. But I
think where where where the dialogue
ends, that's also where that homecoming
feeling kind of does as well, right,
Will?
>> Yeah. Yeah. So, uh I Matt I hadn't
watched this and Matt was like, "Will
you have to watch this and I watched it
and I made it less than a minute until
it I like I'm not a huge Tarantino
person. I'm not like I wouldn't say I'm
a fan. I don't dislike his films. I've
watched many of them. Um, and and so I
have like a decent sense of like what
feels like Tarantino. And it made like
less than 60 full seconds into a
10-minute thing before a fish man sold
the bride a car and I was like
completely pulled out of it. Like it
just
>> Huh.
>> Yeah. Yeah. So, so,
okay,
I'm going to make a large statement that
I kind of came up with while Will and I
were talking about this this morning
because I was really bothered by this
crossover in a way that other crossovers
haven't bothered me. And I want to make
it very clear before I kind of go in on
this. I have no problem with Fortnite. I
think I've made that very clear on this
channel many, many times. I think an un
an unthemed world has a lot of potential
and you can do a lot of neat stuff with
it. Um, I'm also I feel like Kill Bill
as a as a you know IP or two two-parter
movie or one part of one movie broken up
into two parts was incredibly seinal
along with Tarantino's films for me in
general um when I was younger. Uh I
haven't really gone back and rewatched a
lot of them but I've seen every one of
his films multiple times. I'm saying
like recently I haven't like done a deep
dive back. So, I was really looking
forward to this Kill Bill uh the whole
bloody affair thing. And then when I
heard that Fortnite was doing a thing
and I believe in select theaters it will
be playing. I don't know if like in the
actual spot in the movie where it goes
or or just on the side it will be
playing along with the whole bloody
affair. So, I'll report back and see if
my New York based screening has that
going for it as well. Um, and with the
other crossovers we've talked about
before, like the the one battle after
another, that film had a Fortnite
crossover where you played some things
and they watered down some themes and
like um even that didn't really like rub
me the wrong way that this the way that
this one did. And and and I think the
statement that I want to say to sort of
make a very clear point and then sort of
explain why I feel it and I'd love to
hear what everyone else thinks about
this as well. uh is I think this
collaboration, despite the fact it being
done with the best intentions, despite
the fact Tarantino came in and directed
Uma Thurman in a mo cap suit to do this
thing, um I think
this crossover
damages the artistic integrity of both
properties involved.
I don't know if it's going to help or
hinder monetarily. I'm talking
specifically about like what each thing
does and what each thing does well and
the why of of the doing of that good
thing they all do
>> right.
>> Um
>> yeah like and that's if if you if you
were sitting there chuckling at the
thumbnail and you're like haha that's a
funny YouTube terms of service joke.
It's It's not actually because like in
in my opinion, the artistic integrity
thing is that Kill Bill is bloody and
violent on purpose for a point. and and
and while it does relish in that
violence, the violence is never um
even even when the violence is
trivialized in the Kill Bill films, it
it's still um
the the the childish way of saying it is
like it is still scary.
>> It is still like oh god. Like, yeah, you
can enjoy The House of Falling Leaves
and The Crazy 88 and like all like that
whole thing, but like there's there's
more violence for dramatic effect than
violence for spectacle.
>> Yeah. Um, and so so the violence and the
and the visceralness and the seriousness
uh
of the violence specifically around the
character of the bride um is important
>> to the to it and and that's not to say
that it couldn't be done in an animated
version or even in the Fortnite engine
like this has done. Um, but like I think
step one is talking about how they treat
the violence in this because they do
have to Fortnite it because it's
Fortnite.
>> Yeah.
So like
>> you want to take that part?
>> Yeah. So like when people get shot in
Kill Bill, right? The Tarantino blood
fountain is a thing, right? That's a
thing. This is as much a part of
Tarantino's work as excessive cursing or
any of the other things that people in
chat are mentioning about Tarantino's
work, right? That are that's like part
of it, right? So, like people getting
shot happens for a reason in the plot
and the script and like it has impact
and like it's it has a specific style.
>> Yeah.
>> And in Fortnite when you get shot the
bullet just kind of vanishes and there's
like a little pixelated mark
>> a blue blue pixies.
>> Yeah. It's like blue p. So like
okay
and then people just get up after being
shot like four or five times. They even
have a narrative conceit. There's like a
Bill made a drink that like makes go- go
like almost like
>> which is also weird, right? Like the
whole
>> I mean there's there's fantastical
elements in Kill Bill. I'll take it.
Like that Fortniteification is totally
fine. Um Oh, real quick. I want to side
note cuz uh Anna the Owl Lady says,
"It's been a decade, but I miss when
Extra Credits talked about game
development theories." We very much do.
uh on on Thursdays, Will and our studio
director Jeff talk about and design club
talk all about that sort of stuff live
and uh the last few episodes
specifically I think since we've uh not
the board game one since we've come back
but also the um escape rooms episode the
even the the night reign multiplayer
episode but more importantly the
designing a game you can actually make
episode where James deep dives into the
design of the uh Cyberpunk Legends card
game he's been developing. All of those
are really good if you're looking for
stuff for that. So, that stuff's still
here, too.
>> Yeah.
>> Um, but going back to Kill Bill,
>> right? Yeah. Well, and and to Fortnite
and to Fortnite, right? Fortnite if it
wasn't Fortnite.
>> No. And that's the thing, right? Like I
wouldn't I might have brought up on this
show like, oh, I went and saw the whole
bloody affair. It was neat.
>> Yeah.
>> Um, so like, and even when, and I'm
going to I'm sorry. I'm going to spoil
the ending of this thing. I won't even
say to who, but when the bride is
inevitably triumphant, considering this
deleted scene takes place somewhere in
the middle of the movie, so you imagine
it's not going to uh there's no real
sort of narrative danger there. Um,
hey uh sorry, no problem. Um, the the
way that
even uh the character's death, who the
bride bests, is taken care of, is she's
she falls down a stairway dead. You
don't see the body and then you see the
Fortnite like oh you've been killed in
Fortnite like like sort of like zoom
suckup animation like digitization sort
of thing and you're like okay there is
there is Fortnite let me back up.
Fortnite as a game does trivialize
violence.
>> That's it. That's one of the very few
themes it does have in its unthemed
world. I don't have a problem with a
video game doing that. It's a a silly
shooting game where it's it's not bloody
and gory and it's almost like a laser
tag experience, right?
>> Yeah.
>> Um
I think that works for many many
crossovers. I think it works for The
Simpsons. The Simpsons is a farcical
world. Fortnite is a farcical world. Do
I think that it makes sense to have
Homer running around with a gun? No. But
like that doesn't like it. there's
enough mishmash like sort of connective
tissue between it. It works. Even hell
even when they did Star Wars when um the
the the last mainstream uh Star Wars
film in the in the Ray trilogy when it
dropped, how they dropped a plot point
of Palpatine returning in Fortnite and
not in the movie. Do I think that hurt
Star Wars? Yeah. Do I think that hurt
Fortnite? Nope. I think that did a lot
for Fortnite. I think also Space Wizards
and Lasers also fit right at home in
there. I think silly things like Mortal
Kombat can fit right at home in there.
There's a super violent thing, but where
also the violence is treated in the same
farcical way, even if it is gory as the
farcical violence is in Fortnite.
>> Yeah.
>> And then the concerts and stuff are just
sort of gatherings and having fun and
like, you know, and actually in the in
the comments or or you can uh blue sky
us. We'll put that up later uh on here
or even um you know, chat with us right
here if you're live watching on Twitch.
Let us know if there's any other
Fortnite collaborations you think breaks
the mold so much like I think this one
does because I'm having trouble finding
one that I think
>> intrinsically not only hurts the the
teamed up partnership but also kind of
hurts and I will say this with a
completely straight face the artistic
integrity of Fortnite.
>> Yeah. Because like I I think that while
many people dislike it, right? like that
there are definitely people who are all
in on Fortnite and there are definitely
people who are all in on not liking
Fortnite and both of those are perfectly
valid opinions, right? Um I do think
though that we can say that like
Fortnite has a goal that it's aiming at
most of the time, even if that goal is
like
to be the PC Smash Bros., right? Which
is kind of it, right? Does do any of
these characters being in the same place
make sense? No. Are we going to do it
anyway? Yes. Why violence? Great. That's
like that is a thing that they are
aiming at. And here it just feels
weird. Like it feels almost weirder than
Superman holding a gun.
>> Although that that one I will also say I
feel like that one is like bordering on
the
>> a thousand% and I've used I've used that
thing multiple multiple times. But the
way that I can mentally gymnasticsized
real word I checked um the Superman
running around with a gun is essentially
because of the world of Fortnite it is
essentially laser tag.
>> Yeah.
>> Like it feels like Superman playing
laser tag. Does that make a lot of
sense? No.
But like that's kind of how it is coded
visually. Even though the the weapons
themselves do look like military
weapons, but they're big flashes and
blue sparks and things and like that's
that's sort of where I think that's
where it lands. When you start doing
things
that where where violence is an int like
the visceralness of the violence is an
intrinsic part of the metatextual
narrative that it's trying to portray
and you put it in
uh Fortnite, that gets weird. And you
know, I think it's it's a it's Oh, what
do you got, Will? I gotta sort of
>> And I think it's really important here.
If it was just if it was just Kill Bill
character skins in Fortnite,
>> I was literally we're mind melding.
>> Yeah. Right. That would be one thing,
but to portray part of the narrative of
Kill Bill in this way to be like, "Hey,
we did like a real art thing." And then
like there's a scene and we'll get we'll
get we have a screenshot of it later
where they're [clears throat] fighting
in his street and the banana guy, you
know, the banana guy comes out of his
house with a shotgun and the bride's
like, "No, you have to go back inside.
It's not safe." And he looks sad that he
doesn't get to shotgun anyone. And it
just completely like misses.
It feels like it's at odds with itself,
right? the like the Fortnite like
gleeful weird slapstick violence is at
odds with this is a deadly serious
confrontation between two assassins who
want the other dead dead not unal alived
>> right like that's and so it feels like
presenting that as part of the Kill Bill
narrative just like doesn't do anything
other than show that it's not Kill Bill
and it's not Fortnite so why did we do
this
>> like and I can't imagine
And look, I he seems very happy about
it. We have a bunch of interviews with
Quenton Tarantino and the Hollywood
Reporter and Vice. Those two articles
are linked in the show notes as well. Um
it seems like they came to Tarantino and
asked to have a meeting and he thought
like, oh, they're going to pitch me to
do something like with some of my
characters or like something in the Kill
Bill universe. And then I think that
from what I'm gleaning, and this could
be wrong, they eventually knew that he
had cut scenes from, you know, that he
had talked about in the past that they
had cut shots or scenes from the movies
for time, which is hilarious if you
think about how long Kilp is, but it
makes sense. Like this this sequence
line, right?
>> This sequence that is in Fortnite,
even if it was filmed live action, would
not really fit in my opinion anywhere in
either Kill Bill. Like pacewise, even
just on that level, it wouldn't. Yeah.
>> Um, but of course when you're writing
scripts and things, you leave stuff on
the cutting room floor all the time,
things you really like. And um,
then when they wanted to do this in sort
of the Fortnite engine, I could see
probably the the artists in Tarantito
and in Uber Thurman were like kind of
really really excited about like, oh,
this is a thing we' talked about in the
past. This will actually be neat because
we actually get to make this thing now.
And then it's like the last bit of the
movie that was never made. And I I would
and I want to make I want to make it
very clear. My problem with this as a
whole is is is the the the sum of a lot
of different parts. We've talked about a
few already, but then to have it be like
this legitimate true
element of the film that the original
creators wanted to make and then team up
with Fortnite, I would have no problem
if they just rendered the exact way that
Tarantino would like truly sign off or
want it in the in the edit and make that
the thing. I the violence watered down
does sort of muddy it a bit but like
sure
the thing that gets me is literally the
things we're going to kind of show uh
right now. Oh by the way uh go to the
next slide will real quick. It's called
it's called Yuki's revenge. It's
basically uh GoGo's twin sister goes for
revenge after um spoiler alert for Kill
Bill. Uh uh Goari is the bodyguard of
one of the people that the bride has to
kill. uh the takes them out along with
the crazy 88 and in one of the most
spectacular and gory violent fight
scenes uh I think I've ever seen in my
entire life. So gory that I believe even
to get the R rating they had to make it
black and white. It cuts to black and it
works better in black and white in my
opinion. Uh because it is so
>> that might be one of the very few times
I can think of where a mainstreamish
movie had to tone down the violence to
get an R. By the way, that's weird in
the States.
>> Or maybe it was a PG-13. I actually
don't remember. Kill
>> there's no way in
>> I doubt it.
>> There's no way Kill Bill's PG-13.
>> Yeah.
>> No, there's too much blood. There's just
There's It's realistic, too. No PG.
>> There's no There's no NC7s are usually
for sex.
>> Yeah. No cure for violence. Yeah.
>> Yeah. or or they're um for excessive
violence in a way that like an indie
film would do like in a more for shock
value thing. But anyway,
>> but I think I think the thing that gets
me the most is the way that
>> it's sad either way. either if Quentyn
Tarantino and Uma Thurman were excited
about the next bits we're going to talk
about that makes me feel very
disconnected from their original work
and again it's their work and they can
do whatever they want with it but then
it it makes me not want to engage with
it like this this short for for the
multitude of reasons but mainly for the
one I'm going to get into right now has
sadly made me less excited for a movie
that I'm going to go rewatch in in
what's supposed to be its like cinematic
entirety in the way it was intended to
be seen uh that I've been waiting for
for years I've been like on the wait
list on on every sort of movie ticket
app to get tickets for this thing for
easily since since it was rumored. I've
always checked like a year year and a
half ago and I think they announced
ticket sales like a few months ago and
I've been like alert me right and this
made me slightly less excited for that.
You know, the art is the art and you
can't take away sort of what is already
there. But like
the the two things that make me sad one
way or the other are the insertion of
all these different Fortnite elements
into this short because if Tarantino
liked it, that feels bad. And if he
didn't like it, but they were required
to get paid to make the thing, that also
feels bad. Uh let's just go through a
few of them here real quick before we we
go on. So, there's one part where the
bride is running away in downtown uh
Hollywood. Uh
>> it's called Battlewood because Hollywood
is copyrighted.
>> Yeah.
>> Or trademarked. Trademark.
>> I don't even I don't know. Um but like
then she jumps over a fence and then has
a swims next to one of these characters
in like a big Fortnite shark thing and
they're like on a in a a pool on a
floaty with Christmas tree lights on it
cuz apparently that's a Fortnite thing.
And we spend an exorbitant amount of
time with this joke of her swimming past
it with it trying to swim and falling
off a thing even though there is an
intense gun battle going on outside. Um
let's keep it moving. Here we have uh
Yuki uh going through Battlewood and
taking pictures and going to Hollywood
walks of fame and things but with like
Fortnite characters everywhere
>> cuz it's Battlewood. Again, this is an
assassin who again, it's supposed to be
like a whimsical character as well, so
that almost makes sense, but like
>> it just this doesn't feel like
>> it doesn't feel like anything in the
world of Kill Bill at all.
>> Right. Cuz like her whimsicality in a
Kill Bill sense is shown in like the
first shot where she gets on a plane and
starts painting her nails hot pink on
>> her hands. Nails on her hands.
>> Hands hands. Okay. starts painting them
hot pink on the way like that and is
like blowing bubblegum like that's
Tarantino whimsicality not oh my gosh
let me snap a selfie with this insert ad
for Fortnite skin here cuz like a
reminder all of these are designed to
get people to buy these skins.
Yeah, Yuki also uh
and GoGo in the in the in the film is is
sort of played as a like they're
whimsical and like a caricature of a of
a of a school girl, right?
And that's supposed to be off-putting in
this dark and violent world,
>> right? And here she
>> or her sister here, it it it's not
off-putting. In fact, the bride is
off-putting because everything else is
weird and wacky,
>> right? Um, let's keep going real quick
to the Yeah, this is where uh the bride
rents a car, rents the um kitty wagon.
They I don't have no Look, the [ __ ]
wagon is the [ __ ] wagon from the movie.
I think it's they did a like that's a
good joke. They have like a Fortnite cat
and then the wagon on the back of her
pickup truck. I think that's very very
funny. Uh, I have no problem with things
like that, but it's like, why would this
moth man be renting the bride a car or
checking into a motel or wherever the
hell they are,
>> right?
>> And then finally, the thing that Will
was talking about, the moment where
again, in an intense battle where one
character is trying to kill another for
murdering her sister, uh, the banana
comes out with a shotgun and she, the
bride, yells, "Get in your house and
stay on the ground." And looks super
disappointed and sort of walks back
inside. There are
there are so many moments in this thing
where they just go so hard on Fortnite
to remind you that it's Fortnite
that it completely neuters any
effectiveness it could ever possibly
have or I or imagine the effectiveness
that was intended in the original cut
works uh you know for lack of better
word intent. I I am incredibly
disappointed in this. I
>> and
I just want to like do like a litmus
test here.
>> Are we upset about this because it's
like this is always a problem with
crossovers, right? Are we upset because
we feel like a crossover that like an
original IP that we love was treated
poorly or even if we didn't like Kill
Bill, would we still feel like this
missed the mark? Right? Is this is this
deeply rooted? Like is this only as bad
as it is because we like Kill Bill?
>> If we didn't like Kill Bill,
I would not have the emotional response
I think that I am having. However, I
think all of my points would remain the
same. Let let's try to think of
something that like um
uh I don't have an incred like I'm just
trying to think of like a franchise or
something that I don't have a a tie with
that I guess it doesn't really matter.
It's it's the fact you can see two
pieces of art and if you're you know
using using our media literacy brains,
we can see what each one is trying to do
and how they are trying to do it.
>> It's 2025. We're not allowed to have
media literacy.
>> Oh no. Well, uh shooty shooty bang bang
anyway. Um
looking at these two pieces of medium
and seeing how they are both not being
serviced. Again, the art, who knows if
this will also make money. There's also
an argument that most people who play
Fortnite probably weren't alive when
either of the Kill Bills were even
released, let alone know who the bride
is or any of these characters. So
probably So it might not matter like
right like maybe that's the thing. Maybe
that's the play
>> is because no one knows who these people
are. They have to put in these Fortnite
people that I bet you more people who
play Fortnite definitely know who that
peely banana is than who know who the
bride is. But they got to sell them. I
would turn into dust if I saw someone be
like, "Hey, who's that person next to
Peely?" I would just die, right? I would
just die.
>> But Will, to your point, the whole point
of this is not only to uh, you know,
make money in Fortnite because I believe
you can just watch this for free. It's
to sell the skins or to do the battle
pass to sell the skins. Um, and you have
to like uh Yuki and the bride in order
to sell these skins and tie them to the
world to make it feel like so like do I
think this will be monetarily valuable?
I bet you they'll break even on it. Like
I I'm you know, sure. Um, and that is
enough of a of a win on that side. I
just think
truly because of what Kill Bill is and
what Fortnite is, taking out all the
stuff I love or hate about any of them,
they intrinsically do not work well
together and actively hurt what the
other one is trying to do overall with
their property. Um,
chat right now, seriously, is there any
other It doesn't even have to be
Fortnite. You can talk about Magic. You
can talk about whatever. Is there any
other
pairup of two things that one of them
into a video game specifically or a game
I' I'd like to stick it with that you're
just like that you feel the exact same
way that it hurts both properties
artistic merit equally.
>> Yeah.
>> And I'd love to just sort of like as
we're as we're closing out this story
kind of go over that. And please leave a
comment if you're watching this on
YouTube or message us on Blue Sky if
you're watching this on Nebula and I'd
like to like actually have conversations
about this.
>> Yeah, you can you can Um, I'm having a
hard time finding something else that I
feel this exact same way about and I
would love to to
>> figure out like if this truly does stand
alone.
>> Uh, I just want to address something.
Yeah, there's lore in Fortnite.
>> Oh, yeah.
>> Fortnite has an internally consistent
lore doc. It is weird. So, okay. In the
same and I I used the Smash Bros.
comparison earlier for a reason, right?
In the same way that Smash Bros or
Heroes of the Storm, which is Blizzard's
crossover moa or like League of Legends
or any other like spectacle fighter or
like MOA or weird crossover thing, they
do have lore. It might not serve the
purpose that many of the people coming
there for one of the characters are used
to having lore serve, right? But it does
have lore and it is mostly consistent.
It's just thin
>> and for a very specific purpose, but it
does exist, right? It's just not
everyone's cup of tea, I would say.
>> Yeah. Uh I I want to comment. There's a
bunch of good stuff coming in, but
before we get into the the two IPs that
that kissed and never should, uh uh
Doggyear says, uh I never watched Kill
Bill, so I can't tell if it's being done
a disservice. And I think that's an
interesting point. Uh because many
people who play Fortnite have not seen
Kill Bill.
Fortnite might even make out on this
deal a little bit better. In fact, I
think it kind of does. But like I think
if you're looking at sort of maybe maybe
it doesn't do as much damage if you are
just not familiar, right? And maybe
that's what they're banking on too.
>> Uh let's see. Uh Arla oops. Uh says
Negan as a guest character in Tekken 7.
That's an interesting one because um
>> Negan is a guest character in Mortal
Kombat. Yes. Like that's an easy yes,
right? In Tekken, no.
>> I'm trying to think if it does if it
actively does a discern because they're
both is it's different violence, but
they're both violent charact. I mean,
actually, you could that's a close
that's close. I I think
I'm trying. Okay, let's look at that
because
Negan, I've watched The Walking Dead. If
you're not familiar, Negan is a
character who kills a beloved other
character in The Walking Dead. #spoilers
for Walking Dead. Um, the
the Tekken is a fighting game that is
intrinsically not terribly gory. The
violence, I would say, in Tekken and in
The Walking Dead are completely
different.
Um,
I think the only difference here is it's
not, how do I put this? Um,
Yoshi Mitsu isn't walking into the jail
in The Walking Dead. This is not like
this is a borrow. It's a crossover, but
like for instance, this is Tarantino
making a film in Fortnite and using all
the Fortnite trappings in a Kill Bill
story which was originally a film. It's
a very much a snake eating its own tail
where Negan, which I think has the same
amount of problems in a in a Tekken
environment, is just sort of a borrowed
thing that is not fully crossing over
across mediums.
>> Yeah.
>> But I liked that.
>> Somebody brought up a really good one.
Um, which was, let me see if I can find
who
>> I know you guys were going so fast I'm
like scrolling back through.
>> The Drews being in Space Jam 2.
>> The DS The Dukes is the gang from
Clockwork Orange.
>> Yep. Talk about talk about uh completely
neutering the point of an entire film.
>> Yeah. Also,
>> because you recognize them, that's why
they're watching a basketball game in a
Warner Brothers themed nightmare
scenario.
>> Right. Also, tell me you don't
understand media literacy without
referencing Clockwork Orange.
>> Yeah.
>> Like anyway, I think that's a big one. I
also do want to answer a question that I
thought was really good. Um, did the
second or third Matrix movie have half
the story told via a video game? No.
Enter the Matrix tells a side story
about Naobbi and Ghost that takes place
in between I believe two and three.
>> Yeah.
>> And it the the important thing much like
the Animatrix is that it stands alone
because it tells part of a story that
you don't need to know. You don't need
to know about any of those things to
still understand the point of uh Matrix
2 and three, right? which is it's a
trans allegory of the cave essentially.
Uh like that's that's the whole point of
the Matrix, right? Spoilers for I guess
the Matrix. And so you don't need to
understand those, but you can if you
want to understand more, which I think
is like a good way to do this, right?
You can if you want to understand more,
but it's not like Star Wars where you
walk in to the third star of the new
trilogy of Star Wars and you're like,
what? I missed all this. What do you
mean there was a thing that you're
referencing in the slow crawl that only
happened in Fortnite? I'm confused.
>> Yeah. Uh JV Wanderer brings up a good
point. This lost episode wouldn't happen
if Fortnite if if I believe is if
Fortnite hadn't stepped in is basically
it. It would it would have just been
still lost. Uh I think they made uh this
just for fun.
>> Yeah. I I don't disagree with that. I
also though I
Tarantino still has enough clout where
if there was something he was dying to
make, especially in an animated format,
he could have released a short uh fairly
wellunded on any of the multitude of
streaming services that would have it uh
to make this this the exact same way
without all the Fortnite divided like
the Fortnite about it. I
I don't think
I think this I had come back to my
original argument.
The the pairing of these two things
doesn't make either of the two things
better,
>> right?
>> I feel like there's always a winner in a
lot of and and again I by that I don't
even mean monetarily. The goal for
Fortnite at Epic is to make money and
and I guess sometimes if if Tarantino
needed wanted that maybe they were
paying a huge paycheck to do this, maybe
that's another goal for him, too. That's
totally fine. But the art that is made
uh I feel like is weaker and and it
feels like that might be more the case.
>> Um there's a multitude of ways this
could have come to light over the last
20 years and be made. This is not
something that um
listen
more abstract nonsensical bad stuff than
this. Uh they could have gotten it done.
I think
>> Yeah. I I I got I got another favorite
uh that I think Sean Sean brings up
really well.
>> Roblox doing Ready Player One.
>> Is it doing that? Are they doing that
>> for real?
>> I I I I I think so. Are they Is that a
real thing or a hypothetical thing,
chat? Because if it's a real thing, I'm
going to They did it in 2018.
[laughter]
Okay. So, in the before times. Got it.
No, but like that. Yeah, that's 100% it.
Cuz Ready Player 1 fundamentally is both
a fun romp through uh a bunch of
nostalgia in a very pulp fashion, right?
It's it is it is pure pulp
entertainment, right? Allah free guy.
Free guy. Yeah. Um or uh and
simultaneously manages to tell you that
while that nostalgia is cool, you should
live in the real world.
>> Yeah. Like that is the point of Ready
Player One that the movie totally misses
and a bunch of people who read the book
totally miss. But it does end on the
note of you should live in the real
world. So Roblox telling you you should
come into Roblox to do Ready Player One
stuff is like
>> no.
>> What? Okay.
>> Uh great contact uh comment from Danimal
DM. Would it have been quote better if
done in something like Call of Duty?
Yes, that is interesting.
I think overall
yes,
the world would feel more like they're
correct if it had shoehorned things in
it. I feel like it would not be it would
not be like the characters from Call of
Duty popping their heads out and renting
people motel rooms. Like
I think there is a real world where you
could have your cake and eat it too in
that particular pairup. Again,
I'm not saying and and a lot of this is
the interesting part. I think a lot of
the fortnightification of Call of Duty
is BS because I don't think Call of Duty
works as a unthemed world. But when you
throw Skeletor into it or when you throw
Nicki Minaj into it, it starts really
getting out of the military shooter
genre. And I know that there's like the
zombies version and stuff like that, but
there's still a general tone um in in
the majority of the the things outside
of skins.
>> Let's take another example, right, of a
property that is like hugely about
crossovers.
Dead by Daylight. Okay,
>> Dead by Daylight manages to pull off
crossovers that no one else could do,
>> right? A um a Freddy crossover from Five
Nights at Freddy does not feel weird
because it is a world that is
intrinsically
horrific and about incredible violence
being done on helpless people, right?
every killer has like a really gory
execution cutscene that they get to do
if they've won the game in a particular
way. Like this is part of the world,
right? And so it fits in that case. It
doesn't feel totally inconsistent at all
because the horror and the violence is
part and parcel of Dead by Daylight. But
if you put it in Fortnite, it doesn't
work because now this horrific thing has
been reduced to a cartoon, right?
>> Yeah. It's funny. Five Night at I'm not
familiar enough with Five Night at
Freddy's to to know like and I know that
they're like it's it's totally baked in
horror. I could see a world because the
horror of a Five Nights at Freddy's or
even like a Chucky or hell even a Freddy
in the later years is kind of farcical
like they're kind of cartoony monsters
and therefore it would work. Um but
again that's we're getting deep into the
the hypothetical soup here that I don't
know. Anyway, we've spent um a lot of
time uh sort of going over this and I'd
love to I'll kind of crawl through the
comments and stuff tomorrow or the next
day and see what I can comment back and
and and chat about it because this did
irk me a lot and I think obviously
obviously it comes from a place of
loving Kill Bill and I want to even say
like
>> overall respecting Fortnite.
>> I think we have respect for Fortnite
even though neither of us particularly
enjoy it or like it. I if I had infinite
time,
I would play Fortnite a bunch, but
there's too many other games and too
much stuff for me to do to actually do
it. But that doesn't mean that it's bad.
It It's definitely not.
>> Um I respect what they are trying to do.
I just think this is a a true miss that
has not bettered either properties
artistic merit uh for joining it up. But
let let you know again let us know. Come
come at me. Come at me friends.
[laughter]
>> Come at me friends. Um, and we'll see if
we can keep this discussion going. We do
have more stories. I'm so sorry that
took so long.
>> No, it's okay. I think it's worth I
think it's also worth us taking a little
time because we are bringing we can like
open this up into the world of like
sometimes crossovers aren't like you
there's a difference between not
enjoying a crossover and recognizing
that a crossover is bad, right? Like
those can be two different things. It
could be not for you. And you can also
say this is not well executed and here
are the analytical reasons why it's not
well executed without liking either part
of it. And you can recognize a
wellexecuted crossover even if you don't
like either part,
>> right? You could be like, you know, I
don't like Dead by Daylight. But I think
the Vecna crossover that they did for Dn
D is really well done. It's a really
well technically executed crossover. I
don't like Dead by Daylight and I'm not
playing a lot of D and D, but I do
recognize that crossover as like a good
one, right?
>> I think Dan
Dan has another singer. Our conversation
was going to take longer, but part of it
was cut. Check Fortnite for the missing
parts in the future. They'll all be
there. Um, where we get into all the
stuff that didn't didn't quite make it.
I hope Fortnite doesn't become home of
like here's the stuff that wasn't good
enough to be in the other stuff.
>> Please, no. All right, that does however
bring us exactly to our ad break. So
stick around. We're going to do fake ads
for things you can't buy while Twitch
tech gets real ads for things that they
can buy to keep our payrolls off over on
Twitch. So Matt,
>> would you like to uh to to begin also?
Uh yes,
>> I did. I did. Oh, Jay, he did. Yes, I
did. He did.
>> I did.
>> Jay's got Jay's had some ziggers in
chat, too.
Hey everyone, Matt from Extra Credits
here. As Jay just wonderfully pointed
out, would you like to put the creamer
into your coffee in the most metal and
dark way possible? Then may I suggest
the Dairy Estus Flask? Now, I know it
comes usually in red and blue, but have
you tried sort of a darker gray? You'd
think it would actually be something
more of like a cream or um or a or a is
taupe. No, that's not it. What's the
color? Eggshell, perhaps. No, no, no.
This is to make it so that when you're
running around the lands between or when
you're at the Firelink Shrine getting
all toasty before you go out and die
again, your lovely, lovely dairy
beverage does not keep getting warm. It
is fresh and cool and you can put it in
whatever health potions you would like.
My music is over. Back to you, Will.
[snorts]
>> Okay, I'm ready.
Ah,
>> here we go. Hey friends, do you think
there aren't enough crossovers in the
world? Well, have I got a product for
you. It's the Torment Nexus. That's
right. Brought to you by all of the
worst ideas that you think we've had
this year. We're going to introduce a
new thing called the Torment Nexus.
That's just poorly executed crossovers.
That's right. It's a Yu-Gi-Oh Magic set
and also a Magic Yu-Gi-Oh set. It's
Pokemon crossed over with Digimon. It's
Kill Bill, only we've given everyone
Super Soers filled with red paint. It's
the Powerpuff Girls doing real violence
in the style of WWE. That's right, the
Torment Nexus. It's only bad crossovers.
>> Those are some fire. I I The Super Soers
in Red Paint and the Powerpuff Girls
committing real violence is like such
they're two very visceral images.
I'm pretty good at this, but some
sometimes I have a good one.
>> Also, I want to give full credit to the
the Will came up with the uh the the
tagline of the thumbnail of Fortnite
unalived, Bill. Uh that is not SEO
nonsense. I would easily write killed on
a thumbnail, but it's just too good
because I think those three words
>> convey really highlight the actual
problem while also being very, very
funny.
>> Yep. Uh uh I also prefer the Torment
Nexus book over the movie. Um but you
know it's it is what it is in uh in in
2025.
Uh I watched them completely butcher
Ready Player 1 for a movie and I was sad
about it. Like Ready Player One, by the
way, isn't great. It's schllock. It is
pulp. It is not It's not It's It's a fun
romp. It is empty fun calories,
>> but it is schllock pointed directly at
your proclivities.
>> Correct. And it does end with a good
point, right? Which is aimed at the
target demographic of the book, which is
you do have to unplug and live in the
real world. Like that is what it is to
succeed is to meet the people who you've
developed these friendships with online
and walk into the real world for the
things that matter. And the book like
actually ends on that note and the movie
just kind of goes,
we missed that part. It's fine.
>> Yo, but did you see the Iron Giant was
there?
>> Anyway,
>> yeah.
>> Hey, let's let's talk about We've talked
about video games and then going into
movie tie-ins and stuff like that. But
Will, how would all of this run? Games,
movies that are games now, games that
are movies. If you're doing it on a
computer, what would you need in order
to make any of these things become a
reality?
>> You need RAM, Matt.
>> Oh, well, I should just go get some,
right? I mean, I have a decent amount.
No
>> about that.
>> Oh,
>> so there's currently a problem going on
in the world which is going to which has
pretty broadreaching effects, which is
that the price of RAM is skyrocketing.
Uh this is a a thing which not even
Black Friday and rampant commercial
consumerism for the holiday season can
fix. The price of RAM is going through
the roof. In some cases, it has as much
as tripled over the past month.
That is tripled. Double is a big word.
Triple is a stupid word, right? Um the
there there is a real problem with that.
So, uh we're doing this. Will, what
could be causing this rampant inflation
and costs of pieces of computers?
>> Hey, Matt, I'll give you uh three
guesses. Which two-letter acronym is at
fault? And the uh and and the first one
doesn't count.
>> Wow. Uh would that be AI?
>> It would. It would, Matt. You see, just
like the power consumption and the
graphics cards and the stock market have
all been completely screwed by this AI
bubble, RAM is also being screwed by
this AI bubble because they are building
so many data centers that the demand for
RAM is now being uh far outstrips the
supply which is causing the price to
skyrocket
and that's
[snorts] really bad. It's like it RAM is
one of those weird Okay, so as someone
who's built a bunch of computers, I have
literally lost track of how many
computers I've built or how many
computers I've maintained um in my
>> I've built six,
>> right? In my like IT career, like I
maintained a fleet of like [snorts]
hundreds of computers, right? RAM is one
of those things that has up until this
point been an affordable way to
generally speaking improve performance,
right? You need it for everything and
giving your computer enough of it is a
good way to remove an relatively easy
bottleneck. And now with the price of
GPUs already high and the price of RAM
rising,
computers are getting harder and harder
to build,
right? And it it just it feels like
another gate that's being enforced on
people participating in gaming
because AI won't die already. just just
stop.
>> Yeah, it's um I mean some people are
bringing up the Gabe Cube in this
because that's going to be a big place
where people are looking at prices very
specifically. Um but yeah, I I think
will do you imagine a world where the PC
built like
I have a tinfoil hat moment. Sorry, I
keep starting my thought and restarting
it.
>> Yeah.
Do you think it will become harder and
harder to build your own computer?
Obviously because of the prices of
things going up, but like almost like
it's not a mistake. It's kind of the
point that works with everything else
because
it's better for I don't know if I even
believe this. this I'm just sort of like
positing it like is it better for
manufacturers and of all different parts
of the machine to actually just like try
to sell you a computer as opposed to you
building it yourself
>> maybe I I think that that
that almost feels a little tinfoil hat
right
>> I know I I fully admit that it's tinfoil
I threw on the tin foil hat instantly
>> I don't think anyone actually profits
from that like from from make like the
the computer manufacturers in the long
run. I don't actually know that any of
the people that make pre-builts are big
enough players in the general market to
to do that because a lot of like the
people who are getting into gaming are
doing like custom builds. They're not
doing Adele, right? Like
>> but wouldn't you but wouldn't you want I
I know they are, but like for instance,
I this is not the same. Please know that
I'm not trying to equate these two
things. It's where this idea started.
And again, tinfoil hat, tinfoil hat,
housing,
not to get all extra politics on it, but
like you used to buy houses, right? And
you still can buy houses, but a lot of
companies are buying houses to rent you
those houses, right? There that's the
sort of the goal of it. Is it more
profitable in the long run, especially I
mean, I think I know it is, but like
because the PC market has grown so much,
is it are companies looking at it?
Especially we'll see how the GameCube
does with with Steam and like do you
think that they would rather control the
ecos like sell it at a slightly like
basically buy all the parts in bulk,
make their computers, sell you those
computers specifically for gaming?
Like would that shrink enough of the the
audience who wants to build their own
stuff if like if convenience
sort of took hold, right? And they could
make more money and control an ecosystem
>> maybe. But I don't think that that I I
think that could be a long-term idea. I
do not think that that is what is at
stake here in this particular price hike
because what I do think um what I do
think is happening here is that
okay so
[sighs]
imagine a data center right like imag
like in your in your mind's eye imagine
a data center right it's got all
>> it's full it's full of bread spinners by
the way spider
>> okay
>> spider
>> sure in this data center right there are
rows and rows and rows of rat racks. And
each of those racks has
>> racks on racks on racks.
>> Correct. And each of those racks has a
bunch of servers in it. And each of
those servers has more RAM in it than
you probably have in your house.
>> Yeah. Sure. And so the it feels like
while that could be the case the demand
for RAM that is made that is uh
happening by standing up all of these
data centers feels like the real driving
thing like yes there is some amount of
like wanting to build
>> oh
>> like wanting that right but like I think
that while I'm like temporarily
considering that I I think the big thing
is just this demand
>> I don't think let me rephrase I would
have maybe I I might not have made
myself terribly clear. I don't think the
rising cost of RAM is because companies
want to own the means of computer
production. That is not what I am
saying. What I am saying is exactly what
you are saying is because of the need of
these these AI racks upon racks upon
racks of RAM to make all of these data
centers run that is increasing the price
of RAM. I think it will, but I think
like because of that a knock-on effect
would be RAM becomes rarer and more
expensive, meaning only larger companies
can really buy it at at a actual rate
that makes it profitable for them,
meaning they're going to use it in their
machines that they then sell back to own
an ecosystem. Does that make like that
make sense? I don't believe this is an
evil ploy. I think this is a bad side
effect that people will take advantage
of.
>> And uh I think this is another really
good point that uh the overhe brought
up, right? that like the whole cloud
computing rent thing is a real thing and
I think that that is something. Are they
going to get there? No, absolutely not.
Because I watched a video
of a kid of a of a parent who's
reporting that they'd grounded their
kid, taken all of their kids electronics
away,
and then they came into their room and
found the kid on a computer that they'
built out of scraps that they had lying
around playing Doom. Like,
>> yes,
>> sure, but that's not the that's not the,
you know,
>> I I think I think
>> the average
I think much like
much like a lot of other um
building a PC isn't as hard as a lot of
people think it is or as difficult as it
is made to seem in much of media. Right?
I can run a class on building a PC,
right? That like
>> that is that I I don't think it's
actually that difficult. I I think I I
agree
>> like that those things like while it may
become rarer will never go away. And I
think the degree to which they will
become rarer is smaller than I think
we're worried about.
>> But do you know how do you know how like
you know it's been getting harder and
harder to get graphics cards? It's been
getting harder and harder to find this
and that and the other thing. Like I'm
not saying the market's going to go
away. I'm saying that larger companies
will capitalize on how difficult it
actually is getting to build a current
gen custom PC. And by difficult, I mean
expensive because things are rare or you
can't find stuff. Whereas I think I
think I don't know 10 15 years ago, you
you it was still expensive, but it
definitely wasn't rare. And I I think it
was a much like you could you could save
so much money building a PC yourself.
>> Correct. and that that the the discount
for that has certainly gone down. I do
also think however that one of the
places that we're seeing um
build your own PCs go is with uh using
older components using re reusing
components re because and here's the
other secret
>> and and as someone who is looking at um
>> what that's
96 gigs of RAM in front of me between my
two PCs and two 4090s that are running
this dream, right? Like you don't need
it, right? That's actually that's
actually the big secret I think that a
lot of these companies really want
people to forget. You don't need it.
Like a 20 series will get you pretty
far. A 30 series is fine. You don't need
it. You don't need 128 gigs of RAM. I
just have it because I run a bunch of
this stream using browser sources which
>> which eats just chomps. just drinks ram
like a milkshake. Um, you don't actually
need it. And so I think that is the
other thing is that they want you to
think that it's hard and they want you
to think that you need the best. And so
they'll be occupying the corner of the
market for the best, right?
>> But wasn't wasn't some of these articles
um the ones that we sort of went into. I
think it's from uh PC gamer. Hold on,
I'm going to cough. Excuse me.
>> Yeah.
>> Woo. Um, like it's not just the the I
think the the the the disturbing part
about this story was it's not just the
state-of-the-art stuff. It's the next
tier down and the next tier down and the
next tier down.
>> It's it's all levels of RAM. It's right.
We're not saying DDR5 RAM. We're not
saying DDR5 and DDR4. It's
>> the the DIMs, right? It's the actual
>> like chips themselves because those are
the bottleneck for manufacturing here,
right? And so that
>> and I I agree. I think making a piece,
you know, it's it's going to become a
little bit like
I don't know if I agree with this, but
like I I like it's going to become more
akin to like I think as more companies
build their own specific like machines
for gaming, right? It's going to become
a bit more like Raspberry Pies. Making
your own PC will become something like
that, but like a larger version. You
know what I mean? like I and I I have
such a blast with Raspberry Pi. I think
it is such a fun little hobby machine
that could run uh many things that I
own. Um but
I don't know. I I I just I get sad when
when the hardware prices go up for
stupid reasons. This seems like a stupid
reason and it feels like there's going
to be a lot of knock-on effect that also
makes more stupid reasons.
>> Yep. I agree. Uh and all of this to say,
by the way, uh this is also a bit of a
PSA. Don't buy it now, right? Or if like
you absolutely must have it, bargain
scrape during Cyber Monday stuff this
week and get it as cheaply as you can
because it will probably continue to go
up, right? But if you can wait,
wait, right? Because I don't think this
is going to last forever. Um, someone in
chat asked if any AI company had
actually turned a profit ever. No. No,
none of them have. And I don't think
that division,
>> right? I don't think any of them ever
will. Seriously, I I do think we're
we're approaching the cultural tipping
point on this sucks and it's going to go
away because no one can actually make
money on it, right? You're being
forcefed it because people need you to
believe that you need it and it's not
working. You You don't need it. You are
smarter than your chat GPT
co-pilot bard. You are smarter than
that. you don't need it. Don't use it.
>> Well, it's less than that. I I I I agree
with that. But it's also every tool that
you had to use before worked. It's
extensively like not every tool, but 95%
of them in specific things worked
better. Remember when you could just
Google something and find it and it
wasn't all written by AI slop that you
had to spend three times the amount of
time actually going through to get any
meaningful information?
>> Yep. And like sometimes I'll say this,
the AI uh overlay or the AI um overview
of like when you search for something,
sometimes it's correct, but if it's more
than like what year did Kill Bill come
out in, like if it's anything more
important than that, which by the way,
Google just used to be able to do
anyway, um then I would never trust it
and I'd have to do triple the research
to make sure what it's telling me is
true.
>> Yeah.
>> Anyway,
>> yeah,
>> this is stupid. I'm sad RAM is
expensive. Let's move on. Let's go to a
happier story.
>> Let's talk about Charlie Cox. So,
Charlie Cox uh voices Gustav in EP uh
Expedition 33. I almost said episode 33.
That's wrong. Expedition 33. And uh as
you may know, it is awards season. Uh
you know, we haven't talked about the
Game Awards. That's because we're going
to talk about the Game Awards either
next week or the week after after the
Game Awards, either right before the
Game Awards happen or after the Game
Awards happen. And we are gonna be
co-streaming the Game Awards here and I
think on YouTube. I think we're gonna do
that. I think that's I don't see a
reason we wouldn't. Um so, uh the it has
been much in in the news and Charlie Cox
is doing kind of an interesting thing
for awards season.
>> Being a nice dude.
>> Being a nice dude. So what he uh what
he's saying is that um
he doesn't believe that he deserves the
credit for bringing Gustav to life. He
believes that a French actor by the name
of Moxent uh Hazora who did all of the
motion capture for Gustav and also
several other characters in Expedition
33 should be getting the flowers for
bringing this character to life. that
all he did was voice it in English, that
there were other that there were so many
people behind the team that did it that
that he was working off an existing
motion capture and he
>> he went in I think he said for 5 days
and did his voice work which is not not
work of course not
>> right but he he he is also trying to
elevate the work of other actors who
have laid the groundwork for his
performance and I think this is kind of
interesting most of the voice cast has
done this Charlie's just been the most
outspoken and the most on message
consistently with it.
>> But weren't they like I uh like Jennifer
English and a couple other folks, they
did the mocap too, right? If I'm
remembering correctly.
>> I don't believe
>> Oh, I actually don't know. I know they
have in the past.
>> They have in the past. I believe that in
this case, all of the voice acting in
English was done after the mocap was
done already
>> in France by French actors.
>> Okay. They were all working off it. Even
Andy Circus, who voices um a character
in uh that you will meet later on if you
haven't played Expedition 33 yet.
>> I have not sadly. That's going to be my
that's going to be my holiday break.
>> He did not do his own mocap, which is
weird because Andy Circus is of course
worldrenowned for his mocap talent and
he didn't do his own mocap. Um so I I I
think that that is that's a cool thing.
And and some people are also using this
to point out we should have mocap
awards.
There are awards for voice actors. There
should also be mocap awards. Moap
awards, please. These actors do. It is
tough. If you've never watched someone
shoot for mocap, that stuff is hard.
Awards for mocap, please.
>> Going back into uh the Kill Bill thing
real quick. Uma Thurman at the end of
the interview is like they brought her
into a mocap studio and she was doing
it. She said she how difficult it was,
but also how sort of freeing it was and
how it was a different kind of the art
form and like yeah, it absolutely is. Um
I don't know. I think that is a very
good move. And if they if they did that,
they I think the Game Awards could kind
of open up um
it'd be like a side hustle way to
basically get more celebrity involved.
>> Yeah.
>> But we'll see how it goes.
>> Yeah. Uh okay. Next up, uh it is there
will be no spoilers for Stranger Things
in this story,
but
[laughter]
the one of the uh showrunners, Ross
Duffer, is telling people
>> The Duffel Bros.
>> Yeah. Is telling people that when you
watch Stranger Things, you should turn
off all of the smart settings on your
TV. which brings up kind of an
interesting point that sort of relates
to our AI discussion earlier. Um, and
kind of relates weirdly to our Kill Bill
discussion, which is many of you may be
unaware of this. Your television, your
new fancy television that you got for
whatever occasion or for Black Friday or
to watch the Super Bowl this year or
whatever.
>> It's so smart.
>> Is so smart it's stupid. It has a bunch
of features that you may not know are
running on it. And Rostto Stuffer thinks
you should turn all of that crap off.
So,
>> and you absolutely should.
>> Yeah. And and and you should, by the
way, that's like
>> I don't fully understand. Well,
actually, okay, let's talk about this.
So, televisions now, especially smart
TVs, are the price point that they are
because they watch and record and
basically send back to the home base
everything that you're doing. Uh, they
also can show you ads a bunch of places.
Like, that's the reason why television
prices have either steadied or gone
down. I don't know. I actually haven't
shoed for TVs this season. I don't I'm
sure inflation has affected it, but the
amount of data that they get off you
from a smart TV is valuable and that is
why the price point is the price point.
Um,
uh, that is why I still have a Commodore
64 monitor. But the, um, they also come,
I think, to try to sell them to people.
They try to come up with all these
different gimmicks of like basically
buzzwords of things that make it sound
like they're going to improve your image
that you're getting, which
>> no, like I just need you to play in have
a gamut of color spaces and play in the
resolution that I want it to be playing
at and that's what I want for my and the
refresh rate that I want it to be
playing at, especially for games. Yeah,
>> but they do these things like it's
funny. The reason why we're talking
about this is Ross Duffer literally went
on uh I think it might have been Tik Tok
or Twitter, I'm not quite sure, but
basically he went through his smart TV
and showed you where to turn off all the
things.
>> And to have a director do that is just
like
>> that shows how like crazy this problem
actually is.
>> Yep. Um,
>> so we have the list here because people
>> it's basically anything that has any of
these names on your TV and it will be
deep deep into the settings. Uh, dynamic
contrast basically what that does
essentially and it's so stupid because
your TV chances are if it's using this
does not have the contrast range to make
anything look better anyway. um it
basically adjusts based on the lightness
of the image, the amount of contrast or
the or or the lessening of contrast of
the image. So what you get is your black
levels constantly about 5 milliseconds
behind changing when a scene changes. It
is maddening. Uh super resolution, I
don't even know what that does other
than make things look more pixelated for
some reason. edge enhancer. You all
you've seen that in in various stuff it
looks like. But color filters, that's
just basically when they like truly
crank um the contrast and things like
that, especially if it's something
called vi like they have a vivid section
that just breaks the entire color space
of what the actual uh piece of media's
creators wanted you to do. Noise
reduction.
Dear god, there should there's no noise
in an image at this day and age that
needs to be reduced. If there's film
grain, it's because it was shot on film.
Like, but most 90% of the stuff you
watch on this TV is digital. And then
finally, the biggest the biggest the
bane of my existence is True Motion,
which is essentially frame blending,
which is essentially the dreaded soap
opera effect. If you ever go to your
family's house at Thanksgiving, like I
sometimes do, and you watch a movie on
their TV that they've never bothered to
calibrate in any way, shape, or form,
and all of a sudden everything looks
like you're watching an episode of
General Hospital from 1992, despite the
fact it is Stranger Things season 5. Um,
that is because the television is
interpreting the footage that it is
getting at the frame rate that the
creators intended and adding frames
between it on the fly to make the motion
of everything seem smoother, which is a
thing that nobody wants. And I don't
understand why it exists other than a
marketing ploy to basically try to make
to trick people into thinking that their
televisions are showing them a better
image than the stuff that they're
showing. Um, it's awful. It's awful.
It's awful. I hate it. Um, and if you
think that I put this in just to get
Matt to do that rant, you're correct. I
did. I put this in thinking of Matt.
It's a little gift. It's a little
holiday gift for for for the movie Among
[laughter] Us.
>> Thanks, Will. Also, every child in
Stranger Things is 25 and up now, and
it's really weird. That's the spoiler
I'll give. I like the new season so far,
but it's so strange to see these people
so old now, but still being in high
school. I think Steve's like 35, the
actor in real life. It's crazy.
>> Yep. Okay. Uh, time for me to get upset.
All right. Matt Matt's had his turn. I'm
gonna have my turn. Okay.
[snorts]
>> So,
>> it's the weight station.
>> Yeah, it's the way station
chat.
I am a TCG afficionado.
Okay. So, I will explain this from a
history and I've sold TCG stuff and I'm
I'm pretty up and up on this. So, I'm
gonna get good and upset about this here
for a second. So, bear with me. GameStop
has recently announced via tweet. By the
way, GameStop's not a great company
still. I just want everyone to be clear
that I I'm not endorsing or approving of
GameStop. I'm just using them so we
could talk about this. Okay, great. I
still hate GameStop, but they're
technically correct in this one thing.
They they issued a tweet that said, "If
you bring a scale into their store,
they'll ban you for life." And in this
one regard, yes, thank you, GameStop.
Thank you for doing that. Because
there's a problem right now in Targets
and Walmarts and other places where
cards, usually Pokemon cards, this does
apply to Yu-Gi-Oh and Magic cards, but
to a lesser extent than Pokemon cards,
um,
people are bringing digital scales
into stores and weighing the packs.
Now, you might be like, "Will, why in
the world would you do that?" I'm so
glad you asked. They're weighing the
packs because foil cards, cards which
have a foiling effect that are worth
more because they are rarer and have a
foiling effect, weigh ever so slightly
more than other cards
because there is an additional layer on
them. This is not a thing that most
scales can detect, by the way. You need
a very sensitive scale for this. Um it's
a fraction of a gram. Um and uh it's
it's absolutely wild. Um but there are
there are now reports and and video that
people are taking of scalpers in stores
taking packs off the shelves and
weighing them.
I need all of these people
who are doing this in front of the
children trying to buy Pokemon cards
to cease and desist and please go touch
grass.
>> Yeah.
>> Like I I can't believe I'm agreeing with
GameStop here, but
>> let's be very clear. GameStop is not
going to ban anyone from doing anything.
They can't afford to lose the foot
traffic, but they they do tend to they
do tend to make these proclamations
online and then do absolutely nothing.
>> Yeah. Yes. Um yes, they are bringing
laboratory level scales into stores.
That's correct. They're bringing big
Yes. Uh-huh. That's uh correct. They are
doing that. And that's unbelievably
unhinged. Just for the record.
>> Uh it's it's completely unhinged. Yes,
this has been a thing for years.
Generally, people had the decency to do
it in their own home. You would buy a B.
No, this is this is a thing that's been
a thing in and this is why
>> the other PSA,
>> sorry, the the the intonation on the
people had the decency to do it in their
own homes. [laughter]
>> Um, also GameStop, the one of the ways
that GameStop gets uh around this, by
the way, is they um put them behind the
uh counter. That's the other way is that
a lot of GameStop sealed product like
this is behind the counter.
>> Yeah. Also, no, they are not being paid
and have to deal with this.
>> No, no one is no one's being paid. Um,
but this has been a thing for years. The
the predecessor to this was reading
packs. You could uh because the
distribution of rares wasn't random. You
could open a series of specific packs
from a box and figure out where all of
the cards in the box were. That was a
thing. This is the reason that you
should never ever buy loose packs on the
internet ever
>> because they've weighed them and they're
>> any one.
>> Yep.
>> The smallest unit of cards if you
actually want to look for valuable
cards. And again, that is a huge if
because you should be buying singles
because it is always cheaper to buy the
singles to go pack surfing, right?
>> Will question real good here. What kind
of profit are we talking here? trying to
get a sense of why.
>> Uh, that's a great question. Um,
thousands of dollars. There are Let me
let me go uh let me go use a website
real quick.
>> You wouldn't download a scale.
>> You absolutely [snorts] would. Okay. The
current Pokemon set is Fantasmal Flame.
>> Checks out.
>> Um,
I don't know what the top is.
Uh, price high low.
Yeah. Okay. So, there is a uh there are
two cards. It's hundreds at this point.
In some cases, it's thousands. There are
two cards. The Mega Charizard XEX uh 125
of 94 and Megaard Mega Charizard XEX130
of 94, which are both over $400. One of
them is about 500, one of them is about
$450. Um, and these are found in regular
packs. So the the goal is to eliminate
the packs which have a rare which might
only be a dollar and exclusively go
after the rare foiled cards,
>> right?
>> And that increases their um that
increases their profit margin
significantly. Um
yeah. Uh
yeah. And and like if you want to buy
packs just because you enjoy cracking
packs, I enjoy cracking packs, but I'm
aware that what I'm paying for is the
dopamine, not and the and the sense of
discovery, not the actual value resale
value of the cards. If I want to get
cards for that are resale value, I buy
the card.
>> Yeah,
>> I'm an adult with adult money. I can buy
the card. Exactly. And not go pack
chasing.
>> That guy Jamie brings up an interesting
sort of devil's advocate point about
like since it's a gambling system,
they're just going to entice fans to do
this. I sorry that went away quick. If I
can pop it up again, I will. Um, but the
idea is like I think I agree like the
the issue is
this is a game for children that adults
have started to play and because there
is rarity involved, it has inevitably
turned into gambling. like so it's
really for two subsets of people and for
one set of sub for one subset of people
it's ruining it for the other subset of
people right and I don't know how a
company combats this in an active way um
>> yeah now
>> because the company's not saying the
prices of what these things are
>> uh I I will also say that
>> sorry uncclav's right adults have
started to play no they've aged into
continually to play but I do actually I
do know some adults who have started to
play people like that played Magic and
moved into Pokemon.
>> I will also say that Pokemon of all of
the companies does this the most correct
in that that that $500 card, there's a
$4 version of that card. So, if you want
to play the game, one of them is
hideously expensive and is only for
collectors because the regular version
is $4 and does exactly the same thing
from a gameplay perspective. It's not
like magic where there are hideously
rare things that haven't been reprinted
ever that are going for thousands of
dollars that you need a play set of in
order to play sub formats.
>> Yeah. So that is
>> sorry it's and deaf to be very clear
it's not that adults are playing it's
the problem anything far from it. It's
it's the uh
whenever rarity is introduced into an
activity that t that into a population
that has control over uh trying to
manipulate the system for the most
profit possible that tends to be adults.
Um, then that's where the issues come
in, right?
>> Well, one of the, by the way, one of the
ways the Pokemon Company is combating
this is there are now Pokemon card
vending machines that have limited that
have timelocked payouts. So, they they
won't sell all of their stock at once.
They will open at specific times to
prevent people from buying out all of
the stock. And there's no returns on
them because it's a vending machine. So,
you can't do that because you don't
actually get access to the packet until
you've paid for it, right? Which I think
is a better solution because I actually
do see kids buying stuff at those
vending machines instead of only adults
like I do at Target, Walmart, and all
the other places.
>> Anyway,
>> yeah,
>> if only there was a way for everyone to
have fun and not be scalped.
>> Yeah, correct. All right. Uh, we got a
couple more fast stories to get through.
One, Hightail is back.
>> Hi.
>> We talked about this forever ago. Matt,
do you remember Hightail? No.
>> Okay, great. Excellent.
A long, long time ago, there was a
Minecraft server called Hypixel. This
Minecraft server called Hypixel uh
became famous for a bunch of reasons,
not the least of which was uh the um uh
that a wildly successful YouTuber named
Technoblade did a series on Hypixel
about their Sky Block game. This there's
sort of a mutually beneficial
relationship there. It's one of the
reasons Technoblade grew to prominence.
It's one of the reasons that Hypixel
grew to prominence. Um they uh sort of
grew on each other until Hypixel, the
crew that ran the server, got to a point
where they were like, "Hey, we want to
make our own game that isn't Minecraft."
So they decided that they were going to
start using the profits from running the
Minecraft server to make Hightail.
Hightail got started a long time ago and
then eventually got bought by Riot, I
believe in 2018. The game was originally
supposed to come out in 2022 and they
didn't because a lot of games didn't
because pandemic and also it's hard to
make a video game and it's a lot harder
to make a video game that a bunch of
people running a Minecraft server
thought. So they decided that they
weren't going to make the game anymore
and Riot said that they were going to
discontinue the game and the people that
ran Hypixel were like no we're going to
finish Hightail. It's a thing. We're
going to do it. We're going to buy the
rights back from Riot. So, they did and
they've just announced that they are
getting ready to put Hightail into early
access after
7 years of waiting. Um, they have
acquired the rights back from Riot. It
is once again in the hands of the
Hypixel crew. We will see if this
actually amounts to anything, but it is
kind of interesting every time this
comes up. This has gone through this
very weird long and troubled history to
be a game that's trying to be Minecraft
without being Minecraft when we already
have Minecraft.
>> Yeah,
>> it's Yeah,
>> the element of this story that I really
enjoyed was Simon Collins uh Leaf Flame,
who is uh who founded Hypixel Studios in
2018. This is all coming from Kotaku,
basically said they're going to also
price it as aggressively low as
possible. They've said that they know
they've bitten off more than they can
chew, but they are incredibly committed
to actually making it go like go and
work. Like he's like, "It's going to be
janky. You're going to be buying a janky
game. I promise I'll keep working on it,
but there's no guarantee it will never
not be totally janky." Like they're
being sort of very transparent about it,
and I actually really appreciate. He
wrote, "The game is unfinished and runs
on a build from over four years ago.
Changing more didn't feel right. I don't
think the game is good yet. My team and
I will push hard to make the game good,
then great. The vision is clear and the
progress is fast. But that's some real
bold move saying the game is not good
yet.
>> Yeah. Well, like and I think that for
this kind of scrappy team making this
thing,
>> Yeah.
>> that kind of honesty and transparency is
what's needed, right?
>> There's another I want to keep This is
so good. It goes, real talk, Hightail
isn't some polished AAA release waiting
in the wings. It's messy. It's janky and
there's a lot of work to be done. My
plan, get it out to you as soon as
possible. No more waiting. You'll get to
play it rough edges and all. It won't be
perfect on day one. My hope is that
together we can shape it into something
truly special.
Look, it if it does what it says in the
tin, it does what it says in the tin.
I agree. I I have I have no I have no uh
no further comments than that. I just
want to bring this up because Hightail
is weird.
>> Matt, would you like to gloat over the
destruction of uh something that we have
all grown to loathe?
>> Yes. [snorts]
>> So, Embracer Group continues to
self-destruct.
>> Fine, I'll do it myself.
>> That's right. Um, they are not having a
great time. Uh, this is I mean I'm I'm
pretty happy to like I mean the damage
that Embracer has done to the industry
is um
immeasurable, right? Um
>> yeah,
>> and that really sucks.
That being said,
I would really like them to not
continue to do this damage, right? like
we're we're at a weird point where
there's sort of like a surgical
operation that needs to happen to the
industry to get Embracer Group out and
it will cause more damage to the
industry and to people's livelihoods to
do that. But god do we need to be done
with Embracer Group.
Um so they are selling
uh Cryptic Studios and Arc Games
>> for 30 million to Project Golden Arc.
This also comes to us from Kotaku.
>> Yeah. Um and and of course their their
their statement is this transaction
supports our key priorities by
strengthening our focus on strategic
assets and core IPs and embracer while
improving profitability and free cash
flow.
>> Sure.
>> No, no. Here's today's here's Will's
lesson in corporate speak.
Free cash flow means we're broke. Free
cash flow means we don't have any liquid
money. It's all tied up in assets. We
can't move.
>> Free cash flow is not a thing you want
to hear when you hear why a company is
selling something.
>> That means they don't have money.
>> That means they have assets and no money
and they need the money for something
generally to settle a debt with someone
who won't take an asset. Free cash flow
is not a thing a company wants to stay.
>> Yeah. Side note, Will, uh, could you
fill us in while I let Zoe in for the
uninitiated, what is Embracer Group?
Embracer Group is a big old holding
company that bought a bunch of the
gaming industry over the past five
years, pretty much as long as we've been
doing the show. They bought up a bunch
of stuff, consolidated it, shut down
studios, bought IPs, shuffled stuff
around. They're a big um
venture capital and holding company uh
that
essentially was trying to profit off of
shuffling IP and closing studios and
buying stuff in the gaming industry in a
real negative way. I I cannot think of a
single thing that Embracer Group has
done that has been a net positive for
the gaming industry. They have only
caused harm to the industry in an
attempt to line their own pockets. Yeah,
>> I think that's fair. Chad, am I am I
missing anything? Did I
>> Yeah. Okay.
>> Don't eat the microphone.
>> Eat the microphone. All right. Uh,
speaking of unsatisfying collabs.
>> Oh, no.
>> Yeah. So, remember we were talking about
how Kill Bill collab was like not great.
Um, well, Wizards was going to do a
collab for Monster Hunter and they
screwed it up pretty bad. I'm gonna be
really honest. As someone who loves both
Monster Hunter and Magic the Gathering,
this crossover sucked. It was not good.
Um they
>> How many cards? It was a secret layer,
right?
>> Yeah. So, it was a series of secret
layers. The value presented in the
secret layers sucked. The um there
wasn't a lot of harmony, right? It was
like reskins of existing cards, but they
were like, "Hey, this is a Monster
Hunter weapon. It's the same as this
other card. And that card's a dollar,
but you should pay us $10 for this shiny
card because it's a Monster Hunter card.
That doesn't work well. Um, and uh,
they had like spelling errors. They
literally had spelling errors on the
previewed cards. So, they're pulping the
entire thing. What we can't determine,
and I don't know, is if these cards had
gone to print yet. It is entirely
possible given that they were supposed
to go on sale I believe either today or
last Monday. I think it was today. Um
that uh they had already printed these.
>> So Wizard I my understanding is that it
is very likely
>> that they pulped the entire run
>> which is this is the first time this has
happened. Um and it's one of the biggest
pieces of push back that Wizards has
gotten to a crossover thing ever. Um,
mostly because it came from Monster
Hunter fans. It didn't come from we
don't want a magic set. It's dude, this
crossover isn't it. Like I would buy a
crossover if you had any of the cool
dragons or the cool weapons or the cool
characters from Monster Hunter, but this
sucks. Like do better.
>> Um
>> uh so yeah, it's uh it the whole thing
is going away and they're trying again
in 2026, which I think is the right
move. Um I I I think it is the right
move. Um there there are I see people
talking about getting a hold of this
before it gets pulled. None of them made
it to the public. Um this this is a
secret layer which means it is a um
direct sale from wizards that get mailed
to you.
>> You know that some of it's going to fall
off the truck.
>> Come back in 20 years,
>> right? Yeah. So it's going to fall off
the truck and be a super rare
collector's item and all that jazz.
Absolutely.
>> Um yes. And the other the other
assumption I think no it's correct here
is that Wizards didn't just get push
back from fans but Capcom also saw it
and was like no the the thing that makes
that a little less verifiable to me is
that Capcom would have needed to approve
this before it went to print.
>> There's no way that Capcom at every
level didn't see the proofs before it
went to print. So, if Capcom is the one
who pushed back, what happened was
Capcom saw the way that Capcom fans
responded and said, "Our fans are
unhappy. We don't think this is a good
idea anymore." And that's when they
exercise the pull the plug option. Um,
which if they have that option, that's
also wild because if a publisher has the
option to or if a if a IP holder has the
option to pull a collaboration until it
goes up for sale, that's an incredible
amount of control. That is
>> I think it's because it's it's not just
Monster Hunter, right? Like Capcom has a
ton of IPs they probably want to do
something with. So they need to make
maintain like a good working
relationship and make sure that they're
happy.
>> Yep. Yep. [clears throat] Absolutely. Um
so that's cool.
>> Any word if the there's if there's a
kill fee? Who knows?
>> No, I no idea. We we don't we don't know
anything other than they're scrapping
the entire thing. It'll be out in 2026.
>> Uh okay. We wanted a quick followup
on this. So, when we talked about the
Steam console, Steam machine,
>> um lots of people were talking uh about
the price and that that would be a major
deciding factor in whether or not they
were going to purchase the Steam
Machine. Uh because in theory, it looks
really cool. Everyone likes all the
things that it does. The real deal
breaker is probably going to be the
price. And according to an interview
that Valve did with I'm going to make
sure I get this right. Which channel did
it skill up?
>> Mhm.
>> The general idea that you should be
having in mind when it comes to the
Steam machine is it will be priced like
a PC,
which we kind of knew because Valve is
not really selling it like a console.
They're selling it like a PC that's
designed to attach to a TV.
>> Yep.
>> And there's a lot of cool features that
are designed
>> TV PC. Yeah, it's a TV PC and it's a PC
that's designed to work with your TV,
right?
So, most people are guesstimating based
on the specs that have been listed that
it will be in the neighborhood of $750.
That is the current best guess. No one
has confirmed that. Nobody has any
evidence other than the specs. then that
is roughly what it would cost to sell
such a PC at cost assuming that they
don't get a massive bulk discount which
they might. We don't know. So the
current running estimate is that the
Steam Machine will be about $750. Again,
cannot stress this enough. That's a
guess. I don't want to hear anyone be
like, "Well, Will from Extra Breakfast
said it's definitely going to be $750,
so if it's not, he's wrong." No, I'm
reporting on what the guesswork is and
preparing you for the idea that it will
be more expensive than most other
consoles.
>> It will be. There's no way it's not. I
mean, um I think this is going to be a
real interesting um experiment in
consumer expectation.
>> Yeah.
>> And it also is based on how it's
marketed, right? Like let's pretend for
a moment that
is there someone who is into gaming not
just on mobile that doesn't know what
Steam is.
I mean maybe right like um I I
specifically mean people that purchase
their own games
right feels like that's kind of a
juggernaut even if you're not a PC
gamer. You understand you have friends
who play on PC so they understand what
Steam is. you've at this point you've
seen a Steam Deck in the wild, you know?
Um,
>> and
>> Yeah.
>> Oh, I was going to say, so like
is there is there a like
with the price of everything going up,
will a expensive new air quotes console
I should have did air quotes new as
well. Um, like really break containment
of Oh my gosh. Like I'm I'm curious what
the overlap of price understanding is
from people who buy consoles to people
who buy PCs to play games. You are you
are intrinsically moving from one group
into another and the video game market
is
um for for better or worse uh incredibly
toxic towards price changes because most
of the time the price changes hit it's a
lot of BS.
>> Yeah. Uh,
how is this going to come across? Like
it it'll it would have been so
interesting if the Steam Machine was out
for Christmas this year.
>> Yeah,
>> right. Like
what what would the story be?
>> I agree.
>> Steam releases overly expensive console
or Steam brings PC gaming to your living
room. Like what would be the majority
story that would win out? Because it's
not like, again, we talked about this
when we talked about it before. It's not
like like the Steam machine has like the
killer app. The killer app is all of the
apps,
>> right?
>> Like you have the ability to now play a
ton of games not locked in in a normal
console ecosystem.
>> So like one of the So like, okay, so
there's they can't do a loss lead thing.
And a bunch of people in chat are
talking about part of why, right, which
is that it's a PC. So a company could
just outfit their entire company with
these machines for less than market
value and then never buy games. So they
just lose out all all of that. So
they're not loss leading with it. The
other reason they're not losing with it
is
you already own the games if you're in
the target demo.
>> Like I'm willing to bet that they're not
trying to get new Steam users this way.
They're trying to sell this to people
who already own Steam games and who were
already going to buy games on Steam,
right? The Target demo already has all
the games.
>> It's actually It's actually for both.
It's actually both, right? I think they
want that,
>> but they also want to The only the only
reason to do this is to expand their um
their customer base.
>> Yeah.
Like if if this isn't going to sell more
Steam games, there's no point for them
monetarily.
>> Yeah.
>> So, they must believe that there is an
untapped area of the market, namely
consoles, probably people that uh you
know are the honestly at this point cuz
Xbox seems just being like deuces uh
PlayStation people, Sony ponies like
myself, uh trying to sort of get in on
that pie. Yeah. Also, uh I the chat is
on fire today. I love this one. They
don't need a Costco chicken for the
people already in Costco. Correct.
>> Yeah,
>> exactly. And also, uh Chinese says, "I
had to explain to my friend a week ago
what Steam was. She had only bought
stuff on Epic before."
>> Yeah. I mean, that's that's
>> I 100% believe that, but like as someone
who been on Steam for like 20 years,
that's like
>> Yeah. What if your gaming history is
literally Fortnite? What if Fortnite is
the thing that got you into video gaming
in the first place? Obviously, the Epic
Store and the Epic ecosystem are going
to be the place that you go for all of
your gaming and Kill Bill expansions.
So, so [laughter]
why like it makes total sense that that
would that would be the place that they
would think of as the number one place
for games if they're not buying a lot of
games.
>> Yeah.
>> Anyway, we'll see how it goes. We'll
keep we'll keep this uh Steam Machine
price watch going. Zoe will keep an eye
on it.
>> Yep. Um, yes.
>> All right. And last last thing, a little
a little piece of dessert because Matt
and I are both I like what Vampire
Survivors has done for the industry and
Matt really likes Vampire Survivors.
>> So,
>> I would stream it if it didn't look like
Rainbow Nightmare.
>> It completely kills Encoding. Encoding
hates Vampire Survivors so much. Okay,
so there's a new Vampire Survivors
family game coming out and I hope it is
every bit the Vampire Survivors
cardbased rogue life that we waited for
in that no one has waited for that. I
just like that this crew continues to
take absolutely unhinged swings based on
the fact that they've made like I love
when indie studios do this. Hey, we made
smash hit game and made a quadrillion
dollars. What do we do now? I don't
know. Let's take another completely
unhinged swing at the industry. Great.
Good job. No notes. Keep it up. Even if
this flops, I will be so happy.
>> I I um
I love that they are doing this. I think
it will be hopefully very fun and silly.
I love the trailer. If you watch the
trailer, they make a joke at the end
about not using the words cards or
battler so no one will know it's a card
battler game. like it it's just it feels
very like
it feels the right amount of tongue and
cheek.
>> Yeah.
Um
>> I am here for it.
>> Yeah. Uh by the briefest side thoughts
on Mega Bunk. I played it here on the
Rogue Review. Uh we do a roguish um
review stream most Tuesdays. I played
it. I thought it was fine. Uh it's not
really for me, but I think it does a
good job of being an iteration on this
kind of bullet heaven thing
specifically.
>> Right.
>> So, uh and that, dear friends, I believe
will bring us to the end of our stories.
Uh if if you've got thoughts, feelings,
things we didn't address, feedback,
whatever. If you want to continue a
conversation, you get up us hit us up on
Blue Sky or you can uh hop into the
comments down below. uh later this week
if you're interested. Coming up right
now after this on Twitch
>> right now.
>> Right now I'm gonna be taking my first
look at Soulframe. Um I have way too
many hours in Warframe. I actually
burned myself out on Warframe and
haven't touched it in years. So I will
be taking a look at Soulframe uh from
Digital Extreme, seeing what it's like.
I am very interested to see this
incredibly rough version of it uh that's
coming out now for founders. So we're
going to take a look at that. Um later
this week we've got more Minecraft on
the community server. We got talk shows
uh on Thursday. Uh Matt and I are going
to be checking out the Night Rain DLC
also on Thursday. Elder Ring on Friday.
We've got a full schedule here on Twitch
and we'll be back on YouTube on Thursday
for Design Club. So please join us for
those. Um, also an important note, mark
your calendars that next week on
December, I believe it's the 11th,
Thursday, December the 11th in the
evening, Matt and I will be co-streaming
the Game Awards. Get your Martinelli's
and your favorite t-shirt with a tuxedo
printed on it because that's
>> or a baguette perhaps with some berets.
>> Yeah. Right. Uh because that's the only
way to tackle watching an award show
that's not really an award show is to
drink a thing that's not really
champagne while wearing a thing that's
not really a suit. Um [laughter] so join
us for that. It promises to be an
excellent time as always.
>> Yeah. Well, I guess that only leaves us
with um the end of the show, which uh if
you're a first-time viewer here, first
of all, hi, hello. Thank you for making
it to the end. Second of all, uh we
basically do the same ending every time.
Um
because we want to make sure that the
community really uh comes together. We
go off on the right foot, all on the
same page after spending about about two
hours with one another uh here and
making sure that this good vibes Monday
keeps going all the way to the end of
the week with all the gaming goodness
that you would like. So with that in
mind, please join me in the same ending
that we all do every time
and just asking the age-old question.
Your name is Buck, right?
[music]