You know, it has been a pretty good
season for games, so we figured we would
do a Games You Might Not Have Tried
episode before all the holiday sales
hit. It's been a while since we've done
one of these, so as always, the same
rules apply. We don't promise all of
these games are good, just that they all
are interesting. There is something you
haven't seen or some idea that isn't
often explored in every one of these,
even if that ingenuity makes some of
them a bit of a mess. So, with that
disclaimer out of the way, onto the
games. First up,
Undertale. We have to start with
Undertale because it takes some of the
oldest conventions in gaming and
rethinks them to deliver a beautiful,
touching story while at the same time
wrenching some of those old JRPG
mechanics into the 21st century. This is
an RPG along the lines of Earthbound or
the old Dragon Warrior games. But
instead of just having menudriven
combat, when enemies attack the player,
the game turns into a micro schmup where
the player has a chance to dodge
whatever's coming at them. And although
eventually some of these battles can get
a little tedious, the schmup angle makes
them so much more interactive and
engaging than the menudriven games it
draws inspiration
from. One of the most novel elements of
this game is that you can talk the
enemies into not fighting you. And not
through some bloated dialogue tree, but
through an elegant system where you
simply have to choose what approach to
take with them. And as you discover a
tiny bit about them, you can decide if
they need to be complimented or if they
just need some space and some time
alone. And this made it one of the first
RPGs where winning a battle actually
made me feel good about the world.
Watching the enemies do a little happy
dance because you treated them well or
because they simply ceased to carry all
that anger that made them a bully is one
of the most rewarding experiences that
I've had on a victory
screen. The big reason to play this is
for the story. And the last thing I want
to do is spoil that because you really,
really should experience this game
fresh. Trust me. Go into this one as
blind as you can. You'll be glad you
[Music]
did. Warhammer End Times
Vermentide. This game's on the list
because it carries a powerful message.
This game proves once and for all that
yes, you can use both a colon and an M
dash in your game title and get away
with it. It's a brave new world, folks.
Seriously though, the game is actually
kind of awesome. One of my designer
friends put it best. This game is bad in
all of the ways that don't actually make
it not good. No, its graphics aren't top
of the line. Yes, it sometimes crashes
when you're 35 minutes into a mission
that has no save points. No, it doesn't
have host migration. But man, it's still
a blast.
Imagine Left for Dead, but set in the
Warhammer universe with gear, loot
drops, and a crafting system. If that
sentence doesn't sell you, nothing
probably will. And if you have a few
friends to play this with, it's
ridiculous. Over the top, exactly what I
would want out of such a
game. Just know going in that it's hard.
Like really hard. The default difficulty
is probably higher than you're going to
be able to handle when you first drop
in. Luckily, there are two difficulties
below that one to get your feet wet and
to gear up on, and the maximum
difficulty is just nuts. So, if you get
into this, this game will easily last
even the most hardcore player the whole
holiday season.
The Beginner's Guide.
Hi there. Thank you very much for
playing the beginner's guide. We're
going to look at the games made by a
friend of mine named Kota.
what was going through his head as he
was building this. I want us to see past
the games themselves. I want to get to
know who this human being really is. And
that's exactly what we're going to do
here. Okay, full disclosure here. Davey
is a good friend of ours and a brother
in arms. Regardless, this game is worth
looking into if you've ever struggled to
create. Is it perfect? No. But it does
deal with issues that games usually
don't tackle. It addresses personal
imperfection, self-doubt, and the need
for validation in a way that I don't
think I've ever seen a game attempt.
It's one of those games that stuck with
me long after I played it. One where I
just had to sit and think for a while
after reaching the end. If you're okay
with a heavy game that's light on
gameplay, this one is easily worth a few
hours of your life.
Read only
memories. I like this game because it's
a good adventure game, but I really like
it because it's a game that is overtly
about bringing more diverse characters
into gaming. And yet, it manages to be
about that in such a way that rather
than beating you over the head with it,
it simply shows how interesting and rich
a cast you can make when your pallet
isn't limited to the standard racial and
sexual tropes we find in games. Oh, and
because it's cyberpunk. Did I mention
cyberpunk? James really, really likes
cyberpunk. But yeah, this is an old
school adventure along the lines of
Shadowgate. One that ditches most of the
pixel hunting or item fiddling time for
more in-depth conversations.
One that presents a rich nearworld
future and brings up questions of
obedience to authority, use of
technology, and personal freedom. And
one that has a cast that you will fall
in love with. So, if you're okay with
point-and-click, definitely check this
out.
Black Watchmen.
[Music]
This is one of the last games we covered
on James Recommends, so I won't spend
too long on it, but this is probably the
best digital rapper for an ARG that I've
ever seen. Many people have tried to tie
a computer game and an ARG together over
the years, but usually it's resulted in
both pieces being less than either would
be by itself. Black Watchmen, on the
other hand, focuses on the ARG element
and lets the computer game side simply
serve as a platform to allow you to
solve many of the puzzles on your own,
even if the community has long since
solved them, just so you don't miss out
on the
[Music]
experience. It also provides an easy way
for the community to communicate and a
channel for people to work together. If
you're looking for some good, if
occasionally frustrating, puzzle solving
over the winter. Especially if you like
a bit of horror and some X-Files type
conspira thrown in, try Black
[Music]
Watchmen. And finally, Mini Metro.
[Music]
Mini Metro is the most elegant new
puzzle game I have found. The concept is
simple. You're building a subway by
drawing out the map. The goal is to keep
traffic flowing, to keep the passengers
getting to their stops on
time. But the beautiful simplicity of
the design and the elegance of the UI
make this the sort of experience you can
lose hours to. Cities will grow and
expand in different ways each time,
forcing you to adapt and to find new
strategies as you
[Music]
go. If you want to explore and examine a
game that really does an incredible
amount using very little, or if you're
just looking for a strategic puzzle that
can keep you busy for 20 minutes and
possibly 12 hours, check out Mini Metro.
[Music]
I hope some of those help keep you busy
throughout the long winter months.
Thanks for watching and we'll see you
guys next week.
[Music]