They're here. Janet, this just in.
You're Frasier. Don't question it. Don't
think about it. Don't Don't think about
it. But don't But don't think about it.
Listen, we're not thinking. So, you
shouldn't either. Right. We're not
changing the name of you. We're just
saying if if there were places cuz
Twitch was like, "Cheers, Will was
saying where everyone knows your
username," as he said, and we're always
glad you game. Will asked the question,
"What would YouTube be?" And I said,
"Fraser." And then I sang about toss and
scrambled egg. You know the drill. Uh,
yes. Uh it should be clarified that no
um it was not the distinctive smell of
tech gremlins. It was uh me and Matt got
distracted by something shiny. And by
something shiny I mean we were having a
long in-depth conversation and then
forgot to look at clocks. That's my
fault cuz I started the conversation. My
bad. It's okay. It's my bad.
You're good. How's everybody doing this
morning? Uh I'm doing okay. I'm doing
all right. It's a it's a rainy kind of
gross morning here. Um, but I'm I'm
here. I have I have my caffeine. I have
all of you lovely people.
Um, that's
good. Uh, excellent. Also, I did want to
bring up um I don't know, you know, I
suppose I
suppose that it is also a thing on
YouTube. I suppose this is somewhat
platform agnostic. YouTube perhaps you
are aware of clipping.
which is a process by which you can help
us figure out what parts of the show you
like the most by clipping them by making
like little little short forms out of
them. Uh ju just to show like which
moments you think are nifty or neat. Uh
I I know that that is a thing on
YouTube. I don't exactly know how I see
which clips people have made of our code
yet. Also, I don't know how much I could
go. Wow, that's a lot. Yeah, it was a
lot. I'm sorry. Um, but over on the
Twitch side, they've introduced a new
clip leaderboard, uh, which now gives
people spots and a ranking based on the
total number of views their clips have
gotten. Uh, which is kind of cool
actually. It's It's kind of nifty. Um,
so you know, although I suppose it is
per clip cuz Araboros is on there twice.
Once with 21 views and once with 19
views, which I believe are two different
clips. Yeah. Ranked competitive
clipping. Yes, exactly. Oh, yeah. That's
important. Yeah. Yeah. You want to make
sure your your rank and clips is that
like is high or else you won't get into
a good clip college. That's right. And
then you'll never get a good clip career
and then you'll end up
working with a certain anthropomorphized
piece of office supplies and nobody
wants that.
No,
you'll end up just a bill on Capitol
Hill. Apparently, I am making Nova
regret listening through headphones in
the laundromat.
Why is that? I don't know. It's probably
the the sound that I made that could
summon dogs.
That's fun. Aqua, I did not catch
thunderbolts. Uh the podcast will be
happening um about that this week. I'm
actually seeing it tonight. Um uh we're
recording the podcast tomorrow with
Nando from Nandov Movies. So, it'll be
very fun.
Cool. Cool. Uh, your only job prospect
will be down in the clip mines working
for the children yearn for the clip
mines. That's right. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
Yeah. Yeah. Uh, what's the channel point
redemption store?
Well, well, they did just make that
spaceport town in Texas. Oh, no. I hear
things are bigger there, like fraud. Um,
but that's neither here nor there. Let's
Let's um The existential dread is
kicking in early, chat. If your
existential dread kicks in early,
consider timing it better. Upbeat no
politics show. We're going to have such
such a no politics show, Will. I I
Except for the No, Will. No, trust me.
Trust me. I don't have any fingers
crossed underneath the camera frame.
Four. Yeah. Four distinct stories that
are definitely political. Let me look.
Let me look over here. Let me look at
the at the old-fashioned uh uh show
notes. Here we go. Oh, that's really
fun. That's fun. Those are all fun. Hold
on. Wait, hold on. Wait. I have a new
superpower. It is the dog summoning
sound. Yes, cuz it actually summoned a
dog. Amazing. I summoned a dog at the
laundromat. I don't know why that would
make you stop listening, cuz now you
have a dog to pet. Now you have a dog.
What's the dog's name? If the dog
doesn't have a name, may I suggest
biscuits? If the dog doesn't have a name
and it approached you at a laundromat, I
believe it's legally your dog now. Yeah,
sock biscuits. It's like the dog ducks
at the park. Those are also yours if
they approach. A coffee clone knows.
That's right. I don't It's right here.
Yeah, there's a there's a train going.
There's a There's a something train. 20
20 seconds. She'll be fine. We'll get
rid of it soon. We'll start the show.
Hold on. I like this one. Move 16 views
and what do you get? Gifted sub and more
that.
Wow. I love it. No, no, we need we need
the rest of it in the Discord. Go make
it do the thing.
The dog left, Will. Apparently the dog
left as did this hype train. Get out of
here, hype train. All right. Excellent.
Good. Now we can Now we can begin the
process of beginning the show. Thank all
the people, Will.
Oh, I suppose that is technically my
job.
Please.
Uh, okay.
Also, that guy Jimmy, happy birthday.
Thank you for being here on that day.
That's lovely. Hips hips birth to you.
Uh, we got to thank Barbberation for 72
months. Tier 2 Musl for 37 months. Alex
for 55 months with Prime F America for
61 months. Caring for bitties out caring
for 19 months. Mary for 48 months. Oh
no. Mary for four years. That's weird.
Dance and Fred for also for four month
for four years. That's weird. And that's
the end of the hype turn. Thank you so
much. Oh, and we also got a gift
membership over on the YouTube side of
things from Bavaro. Thank you so much
for that. Thank you. Thank you. Clearly
Will needs to make the sound again. Not
you get one. You you get you get one per
stream. Uh otherwise it stops being
special. If I did the trick all of the
time, like it wouldn't I'm like that
weird uncle, right? I've resigned
myself, by the way, at family
gatherings. I will always be the weird
uncle because I have no desire to have
kids, but my brother's really big into
the idea of having kids. So, but aren't
you Aren't you the internet's one of the
internet's two for first and foremost
weird dads? Sure, but that's sort of
like a more surrogacy and not applicable
to family gatherings, right? Where
expected to do like weird uncle tricks,
right? Where you're like, "Oh, my
thumb." Right? Like that. Just because
we're your two internet dads doesn't
mean we are legally bound in any way to
Brad Janet or Rocky. Um that's right.
Yeah, I think. That's right. We'll have
to check with our lawyers.
Correct. All right, enough talk.
Uh hold on. I also want to recognize
that apparently we just made Leopara's
uh partner laugh up a kidney with the
bigger room in Texas joke. So good good
job. If you need I mean good I mean
actually I feel kind of bad now. No no
no it's good. If you need a kidney
removed to settle debts at the company
store come to Extra Credits where we'll
make you laugh it up painlessly.
They didn't say painlessly. I'm going to
assume painlessly because otherwise I
won't be able to sleep tonight. So
painlessly, Matt. Okay, that's
fair. Let's get this show moving. Weird
one. This is just This is gonna be a
weird one. Yeah. Uh Okay, cool. Great.
So, we're going to go to black, then
we're going to come back. Then, we're
going to be recording for Nebula and do
Yes. Uh we might have to run it twice
cuz we didn't run it the first time.
We're so good. I ran it before you got
here. Get wrecked. Oh, I'm the only one
that's bad at this. Look at that. This
is great. I I remain bad at this. I'm
professionally bad at this. But you know
what, Matt? Just for you. Just for you.
What?
[Applause]
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
Good morning, Matt. Oh, good morning,
Will. Good morning to all of you.
Welcome to Games for Breakfast, the only
internet talk show we talk about this
week's gaming and tech news. But that
also and for once will, for once in my
silly animated life, I can actually say
we are going to be the only live talk
show to be talking about a specific
thing. And that thing is a a thing that
happened to me this week. Will, I'm
going to send you a picture, okay? And
then you can react accordingly without
saying what it is. and then we'll let
Brad and Janet see and react. Okay.
Okay. Here we go. I have sent Will the
picture. I have kept it secret from him.
I I when you told me that there was Of
course. Of course. All right. Great.
Great. Great. Uh oh. I have to do I have
to do that. This breaking news. We won't
even show you the breaking news. I love
I love the Accutra Ma. That's the point.
the the the Accutra M really like it
also has a little bit of a breakfast
flare to it if you really think about
it. I don't know that that's something
that I normally think of as having a
breakfast flare. Part of a balanced
breakfast.
Uh, you know, I suppose that's true. All
right, chat. Are you ready to have your
mind blown with an announcement?
It's a little bit It's It's a So, I did
a thing this weekend. Um, I don't know
if you can see, but beyond the the the
delicious uh finger food on on top of
Jaime's hand, I actually did proposed to
Jamie this weekend uh on an island 9
miles off the coast. It was a desert
island. It was very beautiful. Are you
tech Wait, were you in international
waters for a specific reason? Don't
worry about it. Don't worry about it. Uh
and she said yes. So, that is my big uh
announcement for today.
Um, this was
uh and there was no screaming or
violence or anything. It was all very
lovely. Uh, so we had an awesome time
and I wanted to share that. I think this
is actually the first public space where
we've talked about it. We haven't done
Instagram yet. We haven't done any of
the other socials. I wanted Brad and
Janet to know uh on my side of the
family first. So, well, I feel like
that's because Brad and Janet are
legally not your children that they act
like they are all the time, right?
There's a reason. See, all the show's
connected. The show's connected, right?
Yeah. No, it's uh it's like how all the
neighborhood kids just show up in your
yard to play ball. It's great. Yeah.
Thank you everybody for the very nice
wishes. Also, Miss Ingitch. Yes. Yes.
That Listen, don't think I didn't I
didn't instantly think that, right?
You're just marrying her to become the
goblin king. I already have the Jarth
cosplay. She already has the title.
Uh I don't know. I think it's I think
it's pretty solid. So yeah, that's fair.
Um thank you everybody.
Hold on. I want to call back to the
pre-show just real quick. Just real
quick. Partner's fine. She's feeling
down anyway. So now you have a kidney to
sell for rent money. See, I told you
removal. It all connects. Anyway, thank
you everybody. I don't want to take up
too much more time. I was just very
excited and I wanted to let you know
about it. Um yeah. Well, speaking of
other things that we're announcing that
are happening this week that are kind of
cool that relate to our internet ch uh
adoptedesque children.
Oh gosh. Yeah. Then there's that. Uh
Matt's Matt's been busy actually. Uh
Matt Matt's been busy. We also have
another announcement after this, but we
want to talk I want to talk about this.
We have lots of announcements. Uh change
the order. Pray I change the order.
Okay, that fair. Uh, my episode Abolish
Everything is live right now on Nebula.
Uh, apparently I made the front page of
Nebula. So, I think that means I did a
good job. Um, I was super nervous about
this and super proud about it. Uh,
please go check it out. I kind of don't
want to spoil anything else. If you have
seen it, you can let me know in the
comments right now if you liked it or
not. Um, I am very very pumped about it.
I watched it last night and holy mo I
blacked out I think while doing it. Like
I think I just left my body and then I
came back and uh and someone who
performs live daily like normal. Yeah.
Yeah. Anyway, uh yeah, please uh please
please go check that out. Uh and
there'll be a link in the description of
this if you're watching this on YouTube
or anywhere else uh for the discount
code to get a Nebula uh subscription if
you need one. Uh I would very much
appreciate it because it the show itself
is hilarious and I was super honored to
be a part of it.
Uh yeah, please go check that out. Cool.
And then uh it is of course the first
full week of May, which
means that it is time for Pix East. Pix
East. Pax East. Pax East. Uh god,
there's so much stuff going on. It's not
the Pax Romana, it's the PAX of the
East. Uh that's right. We we are going
to be uh in the Dragonfly theater on uh
Friday uh noon 30 uh for a little little
thing uh I came up with um that's a bit
more movie related but there's only been
two movie adaptations made this year in
the year of some lord 2025 and that is a
Minecraft movie and Until Dawn and I
wanted to look at the concept of
adaptation rather than just look at
something that is like oh video game
movies and whatever so we're taking
these as two sort of like holistic
experiments in the act of adapting a
video game property to the screen and
seeing what they did well, what they did
poorly. I've seen both films at this
point. Uh there's podcast episodes about
it if you want a deep dive. Um but yeah,
if you're going to be on PAX Paxbound,
please uh bookmark that in your
schedules. Again, 12:30 p.m. in the
Dragonfly Theater on Friday, May 9th.
Also important to note that related to
our topic, one of these has just set a
new
record. Uh, Matt. Oh, was it Until Dawn?
No, no, no. Matt, are you aware of the
new record that a Minecraft movie has
set this weekend? You may have been busy
with other things. I might have been
busy. What was the record? Uh, it is now
the uh progenitor of the shortest song
to ever chart the Billboard Top 100.
Oh, with Lava Chicken. Lava Chicken is
now the shortest song to ever chart on
the Billboard Top 100. Yeah, that checks
out. I um that is an earworm. Yeah. Uh
yeah, someone I have now seen unholy
remixes that would make most music
producers scream and weep at the same
time of that song. Um good job to all of
the people out there doing the blurs
work of keeping it relevant. But uh
listen, blurs work is real work, man.
Like al I mean also for nothing, the
more I hear about it, the more it annoys
me that the thing that Steve does there
doesn't actually do the thing that he
says it does in Minecraft. That's that's
not how you do that machine in
Minecraft.
You use a lava blade. It's way better.
That's not how you do the machine. All
right, that's fair. It's valid. Um Aha.
And that's the whole beauty of
Minecraft. Anyway, so come check us out
there. Then there's some uh some other
schedule announcements here. Wow, we
have so many announcements. We promise
there's a show. Yeah. Well, uh, because
everyone's I mean, this is short.
Because everyone's at PAX East, there is
no design club, nor is there time with
Will and Matt this Thursday. So,
instead, earlier in the day, it's in the
schedule here on Twitch and in the
Discord. There will be a uh extra extra
bonus blueprints episode. Uh, I'm
working on getting to the credits. Matt,
have you do you know about blueprints?
Yeah. Oh, yeah. Okay, cool. So, I'm like
continually getting screwed by my draft,
right? Like I have I have played
everything to the best of my ability and
then the the RNG is just like, "No, you
shall not finish the game this time."
And I'm like, "But I did all the things
right." And it's like it's like, "No,
no, you shall not. No drafting for you.
All dead ends all the time." And you're
just like,
"I okay. Okay." Yeah. So, I'm playing
tomorrow. I'm playing Thursday. And also
the rest of this week is Clare Obscure.
They'll be clear obscure after this.
They'll be clear obscure on Wednesday
and on Friday. Please look forward to
that. And that's all the We should also
Can you get the breaking news up? The
breaking news logo. Even though we've
had so much breaking news. I do. I
realize we haven't even talked about
this yet. But we should talk about the
other thing that is happening coming up
relatively soon. Oh, that's right. We
were We won't have a chance, right? We
were going to tell them about that today
and then I forgot to put in the show
notes. Yeah, that thing. Yeah. I have to
make a I have to make schedule posts on
both sites. So, uh we my birthday has
come and gone. However, the birthday
stream still lives on. Uh we will be
doing a uh another birthday stream all
day event crowdcontrolled where you can
help or hinder my playthrough of a
little independent game uh called Tiny.
You might have heard of it in in
Whispers and Circles, Fallout 4. Mhm. Uh
where the Brad Roaches will be out in
full effect, I think. Uh that's correct.
So, we should probably explain for
anyone who hasn't who has joined us
since your birthday and uh for all the
members of Janet who are unaware. So,
every year for Matt's birthday, since
I think this is the seventh one, sixth
one maybe times. Yeah. Um we have done a
crowd control video game stream for
charity. Um, and the way crowd control
works is there'll be a link pinned at
the top of chat and you can go there and
interact and any of your donations to
charity will get you coins and you can
spend those coins to do things to Matt's
gameplay in real time. For instance, we
have uh curated for you as Nucacca
Somalier, a bouquet of flavors of
Nucacca, which you can cause to burst
forth from Matt's vicinity like an
explosion uh for a modest donation to
charity. You'll be able to summon
Bradroaches, which are just radroaches
that we've called Bradroaches, um that
are either friendly or unfriendly. Both
varieties will exist. Uh, and you can
have them fight, I suppose, in Matt's
vicinity if you would like. Uh, it'll be
team order. It'll be team chaos. Uh,
there will be uh I'm I'm filling out the
special guest roster. This one is
packed. Um, so there'll be people,
friends of the channel jumping in uh
throughout the day to say hello. Um,
also
uh there'll be prizes. Uh, Jeff is in
the middle of wrangling all the prize
monsters. Uh, so all you have to do is
literally just show up and um yeah, Mud
Krabs crash. Mud crash. Yeah, we're not
SC Skyrim. We crashed with Mud Krabs one
year. Um, but there'll be just giveaways
in chat if you're just there and
entering keywords. So, um, not sponsored
by Nucacca yet. Um, yeah. So, please
join us. I believe we're starting at 11
a.m. on May 16th. Uh that will be
basically not this Friday but next
Friday. It will be going all day. So
swing by. Oh, we didn't even say the
wonderful charity that we're working
with. We are raising money for Best
Friends Animal Society again. We did it
before. Um and this felt really, really
great to do with Fallout because in
Fallout 4, again, small game, I'm not
sure if you're familiar. Um there is a
character named Dog Meat, and Dog Meat
is your constant companion in Fallout 4.
Now, um I wanted to go a little bit
above and beyond. So now dog meat in
Fallout 4 is modded to be Zoey with her
actual meows as the sound effects that
dog meat does. So I've put Zoe into
Fallout 4 and she will be adventuring
with us continually as we raise money to
help other cats and dogs and uh and
animals uh throughout the day. So please
join us and uh yeah, looking forward to
that very much. Okay. Um before we get
into the show proper, how many
announcements do we have? You may have
seen my face wrinkle in
consternation.
Matt may be
possessed by a tech gremlin. So I'm I
don't actually know your hiccup. I look
fine on my end. Yeah, you look fine on
your end. You are occasionally
mid-sentence drifting off of sync. Um so
I'm just going to refresh you real
quick. So nobody nobody panic. Matt,
you'll be able to hear Matt, but he's
going to disappear into the ether ever
so momentarily uh while I refresh this.
So,
uh Okay, cool. Great. Awesome. Am I
back? Yeah, you're back. I just I just
cleared the cache. Great. Okay, that's
the best I can do for now. And if it
crashes, it crashes. And we deal. It's
great. We're having a wonderful Monday,
everyone. All right. Are we now We are
now ready to begin the stories proper.
Right. Exactly. Ghost. That's how it
goes. Exactly. Uhuh. 100%. So, I did do
a magic trick. That's right. I'm gonna
pull this coin out from Will's ear.
Where did it come from? It was behind
his chair. That's how my trick works.
That's right. Okay. All right. Uh, first
off, I would like to thank uh Jouah over
on Blue Sky for sending us the story. We
had our first story that someone sent me
on Blue Sky. sent me a very nice message
said, "Hey, this is a story that's
really important to me and I'd love if
you guys covered it." And I went, "Yeah,
of course." That's heck yeah.
So, Matt, you've played Hearthstone
Battlegrounds. I sure have. Will, you
played Team Fight Tactics? I have not.
Okay, great. I have. Uh, much to my
eternal sugarrin, it's not a game for
me. Um the one of the interesting things
about Team Fight Tactics is that it is a
game that is complex and somewhat
obscured. Uh it is a game that depends
on you learning a whole awful lot about
the game before you really play to get
good. Um it does require a lot of study.
It requires a lot of player investment.
One of the sources of that player
investment has been the director of Team
Fight Tactics, Mortg um also known as
Steven Mortimer. uh if we're going to
use his government name,
uh streaming patch notes and streaming
uh extensive amounts about the game on
Twitch. Mhm. And he's not going to be
doing that anymore.
Why not? Because the community has
gotten toxic and draining to the point
where he doesn't think it's a good
investature of his time and energy to
try and deliver that information. Is
this another complaints and the haters
kind of win but end up taking away a lot
more information than they would have
gotten anyway in the process? This kind
of thing. This is one of those cases
where people I think fail to recognize
the humanity in people on the other side
of the screen.
Yeah, I think that that's that's really
what's going on here. And I think that
this is a common problem in video game
circles, particularly when dealing with
people who wear corporate styled hats,
right? People who are acting on behalf
of a company, people who are deeply
passionate about a project that they're
creating.
Um, and uh, oftentimes that means that
people use those individuals as sort of
a focus for all of the rage that they
feel at the game, the community, the
balance, the
whatever instead of right,
going to therapy.
Well, therapy is expensive, but still
that's true. And ra is free. It just
cost the community lots of stuff,
including uh including um losing access
to uh a re um an incredible resource,
right? Um the uh to to quote Mortg, the
last few weeks, months have been really
tough and the spotlight is the target
for a lot of the frustrations on TFT. I
don't know how else I'm going to phrase
it other than the haters win. They got
to me, which sucks to admit after six
years. I'm going to take a break because
I can't take much more of it. Yeah. And
that really sucks for a game that needs
as much explaining and as much
information dumping as TFT does. Yeah.
This might in a weird
way cause a domino effect that really
hurts this game. Correct.
Yeah. Huh. It's almost as if sometimes
will just sometimes not all the time. Uh
groups of people may not always I should
maybe, I don't know, act in their own
best interest. I don't know. I don't
know. I don't know, Matt. That sounds an
awful lot like an idea that could be
carried into other realms besides video
games, but surely those don't overlap
with video games at all. This is purely
about video games. It has nothing to do
with anything else going on in the
world. Yeah, definitely not. Okay. I And
I'm personally, Will, I'm offended that
you would even that you would even think
that. Oh, okay. Well, that's I mean I
don't think so. You're safe on that
count. Oh, okay. Cool. Yeah, great. Uh I
am I'm sorry to hear um that that Mog
got kind of pushed out of a space he
seemed to like. I too am not familiar
with his content. However, um the the
the constant erosion uh of one's
self-worth is something that is ever
present. I uh in in a lot of content
creators whom I've spoken to. Um, and it
is hard and it is difficult and I think
everyone does uh have a have a breaking
point. Um, and hopefully uh I I was
reading the article. This comes to us
from esports insider and I was reading
the article and it doesn't say that
he'll like never be back but at the same
time
I you know it is there there's a
phenomena which
um say it with me
everybody. All right. Anyway, um that
occurs when someone takes a break like
this and it is that um they realize how
much better off they are without that
thing. And that occurs a large segment
of the time, right? When people get away
from
um things that have been weighing them
down, from toxicity in their lives, and
then they go,
"Oh, I feel better."
and then they don't go back, right? Like
that that is kind of the the the thing,
right? Like why would you want to return
to that? Um so that is, you know, kind
of my my bet. Although, you know, for
the sake of the TFT community, I do hope
that something else steps in to help
explain
this giant pile of obscure mechanics and
interesting interactions between all
kinds of different League of Legends
characters that have been mashed up into
an auto battler. Um,
uh, okay. Next up in things that are
definitely not abs definitely not no
politics at all. If you if any of you
mention something political once, I'll
turn this show right around. We'll go
back to the beginning. This ad
definitely not a spoof of a political
ad. Definitely not. What are you talking
about? This is a Fortnite character, a
colorful Fortnite character walking
through a black and white uh auditorium,
which is definitely not a reference to
Apple's commercial, which is definitely
not a reference to 1984. Well, Apple
Okay, first of all, Apple's just a
computer company, and 1984 is just a
year, so I don't know, right? Okay.
Right. What you're getting at, right?
Well, what I'm getting at actually,
Matt, I'm so glad you asked, is that,
uh, there's a big problem right there in
Apple City, um, which is that the judge
in the Epic Games v Apple lawsuit has
ruled that
Apple may have done a little bitty oopsy
whoopsy poopsy case of lying in court.
Um, oh no, just a little bit. Just just
a scoch. just a tiny
significant major part of the lying in
court bit. So, uh, as a result, the
judge has, uh, issued, uh, I believe an
injunction that the Apple can no longer
take a cut from purchases made outside
of apps, which means that, uh, the the
two places that you're most likely to
see this are uh, the Epic family of
things like Fortnite um, and the other
one that got a lot of attention
immediately, Patreon.
Um because Patreon's mobile payments
were going to get overhauled to help
people avoid adding 30%. Twitch might
also benefit from this weirdly if you're
on Twitch and you're purchasing things
and any um but they will no longer be
able to take cuts of payments made
outside of Apple's payment ecosystem.
nor will they be allowed to discourage
people from pointing to third-party
payment options in their apps,
which that is not a small deal. That is
a rather large amount of money that
Apple has just been told that they can't
have. And this has been going I mean I
believe uh the EU and a couple other
places already have sort of similar
things like this in place.
Um, yeah. Uh, I don't I I'm so curious
how Well, I get Okay, we don't know what
this means. Apple, of course, will
appeal, no pun intended. Um,
and Tim Sweeney actually went on on uh
Twitter and basically said, "We will
return the Fortnite to the USOS app
store uh next week. Epic puts forth a
peace proposal. If Apple extends the
court's frictionfree Apple tax-free
framework worldwide, we return Fortnite
to the app store worldwide and drop the
current and future litigation on the
topic.
Um, now again, I I put up a a screenshot
of um uh Zariah about not liking Epic
Games, and that's totally fine. They
have their own issues, of course. Um,
but I I'm curious how this actually does
play out now that and
again, how do I say this in a completely
unpolitical way? You can apparently
ignore judges now. So, I don't know.
Very, I don't know what this actually
means. Like, what if Well, whoa, whoa,
Matt. Matt, Matt, Matt, what if Apple's
just like, "Nah, Matt, you can't ignore
judges if you're a Fortune 500 company.
You can only ignore judges if you're a
failed reality TV
star." I don't know about that. I I
would I
would again, it seems like Okay, I'm
going to bring this back to video games.
You know how if you have an infinite
money glitch in a game? Yeah. Right. You
can kind of break the games. You can
basically go on easy mode in a lot of
different ways because all you can do is
just go and buy the best gear that's
meant to be so far ahead of you or
whatever. Yeah. Well, now it feels like
someone just posted the infinite money
glitch uh for getting away with
everything uh in life. Yeah. So, like I
don't know. We'll see how this works.
The the other interesting thing truly,
you know, with all the the jokes of no
politics aside, even though this won't
be political at all, because other
countries that do a lot of business with
Apple already have things like this in
place, it probably won't go the way that
I am poking the bear at, right? Like
this will be something that they'll have
to answer to because other places make
them answer to it. Now, there's a chance
that uh things still go completely uh
badish over here and then someone steps
in and goes, "No, you don't got to do
it. Don't worry about it. America
freedom. Yay." Uh and then we'll see
what happens. Yeah. Uh this is sort of
one of the longest running slug matches
in big tech right now. Um and I do think
that one of the important things to keep
in mind is that this will have
implications far broader than merely the
Apple ecosystem. and bigger than Epic.
Um, they're just sort of the
two citysized kaiju we have sort of set
up to fight one another until we
determine what the what the rules of the
game actually are and all of us are just
kind of sitting over here eating popcorn
while Godzilla and Voltron fight it out.
So, we'll see how this goes. I'm Yeah, I
am I am very interested to see that the
judge is already very annoyed with
Apple. It's kind of a weird thing when a
judge is particularly annoyed with one
side and is very upset that they've done
things like, I don't know, little things
like
perjury. Um,
again, who knows? Who? But it's
interest. It's interesting. We've been
talking about this this story for four
years now, I think, or three years at
least. Yeah. And
uh we'll see where it goes from here. It
is continually evolving. Yeah,
absolutely. Uh okay, next up on our list
of uh continuing evolving stories, these
things.
Matt, did you have any interest in
buying a box made of X's? No, but a lot
of people do. I don't want to I don't
want to bismerch uh Xbox as a system. I
mean, they they're trying to do what I
consider interesting things in how
people are able to play games either
with Game Pass or the this is an Xbox
campaign or any of that stuff. It's not
a ecosystem I am interested in
personally, but that does not mean that
it does not provide access to many
people outside of uh the way that I
personally play games. However, now that
access is a little bit less. Um,
basically, I don't know if you've heard
this, uh, Brad and Janet and Rocky, but
Xbox is moving their prices up.
Normally, consoles, uh, tend to go down
in price over the course of their
lifetime. This is not the case here. And
now, uh, many products in the Xbox line
are basically, uh, jacking up their
price a bit. Some people think it's
because of tariffs. Um, other people
think it could be because
um, I I was reading somewhere
It's probably terrorists, but also like
if they're going up, that might make
people sell out of them faster because
they think they're going to keep going
up. Yeah. So, this Okay, the we'll use
gas as an analogy because it's really
easy to see with gas. If you drive past
a gas station every day on your way to
work, and this assumes that you own a
car, and that makes it very American,
bear with me. If you're driving past a
gas station every day on your way to
work and you know for certain that gas
will be more expensive tomorrow than it
is today, it's financially responsible
of you to fill your tank because it will
be more expensive to do so tomorrow and
probably the day after that. Yeah.
Similarly, if the price is going down,
you never want to fill your tank. You
only want to get enough gas to get you
back to the gas station the next day
because it'll be cheaper to fill up the
next day. That's sort of the phenomena
that we're talking about here where if
it will be more expensive in the future,
locking in now is reasonable. And we've
also seen this in a less
um big money sort of way. Um which is uh
this is not uncommon practice for
streaming services. Both Dropout and
Nebula did this in the past. They
telegraphed well in advance that due to
the cost of doing business in the world
um prices were going to raise. not buy
nearly as much as Xbox raised their
prices, but they were going to raise and
that people could lock in the current
rate now. Um, which is a good financial
decision for everyone involved. Nebula
Drop Out get a whole bunch of new uh
potential uh streaming customers and
those customers get the same u great
stuff at the current rate. Um, so I I
think that's kind of uh what might be
happening. By the way, to talk hard
numbers, the Xbox Series S512 is uh went
from
$299.99 to
$379.99. And uh the Xbox Series X went
from500 to $600.
Yeah. So, it's between 20 and
27ish% depending on the system. They
also did announce that the games would
be going to 80 pound uh $80. Excuse me.
I'm looking at the conversion to pounds
over here. Five pounds left into my
mind. Um $80 does seem to be the price
point that most of these companies are
aiming at for
um where their games are going to be.
Yeah. And
that's not I I understandable, I guess,
but not really where any of the
consumers want it to be, right? uh the
way that the world is going to be
moving. It's funny
even in the hypothetical game that is
Earth
uh the move that has happened in the
last few turns uh from a financial
perspective is even if it was reversed
by a a wacky UNO reverse card at this
very moment back to where it was has
still caused a ripple in the market that
people will feel for months if not
years. And that's just if that were to
happen, right? Interruptions and price
hikes are coming. That's just what it
is. Um, and you know, this is the first
I think largecale like here's the
notice. Xbox kind of has
the It's interesting. I wonder if if if
Xbox and Microsoft decided to take this
sort of like PR hit early
because with all of the stuff that
they're doing with Game Pass and trying
to get uh different systems to run to
run uh Xbox games, etc. I think that
they aren't putting like as many ducks
in the row of their current gen physical
standalone consoles. It seems that way
anyway. and therefore they're like,
"Yep, fine. We do this." Maybe it does
incentivize people to do that like
better get the gas now kind of vibe. Um
because this doesn't seem to be where
their where the majority of their money
in their video game department will be
coming from. Does that make sense? Yeah.
Yeah.
Um I also think that the Chad's also
been talking about this. I think one of
the interesting knock-on effects of this
is that it has
um sort of taken some of the heat off of
Nintendo. Mhm. Because now in
comparison, the Switch 2 looks like a
great deal.
Yeah. But then why would they do that? I
actually I don't know. We'll see. I have
a I have a bunch of dumb conspiracy
theories that are not worth the breath
that they could put on right now because
I have no proof and therefore why
bother? But um
the yeah, I mean this this does take a
lot of heat off of the lower the price
kind of thing because now that kind of
moves the conversation to Xbox, which is
strange. Yeah, I
agree. It is. It is very strange. Uh I
don't we we we are not corporate
executives, nor do I think we ever
really want to be. I don't know that I
could ever get in that mindset. Only
only
Why would I want to be a corporate
executive?
Stay vibes.
If if a job opened for that, I think I'd
try to apply.
Yeah. Um and and yes, Chad, I think Dog
Dog's got a good point here. Uh and
other people have mentioned in chat. I
wonder if the new price covers cost
because each Xbox was sold as a loss
leader. Yeah. For those not in the know,
most of the time, and Nintendo is the
exception to this, most of the time,
most consoles, historically speaking,
have been sold at a loss in order to
make profit back on the games. You can't
buy the games without the console. The
console past a certain point wouldn't
sell. So, they sell the console at a
loss to get you to buy games for it,
which is how they actually turn an
overall profit. That's the theory.
I don't know. I I don't I don't know um
if if that's it or if it's or if this is
something they were going to do and now
they can blame it on tariffs or if it's
genuinely response to tariffs or what it
is. Right. I I think there is kind of a
point at which my desire to speculate
about the why of these things is
diminished. Right? I don't really know
that I know why or that. And at this
point, so many companies are doing it.
Yeah. That I don't think the why
matters. It's merely a sort of this is
what is happening to the like we've
moved past speculation and into analysis
of what the impact of this is going to
be on the average consumer's experience
of video gaming, right? and it is that
the hobby is getting more expensive
unless
unless you come play in the indie game
discount uh dumpster with me um which I
enjoy greatly. Uh reminder also that
Clare Obscure, which is uh currently
towards or at the top of everyone's list
for game of the year, was $50 US because
they didn't want to be priced in the
same bracket as
AAA's. So, it's not every game. It's
just the first party ones. It's just the
consoles. If you already have a console,
if you don't buy AAA games, this may not
affect you as much. Yeah, it it'll move
the It'll move the needle around a bit.
The the other Well, here's the Okay,
here's the interesting thing about it
won't move the needle as much, but I
think about like indie games still need
hardware to be played
on. like and if all hardware gets more
expensive inevit I mean there's still
again traditionally you'll have
something already that you could use to
play the game because it's probably not
you know the that you don't need like
the the newest graphics card etc but
this will trickle to everyone. Yeah I
agree. Um no question it's just you know
if you don't want to spend $80 for
games. Yeah. Also Shurro I did put your
thing up before about the vibes and that
vibes coding thing does sound uh
horrifying. I said it as a joke. I
didn't think any actual company would do
that. Um. Yikes. Yeah. All right, moving
on. All right, next up, Grand Theft Auto
6 is delayed to
2026. Good.
Yeah, good. That's the story. Uh, also,
apparently, um, and this has come out
more as they've talked about the reasons
for this delay, Rockstar has been
pushing back heavily on Crunch. One of
the reasons that they're delaying this
is to crunch as little as possible.
Good. This
is great. Like the the there's no better
way to put this other than that. And
anyone who is getting upsetty spaghetti
about Grand Theft Auto 6 being delayed
needs to kind of I think open their eyes
a little wider and see the breath of
games that are in their own back
cataloges that they're probably not
playing. like th this is this is good.
I every time I open up any sort of uh
video game news site, etc. We'll be
talking about some in a little bit about
um uh the release of a of a hotly
anticipated game that is super buggy or
doesn't feel finished or they had to hit
that limit like Yeah. Yeah. Not to
compete with Silkong. Nice dog bird. Um
but like this is better. I want
something that ships feature complete
that works. I also want it to ship while
not having killed the team that made it.
Like video games don't just appear.
People work on them very hard and uh
depending on the production schedule of
things that could put a lot of
detrifying badness on said people. So I
don't want that to happen. This is good.
They are not ready. they're admitting
they're not
ready. Again, you can be upset about
um maybe the marketing department
putting out something, saying it would
be a thing, making a promise, etc. But
the act of pushing it back, in my
opinion, if you care at all about video
games, it can only be a net positive for
you.
um across both across both a product a
cold hard product um sort of outlook on
the subject
and the humanitarian people way that
that video games are actually made.
Yeah. Uh okay. So, a reminder reminder
that people have now been playing Grand
Theft Auto
5 for 12 years and I'm one of those
people and still I love GTA online.
Yeah. Right. Right. Right. people are
still playing this game. You can wait
another year because you'll be playing
this for another decade, right? And like
you if you're if you're one of the
people who's like, "My entire
personality is Grand Theft Auto 5." A,
you're probably not watching the show.
You might be. And if you are, I hope
you're enjoying your RP servers and the
continued resurgence of Grand Theft Auto
5 is one of the top streaming games on
Twitch. Also, meet me in the Diamond
Casino and we'll play some blackjack.
Right. Yeah. Yeah. like the the there
are entire groups of people for whom
Grand Theft Auto is the video game, not
a video game, the video game that they
play in the same way that some people
only play old school
Runescape. But also even beyond that, so
GTA represents something that is very
important for the industry. The fact
that they are doing this is so helpful
in a in a industry now that is littered
with stuff that is just hurting the
people that make the product. The fact
that the largest most anticipated media
property of I would argue all time is
saying it's not ready. We're not
crunching our people. It'll be out at
this point later is a huge message to
other companies and places that this is
okay to do. Now granted, I understand
that not every company is rockstar. I
understand that they don't have all the
coffers to make these things work. But
when you do have the coffers to make
something like this work, it's better
for everyone, your customers, your
employees, and the piece of art itself
to do something like this. And to have
the largest player in the game basically
shoot the shot across the bow and be
like, "This is how it's done."
is it's one of the few positive pieces
of news out of the AAA or whatever sort
of the mainstream video game space in a
long time that is not
like countered with like oh the Switch
cards are complicated and weird or it's
too expensive or like any like all of
these other things. this is actually
something that will be better for you
and the people that make the thing that
you love. Like, and I I do get a
little prickly when when the gut
reaction is, "What the hell?" Like, it
just feels so silly. Like,
it's funny because the old adage Oh,
sorry. As if all of the people who are
complaining about delayed games aren't
going to play Elden Ring Night Reign
until they know every route through
every boss in every possible
configuration of the game. Well, I'm
still trying to figure out a way that I
can sherk every duty I have uh for the
week that that comes out and we just
play that non-stop. Oh, yeah. It'll be
great. I'm looking forward to it.
Hopefully, I'll be done with Clear
Obscure and Blueprints by then and then
I can give it 100% as well. Well,
so I just think that like the old adage
that I believe is apocryphily
uh quoted to Shigurumoto, but I I don't
remember is like a delay a bad game is
bad forever, but a delayed game
something something. I'm trying to
remember. A delayed game is eventually
good. Yeah, it's funny because that's
sadly or not sadly depending on how you
look at it, not true anymore. Cyberpunk,
No Man's Sky, like Well, I will point
out that we've got a fair amount of
survivorship bias for those two because
of the size that they Oh, yeah. Yeah.
Yeah. Yeah. Of a thousand% agree, but
it's not a statement that is completely
true. And this is the other thing. If
they released Grand Theft Auto 6 in a
janky state, as side note, Rockstar has
released remasters of Grand Theft Auto
games in complete janky states. Let's be
very I'm not like singing the praises of
the the timing decisions of the company
across the board, but if they were to
release this game, not feature complete,
kind of broken, whatever, rushed,
crunched, something, they'd still make
all the money and have the time in the
world, all the time in the world to fix
it and make sure that it worked. They're
choosing not to do that. They're seeing
what happened to CD Project Red and
they're being like, "This is not worth
it for our publicity. This is not worth
it for our people. This is not worth it
for the product." Yep.
And there is no world where that is not
a good
thing. Just because large companies can
survive doing it doesn't mean that they
should and that it should it should make
people who are buying and excited for
this game feel bad when something comes
out and is broken and incomplete. So I
don't know. I see this as a complete net
net win. Delay more games. Delay them as
long as you possibly
can to not sink your company because it
will be better in the long run. And and
side note, I might be I understand I am
drastically oversimplifying that. Like
that is not an easy metric to gauge. Uh
I don't have the training in order to do
that, but I know that people in finance
departments and people who are long-term
coders and devs do have a they can work
together and sort of figure that out.
And on the indie side of things, right,
we're seeing this phenomena, right? It
doesn't it literally does not matter
when Silkong comes
out, right? Team Cherry has enough money
to coast on for, and I cannot stress
this enough, the actual rest of their
natural lives and never release Silkong.
They don't monetarily need to release
another game. They're releasing another
game because they want to release it
when it's finished and it's a game that
they believe in. Isn't it funny how
sometimes art is released when people
want to make it? Amazing. And and
because of that, that is one of the
reasons why I still have hope that Silk
Song will be good despite all the people
who are like, "Oh, it can't possibly be
good after all these delays." Of course
it can. Of course it can. They're just
delaying because they can and they don't
need to release it, right? They're going
to release it when it's good and ready.
Do you know what other project I'm super
looking forward to despite the fact that
it's just been vaguely mentioned? Local
Funk's next project. Because in his own
words, it's going to be a pile of trash
that's released when he feels like it's
ready. Beautiful. do that. More artists
need more time to make games that they
just want to make, right? Just do that.
Just make a game that you feel like
making and I'll pay you money for it.
Again, I want to say while all of that
is true, we do understand the sort of
corporate hellscape that does exist in
this entire industry that does have to
keep churning and moving and and
functioning to keep all of these things
afloat and and going forward. Yeah. But
it is nice to
see a large company do something like
this. So for as much garbage and crap
that I've given Rockstar in the past for
milking the same game for 12 years, I
will continue to drive around San
Andreas. Yeah, there you go. Uh for the
next year happily and spend all of my
fictitious illotten gains that I have
not ever had the time to even spend uh
in Grand Theft Auto Online. Yep. I think
there's nothing but good here. Uh, good
on you Rockstar for doing it. Uh, three
cheers to you not crunching your team
and making a product to release when
ready. Hip hip. Hooray. All right.
Speaking of things that we have talked
about uh to some extent and the
industry, people have talked about this
every time. So, every time an MMO gets
brought up,
we talk about how it's an ephemeral
thing, right? how the experience of
playing an MMO is an ephemeral thing and
that one day your favorite MMO and you
if you play MMOs, you now have one in
mind will stop working. Yeah, it will
shut down. There will no longer be a way
to enjoy
Azeroth or uh Athetherus, right? Or
whatever the world of Runescape is.
Although, I'm pretty sure that Runescape
will exist until computers stop
existing, but that's a different story.
So, it's kind of interesting to see a
game that is taking a
more long-term approach from the get-go,
and that's Bitcraft Online.
So, they are quote democratizing MMO
development because their goal is to
release the game as soon as it enters
its full release as an open-source
project.
Now, it's not the first time that that's
happened, but it's one of the first
times that it's made this much noise in
this big a way from the very beginning
and not as like a end of life move at
the end of the game to keep it relevant.
They are they are talking about um
releasing it from the very be. Now, it's
gonna have like an early access to make
sure all the bugs are out before they
like just yeet the codebase into the
great unknown. So that's, you know,
understandable. But it I do think that
this is the kind of thing. And if you're
a person who believes that MMOs should
have open- source server code so that
people who are like so deeply embedded
in those communities can do the thing
forever or as long as they want to. This
is a project you should probably keep an
eye on because that is a cool idea. Um
Yeah. Yeah. And even that I believe uh
and this this um this cames uh to us
from Massively Overpowered, but the um
the the people behind Bitcraft are
saying this this is an experiment. Yeah.
Like they're full-blown like let's give
it a go. And that's the way that the
only way that something like this even
has a chance to work. So it's really
interesting. I think this one hits home
for me because um recently there was a
fantastic piece on Anarchy Online, which
is an MMO you've probably never heard
of, um by Josh Trev Hayes, and he did a
whole thing on it, and the community he
did a he did an episode on it, and the
community was like, "This game is not
dying. It's alive. It's thriving." and
he looked deeper into it and the
conclusion that uh he and a lot of other
people came to was that the community
had stepped in to act as pseudo
developers and operators because in the
place of an absent actual developer and
operator for the game. They're
essentially issuing sort of community
workaround patches for a bunch of
balance problems in the game and doing
other stuff. And it it reminded me of
how deeply embedded into an any
arbitrary game, right? I cannot stress
this enough. Any arbitrary MMO will have
some collection of people who are so
deeply embedded into it, it becomes part
of the fabric of their lives. Right. And
whether or not that's a good thing, it
is a thing that happens. Sure. Right.
And so having a way to have people
um have a different relationship with
that that isn't maybe as contingent on
having the operators around still um
strikes me as probably a good thing all
around though I do think there are
potentially some problems with this.
Please tell me it's not client
authoritative. Client authoritative open
source MMO is just not a sentence that I
want to exist in the world. Thank you.
But yeah, you know, small problems.
We'll get there. Um, so yeah, I don't
know. I think it's a neat little neat
little experiment. I I do too. Um,
checking the time. I'm checking the
time. We got time for at least one more
story.
Matt, you remember? Oh god, not last
week, but two weeks ago. Two weeks ago.
No. Okay, that's fair. I don't
either. But maybe you remember that on a
Tuesday, Oblivion came out and on a
Thursday, Claire Obscure came out.
Everyone was like, "Oh my god, they're
going to eat each other's lunch."
Turns out not so much actually. Not not
really at all, actually. It sort of
became uh in in some people's words, the
Barbenheimer of the year. Uh, turns out
that having two RPGs with massive hype
and uh, love towards both of them
released in the same week is actually
just a good thing. It's just it's just a
good thing. Uh, the the developers of
Clare Obscure think it's a good thing.
Uh, the um, by by all accounts uh, it's
been good for both of them. Uh, ju just
good. Yeah, it's it's the Doom and
Animal Crossing. Correct. No one is
better friends than Isabella and Doom
Guy. Correct. Like that's that's just
where we're at right now. And I think
it's really good. It's it's really
lovely to see because if you think about
it like and and you've played uh
Expedition a bunch, right, Will, at this
point? Yep. So it's it's a JRPG in kind
of in in its style of turnbased, etc.
Whereas it feels like uh you know,
Oblivion is a western RPG in in those
senses. And what's really nice about the
Tuesday, Thursday release of both of
these kinds of games is like RPG players
were kind of just eating good and they
will be for a while because these games
have a lot of content. I think it's
really lovely and I think actually uh
Kepler Interactive even um
Yeah. Right. Yeah. It's French Matt.
It's a RPG RPG. Um but but the the
it's each one of them will eventually if
they were like planetary bodies have
orbiting players that will sort of get
pulled off and mixed into someone else's
gravitational pull because they do
actually have things that both parties
can probably really like. And because
they came out the same day obvious or
the same day the same week obviously
people are going to gravitate towards
the one that they are more excited
about. But the news cycle did a really
good job of keeping both of them kind of
present in different ways, which then
makes it seem like once you're done with
one, you're probably going to explore
the other. That's where I fell with
Expedition. Like I've heard nothing but
great things. When I have the time, I'll
do it. I I actually I I in my own head,
I need to finish um Rebirth, Final
Fantasy 7 Rebirth before I touch this
because it just feels I try to I don't
Does anyone else do this? I would love
Brad Janet, answer me this question. I
know this is a little bit of a tangent.
Do you keep genres of games like locked
in in your own little like playthrough
or catalog of games you're playing? Like
do you have your shooter? Do you have
your RPG? Do you have this thing? And
you need to like beat or be done with
that one before the next one in that
genre can fill that slot. Does that make
sense, Will? Do you ever do that? Yeah,
it does make sense. I think I only have
like per stream games and daily games,
right? They're like stream games that
I'm playing on stream and those I'm
trying to like keep to one or two so
that chat can track. Um, and the other
ones are just like games that I play
daily and I don't
know that I have like that kind of
categorization, but I also have a very
weird mental filing system for games
because of playing them for stream.
Right. Right.
Yeah. I'm seeing a lot of different a
lot of different answers here.
Um,
yeah, these are good. These are really
good. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Um, I do agree,
by the way, that you should play
Expedition 33. And again, my piece of
advice to everyone looking to play
Expedition 33 is it is a beautiful game.
You should play it on console if you
have a console that will play it because
it does have some problems with
controller remapping and with graphics
problems on PC right now. Those are
being fixed. But if you have the choice
and it's an even toss up, you should
play it on console and you should know
nothing. Just like you should know
nothing about blueprints. Just if you've
ever trusted me on a recommendation for
a game, play Expedition 33 and know as
little as possible because it does the
same thing that a lot of great novels do
where it just lets you sort of be wrong
about what you assume about the world
until you find out that you're wrong.
and finding out that you're wrong about
the world is a sublime moment. That's
great. Great. Yeah, that's the reason
I've been staying away from Thunderbolt
spoilers. Um, no, this is very cool. I
think the Barbenheimer uh uh analogy is
apt. Uh, I think it's a little bit more
slow than like cuz Barb was fun because
you could see them both in the same day
and they kind of did juice movie sales,
etc. But this you could I don't know. I
just I think this a longer term Barbran
and I like it a lot. So, congrats to
everyone involved. Yeah. All right. Uh,
I am going to alter our programming ever
so slightly. I'm going to move our ads
forward to now. So, Oh, uh, I'm going to
move them forward because I think the
next one's going to take more than the
three and a half minutes we have. Sure.
So, we're going to move our ads forward.
We're going to sell you things that you
can't buy while Twitch chat gets ads for
things that they can buy. Twitch chat,
tell us about what ads you're seeing as
you see them. And we'll be selling uh
our subscribers and the people over on
Janet something completely different
that probably can't actually buy. I have
mine right now. Are you ready, Will? I
am so ready.
Uh ads are now running. Go. Hi everyone,
Matt from Extra Credits here. You know,
we've talked a lot today about a lot of
interesting topics, but I don't want to
actually sell you anything right now
because I am going to delay my ad until
it's ready. That's right. Will tells me
when there's an arbitrary time that I
need to pretend to sell you something.
My thing that I'm going to pretend to
sell you just isn't ready yet. It still
needs more time in the hopper in the
oven and the thing to make cook and the
machines and all that stuff and the
dodad hickory. Listen, I am not going to
sell you or even pretend to sell you
something until I know for a fact that
you can pretend to buy it with
confidence because that is something
that we tried to do back in the day with
flexible sticks. And by golly, anything
I try to pretend to sell you right now,
we're going to do the same. Seems good.
There we go. Seems good. All right. Uh,
I have mine. I like Team Worb. I like
Team Worms, but I want it now. No, it's
fair. Yeah, it's very fair. All right.
Uh, all right. Ready? Okay. Yeah, I got
mine.
Hey there, chat. Will from Extra Credits
here to sell you a definition. That's
right. I'm going to sell you on a
definition. So, you may have heard Matt
refer to Expedition 33 as a
JRPG, and some people have been calling
it a RPG or the Baguette RPG. It does
actually feature a lot of French jokes.
It's very French. We'll talk more about
that later. But what I want to tell you
is this notion that JRPGs and and and
so-called Western RPGs are are not
really that different. Difference is in
what you're doing. It's not in anything
about the platin style of play.
Anything. My definition is is that a
JRPG is any game where you kill God with
friends. That's it. If you kill God with
the power of friendship, it's a JRPG.
Now, I don't care what the It could be a
shooter. It could be a turn-based game,
an active game. Uh, if you're playing
Elden Ring with friends, that's a JRPG.
Now, I'm sorry. I do make the rules. If
you kill God with a power of friendship,
it's a JRPG.
Okay. Listen, I'm sold. I'm fake sold.
Yeah. Uh, coffee, I know it's a little
harder to hear me over the music because
I am a little ill. A little ill. I've
got something going on. It's gross. Oh,
also cuz I control the volume of the
music. Apologies in in advance. Here,
I'm going to do one more ad because now
it's ready. Okay. Hey everyone, Matt
from Extra Credits here. Have you ever
flown on a plane? Have you ever flown on
a plane and all of a sudden when you
land your ears don't pop? Have you ever
had a condition with your lung that
makes it so you can't do the thing where
you hold your nose and blow to make them
pop? Well, I have all of that. So, I'm
here to sell you an apology for me not
being able to hear properly. I don't
know what levels of audio are. This ear
makes everything I'm saying sound like
it's 9 miles away. And this ear makes
everything that I hear feels like it's
already in my skull. So if you would
ever want to experience that and please
don't. You can pretend to buy that from
me right this very instance cuz I'll
sell it to you. I don't want this. I
don't want this. Seems good. Yeah. And
we have perfect timing as usual because
ads are now over. Yeah. Uh I have tried
chewing gum. I've had tried swallowing.
I've done all the things. I don't know
what it is. My ears are also like clean.
I cleaned them all good before I left. I
think it's just a thing that happens to
me sometimes on short flights in in
small planes. I've noticed more um uh it
is it when I arrived where we went, I it
was I was in a lot of pain and I'm in no
pain now. I just have no
regulation of audio in my head. So,
apologies to everybody if the music
seemed a little off uh around that.
Okay. Zenith got a Final Destination
teaser trailer, Switch 2 ad, an AW ad,
Leelo and Switch trailer promo, Doom the
Dark Ages promo, Malibu ad, don't drink,
Wendy's ad, Red Bull ad, Alienware ad.
Thank you, Zenith, for telling us about
the the ad content here on Twitch.
Deeply appreciate it. Okay. Uh, let's
keep moving then
to a big shiny button. I love buttons.
Okay, so this I I think we'll Sorry to
interrupt. I think you and I are going
to have different opinions about this,
but maybe I'm wrong. Okay, cuz I I will
tell you in advance, I have no opinion
about this. Interesting. Okay, so I have
a strong opinion about this even though
I don't play many MMOs anymore. Okay,
great. So, let's let's go back. Let's
pretend like the audience understands
nothing about
MMOs, just briefly. In an MMO, you get a
whole bunch of skills and you assign
them to keys or to hot bars and you do a
rotation. This is true of most. It's
particularly true of tab targeted MMOs.
It's particularly particularly true of
both Final
Fantasy Final Fantasy 14 and World of
Warcraft.
Um, the route through your rotation is
not always the clearest to new players,
particularly new players to a new class
or job. Not always the clearest. So,
there are various tools that both games
use. In WoW, up until this point, it's
been add-ons. In 14, there are combo
systems that teach you how to play once
you actually like take the time to, and
I get this is wild, read all of your
tool tips. Like, if you read what all
the skills do and you stop instead of
just mashing your face on the keyboard
like some kind of keyboard
cat, you you will understand better how
to play the All right.
Anyway,
Wow is making a change.
It's a very interesting change. So, the
change takes two levels. One, into WoW
natively, again, this will not be an
add-on, and it's because they're
changing their view on what a necessary
add-on is. Yeah. And we'll talk about
that a whole bunch. WoW is making it so
that the theoretical next move in your
rotation can be highlighted. So, if you
have a a mage rotation, it will show you
the next spell that you should
cast in that
rotation or and the second level is far
more interesting, I think, to talk
about. In exchange for a penalty on your
global cooldown, aka you cast all your
spells
slower, you can set it up so that you
only have to press one
button to go through your whole
rotation. You can just press the same
button over and over and over again and
it will change to the next spell you
should be casting in your rotation in
exchange for you doing less
damage. There's a penalty on your damage
because you are casting fewer spells
because you are casting slower. Yeah,
that the cool down timer gets
incrementally larger.
Yeah. Uh I Yeah, Matt thought this.
Yeah. Okay, great. I love this because
something that actually I I found I I
used back in my WoW days very few
add-ons, but when you raid you just kind
of have to like you absolutely have to.
You can't run the game vanilla. And I
get there's like a benefit to that
because it shows you are committed
enough to the game to get the tool to
get the job. like there there's
positives to it, but I think I just
rather, in my opinion, more people be
able to not only be available to help
with those things in positive ways, but
also have the game actually teach you
it. Like, if I was coming into WoW now,
this would be a helpful tool for me to
learn the rotation for my first few
raids of of all of my things. I would
see it and know it and if I again if I
wanted to right because the fact that
you can do this but there is a detriment
to it and the more you use it the more
that detriment is present I would then
learn my rotation what it was supposed
to be and then if I want to move forward
if I want to do higher level mythic any
you know whatever MMO you're talking
about like if I wanted to do the higher
level stuff I couldn't just do the one
button approach I'd have to look at it
see as I'm doing it learn what I'm
supposed to be doing to get those
optimal things and then start doing it
on my own. It's essentially training
wheels on a bicycle, but for WoW. Yep.
And I I think
truly getting more people involved in
high-end like endgame content
play and teaching them what they need to
do in the game itself is incredibly
beneficial to the health of a of an
online of of an MMO. I'm also going to
point out that there's another thing. Um
I we got this really interesting
question from Aquaman. Yeah. Um that I'm
going to bring up. Uh, if you're only
pressing one button, are you essentially
not playing anymore? And I I also think
it's good for accessibility. Mhm. No.
And here's why. In all of these tab
targeted MMOs, uh, 14 does it slightly
differently and I would say more
precisely than WoW does in my
understanding because of the lack of
weak oras. No add-ons are officially
allowed in Final Fantasy 14. Zero. No
damage meters, no nothing. Yeah, there
are cases where people use those. They
are not officially allowed and you can
get wrist slapped if you're found using
them. Um,
there are more things than just your
rotation that you're doing.
There's positioning. There are other
things like interrupts. There are other
things like targeting. Targeting, right?
If you are playing a raid for the first
time, it can be beneficial to not have
to worry about your rotation. In fact,
we had this in the last Final Fantasy 14
World Race. What the team that won had
several pulls where they did virtually
zero damage in order to stop worrying
about their damage rotation to
understand the mechanics at play. They
did a walk through where they just they
they took everyone off of the jobs that
were going to do all the damage, put all
of them on DPS jobs that can combat res
and walked through the entire fight and
then saw enrage. And once you've seen
enrage in 14, you know what all the
mechanics are and then you can work out
how to do them with the damage. This
feels like that in a lot of ways where
it makes it it says, "Okay, if you're
still if you're over mentally
overloaded, right? You can focus on the
not your damage part and then once
you've got the not your damage part,
then you can amp up the damage and meet
and rage, right? You might not be able
to do both at the same time, but
unloading that bit from your brain while
you're trying to do it, especially if
you're getting used to a new job, a new
class, a new character, a new role,
whatever, is a good way to teach people
those things. Because one of the things
that MMOs all have trouble with is
teaching people how to do endgame well.
Yeah, all of them are bad at this. And I
think this is an elegant solution
because you inevitably will just have
the people that want to that either want
to or can only or however you want to do
it hit the one button approach to do it
and their damage and their effectiveness
will cap out at a certain point. I
imagine that means they'll be able to do
like a regular difficulty raid on that
sort of style of play, but they might
not be able to do the highest end stuff,
which I imagine is number crunch to
basically not let a team that's just
doing that probably get through it. Like
they want that extra level of
interaction and skill to be able to use
to to play that stuff. So, it's going to
allow more people to see the endgame
content and for those that are
interested, teach them what to do to
eventually take the training wheels off
should they choose that they want to do
that. I think this is so good. Um, I I
love it when games, MMOs or whatever,
see a mod or or an add-on or something
and they're like, "That's great. We need
that." And they put it into the actual
game itself. Yep. I also think, and this
is really important, this is one of the
I believe since we've started the show,
this is one of the biggest pivots in
WoW's viewpoint on add-ons. Yeah. Right.
They have let add-ons do all the things
that add-ons were going to do up until
now. And this is a step towards removing
one add-on that was seeing prevalence
among new players from the pool of
things that new players need in order to
get into WoW. And I think that that
beginning the process of shaving down
that curb, right, to make the game more
accessible to accessible to need fewer
add-ons is a very good smart move on
Blizzard's part because I think you want
people you want people that can just
sign into WoW, not hunt on the web page,
find the thing, install the stuff, move
all the like you want you want those
people to get in there early and fast.
otherwise and and inevitably you're just
going to hook more people that way and
then there's going to be more people
playing your game. I don't know. I think
this is great. I'm sure there someone
has an argument why it's not um I don't
Yeah, I I I think Sacronos has it best,
right? We have lovely people on our raid
team who are bad at their rotation and
will probably never be better than they
are currently. And if they choose to use
this, they will be able to focus more on
the fight and do better damage and they
will still be lovely people that we
enjoy hanging out with. Yeah. Yes. Enjoy
hanging out with your raid. Enjoy
hanging out with your raid team. If you
don't, why not,
right? Okay, cool. Great. Uh, all right.
Also, hi, Napoleon. Greetings.
Salutation.
Uh, next
up, so this is a story I added. Again,
totally apolitical. um super political,
but this is something I I want to talk
about specifically and I I posted
something from the Guardian on it. This
is about uh I think a a tweet or a Z or
a something. I don't know where whatever
this was posted. Uh Trump wants to put a
tariff on the
concept of films not made in the US.
Again, this is a Let me I'm going to
take this one off, Matt. I'm going to
take this one off, Matt. This is
breathtakingly stupid. Well, yeah, yeah,
yeah. No, no, that that's fine. And I
don't want to talk too much about movies
because we I have another place where I
do that and I know you're not here for
that. Um but this is taking a art form
that due to um monetary uh I basically
bonuses and things or or whatever you do
a basically you create a piece of art
across hundreds if not thousands of
people probably all over the world to
make something in a budget where it
actually can be made. Mhm. And then you
sell it and you distribute it and you do
all that stuff. This is just on movies
and there's no clean way on how this
works. And this is just sort of like a a
rant idea that I'm sure will get an an
executive order and then everyone will
try to figure out how it would even
function and who the hell knows and then
it will go away or it people will ignore
it and then it'll be a great victory or
whatever. I don't know. But my point
here is this
movies is step one.
Yeah. bec if you don't think that this
is going to come into video
games this kind of
stuff I have a bridge in San Andreas I
would like to sell you correct uh it
this is this will come for our uh hobby
of video games as well yes and then it
will become tariffs on video games made
outside of the US and then something
like expedition 33 will cost 4 like
$145 or something, right? If this this
movie is designed to kill the
international film industry. Yes.
What an incredible way to make so many
people lose money. Yeah. So, while we,
you know, pretend occasionally like
we're in a political show, um, and we're
not because we talk about I thought that
was fairly clear. Yeah. Right. Just just
in case that has like missed anyone, uh
we'll go through the chain of of
thoughts real quick. All video games are
art. All art is political. We talk about
art which is political. Therefore, the
things we talk about is political. Cool.
Okay, great. Um politics is the
interaction of people on a large scale.
Correct. Yeah, that's just a thing. Um
this is going to be another big moment,
right? Because there I did see and I was
participating and I'll fully own this,
right? that there was some amount of
sigh of relief that a large part of the
thing that's providing me comfort during
eternal screaming um is a digital good
not subject to tariffs. Digital goods
don't move through ports. Airgo digital
goods not tariff. But movies are not
physical goods anymore. Well, they're
trying they're desperately trying to
make them not. Well, right. But like the
the idea that like a movie enters the US
only in physical forms is silly because
of course it doesn't, right? Um, and
this is uh this is going to be a
problem, right? Like uh Larky, to your
point, this is something that I bet you
actually this plays into the story a
lot. I think uh Nha 2 is what Larky is
talking about right now. Uh that is a
film that has grossed uh $2.1 billion in
the last 3 weeks. I think it cracked a
billion before leaving China. It is a
excellent film made by a ton of people.
Um we did an episode of the podcast on
it. I I bet you because this is the
first time that has happened. Um because
it basically like it's it it coming. Red
might actually know this is who's in the
chat.
Um it's like it's coming forward if not
has already crushed Titanic's records.
And I bet you this came across someone's
desk and say, "Wow, this Chinese movie
is doing numbers. Oh, also China's going
to be doing reciprocal tariffs or
whatever the hell blah blah blah blah.
Oh, it's their film industry. We need to
kill it." problem is if they're making a
billion on their own, don't think this
is going to really affect
them. Who knows? Yeah. Uh I mean, and
and there's also, you know, rumors that
we can now see someone's internet
history writ large because if you begin
to look for movies that grossed well
domestically but didn't do well
internationally, you find a movie about
Alcatraz and then that just shows up
randomly. So like there's this whole
there's this whole chain of events,
right? And it's it's really important.
Uh I think it's it's been important,
right? There are many events happening
that are not related to the content of
this show. So we haven't brought them up
because they're not relevant to the
show. I've brought them up elsewhere.
Well, we've talked about lots of things
elsewhere. But for the show, we're
talking about media. We're talking about
games. It is important that we not shut
up about this. I think is the not not
like us on the show. We're going to talk
about a broad spectrum of news, but like
together, right? Don't let this be like,
"Oh, well, I guess we're getting
tariffed." Oh, no. Right. Like don't do
not go quietly. Dear Brad Jy, and again
and again, this was just a post earlier.
Who knows how far this goes down. I
mean, I don't know. This could also be
distraction. Who I I don't know. It's
just something that I was like, "Oh,
they're doing this for movies. Video
games are next." like uh a thousand%
that will happen um if this moves
forward. So, you know, do whatever
political things you're apt to do um
once this show's over. Just wanted to
talk about that. And I wanted to put
Arnold Schwarzenegger and Tom Cruz's
heads on uh Donkey Kong and Bowser. I
feel like No, that's that's a legitimate
reason to add a story to our roster. All
right, let's talk about everybody
putting on your taking off caps.
Last week was a bad week for video game
journalism. It was a bad It was a bad
week for video game journalism. So,
um, Giant Bomb and
Polygon have both
been less than gracefully sunset, we'll
say. Uh, Polygon got bought by Valnet,
who immediately began firing people
left, right, and center, and then
promised to do what was best for
Polygon.
That seems disingenuous. And fandom uh
took out Giant
Bomb. And this leaves us in kind of
a Let's back up a second. Remember that
whole bit where I said that talking
about video games, which are a form of
art, is political, right? Talking about
talking about video games is also that,
right? The ways that we talk about these
art forms and the ways that we engage in
meaningful discourse on art and the
industry are important because video
games are still relatively speaking a
young industry, right? We're still
figuring stuff out that Hollywood's had
figured out for 50 years because
Hollywood's old, right? or radio or
music or any other uh any of the other
big art forms that make our lives full
of beautiful things, right? We're still
talking about that. And it bothers me to
my soul when we see places that people
could talk about these and bring up
questions and critique and comment and
point us at good art get kneecapped
because somebody doesn't think they're
making enough money. Yeah.
And that's tough.
Yeah.
Um,
Polygon is or maybe was at this point a
site that I visited daily. Um, I tried
to spend time on there. I clicked on I I
don't know if you all do this. Maybe let
us know in the in the comments here in
in chat. Um, but like I would click on
ads just to give them the click. Like I
would I would try to like cuz again
Polygon is a for the user essentially a
free website that runs on a bunch of
ads. I would try to you know do what I
could and click on two or three ads on
an article if I was reading the article,
right?
Um but it it felt like it was a one of
the
last somewhat independent feeds on this
kind of stuff. And admittedly I I am not
a giant bomb person. I no no no no no um
ill will or offense. I just never I that
was just never in my rotation of gaming
sites. But I know it's huge and I know
it meant a lot to a lot of people. And
to have both of these go down in
essentially what a week and a half. Uh
and
and go down air quotes. um they're
bought by companies
that if we're if precedent is to be
believed don't care about the content.
Uh yeah. No, I think that that's fair.
Um a reminder that Valnet also bought
Faxrolife. Uh thank you to Larky for
bringing that up in chat. Yeah. Um
Fextra not exactly known for being a
bastion of great wiki hosting. Fandm
also not really the best bastion of wiki
hosting. Um, reminder that many we we've
talked about this before. Many wikis
have very intentionally and purposefully
moved off of fandom and that when you
are using a wiki to explore your
favorite game that has way too much
information to cram into an in-game
guide, you should find a nonfandom wiki
to use for it.
Minecraft, uh, I believe Minecraft,
Warframe, uh, a couple, uh, No Man's
Sky, a couple others have all been very
intentionally moving off of fandom
because of moves like this by fandom
that have been harming the video game
industry. Yeah, Minder. Um, Red B, I
don't want to be too insidious here,
but, some of ours, we, not just us, we
specifically fault for expecting
journalism to be free for the user.
Yeah. But also um so the short answer is
yes. The longer answer
is larger companies trained us into
that. Like I want to take responsibility
a thousand% for for those like inklings
that we did as individuals. But that's
how the initification of the internet
works, right? like you get something
cool that is absolutely free for a while
until you nickel and dime it or change
the content on it to be a specific
viewpoint etc. Like that's just that's
the that's the play, right? There is
also this problem that millennials I
think have that maybe um Z and alpha
don't have as much um which is the
expectation that the news capital N is a
non-commercial idea right that telling
people what has happened in the world ex
we we sort of I think to some extent I
know I certainly do have this
expectation that the news is a thing
which isn't
necessarily driven by ads, right? And or
that it should be such a thing, right?
It obviously is now. Thanks 24 news uh
24-hour news cycle, thanks sponsored
segments on news programs, etc., etc.
But when I was growing up, there was
this expectation that the news was
simply telling you what had happened,
not necessarily trying to make a buck
off of it, right? And that goal, right,
is still a thing that is enshrined in my
mind as what journalism should be about
everything. And there's also really
complicated things
because god, this gets so weird, right?
But like, okay, there's like global
news, what a country is doing, an
invasion of a foreign nation, uh a
drought, a famine, uh incredible weather
conditions, you know, things that like
you should be informed on uh for for
safety and the betterment of human
beings, physical safety. Then you get
into what is essentially a billion
dollar industry of what is essentially
entertainment news. That's what we would
fall into. As much as I'd love to
believe it, we do not need to exist for
your existence. Do you know what I mean?
Like stories and stuff like this, even
reporting on video games essentially,
even though it can get into elements of
politics, it's kind of like at the tail
end of what's going on. And the the
thing that starts affecting people when
tied to entertainment news is things
like tariffs on movies because then you
start getting into well this will hurt
the jobs of people who make it and
therefore the economy. But like there's
this e like how does in this day and age
an
independent games journalism site with
the expectation set by all of these
larger institutions that this
information should be
free
survive? Like how does it work? I I
would I would argue that you could make
it
function with people that have a lot of
like new media training. Um you could
make sure that there there was sort of
like a full transparency and and and
have how and why you are covering what
stories going. You do your Patreon
thing. You have you you hell maybe you
even do like a subscription service to
like a newsletter or something. But
those things are incredibly difficult to
to get off the ground even for the
savviest business people in this new
media space. Yeah. Because we are all
trained to think that this information
should be free. And it's interesting
because there's we're trained for that
because of all the stuff I've said
before. We're trained for that because I
truly believe that some of this stuff
should be publicly funded by taxes and
things like that to make sure that we
know weather patterns and droughts and
things and important like the global
stuff that affects people's safety.
this news isn't that, right? Like, this
is something else. So, how does it
survive? Um, and sadly, and I and I
won't call it fully survival. Again,
we're not uh incredible futurists here.
Who knows what these two new owners will
do with these with these properties? I
know a lot of people have been laid off
from them. Um, and I anticipate the new
versions of these sites will be worse
for losing the people in the spirit that
kind of made them popular in the first
place. Agreed. Uh, but I I'm not we'll
we'll see that coming down the line.
Hopefully I'm wrong. I will say um if
anyone knows any um specifically
writers, games writers at either of
these places, we are always looking for
one-off scripts and and uh guest writers
and things like that on EC. So, if
anyone knows any of them and they're
looking for some some part-time work, we
might be able to help out in that
regard, depending. No guarantees, of
course, but I would love to because
again, Polygon specifically, and again,
no shade to Giant Bomb. I just I always
read Polygon.
They had great great great writers over
there and I hope that they land on their
feet. And um yeah, if anyone knows any,
shoot them our way. Shoot them my way.
Um I'll try to reach out on some
socials, too, uh just to see what's
what.
Um, yeah. I don't know. It's It sucks.
It just Every every one of these shows
is always like, "Well, here's something
else bought by a mega corp." And Arisaka
wins again. And you're like, "Okay, all
right." Because like this isn't these
sites, sands, the people that made them
special are not going to survive. And I
know that there's some very talented
people still at Polygon post
acquisition. I'm not going to name drop
or anything like that, but who knows how
long they last? Who knows if they're
going to be comfortable doing what what
uh Valet wants them to do,
right? It's just hard. It's um
Yeah. I don't know. Yeah. All right. You
want a good news story? Yeah. Well,
we'll perk you up. Okay. So, in news
that's definitely totally not political,
um, a reminder that video games are art
and that art sometimes comes from, uh,
needs to be recognized, needs to be
lifted up. And, uh, this past week, um,
French President Emanuel Macron gave a
specific shout out to the team that made
Clare Obscure Expedition 33 as a work of
French art and quote, "A shining example
of French audacity and creativity."
Good. Right. This is this is very good
and it should happen more frequently
that art that exists in ways that aren't
um as consumed by older generations is
recognized as being influential and good
and important. Right? Because without
spoiling anything, Clare Obscure
embraces a tradition of telling a
multi-layered story that is in, in my
opinion, the best traditions of
traditional film media. It just happens
to do it with player actions and
choices. there's really good story there
and it's really good to have people uh
recognize and uplift that when it does
something good. It's also really nice to
have a game that comes out of France
that's not made by Ubisoft. That's also
a thing that's very important and good
and nice. So, props props to Macron for
recognizing uh when when something good
comes out. And uh yeah, I also I added
Muzzi here just because the Zui I don't
think I don't even know if Muzzi is
specifically a French thing. It's not
the phrase Muzzi Muzzi is worldwide.
Yeah. Yeah. Muzzi is us all. Yep. Uh
okay, cool. Which brings us now to
questions, comments uh from you all from
last week's episode over on YouTube. So
throw, uh if you're on watching this, if
you're Janet watching this on YouTube,
throw your questions into the comments
section. If you're watching this as a
VOD or any other place, if you're
watching this on Nebula or or if you've
somehow pirated it because you can't
stop the signal off of uh whatever data
net you use, uh you can message us on
Blue Sky here and we'll look at uh those
questions there. What do we got, Will?
Uh from Keredwin says, um on the remakes
versus remasters thing, uh one excellent
reason for this half between the two on
the Oblivion uh remaster is the engine
update. Creation Engine front end isn't
all that Windows 10 or 11 uh friendly
and other games are even less so. An
update like this makes it more futurep
proof than playing with compatibility
modes that might or might not work. Um
and goes on to talk about the
um uh goes on to to talk a little bit
about that creation engine. Um and the
uh says all this does is reinforce my
mapping of Todd Howard uh Emil uh Paglia
Ruo to George Lucas. Great success early
got the accolades decided they walk on
water. stopped listening to anyone
except themselves. Almost destroyed the
original success and now the industry is
rightfully crying all over them. Nobody
cares about Lucas anymore. Todd De
should probably just pack their bags of
money and retire. Todd Ain't Spielberg
and shouldn't want to be Lucas. I kind
of agree that there's
there that the the public opinion of the
executives that have risen to this point
and are remastering games
now is not in the best place. But what I
did want to focus on was the idea that
one of the
problems that games have specifically is
this formatting issue. So
Matt, do you have a Betamax player?
No. But you had to think about it
because if someone did, it would either
be you or Red. Red, you got a Betamax
player? I you know, there was a chance I
had to buy one a while back and I just
didn't. But but that would be the only
thing that's required for you to play a
g to play a movie on
Betamax. And now with the ever evolving
complexity. Okay, Red has one. Red has
one. It's in his closet. Great. Awesome.
How did I know that Red had a Betamax
player, right? So the um that's all
that's required for you to watch that on
that media, right? Assuming you can get
to hook up to a TV, which shouldn't be
that hard. the
um fundamental underlying necessities
that are required to play games of
different eras is much
higher. It's much much higher now than
it was before. Right? Compatibility mode
isn't always the best thing as anyone
who's worked with Windows will tell you.
Things like Creation Engine not working
on the front end of um 11 or 10 is very
big. And I do think that's a big point
of remasters that even for PC games,
it's becoming harder and harder to get
things to work because it's harder and
harder to get new games to work, let
alone to get old games to work. Yeah. Uh
I now have to uh here's here's your fun
fact. When we play a game on stream, I
have to spend time ahead of time
configuring it, making sure it captures,
doing all of the work to set up that
game to make sure it runs smoothly for
every game. I spent time this weekend
ripping drivers out and backing drivers
back up to the December Nvidia drivers
because I was having issues with stuff,
right? Is becoming harder and harder to
become a
gamer with all of the tech problems. So,
remasters are doing something really
important there for that. And I wanted
to thank Keredwin for bringing that up.
Yeah, good stuff. Do we have another one
or is that the only one this week? Uh,
we have one more. uh which is talking
about how um we were talking about how
difficult it was to do pre-orders for
the Switch here in the US. Sure thing.
Uh and Bel Hoggle points out correctly
that um they managed to pre-order uh
switched to from GameStop in Canada.
That that it was a trivial process. They
got there before um they got to the mall
about 30 minutes before it opened. 10th
in line. No issues, small issues with
one person trying to pre-order too many,
but that even got sorted out and there
was still plenty for others and the
staff handled it all well. Again, we're
talking about the difficulty in
pre-ordering stuff in the modern age.
It's mostly in the States. Every other
country seems to have this figured out.
It's just the states that has all of
these problems pre-ordering things that
we want to
buy because
freedom will freedom cuz freedom. Yeah.
It's just a giant pain. And that freedom
isn't free will. Costs a buck05.
cost a buck 45. Now it's important. Oh,
no. They have to change the song. Yeah.
All right. Well, that's good. I'm glad
I'm glad that uh our neighbors of the
North got some Easy Peasy Switch uh
pre-orders. That's great. I think
Nintendo's going to start rolling out
its pre-orders through its system on the
9th. Yep. If I get mine during the
panel, I will be very upset.
Or you can hype with everyone at the
panel. I I'm not going to check my phone
during the panel. I'll be
performing. perform.
Anyway, yeah. No, let us know your
thoughts on any of those things or any
of the topics we talked about today at
the places where you talk about those
things. Yeah. Uh, coming up next here on
the channel, we've got Claire. If you're
over in Janet, come over, say hi. Rocky,
if you're watching this tomorrow, I'll
be playing Blueprints. Come over and
watch that. Uh, Brad, you're
contractually obligated to stay put and
hang out and talk while I play CL. Oh,
sher says something nice here. All
right, we actually have 72-hour window
to get it. So, I'm good. I'm fine.
All right. Well, thank you everybody for
joining us this week for Games for
Breakfast. The only thing that is left
truly is for me to lead you in our
traditional end of the show that is the
same every time we do it again. We do it
because we want to make sure that we
foster that sense of community and make
sure that we're all one big happy gaming
family with uh myself and Will as your
two surrogate surrogate internet dads in
a non-legally binding. Non-legally
binding, but we still can tell you to go
to your room now. But you get to decide.
See, here's the interesting. You get to
decide where your room is because we're
not your dad's. We are your dad's. We're
not your dad's.
Okay. Anyway, that I got distracted. You
did a bit, but that's okay. So, anything
else, Will, before we we take off? No, I
think that's it. Please, please go ahead
and uh begin our sign off and I'll I'll
join in at the perfect time. All right.
I will begin our sign off as soon as
it's ready.
[Applause]
[Music]
I probably could give you like a couple
more seconds of slurp, but fine. I felt
like the slurp was good. No, we're good.
Look at that. Yeah, it's good. Dumping
my room at Denny's. Good job. Good job.
Good job. Good job. Uh, I'll have the
grand slam. Oh god. I'll get in a fight
in the parking lot at 2 a.m. Nice. Uh,
as is the way. Chat, thank you so much
for being here for this one. Matt and I
are both a little out of it. So, that
was an I thought this was an interesting
one. I think the first third of it was
rough and then I think we hit a a nice
stride. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Absolutely. Uh
you know, TAC liked it, so that's that's
the really important part. 11 out of 10
sign off. No notes. Good. Good. Good.
Good. Um yeah. So, like I said,
everybody check Matt out. He'll be at
PAX this week. The rest of the time
you're stuck with me, Claire Obscure,
and Blueprints. We got a lot of gaming
to get through. We got a lot of stuff to
talk about. A reminder, if you're if
you're unfamiliar with this, and I I
want to make sure that we're conveying
this. When I play games, it's not just
like, oh, I'm going to play this game.
We're talking about the themes. We're
talking about the game. We're picking it
apart, and we're talking about how it
relates to the world, just in case
anyone hasn't been to one of those and
is like, why would I watch Will play
games poorly? First off, I'm a pretty
great gamer. And second off, uh we're
actually doing a lot of talking. Um and
I have a feeling that today's Clare
Obscure will be particularly
conversation laden. if you're willing to
come along and maybe be able to split.
So, well, Trevalin, this is my last
thing for Trevalin. If you're looking
for that, the next time I'll actually be
on this channel, these channels will
probably be So, there won't be a
breakfast next week. We didn't say that,
but Or did we? I don't remember. We did
not. That's okay. I was coming back from
PAX. So, yeah. Um, however, the next
time I'll be here will probably be a
Thursday test stream
that you will probably see listed as
charity test stream. Please ignore and
that's probably what we're going to be
doing test and then making the Fallout
character and getting Fallout through
that thing and trying to get to that
point. Um, and then uh the charity
stream will be on the 16th on Friday.
Also, Flicklesticks, we're not ending
any gag, man. We're just we're just
we're hanging out. I I'm the the CVO,
the senior vibes official officer or
whatever. Uh senior vibes officer. I can
be both.
Uh all right, I'm going to get out of
here because I got meetings. All right.
Uh Janet, we will see you
all. Oh god, it'll be a bit, but there
will be a pre-posted thing where you can
get reminders about Matt's birthday
stream on the 16th along with when it'll
be um and details about the charity and
all of that. That that'll be going up
sometime this week. So, please uh watch
your feeds for that and sign up to get
reminders when it goes live. There is no
design club this week. So, Janet, take
care of yourselves. We will see you all
next time.