Hello, Janet. You're not allowed to
panic. I see that comment. I see that
comment right now. I see your comments
about panicking. When are you allowed to
panic? Not now. Haha. Panic, panic,
panic, panic, panic. No, no, no. They
can have a little panic as a treat, but
like not a lot of panic, right? Not not
a lot of panic. Um, hey Will, you know
what I just managed to do? What? See
ads, realize that my subscription had
lapsed, and resubscribe myself before
somebody sniped me and did me a sub
again. Very nice. Good job. Yes. Uh for
anyone uh curious on um here on on
Twitch, there is somewhat of a tradition
um where uh the staff uh get their
personal accounts gifted subscriptions
to the channel that they work for
because they forget to resubscribe. So
despite the fact that we do not indeed
need them and are perfectly willing to
do it ourselves. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
Yeah. Yeah. Um should I be concerned? I
mean about us always. Always always is
good. Um, all right. So, Will, do you
know how many windows I have open right
now for what we're about to do today?
I think this is more windows. Buddy,
buddy, do you know that that's the
number of windows I have open every time
we do this? This is your professional
gig. That's true. That you're you're not
wrong.
Um, I'm seldom wrong and actually very
happy to admit it when I am. Usually I
can learn something from that. That's
fair. Learn. I have learned today you
open more windows than I do normally.
Yep. Though I don't think you beat me on
tabs. I believe my tab ball makes you
panic. I I I I believe that. Um now I
have a very salient question for both
Brad and Janet based on some feedback we
got. How do we sound? Do we sound okay?
I uh it it it Matt and I took a a brief
look at this earlier and um it wasn't
like anything astounding to write home
about, but we did do a little bit of
adjusting here and there to try and make
Jeff and I a little more level and to uh
up level on our volume. Yeah. Yeah.
Right. Right. Right. Right. Right. Okay.
Cool. And I believe I have I have
adjusted Well, I have gained something
today. Yeah. What? You You've gained I
increased my gain and therefore I have
gained something.
Well done. Well done. Okay. Uh great
great great. Thank you. Thank you all. I
cannot tell you how excited I am for our
topic today. As mundane as it may seem,
I feel like Well, okay. So, so as the
title would suggest, we are going on a
theoretical We're not going to buy it
because we don't need it, but we're
going on a theoretical $5,000 unity
shopping spree. We'll talk more about
that once we do the intro. And Jeff has
been pitching this idea for six months.
Six months. Isn't the dollar sign
supposed to go before as opposed to Oh,
sorry. Never mind. No. No. Now it's too
late. Now you've drawn attention to it.
Now people will wonder. Now people Yeah,
I would have gotten away with it, too,
if it wasn't for you meddling kids. Um,
pull off the mask. That's right. Aha,
old man Smithers. That's right. I was
trying to inflate my property value and
you meddling kids. Anyway, um, was that
included in those Scooby-Doo liveish
action movies as well, so that that meme
continued, or is that only known to
people who watch the cartoon a long time
ago? I I would be shocked and somewhat
appalled actually if that particular
trope didn't make it into the full
liveaction ones. Um, yeah. So, so
Snackens, uh, right, the other way to
look at this is what can Kickstarter
money actually buy us? Yes. So, uh, the
reason that we're talking about this is
that, um, the Unity store is kind of a
really cool place to get started. So,
we're going to we're going to intro all
of that. Um, we're going to get started
here momentarily because we did start
late and we want to get into this. Um,
oh, that's right. We we should actually
theoretically start the recording before
I start my spiel about how excited I am
on this. Correct. I have one other item
of business. You're at the beginning of
this. You're at the beginning of this in
the VOD. You're at the beginning of this
in the stream. If you are somewhere
where you can leave comments, aka
YouTube, or you're watching this on uh
well, you won't be watching this on
Nebula or you're watching it on Twitch,
uh or you're in the Discord, Jeff and I
are planning to do a designer ride along
next week for a game. And we've got I I
would I would say too many ideas. At
least that's my problem. I have too many
ideas. I would like to know what you all
would like to see. Is there a game that
you would like Jeff and I to spend about
an hour poking the first hour of maybe
maybe poking a little deeper? What would
you like to see
us take and put under the microscope?
Last ride along have been things like
checking out actually different
character creators. We did a good one on
Boulders's Gate and then another one on
Monster Hunter Wilds. Monster Hunter.
Thank you. Checked out the monster train
separate game demo. We've done ride
alongs
for shoot against the storm. Like
actually any number. Actually, we didn't
do Against the Storm. We haven't done
Against the Storm because I don't like
Against the Storm because it gives me
analysis paralysis looking at the UI. Oh
yeah, I I found that too. Um any number
of games have just kind of ridden along.
In fact, Will's very very first stream
as an Extra Credit streamer was a ride
along for the Monolith Productions game
Fear. Yep. and fear if you can get it
running which will manage to do with
some pretty cool hacks still holds up as
a pretty badass um it's great I I I def
there there is one of I'm not normally I
don't like horror as a genre and I feel
like fear cuts the cuts the very thin
line between action game and horror game
in like the suspense category just
right. It really does. And one of my
favorite clips of me ever is um there's
a there's part where you're walk through
an office and there's like the the those
big slat curtains, right? You know, it's
not real like cloth curtains. It's like
a bunch of slats. They're like back with
plastic and they hang in front of the
thing. They're like a privacy curtain
kind of. And one of them blew into the
like one of them blew into the hallway
out of the and I saw it out of the
corner of my eye and I turned and dumped
an entire SMG mag down an empty hallway
and it was it it is a spectacular game.
It does require heavy patching to get it
to work because they made a bunch of
because it was released in um 2000 04.
Yeah. Early early early. Mhm. Um, so
yeah. Uh, my old tangent, but yeah.
Yeah. Yeah. Uh, Total Warhammer 3, but
that's a joke. Um, I see Forza Horizon
5. Interesting. Actually, racing games
aren't really my
forte. But I think that could be
interesting. Come here, kitty cat, if
you But I will I will be taking all
these suggestions into account, and Jeff
and I are going to meet next week and
plan which game we're going to do. So,
we got time. Um, so without any further
ado, I think we're ready to start a
recording. Uh, so if you're new here,
hi, welcome. You'll get the full intro
in a second. We're going to go to black
for a mere moment. Uh, and then we're
going to start a recording. Um, and uh,
we'll we're going to be doing that for
our friends over at Nebula. And then
we'll do a show and then we'll stop the
recording, but we'll still be here.
We'll do some after action business and
then we'll be done. Cool. Great.
Excellent. Awesome. I see a VOD screen
and I want to turn it
[Music]
black. Good time zone internet. Hello
and welcome to Design Club. The only
game design show on the internet where
there was a cat and now there's not and
there might be a cat again and you don't
know. I'm your humble host. Ah, there is
a cat. I am your humble host, Will,
joined as always by my pal Jeff and
Persible, who is living up to his name.
That was a pretty good purr into the
mic. Yeah. Hi everybody. I am Jeff Rzak
and I'm the studio director of Extra
Credits and longtime video game designer
and I'm here with my companion Will. I
am will our live content producer, voice
of the people, analyst, enthusiast, and
uh all around just sort of uh will of
all trades if you will and I will. So I
am uh we have an excellent topic for you
today. So Jeff, you've been excited
about this topic for six months. I I
would say conservatively six months.
Um pi pitch pitch us this idea.
Okay.
So today we're going to go spend some
money in the Unity store. And this is a
really interesting thing as a developer.
Mhm. Well, you're making a face. Is my
volume okay? No, you're fine. You're
fine. Okay. Just making sure. Yeah. This
is a really interesting thing as a
developer because for those unfamiliar,
game engines are the thing that you
build games in. And there are several
big commercial game engines. Unity and
Unreal being the two biggest game
engines. And for a long time when I
started deving, you did not go buy game
engines. You had somebody who put one
together on your team. You you had you
had the in-house engine and you were
going to like it because you still had
the, you know, the giant floppies or the
punch cards that that engine was written
on and it was what you had by Thunder
and you were going to program in it and
learn all the skills to program in that
language. Yeah. Yeah.
And this was a serious impediment
honestly to early game development.
Actually, it was a it was a pro and a
con as many of these things are because
the engine that got built was hopefully
the exact engine your game needed and
maybe you could reuse it along with
that. But it also meant you were
building your game engine while you were
building the game. So all of the tools
associated with making a game were
getting built while you were building
said game. And this was not an optimal
solution. My very first commercial game
was EverQuest and there were parts of
the game engine that just did not work
as we were doing parts of the
development or that weren't optimized.
And we like Oh, go ahead. That means you
can't QA those features. You can't you
can't uh balance test those features.
You can't do anything with stuff that
just doesn't work or let me give you an
example. Or it means there was just no
time for certain things like our level
editor. I built a couple of edit edit
levels didn't have a copy paste
function. This meant every single thing
you built in there you built by hand
every time you built it. So if you were
building a room with columns, you built
every
column. There was no importin function.
There was no copy paste function. Like
this is what lack of tools means like at
an even basic level. Yeah, that's um
that's kind of terrifying actually. I'm
gonna be totally honest. And like years
later when I was working at Monolith
Productions, our sister team was The
Matrix Online. And we had this Oh, what
was her name? Was it Kiko? We had this
badass fashion designer modeler who was
building all the clothes for the
Matrix. And building clothes for the
Matrix is a big thing. Like Matrix
fashion is Matrix fashion. And they had,
I believe it was three body types of PCs
you could play, male and female. So that
would be six bodies. And once she
finished each piece of clothing, she
would then have to manually adjust it to
fit the other five sizes of bodies. And
like a year after I got there, they
hired a tools programmer who in about
half a day made something that would
automatically resize all clothing to the
other sizes for her. But she'd been
doing this for two years. So
basically at least half of her time was
spent resizing assets. So she could have
put out twice as much Yeah. as she did
from half a day worth of tool engineer
work.
And this is where when you start hearing
about commercial engines like Unity and
Unreal, this is
why like these are so commonly used now
is because all your basic slates of
tools come with the game engine. Yeah.
These are engines that have been
professionally developed. In some cases,
they've been developed
for 20 years now with Unity. Yeah, I
think 20. Yeah, that that sounds about
right. At least 15 like for a while and
they keep building on it. And so in
nobody today Oh, go ahead. What do you I
was I was going to mention this uh this
this comment from Pin King. Uh first
off, thank you so much for that super
chat. Second off that like a game like
Payday 2 was designed in a racing game
engine because the studio knew how to
use that engine, which is wild, right?
Like that's that is the kind of thing
we're talking about here. And one of the
things that like Unity and Unreal
attempt
to not solve, but like mitigate some of
the downsides, I guess, right? And the
biggest downside is
that they are a universal engine.
Meaning it is not an engine optimized
for one particular game or type of game.
They are engines meant to be generally
applicable and usable by almost every
game. Yeah.
So there are occasionally still games
that will build their own engine for a
very specific need that they need their
game to pull off because they think it's
going to be more efficient than using an
offthe-shelf engine that can then be
modified. But these cases are few and
far between. Sure. Like GTA, actually
I'm curious if the next GTA has its own
engine or if it's just using hyped up
Unity or Unreal. It'll probably be
Unreal, I would guess, right? Like we
there are certain tells like if you play
enough games you can tell. So one of one
of the very interesting ones is lots of
indie Unity games. I know that they're
Unity because they uh don't know how to
exist as not the main window. That's a
common Unity like developer thing,
right? Is that they assume that you're
always going to be focused on that
window and if it's not the focus of the
stream then it doesn't know what to do
as an example, right? So, um that's a um
you you you kind of get a sense of what
they do and what they don't and what the
common problems are.
Yeah. And anyway, so one of the things
that has grown up
around these um the Unity and the Unreal
store, but particularly Unity is a whole
whole ecosystem of developers who make
not games, but things for people who
make games. And
Unity very quickly saw that this could
become an interesting thing and set up
the Unity store and initially they put
some of their own assets in there and b
and then said you can upload things here
we will review them. So everything I
believe in the unity asset store is they
call it moderated by
unity. I'm not exactly sure what
moderated means, but that that implies
at least some level of
checking. And all of those assets are
basically designed to be used
easilyish in Unity if you're using the
Unity engine. Unreal does this too. They
honestly just started later and because
of the way the ecosystem works, the
Unity store is just bigger. Yeah. And so
what this means is if you're using
Unity, you can go to the store and get
some free stuff. That's pretty cool.
There's a lot of groups that put out
free stuff as advertising for it's like
here, check out this low poly pack and
if you like it, I make a whole bunch
more. So it's a great way of checking
out how good their assets are and
actually bringing them in. everything up
to fairly expensive paid things that
cost hundreds of
dollars. But reframing
that hundreds of dollars, say you're
going to go, will there's a Let's go
look at a thing for a minute, actually.
Sure. All right, cool. So, we're going
to we're going to bring on in this here
monitor. So, uh you may notice uh that
this is going to move back and forth.
Jeff has one of these. I have one of
these. Bounce back and forth as is
appropriate. Let's see. Actually, let's
go over here for a minute. Um, low poly
asset
pack. Let's go find an expensive one for
a
minute. Oh, Poly Perfect. Poly Perfect
makes awesome stuff. Let's go look at
what Poly Perfect has.
So, this is
$120. That's a lot of lattes. $120 is
not pocket or is not cheap by anybody's
stretch of the imagination. If you're
just like, I'm just going to go spend
$120 polies today. But if you look at
this video running for
$120, this is a set that they keep
adding to of low poly assets. And if you
buy it, you keep getting everything they
put in this set. So for $120, and this
is one of the things I love about the
Unity store is kind of like the Steam
store. You'll get their initial trailer
and you can go look at
things, but you can start seeing they're
basically selling
you. Here we go. This is the number of
models in each of these sets. You know,
38 model Egypt set. There's 32 dishes,
125 building parts, 286 sci-fi assets,
all the scenes from these separate
different bundles that they sell
together.
I think there's 202 apocalypse models.
That That's probably my favorite.
I'm wonder if we can find apocalypse in
here. But if you look at this, you're
buying more than a man year. If I went
and hired an artist to go start putting
this together, this is more than a man
year's worth of work. Well and truly.
And all of these are actually one of the
cool things too, this works in the
built-in Unity engine. Um, and the two
basically um the universal render
pipeline and the HD universal render
pipeline. any set any way that you are
importing assets into
Unity. All of these assets are
guaranteed to work. Oh, there you go.
Oh, eight years worth of work with free
monthly
updates. So, $120 is expensive, but you
are also
getting enough assets that if this is
the kind of game you're
making, this may be two man years worth
of
art because you're not going to use
everything, right? two manurs worth of
art that you could be using 10 minutes
from now. Yeah. And that's the magic of
this. Okay. So, now that we've kind of
like taken a look at one of these, I
want to I want to address a really great
question from chat real quick. Uh which
is
um what's the difference between this
kind of purchase an asset, use it for
your game, and what what some people
will negatively refer to as an asset
flip, right? Is a what term? asset flip.
Um, and and I think uh I'm gonna I'm
gonna take a shot at this and then you
can course correct me if I'm wrong. My
thought is that uh it's about the
intent, right? If you um asset flips
usually Let's define asset flip real
quick. Yeah. Uh are um generally
regarded, I would say, as
lowquality games that exist because
someone has assets to use for it, not
because there's an initial driving force
or market need for it.
um would be my is my general impression.
Let me think about that, Jeff. Yeah. And
I would
say so part of it is the intentionality
behind it. So like one of the reasons
that the title says $5,000 Unity store
shopping spree is five grand is a little
less but roughly what a junior
programmer makes in a month.
So, what I'm comparing this here is,
well, I'm starting to make my own game,
right? I'm relearning Unity. Sure. I am
going to see if I can pull off a one
maybe two or three person game that I
think that I've been running around in
my head that I would like to make into
an actual release on Steam. I think this
has a pretty good chance of being an
excellent game. Okay. I am an excellent
game designer. Sure. I am not a great
programmer. I am not a great
artist. Um, I know how to do a little
bit of both. But I have a very exact
idea of what I would like to
build. There are certain parts of this
that I don't care about. If, for
example, I'm doing a low poly art style,
I don't want to go build every table. I
don't want to go build every piece of a
castle. I don't want to go hire an
artist to spend a year putting assets
together.
that I think with the treatment I'm
doing, I could use offtheshelf assets to
get 80% of what I want and then maybe
hire a contractor to do the final
um putting the extra polish on. Mhm. And
assets are just like 3D assets are just
a part of it. Yeah. But in the same way
you don't go program an engine from
scratch, you use Unity. In the same way
you don't go program a physics systems
from scratch, you use Havoc. And that
you don't go implement a multiplayer
system from scratch, you probably just
use Photon. Like a lot of these are
literally commodified pieces of your
game now. And some like art is actually
one of the things that I may consider
not using the most, even though I think
it's what most people think of when
they're like, "Oh, go buy an asset from
the Unity store." Like the art is
interesting. There's some like check
this out. Polytopia, the group I was
just talking about. Hold
on. And this can also be good for like
anything you want to use it on. Wait, am
I on the right page now? Hold
on. Come here. Where are
you? There. Here we are. Come here.
They made low poly dinos. Well, they're
rigged. That's amazing. They have
animation. Yeah. For 20 bucks, I can go
get low poly animals that will wander
around. There you go. Check these out.
Including, let's see, attack, idle,
death, roar, walk, like animations. So,
if I want to set up a scene where away
in the distance you see dinosaurs moving
around, I don't need high poly models. I
can use low poly models. For 20 bucks, I
can go get all of the low poly dinos I
want that are already
animated and I can just set up a scene
and have it go. Yeah, like that's great.
That is an excellent use of things that
if I was having to go hire an artist to
do this would never be in my budget for
an indie game. Right. And it's worth
noting that like these are all um this
is sort of a a very interesting way that
taking a step back and looking at the
games industry as a whole, right? Um
jobs at major studios
are unstable, unpredictable at the
moment. We're having a a touch of layoff
problems in the gaming industry, right?
And so this is another way that artists,
programmers, we'll talk about this,
right? Because when you think asset,
dear viewer, I we're about to break your
asset idea in a minute. But yeah, right.
Like you normally think of art. Oh, this
is so much more than art. This is so
much more than art or or any sort of um
what what I would consider like a thing
that the user sees, right, is available
here. And so, um, this is a really
interesting way to sort
of match people up with people who want
their work and and to help people find
freelance work in the games industry,
which I also think is really good right
now. Um, because the games industry
is having a year. It's just having a
year, chat. We'll talk more about that
on breakfast at some point. Yeah. Hold
on. Where did my select
Jeff is juggling more windows than usual
today because he's driving one of these
and he's not uh Jeff only has two
monitors, I believe. I do. I'm about to
set up another one. Let's see. Just
highlight it. I have a third monitor
just for this. Um,
wait, where's the one where I can
highlight things? Uh, it's the
dashboard.
Show me your dashboard. You might need
to click on the link at the top of the
bar on the right hand side of the main
window and then you will get a box that
says dashboard. Yes, because three chat
windows isn't enough. I obviously need
you don't need the other ones open. You
just need the dashboard open.
Oh, does it Will, can you do me a favor
and click on 20 for a prototype from
dog? Yeah, this one.
So this is absolutely the most
common use case you hear devs talking
about is hey I can buy something to
quickly stand up but let's take this out
of the theoretical will yeah sure okay
I'm going to go make okay TM out of the
theoretical this is a theoretical but
right screw it but like we're going to
we're going to create a more concrete
example as a use case I'm going to go
make a slay the spire kind game, but
instead of doing 2D, I'm going to do it
in
3D. And we're going to do we're gonna
change our art style, and I want to go
make this as a one to two person team,
and I don't want to take eight years to
do it. Sure.
I've saved up five grand. Let's go
shopping. Okay. This is basically I'm
going to try and take what would be a
six-year project and turn it into a
two-year project. Okay, that's by
spending $5,000. Okay.
So, starting with that.
So, this is a So, so just so everyone's
on the same page, this is a turnbased
card
engine adventure
rogike that involves we're doing in 3D
instead of 2D. In 3D instead of 2D.
Excellent. All right, let's let's take a
look around. Okay, here. Let me go up
here. I did some favorites just for
this.
Um, real unity asset store. You're going
to make
me do this. Check this
out. Okay, here's the very first thing I
Oh, it goes on a flash sale
in 20 days. That's what Oh, hold on. Oh,
that's the CCG kit. Here we go. Here's
my first $99, right? I'm going to go buy
a rogike game engine. Somebody has gone
out there and made a
generic rogike slay the spire style
engine. I don't like the art style. No
disrespect to the person who put it
together, but for $80, excuse me,
$99, I can
get a something that lets me see cards,
see monsters, select targets, generate a
map, get cards with assets,
is universal is works with the built-in
in the URP engine. Okay, here we go.
features, card battles, generate an
adventure map, solo and co-op, desktop
and mobile controls. Actually, I don't
have to read these all out. Yeah. So,
for a hundred bucks, I can go look at
the code somebody's written for this and
use this to read through it and as I'm
reting myself Unity, have a commented
guide on how to build all of these with
examples that work. Yeah. So, um that
seems like a pretty good $100. It does.
Right. This this feels like a way um it
it feels like in many ways uh the as
someone who worked in IT for a really
long time, right? You almost never need
to make your own solution. Someone else
has made the solution. Your job is not
to make the solution, it's to find the
solution, right? And then adapt it to
your use case. So here, if all Jeff uses
is the underlying structure of the game
and then tweaks it from there in a bunch
of ways, that's worth that's well worth
a hundred bucks because this takes you
from I would like to build this kind of
game to I would like to make here's an
example of a game that works with code,
right? Yeah. Here here's an example of
this. It sort of um gets you into the
range of building a minimum uh viable
product rather than starting from zero.
Right? It's sort of the um in order to
bake a cake from scratch, you must first
invent the universe. We have now
invented the universe. Let us proceed to
bake the cake. Sort of. I don't have to
go grow the wheat to grind into the
flour. Correct. I'm starting with
prepackaged flour and going off to
actually build my cake. Yeah. Okay,
cool. So that's that's a hundred bucks.
We have 4,900 left to go. Yeah. And by
the way, I was just looking like at a
couple of these. Like Indie Mark, who
makes this um has also
done. Are we not going
back? Oh, I have it here. Um he's also
done a CCG one. Oh, no. Right. That was
Game Vanilla. Yeah. Who did the CC?
I think Game Hold on. It's funny. You
actually start to recognize some of
these groups. Come here, Game Vanilla.
What have you
done? CCG kit, single player, CCG kit,
gooey pack. They've done a generic
bubble shooter, a generic match three
with swipes, generic Candy
Crush. Like different groups have
actually gone out there.
Maybe we Oh, I think it was this CCG kit
that I actually thought
was Let's go look at this one versus
Indie Marks one.
Oh, this one's only the built-in
pipeline, not the universal render
pipeline. But again, you might buy these
just for the code, right? Yeah. It's
also really nice that because it's all
consolidated in one place, right? You're
not God. Okay, so streamers, right? My
experience with buying assets is is in
Streamland. Streamers buy assets off
Etsy. This is so much better than that,
right? This is so much better than that
because you have guarantees of what it
works with and that it's been tested and
that like it's a genuine product and
that like Unity vouches for it, right?
Yeah. And I think that um Brain's
distinction is a good one, right? That
um there are you can definitely see how
someone would like essentially say, "Ah,
yes, I'm going to take this bubble
shooter kit and replace buy a couple of
assets and buy like five bucks worth of
assets." flip some logos around and then
call that my game, right? Versus I have
a thing and I'm gonna transform it,
right? It's the degree of versus my
50page design doc that I've already put
together and two years of thought on how
I want to make all of this. Yeah,
exactly. But it's still like it is
amazing to me and it's amazing how far
the store has come. back in 2016 and
17
when 15 man when I was um doing some
development work for VR for u the early
Oculus ecosystem
um Oculus didn't have avatars yet so we
had to go make our own avatars for use
in VR
and we were doing tabletop games
and one of the things we opted on to do
was masks became our avatars So, we had
one of our artists putting together
these really cool masks and they mapped
your body movement. So, as you moved
around, you could see it and you'd see
their hands move as well because you
used the hand things. And a mask would
take roughly 2 to three days to make a
good mask. And at that point, we also
went under the Unity store and for
another 50 bucks picked up three, I
think it was three more masks. And so,
we saved nine days of artist time. Um,
which considering we only had a couple
of artists and we had a deadline to get
this game out was great. I'd also wanted
to put in that when you won a game, so I
mean you like we were playing Katon. We
had the license for Katon. So we're all
sitting around the table playing VR
Katon that when you won the game I
wanted little fireworks to come up and
like explode over the board at right
just over eye level. We didn't have a
great VFX artist on staff. for 20 bucks.
I found a a firework package on the
early Unity store. We bought it. It took
Paul an hour to implement it and it was
beautiful. Somebody had made a little
fireworks package and after every game
little fireworks
you and they just explode over the table
and it was so pretty and everybody
remembers that it was 20 bucks. Like
these are the kinds of things that even
a financed team like oh we don't have a
specialist at this. pay somebody who was
a specialist who put this together to
make money on their side hustle. Yep.
And it was great. And even if even if
you couldn't have found exactly what you
were looking for,
you know, nowadays it feels like that's
likely, it does feel likely that you
could have said, "Hey, uh, I noticed
that you have this thing that's kind of
like what I'm looking for. Would you do
a commission for this thing?" Right. Um,
oh, I am sure that half the people up
here make a sizable amount of their
money off of commissions. Yeah. You put
out these low poly art packs. I need
these five models that aren't in there.
Could you make them for me? Mhm. And
there's probably a deal where like if
you they'll cut you a break if they if
they can put them in the asset packs
afterwards or you can pay more for
exclusives or whatever, right? But I do
think that it this is a really cool
indication of how
it feel not like leveling the playing
field but like it definitely feels like
a big step up on hey you want to get
started. It takes the getting started
from I have no idea where to start to I
have an idea of where to start and I
need this amount of money to do it which
is very nice right because starting is
usually one of the hardest parts.
Finishing also one of the hardest parts.
The starting is very hard. Well, we've
talked about art. Yeah. Well, let's go
look at some other things for a moment.
Sure. Here we go. I'm going to open up
this one, this one, and
um this
one. So, Will, you know what I don't
want to build for my game? What? I don't
want to build a game launcher. I don't
want to build a little thing that pops
up at the beginning. I'm not going to
have one for my game anyway because it
launches out of Unity. But you know
those one, you know, the launchers that
pop up, like the League of Legends
launcher or the others,
for 250 bucks, you can buy one that'll
um basically do binary patch
differences, give you news, repairs,
self updates, multi- language support,
set your
resolutions. Um, easy to, you know,
animated, customizable, well documented.
250 bucks. I don't have to go buy a game
launcher or excuse me, build a game
launcher. I can buy a game launcher code
and hook it up and here's one with 285
people looking at it, five star reviews.
Like, yeah, that's that is great. I
don't want to build a game launcher,
right? You know what else I don't want
to build? I don't want to build a save
system. I don't know how to do
serialized saves that store in the
cloud. Um, for 50 49 bucks, 1,000 people
have five starred this
system. There's a whole bunch of things
like that you may be interested in
building a game that have and this has
nothing to do with art. This isn't I'm
going to go buy some models. This is I'm
buying a game launcher. I'm buying a
solution that tells me how to do game
data and serialized saves. Yeah. Like
that's pretty cool. Yeah. Check this
out. Oh, go ahead. I I think that that's
that that like game launcher save
system, right? Especially because like
saving to the Steam cloud isn't new,
right? That's not a new thing. But you
don't want to have to implement why why
would you bother implementing a new
version of that? Just find a solution
that does that thing. It's not new,
right? Yeah. Look at
this. Let's see. This was used by Do
they say
here? Oh, here we
go. This is the text animator used by
Little Kitty, Big City, Paper Trail,
like Cult of the Lamb. This lets you
hold
on come in and basically with typing
something the equivalent of HTML code in
your dialogue, make it start to do the
wiggles and the booms and all of the
other little fun things. I could learn
how to go program this from scratch, but
for
$65, I can come in and use the system
that several other fantastic lowbudget
to mid-budget games have used to come do
custom
effects in my text, right? Like I saw
this, this was one of the first things I
saw and I immediately put it on my save
for like the real game I'm going to
build. I am buying this asset. Yeah.
Okay. So, so by the way, so right now,
just so we're like I'm I'm keeping kind
of mental mental math track. So, we've
got $100 for what we'll call the like
foundation of the game, right? We've got
250 bucks. Oh, we don't need a launcher,
but we do. Yeah, we don't need a
launcher. If I needed If I had a game
with that needed a launcher, Yeah. I
would spend 250 bucks to buy it any day
of the week, right? Like that is weeks
to months worth of programming hell for
something that people want to just work.
Yeah. Nobody tells you how good your
game launcher was. Yeah. But people will
tell you if it's bad. That is one of the
downsides, right? like you do need to
make sure that this is meeting the needs
that you have and that it's doing the
thing that you want it to do because oh
people will tell you if it's bad but
like you know uh and then we're at like
105
$115 for like a save system and a text
animator and a foundation for a game
like right there right and just those
three things alone would let me start on
that game have beautiful text on it and
have basically all my saves on. Yeah.
And those I mean I'd still have to read
through them and learn how to implement
them. Sure. But the mental load that you
save on those things is also
significant, right? It's not just like
particularly as you've said, you're not
a programmer by trade, right? You have
the design for the game, not the program
for the game in mind. And so you get to
save all the mental load of training
yourself to be a programmer, right? You
don't you don't have to do that. like
you have to figure out how to implement
it and that is some amount of
programming but it's very different than
invent the universe right
um let me show you a couple more fun
things you talk about settings all the
time you know how accessibility and
settings yes this is a by default by
here that just it is a game setting
system that hooks into all of your other
hooks and lets you adjust everything
from display to graphics to edits to
controls and um like they've laid it all
out. They've put in all the hooks,
different times of volume, everything
else.
Yeah. And those things, by the way,
that's really important for the industry
because if you make it easy to do things
like accessibility settings, more people
will do them. And I am a huge 50ucks.
Yeah. Right. I am a huge believer that
every game needs good accessibility
settings. In fact, the game that we're
playing tomorrow south of midnight uh
which just came out already earned
massive points. I was setting up uh the
game to make sure it ran and captured
okay and all that before this stream and
it opens with, "Hey, would you like all
of the menus for this game narrated? How
would you like your subtitles? Here are
all of your subtitle flavors and
options." And I was like, "Oh, I love
this game already cuz it did this
correctly, right?" And I'm not I'm not a
normal person when it comes to settings
menus. I love a good settings menu. Um
uh I think that they're one of the marks
of like a well-considered game. And if
you make it easy to do, more people will
do it. Um I did I did we did have a
really good question from chat real
quick. Um because uh I think this is a
really great question. Um what's the
launcher for? What can't you just run
the game executable straight out of
Steam or whatever? like c can you
explain that real quick? Usually it's
only used by companies honestly that um
operate outside of the um the Steam
ecosystem or that want you to be able to
launch multiple games from one place
that isn't Steam. So, for example,
League of League of Legends has it in
there to patch League before you play,
but also to patch Team Fight Tactics and
um
I'm for and um Valerant I think is in
the same launcher. Yeah. Um a lot of Civ
actually used to do that um because
Foraxis wanted you to see their other
games and be able to run advertisements.
They recently got rid of it. It used to
be a more common thing that it is now. A
lot of MMOs do it because they want to
do basically checks on your patch before
you run it, but
um not well basically Steam takes care
of a lot of the updating and settings
for people, but companies that don't run
exclusively through Steam still want to
get all of that check and update done
before you
run. So Steam in some cases has turned
us from every game has one. Excuse me,
half the games have one to like 5% of
the games have one. Yeah. Oh, and um
that's a big one there. Let's
see. If you want to have a whole bunch
of mods and loadouts, some games prefer
that you do it before you load the
entire game. Other games are fine with
you do it basically from like your um
initial landing window. Yeah. Depending
upon how their game works and how their
engine works. Minecraft is a prime
example, right? Everybody has their
favorite Minecraft loader thing,
launcher, um mod downloader manager
thing because they're all different,
right? Yeah. Um they will Yes. 95 bucks
for an industry standard dialogue
system. So like branching dialogue trees
and dialogue management and all that
done in a visual editor so that you can
basically say oh this points to this
points to this here's the dead end
here's here here's the branching oh I
want this one to actually be up here you
can drag it connect the
arrow and if we go down again let's see
barks you can combine it with scriptal
event a bark is something like if you
come near an NPC a bark is the industry
term for it says a thing alert alerts,
cut scenes, cinematics, relationship,
language
localization, like all of this built in
to a non nodebased visual editor for
less than $100 that has been used
by a large number of
games. Again, you could build these from
scratch, but in a lot of
cases, why would you, right?
And again, like, oh, there you go. This
is showing like the trigger and
interaction, like you're setting the
radius around your model for when
somebody steps in, a thing, a dialogue
event
happens. Like this may actually be for
the if I'm doing a Slay the Spire game,
honestly, overkill. I don't think we
need this heavy of a dialogue system.
Pretty text, yes. But buy a dialogue
system for under $100.
Yeah. And and and the really cool thing
too
is the more people use the tool, the
easier it is for the person making good
tools to make a living making good
tools, right? So instead of having a
tool programmer for your game, there are
now freelance tool programmers that have
made the digital equivalent of wrenches,
right? This is a digital wrench and they
keep updating them and adding to them.
Yeah. Over time. Yeah. And and I think
Grass makes an excellent point here that
like uh it depends on the kind of game,
right? If you're doing a VN
that is like a huge chunk of your game,
you can write a visual novel in
something in in something like that
where you flow out all of the dialogue
and all of the relationships and all of
that in that system and that's the bulk
of your game. So it really is like
system dependent, right? Yeah. And
again, like looking at these, this is
also what's part of what's bringing game
development
Honestly, I would say to the masses.
Yeah. And that without something like
this, if you were a really good writer
who had done some game development, you
couldn't make your own thing, right?
With Unity and this, you're a lot
closer. You can actually go they have
visual novel templates in the same way
as like that um CCG one I showed you.
And notice, by the way, the past like
six or seven things we've looked at have
nothing to do with art. This isn't going
and buying a model. This is what
actually got me so excited looking
through this like 6 months ago when I
started looking was the amount of things
that you could buy that had nothing to
do with art that were tools and
utilities, like good fun things. And
we'll go through some free stuff maybe
later, but like I just like some of
these I'm just check this out. Hey Will,
pretend instead for a moment we're going
to go make a badass tower defense game
and I'm going to call it Zerg Rush.
Okay, here we go. Agent navigation
crowds. This is 3D path. This is 3D
pathf finding for large numbers of
entities. It's a plug-in solution.
Yeah, that's that's wild because like
path finding not easy.
Mhm. Look at this. $25.
Yeah. It is a pathfinding solution for
crowds, right? Yeah. Oh god. I I So,
that's Yeah, that's a ton. Look. Okay.
You know what this is making me think
of? Um when Weda had to build a battle
animation system for Lord of the Rings.
And here it is for 25 bucks, right?
Because essentially that was just a
complex pathfinding model, right? where
the two armies would like find each
other and interact and then there was
like a kind of a script for like when
someone would die, right? Um and even
they screwed it up. They admitted that
like offshot there were enemies who
couldn't pathf find to each other that
were just running away from the battle
in opposite directions and here's a
solution for 25 bucks. Like I saw this
and like you know how you get
inspiration from seeing this made me
almost want to go make like a Zerg Rush
tower defense game. Like what could I do
with something that let me do funneling
other thing with large amounts of people
in funnels? Like this is
cool. This is so cool. Yeah, it's it it
is a really cool um Yeah, like here we
go. This is art for a moment. Cloth
animation. There's a $35 solution to
animating cloth on your models. Cloth is
hard to animate, by the way. Yeah. Uh
especially I don't know if you all have
noticed but cloth is like cloth and hair
are like the two things that always clip
they clip into everything all of the
time forever in every game engine in
every game. They just do right and this
is this is I'm seeing minimal clipping
here and this looks really good and it's
35 bucks. Right. Yeah. Like and again
it's just the sheer breadth of things on
the Unity store. if you just start
browsing through. Like I'm not a Unity
store expert. I've looked around for a
while, but these were just like fun like
um Oh, check out like actually we don't
even need to go look at more art assets.
There's cool art assets. There's cool
VFX like yeah, you know, stylized
projectables. Ultimate VF actually
ultimate VFX
bundle like this is these are VFX, you
know, little pops, little arrows,
explosions, outlines,
slashes. This is a collection
of Oh, here we go. eight different
bundles of VFX. And it's just like
looking through it, it is
mindblowing what you can get. And again,
this is fairly expensive, but for
$160, this might be your entire solution
for a game if you're making a small
game, like a two to three person game
like I'm thinking. And it is very
interesting um that this is one of the
things that recommends Unity as the
engine that you choose, right? Like in
addition to the other like you're going
to need to pick an engine when you build
your game, right? You got three major
choices, two really major choices and
one that's kind of like sitting in the
back going, "I'm also here. I'm here.
Look at me." Um that one in the back is
good, right? Uh and then you've got uh
the the two the two big contenders which
are Unreal and and Unity as we said
before. And this is a thing that
recommends Unity, right? is that's like
enough. That's enough VFX for like a
mobile. Like you could do a whole
flipping through like look at that.
Yeah. Like that's nice. Like that'll do.
That's way better than I can
build.
Um Oh, hold on. I got to show you. Like
as long as we're talking about cool
stuff. Let's
see.
MeshBaker. Um uh by the way, um uh Mr.
Omega over in YouTube chat said if you
like text animator you should look at
feel. Um and this feel's on my list. I'm
coming to it. I'm coming to it. Um thank
you. I also think that this is a um that
this is another big useful thing, right?
Which is if you know other devs and if
you're deving in Unity, you probably
know other Unity devs. Um you will have
[Music]
a it's much easier for people to
recommend things and to say like, "Hey,
I got this thing from a reputable place.
Here are the reviews. Here's the thing.
you should add it to your system because
I know that it works with yours even
though you're developing a tower defense
game and I'm developing a third person
shooter. Right? So, here's the thing you
almost never hear anybody talk about in
who isn't hard into dev mesh making.
It's basically
um meshes and materials are all over
every 3D object you see and they all get
rendered. A mesh baker basically takes
them and combines them in ways that it's
processed so that it is less intensive
um on how many what's called batches it
runs to process this. So here's an
example. We're looking out at an
asteroid field. Before this was
optimized it was calling
5,924 batches. With a match baker it's
calling 40.
That seems basically less than 1%. That
seems significant. Yeah. So, basically,
it's an optimizer for meshes, which is
something nobody knows exists until they
get that awful frame rate, and they're
trying to figure out why. And here you
go. Here's the solution that's been used
by or bought over five starred over 427
times. Yep. Like, and is on over 7,000
people's watch list. Because what
usually when you're watching it, you're
interested in an asset, but you might
not need it yet, right? or you're
waiting for a sale because those also
happen. Yeah. Well, like um
Microslat puts together, speaking of
meshes, terrains and meshes. So like
tracks in snow,
wheel tracks on dirt.
Welcome, Will, to basically Yeah. like
you're not when you see tracks go in
dirt like when you're watching um Red
Dead Redemption and you see looking
they're not actually carving
3D divots into the ground. They're
putting textures or decals on top of it
that mesh in with the dirt mesh that
together make it look like it's leaving
tracks. Right. It does. If you actually
had to put 3D indents into it, the
rendering would be crazy, right? Yeah.
You're not, you don't actually change
the terrain mesh. You're just changing
what it looks like. So, here is a
solution that gets you a frigin ton of
stuff. Again, a lot of these are getting
into the weeds that most people don't
even know they exist. But these are
solutions in this case you that just you
can buy and work, right? and and and and
these are things that
like top end games are used, right?
Wait, hold on a sec. Wait, wait. This is
visual scripting from Hearthstone,
Inside, Hollow Knight, First Tree,
Observation, Dreamfall, Chapters, and
more. Okay, great. Yeah, this isn't just
small studios that use these. Um, and
again, visual scripting is like, let's
see if we can find Okay. Oh, here we go.
Made with Playmaker.
This is one of the ones that I was
realiz like everybody buys, right? And
it basically lets you set up a visual
script is instead of all programming
code, you put little blocks like door
trigger. It starts closed. When you
trigger the thing, the door opens. Each
of these then point to a little line of
code, but it lets you reuse these
blocks. And visually, you might even
have an a programmer put it together and
then hand off the set of tools to all of
for example the level builders who can
then go and visually script doors and
windows and all of these other things
that get event and triggered. This is
one of the things that bridges the gap
between hardcore crunchy programmers who
are like ah yes I dream in C++ and uh
people who are like I have a great idea
for a game but I don't know how to make
the computer box do the thing. Right?
This is this is a tool, right? It's just
a tool like any other. And I I love that
it's I So, Jee, are there lists? Are
there like lists of of um like
centralized lists of things? Cuz I feel
like there should be a list of like
here's all of the Unity asset source
stuff. This is the gold standard start
your Unity game thing. Here are all of
these things. I don't know. Let me show
you one more. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And then
I want to get to that. So, somebody had
mentioned feel. Yeah,
feel
is
basically they call it adding juice to
your game. This is a collection of card
little bumps. This is ground shakes.
This is motion blurs. This is all of the
extra little stuff like look on the left
and right. Left is un, right is with.
Yeah. that let you come in and like add
that little bit of well actually let's
just so you can see they're going a bit
into the code but like the things that
make those go back a little bit the
little bump and the little that happens
around there the screen shakes it's a
whole package that just let you add
small amounts of polish to everything
that happens this is something that some
games don't even know to put in here for
50 bucks is a package
of a whole bunch of them that just let
you add it. Yeah. So, in our mythical,
you know, rogike, you play a card and
you want a little thud or you want the
card to shift and Twitter a little bit
or upon a big hit, you want a small
screen shake or you want, you know, a
little kind of camera blur whoo in like
these all come in for all of the render
pipelines. Oh, here we go. winner of
best artist tools for 21 and publisher
of the year for 23 of
just extra little things to polish up
your game all in one package. Yeah. So,
I I want to back up real quick just for
a second because you you brought this up
a cool a bunch a few times now, right,
with with a couple others about like
this is a thing that most people don't
know that they need, right, or that they
want, right? They don't know that they
want it yet. And what I think is kind of
cool as a tool for aspiring um
designers, developers, programmers,
whatever, is not only is this a place
where you can get the stuff, it's a
place where you can find out the stuff
exists, right? Which is huge because not
knowing what you don't know is a weird
huge philosophical learning gap, right?
And this is a way to expose your brain.
As a dev with 20 plus years experience,
I am learning things in here, right?
just looking through like of course I
was thinking of saves for my game. I
hadn't thought of a save system. I'd
kind of naively assume that maybe Unity
had that in. Maybe they do, maybe they
don't. But the fact that somebody's made
a third party system means that there's
room for improvement. Yeah. Um we have a
question from male. Uh while this is a
Unity focus episode, even as a Unreal
Engine indie dev, I'm taking notes. Will
any of the storefront platform
differences matter? Um so Unreal
absolutely has their own store as well.
I happen to be operating in the Unity
ecosystem. So, I've been checking out
Unity. I do know that Unreal has it. I
believe some of these assets it wouldn't
matter like if you're buying, you know,
if you went and you bought that CCG
engine, the code on the back end that
runs it, which is probably written in C
or
Python, it's going to work no matter
where you put it. As long as it's
something that can run those, it's going
to work. it won't necessarily have all
the hooks. So, and and I think the core
concept applies of there are tools that
are available that you can purchase that
will improve your game significantly um
by trading a little money for a lot of
time. Uh that principle, that core idea
will also carry through I think uh for
sure. And part of it's your goal like my
goal if I make a game will I want
something good enough that when people
play it they're like this is a great
game. Sure. And there's a big difference
between a passion project and that like
if you play it and you're like you want
people say this is a great game. Your
saves have to work. You need those extra
bits of polish. You know, you need all
of the stuff working because the bar is
so high now for what people expect from
an experience, right? Like this is still
on field. Look at this here. Like
post-processing depth of field or lens
distortion or color grading. Like this
is just 50 bucks. Once you get the
package, like you could probably retune
your entire
game just off of this to have a better
UX user
experience just with this package. And
it might be a thing that you did. You
spent 50 bucks and then spent an entire
week going through your game just taking
it and trying to up the feel everywhere
that you want it to be. Yeah. And this
it is kind of an interesting like
double-edged sword here, right? Because
on the one hand, there are more um there
are more games than ever that are coming
out every year. Unfortunately, that also
means that there are more games than
ever that come out every year that get
ignored, right? Because I unfortunately
in 2025 have the same amount of time to
play games more or less that I did in
2020 when there were far fewer games
coming out than there were in 2015 when
there were fewer games than there were
in 2010 when there were fewer games.
Right? So, um, the water level for
getting noticed feels much higher. Um,
by the way, look at this one. Yeah. It's
a tool that let you basically run a
database out of Google Sheets or Excel
and syncs it into your game.
Okay, that's it's cool, but please don't
please don't
if you're building a CCG Yeah, for sure.
I mean, a rogue like CCG that has, you
know, a 100 powers, you might as someone
who is currently dealing with the
spaghetti code written in it, if you're
use, if you're building an MMO, don't
Oh, yeah. Just don't 14. That is the
difference in scale. Yeah. 14's back end
is written in Excel sheets.
Excel is not a database grass. Yes, I
know that. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. But I
just like some of these things I look at
and I'm just like, this is cool. Yeah.
And this isn't even getting to all of
the free stuff out there. Mhm.
And it like this is I think one of the
biggest strengths of Unity. Not just
that it is a good game engine, but the
sheer amount of things that you can get
for free or buy for I'm going to call it
low cost because
even you know even a $120
package if that say you know if that
gives
you half a man years worth of work. Yes.
Hell if that gives you a month's worth
of work from one person. Yep. That is a
huge trade-off assuming you don't have
unlimited
time
like
and let's just unpack that real quick.
In gamedev, you have a finite amount of
money to pay people and when that money
runs out, you are out of time. So your
time is kind of like you the how long
you can drive your car is dictated by
the gas in your tank, right? So if you
get further towards your project by
spending money on assets instead of the
time it takes to make those assets,
you're still spending money for time,
but you're spending it more efficiently,
which means that your team can make a
better product overall, right? That you
have more time for the parts that your
team is really good at. Yes. Yeah. You
can you can make your game shine uh in
the right way. Um yeah, like we did have
we did have a quick question which is
does GDAU have anything like this? Um I
believe Odinir is talking about it in um
in chat a little bit. There is a GDO
asset library. It's serviceable, but a
reminder GDO is new on the scene, low
adoption rate, right? And um people are
still like figuring out if they want to
switch to it, how they're going to
switch to it. Right? That's nothing
against GDAU. It's just a factual
analysis that GDAU is the new kid on the
block. And while I know a lot of people
are really excited about it, this is
sort of one of Unity's big benefits of
having been here for forever is that
they have this, right? And again, like
this, as I said, I think is one of
Unity's killer features at this point is
that they have a vibrant third party
community making things for people who
build in Unity. Yeah. And that whole
economy of creators helping other
creators is really cool. Yeah, just
straight up. Yeah, I I think that that
is Yeah, it's really neat. This is, by
the way, not un not dissimilar to mod
communities except people are paying for
it. Mod communities do this all the
time. So, if you're familiar with the
way that mod communities, like mod packs
in Minecraft, are made up of like
hundreds of mods, each of which is
maintained by a different mod author,
and which are designed to work together
to some extent, greater or lesser, in
different versions of Minecraft, right?
And you can make a mod pack, a finished
product, a program by putting together a
bunch of those and then using your
knowhow to make all of them work
together to tell the story or to give
the gameplay experience that you want,
right? And that's actually one of my
goals long term is I think my first game
build project I would like to be a
Minecraft mod pack because that's a
system that I'm reasonably familiar with
and I'm familiar with all of the
different parts of it. Um and I think
that would be cool.
By the way, well what I'm showing here
125 bucks you can buy a system that lets
you model in the Unity engine as opposed
to like building things in Blender or
other places. You can actually mod in
the engine. Excuse me. build models in
the engine while looking at how it will
actually look.
So you don't have to import that. You
could still import stuff from Blender,
but you don't have to, right? Or you can
import something in and then continue to
mod it. Yeah. Although I'm I'm probably
going to say, and this might be a tiny
bit of heresy. Um, this is cool and
great. You should probably also learn
Blender.
Probably what, sir? You should probably
also learn Blender. Uh, it's just like,
yeah, I've been impressed with the sheer
variety of things as I've been looking
through the Unity store, right? And I
think not in a bad way, right, or in a
dismissive way, a lot of these solutions
are good enough, right? You don't need
your CCG to have
best-in-class ray tracing. probably I'm
going to go out on a limb and say that
your CCG doesn't need world class ray
tracing. It needs something to make the
graphics pop. Great feel does that
right? Is it the best thing in the world
to do that? No. But is it good enough?
Yes, it's absolutely good enough. And
that's a very good bar to meet when
you're building a game, right? Um but my
foils need ray tracing. Listen, listen
nerds. I like shiny cards as much as
everyone else does. You don't need to
ray trace the foils. I'm sorry. Yeah.
Um,
let's see. You were asking about lists.
Yeah. So, like this here, Unity Unity
has some pretty cool things. Like this
is top selling
assets. I was just kind of looking at
sort by popularity. And then you can do
all sorts of things like you can be
like, "Hey, you know, I want top selling
assets that
are free." Mhm. actually. Oh, this is
this is another uh this is another very
uh interesting one that uh Leil Lumis uh
brings up and I think this is really
great. Um Nope, not that this text move.
I really like that the Unreal store
because they give out free stuff every
month and so much of it is useful.
That's good too, right? Unity has and
that's in keeping with Epic style,
right? Epic is very used to paying out
the nose for user acquisition. Unity
pays or not Unity um Epic pays money
every month to devs and tool creators
and everything else to try and get
people into their ecosystem, right? The
the cookie is like yes, you get a free
game, make an account, install the
launcher. Yes, there's this free asset.
Will you use Unreal Engine for your game
now? Yes. Right. Um, and that's not a
bad thing, but it is worth uh noting
that you have an opportunity as a
developer, an aspiring developer maybe
to profit off of that, right? To profit
off of the the way that they do
business, right? It behooves you to at
least get them. Just get them. Even if
you don't use them, you have them for
when you might need them, and it costs
you nothing but a couple minutes.
Um, yeah, just looking at a weather,
lighting, and water and space solution.
But again, just some of the stuff you
look at here, you're like, cool, dynamic
clouds and weather,
like that seems fun. Mhm. And one of the
neat parts for a lot of these is that
they're very modifiable. Yes. Oh, okay.
So, this is a bundle that just gives you
everything else this group has
done. But, you know, like if you're
looking at the weather there, say I am
and I'm going to go design this in an
outerorldly fantasy thing, maybe I
retint it. I guarantee you there's a
couple of sliders in there that I can
make my, you know, I can make my storm
clouds pink or purple, right? Or, you
know, change the density of the clouds
or the frequency of the lightning
strikes. Yeah. or I can make it move
five times faster. So, it gives you that
in the cinema effect of like the clouds
racing by. Like, so as a designer, I
look at a whole bunch of these and like,
oh, it's a tool I could use. What could
I then do with it to make, you know, to
make it mine in the system that I run?
Yeah. I I think that this is um it feels
like this is a whole world of starting
points, right? that that like you have
to start from all angles at the finished
product which is a game right and this
is giving you so many starting points
I've seen so many like just in the
things that are going through right
there's water physics there's crowd
physics there's clouds there's envir
volutric fog I I'm going to get a I'm
going to buy a volutric fog solution I
want the 3D Yeah
look at that
I don't know if it's going to be this
It might be
like and again these are just things
that I could go learn how to program all
of these but you know with a five grand
budget and again that's just picking an
arbitrary number which is the cost of a
a junior engineer for one month for five
grand if I've saved up I can go buy
enough stuff to make a one to three
person team look like they are probably
a 10 to 15 person team, right? Which may
not seem like a lot, but that is the
difference between Mega Crit and um
well, they're bigger than that. Super
Giant used to be that small. Super
Giant's bigger than that now. Thanks,
Hades. What was the Hades team? Hades
team
was I want to say in the 20s. Chat,
double check me. How many people made
Hades? I guarantee you all of the teams
like that were coming over here like we
just saw like that the dialogue system
or whatever used by Little Kitty and all
of those other ones. Yeah. Or
the what was it? There was a visual
scripting system that we saw been used
by Hearthstone and like Hollow Knight
and everything else. Yeah. Like there
are just solutions out there that people
are like why would I go recreate this
from scratch? And there is a place where
this has been the industry standard for
um openly the industry standard in an
acknowledged way for a really long time
and that's music. You probably don't
need a staff composer. You probably need
to license a or you need to commission a
composer to make a
soundtrack, right? Probably for most
games that we're talking about in this
sphere, right? Small team, small budget
games, right? You're not going to have a
composer on staff. probably if one of
your programmers, you know, composes on
the side, then great. But for a really
long time, they have brought in
additional people to do music
specifically because it's art, right?
It's a different kind of art. Um, and so
this feels like that, right? Whoa.
Um, no, Brass, I'm not saying I always
see weird things. I'm like, what's this
one? This is a little bloodier than I
wanted. Motion warping.
Oh, that's cool.
Yeah, it's it's 750. Yeah. Um to be
clear, by the way, um to answer Brston's
point, I am not saying that they uh that
Super Giant used Unity. I am mentioning
the size of the team and what they could
accomplish. Right. Mega Crit, the studio
that made um Slay the Spire is two
people. Two. Hollow Night. But they also
worked for what, six years? Correct. A
very long time. Hollow Knight was three
and they had Kickstarter money and they
made the when you have a threeperson
team and we're going to talk about this
in the upcoming future.
Kickstarter kind of a trap in a lot of
ways. Um but with a threeperson team,
Kickstarter money will get you to the
point where you can release your game,
right? Versus something like Super Giant
and making Hades a much bigger team
capable of much bigger things, right?
Because in the indie space, right, we
kind of all have a sense of this is a
AAA
title. It's from EA, Ubisoft, uh, you
know, whoever, right? It's a big game.
It's a first party Nintendo title. It's
a whatever. There are a 100 plus people
working on it, right? When we get down
to the indie space, it's a little harder
to see the gradations between what the
budget and what the size of the game
was. So, I usually when I'm thinking
about it and talking about it on stream,
I normally go and look at how many
people made the game because that's
generally an indication of how long how
deeply some things were messed with,
right? Because Hollow Knight, while I
love it to bits forever and will be
losing many hours of sleep when Silkong
comes out, is a relatively simple
game. Relatively simple, right? Mhm. Um,
and uh, so I need to stop looking like
every time I look in the Unity store, I
find new things. Yeah. Which is one of
its strengths and I get new inspiration
of for the game I'm building. Is this a
tool that I could bring in and do it.
Yeah. And I want to be very clear. I'm
not trying to sound cavalier about even
a a sum like five grand, but in the in
the large in the scheme of things, if
you have a 10 person team and let's say
the average salary is let's call it
$75,000 and this may be for all the way
up to senior people down to junior and
I'm picking a random number. It could be
higher or lower. 10person team for
$75,000 is
$750,000 a year. So if you're doing a
three-year development, that's $2.25
million that you're spending just on
people for three years of game
development. Like game development, the
single most expensive thing is your
people. Hands down. That is a 10p person
team. You know, if you're looking at
Rockstar with a thousand people for six
years making
GTA, they are spending hundreds of
millions of dollars just on their people
for it. And so that's why when I look at
things like this, you know, five grand
to go buy man years worth of time might
be the difference between that $2.25 25
million for people getting their game
out on time or not. And you know that's
all money that if you do profit sharing
or royalties for your studio, all of the
money you spend has to be recouped
before anybody gets profit sharing or
royalties. So, in a lot of cases too,
the pe for the people working on the
game, ways that you can add more money
in or excuse me, add more time in or
make your game
better directly benefit all of the
people working on the game because it
makes it faster for them to actually get
a bonus. Yep. And that's great. Like
I've been on games that have done well
and gotten bonuses. Like everybody's
really happy when that happens. and your
whole team is pretty much aligned on the
oh, we can save a little bit of money
here and buy something that keeps us
from having to do it and lets us go make
more game or better game. Like that is
almost always a from game developers
that two thumbs up would repeat. Yes,
please. Right. I feel like I if if if I
were uh in charge of running a studio,
there would be a floating line budget
item in the monthly budget for Unity
store for uh you know asset store
purchases for our engine,
right? It's just in the budget. We just
already put it in the budget. It's
already there. If we don't use it,
great. We'll roll it to next month, but
it's there in case we need it kind of
thing because it's efficiency, right?
Yeah. Um, we had a standing order that
anything under X anybody could just buy
if it sped them up in any in
any reasonable way. Yeah. And it wasn't
even that high. I think it was like 50
bucks. But it was just like, don't
bother us if it's less than $50 and it
speeds you up. Yes. Just do it. Um, and
then put in the repository because you
buy it for the company and then other
people can use it too. Yeah. Uh so uh I
want to bring up a question because it's
incredibly salient both to the topic
that we're talking about and to a future
topic uh which is Darkwolf asks, "Have
we done a design club about funding game
development?" I'd like to see something
about that with a deep dive into
Kickstarter pros and cons or some such.
It's it's been years. We could do it
again. It is remarkable that you
mentioned that because we were talking
about maybe doing something like that
soon because and this is one of the
interesting things. It keeps changing a
little bit. Not a ton, but a little bit.
And I think it is worth a revisit. So we
will absolutely be putting that um in
light of this talk about like how you
actually get the money to or how you use
the money, right? Let's back up a step.
How are you going to get the money um to
spend on UD assets, right? Yeah. Yeah.
Actually really fun question here too.
So this is a thing actually to think
about a little bit. When is an item in
the store not worth the money? Yeah. So,
one of the downsides to buying systems,
not necessarily assets, but systems,
like say you went and bought that save
system, and then Unity went and changed
some underlying part of the store. say
they went or not story they're um they
go from Unity 6 to Unity
7 so years from now there is a chance
that some of the architecture they
change might make it so that some of the
plug-in or excuse me so that existing
code has to be modified to continue to
work in Unity 7. So if you are upgrading
from Unity 6 to Unity 7 for your
development there will be some things
that you have to fix. That's just how it
works. For every plugin you have that
you didn't write the
code, that is a thing that could
potentially break that you don't know
how to fix.
And if the if it is a long-term
developer on the Unity store like and
they gets upgraded to Unity 7, I
guarantee you if that person is still
selling that save bundle, they're going
to go upgrade that because they want to
keep selling that save bundle and they
want everybody who bought it to be able
to keep using it. Mhm. If you buy
something where basically the dev's
like, "Cool," and it's deprecated and
they head off and no longer support it,
there is a chance that that at some
point becomes obsolete code. That
phenomena happens all of the time in the
streaming space. We have every time OBS
updates a major version, we get a bunch
of cool new stuff, right? When I started
streaming, back in Mayday, OBS didn't
have
undo. Undo is a recent innovation to
OBS. Okay? So like OBS version updates,
great, amazing. More of them, please.
More things like undo, huh, but they
break things that are no longer
maintained. And we lose we get new
stuff, but we lose stuff every time
there's a major update. So, it's always
important to update, especially because
Twitch kind of expects and YouTube both
expect that you're running like the
current version of OBS. Um, but there
are problems, right, with with breaking
things. Um, I also think that this is a
a great one from Ryan Fox. I frequently
run into the issue of an asset looking
great for 90% of what you want, but then
you run into the last 10% and have to
decide whether to replace it or try to
reach out for more. Yeah. Nothing is
going to be a perfect fit, right? And so
it that's why people hire the actual
person, the programmer, artist or
designer to come work on the team
because then you get to say, "Wait,
wait, go fix that last bit, please."
Yeah. Um, and I think that that but
still you're getting 90%. Correct. It's
a trade-off, right? Is a question of
whether that last 10% is a sticking
point for you, right? Is is that last
10% a dealbreaker, right? Because for
some things it might be and for some
things it might not. This low poly
package has 90% of the things that we
want and we're willing to commission the
last 10%. Is very different than
um this save system does 90% of the
things that we want but doesn't have a
core functionality that we need for
something that we're trying to do with
the game. That might be a deal breaker,
right? So there's a huge variance in
what that last 10% means to your game or
to your project. And in some cases,
again, this is a learning opportunity.
Like half of when I do this, half of the
stuff I buy will probably get taken
apart, put back together, and modded to
hell. And half of it I'll probably just
be like, "Cool. All of it I'm going to
have to learn how to use." Like, just
because you buy a thing, you then still
have to plug it in and then take the
controls it gives you and hook those
controls up into things actually with
your game. Mine a dynamic weather system
means you own a dynamic weather system.
It doesn't put any dynamic weather in
your game until you go learn how to use
the system, put it in, and then adjust
all the variables and tweak all the
things that you want to make it actually
work, right?
And that's a lot, right? That that can
be that is a lot in itself because
you're trading learning how to make the
thing or learning how to configure the
thing, which is generally easier, but
still work and still learning and still
practice. Yeah. And it all takes time.
But again, you are just you're like my
goal out of this would be honestly to
come out with a higher caliber of thing
with either a single person or a very
small team than I could otherwise do.
Mhm. And I'm at the point in my life
where I'm willing to trade a little bit
of money for a higherend product because
if I make a thing, I want it to be good
and I want people to play and be like,
"That's a badass game." Yeah. you you
have thrown out I'm gonna make a garbage
game as part of a game jam thing and see
what everyone thinks of my garbage game
phase. Uh which is by the way a
legitimate phase. Nothing wrong with
that phase. That phase is great and I
love it and I love people's garbage
games that they made to see if they
could do a thing because sometimes they
end up being amazing. Right. Uh, your
regular schedule reminder, Local Funk
didn't think Bolatra was good or that it
was going to sell very many copies by
his own
admission. Whoops.
Not a whoops. It's Yeah. So, Oh, they do
have a best essential assets though. I'm
a little
curious. By the way, anything grayed out
means I already own it, which means it
was free. free. And as I was going
through, just looking at things like
that seems pretty good for free. Yeah, I
definitely think free, like if you're if
you're looking at starting a thing,
starting in the free section and just
grabbing stuff that looks vaguely right
and then playing with it, uh is probably
a good place to start. Yeah. Yeah. Well,
Jeeoff, as as much as I would love to
let you roam free in the wilds of uh of
this uh all day, I think this is
probably a good place to to wrap up our
conversation on this. U you see why
you're so excited just on like Yes. as a
developer, as somebody who puts things
together
like just looking at this and being
like, "Wow, I could build so much more
than I other than I was initially
thinking I would be able to," right? Is
a really exciting process. or just
mindset too, right? And and I think the
the taking the I think that's a really
big one, right? Making this
approachable, making this um an
affordable way to get the things that
you need is is really great. And as
we've talked about throughout the
episode, this is not unique to Unity,
though. Unity probably has the best
store.
Unity does have the best store
currently. It's not even close. You can
say that. I can't say that. I Unity has
the best store, right? Um, but there are
other solutions like this for whatever
engine you're working in. Um, they may
not be as good, but they do exist and
you should know what they are, right?
This is also kind of a reminder to check
your resources, not just to see what
resources are available to you, but to
see what resources exist, right? Because
again, Jeff was bringing it up
repeatedly, one of the big strengths of
this is you get to look through a big
list of gamedev stuff and think about
things why someone would use that,
right? Oh, I didn't even think about
feel for making my game pop more, to add
more juice, right, as they say. Until I
stumbled on that, I hadn't even realized
somebody might put together a kit that
did that. And as soon as I saw it, I was
like, "This will be one of the things I
buy." Yeah, exactly. And I think I think
that will Yeah. Yeah. It's a great
thought exercise, too. We we do this um
occasionally on the channel when we're
going game shopping when we're we'll
we'll end up like going down the rabbit
hole of like, "Oh, this game looks kind
of interesting." And then it recommends
this game and then it recommends that
game and now I'm looking at like some
obscure title from 10 years ago that
I've never heard of before that's played
by like 12 people, but all of them swear
it's the best game they've ever played
and it's a buck 50. And you're like,
"Sure, I got a buck 50 like whatever."
Right? um that phenomena with with
stores and with places where gamers and
programmers and devs congregate is is a
very powerful one. The other thing I
actually hadn't really realized that I
think is a great closing one is how
ubiquitous this has become. Like looking
at some of those big tools and the this
was used in you know big list of games
you've heard of makes me realize that
this isn't even just this is what indies
do like this is what Blizzard does. This
is like this is there are certain things
that just this is what you go by.
Absolutely. And they actually I was the
other big one too is Unity licenses like
looking through they will show you the
license actually. Will can you bring it
back up real quick? Uh yes I can do that
real quick. Let's um let me just find
one real quick. Let's go look at the
text animator.
So if I look at this real quick, like so
standard Unity
license and it's an extension asset,
which means one license is required for
each individual user. So they tell you
straight up front for people using this
what your license covers and the type of
license it is. So as you're buying, it
is right there. I'm a big fan of uh
transparency when it benefits the
consumer. Right? Just here. This is
exactly what it is. There's no hidden
terms. There's no this is the license.
Here it is. Please enjoy. But this is
also how some people can make this work.
Like if Blizzard went and bought this,
you might be like, "Wow, Blizzard's
cutting corners." But the guy who made
this, there's probably going to be 20
people a Blizzard who in some way touch
the dialogue systems. So this person
just sold 20 copies of that because
Blizzard's using it. And once they've
coded it, it doesn't cost them any more
money for each license that come to for
every license they sell. This isn't a
physical product. Yeah. Digital
products. Cool. Like that. Yeah. 65. So
they get paid. Yeah. Exactly. Exactly.
Well, friends, that is going to do it
for our show today. Thank you so much
for joining us for this little deep dive
shopping spree kind of thought exercise
into the Unity store. Um, we will be
back next week with a game ride along.
We're still figuring out which game it
is. We've we've asked um Brad and Janet
here to give us some uh feedback. If you
have if you're a Rocky and you have
feedback, you can either uh pop on over
to YouTube, leave it in the YouTube
comments or at one of us on Blue Sky or
pop into our Discord or hop into our
Discord and leave suggestions there. But
we're taking suggestions for what game
we do a design focus ride along for next
week. Um, thank you all so very much for
joining us. Final thoughts, Jeff?
Um, I'm just excited we get to do this.
I said the Unity score, how how far it's
come since I looked through it a decade
ago has really been nice. Like just
looking at all the stuff and it makes me
excited for a lot of, you know, small
dev teams in the industry. I think that
is a great place to be. All right,
everybody. Take care of yourselves. Take
care of each other. We'll see you all
next time. Say bye to the people, Jeff.
Bye to the people, Jeff.
[Music]
I am glad we got to do that topic. As I
said, I've been wanting to do that one
for a while. Your your passion for that
is uh is infectious. Um and I I think
that that was that was really good. Let
me get out of this so I can stop having
a light mode window uh blast my face. Uh
that would be great. Thanks. Let's see.
We're not going to do any more sharing.
I can close down that part. Correct. You
can close that. You can close that down.
Um
uh yeah, thanks thanks everybody for
joining. Um and you you all had some
really great questions over in uh in
Janet. Um thank you so much for all of
those. Uh and again um here's a
reminder. Uh if you are watching this uh
in the YouTube VOD or wherever, hit us
up with what game you'd like to see us
play as a ride along um next week. Uh
we've got a bunch of options. We've done
a bunch of things uh before together.
Um,
uh, and I'd love to hear from all of
you. We've done a bunch of turnbased
stuff. Action stuff is a little harder
because Jeff has to watch it through a
feed and comment on it while I'm
piloting. Um, it also makes it harder
and I'm like, wait, pause that a second
because, you know, you will in the
middle of a swing with something. And
yeah, right. Elden Ring a little more
difficult than, you know, Pokemon or
whatever. Um,
uh, it's funny. I was just I'm looking
at the comments again. I knew there was
going to be a whole bunch of people in
here who were like, "Is this an
interesting topic?" And then we start
going and like, "Oh, yes, this is an
interesting topic." I I think it is um I
think it is one of those things that
doesn't like when you pitch it as an
idea. It's like why why would you and
then you start doing it and you're like,
"Oh, like genuinely Steam shopping is
one of um my favorite things to do with
chat here on Twitch is go through the
Steam store. uh go through the Steam
store, see what's on sale, see what's
new, see what we've missed. Um and and
see if we can um we can get something
out of that. Uh
I'm actually really curious now, Will,
if there is a curated list of the like
start here in the Unity store. If there
isn't, there should be. Now, the problem
with that is that with the power to
moderate that list comes a great deal of
responsibility, right? because it is
very easy to put things that don't
deserve it on that list because people
will just buy it on faith, right? So
like the curation standard for the like
the big you should start here list is
very high, right? Like it is for
Minecraft mods too. Um like there is my
my core like every mod pack should have
this list is very small. It's it's like
JI a map. There are a handful of maps,
sophisticated backpacks because I think
sophisticated backpacks should be in
base Minecraft, but that's just me. And
like two other things and that's it,
right? Um because like it's such a big
responsibility to have those things be
as ubiquitous as they are. Yeah.
It's and there's different kinds of
things too like because I don't So you
may not know this and I didn't until I
learned kind of recently. There's
basically three different
ways of rendering in Unity. Yeah. And
the assets all very clearly show which
of the three or two or all three they
work for. But like that alone means you
might have a game or you might have
something you consider universal that
doesn't work for the particular render
pipeline that you're using which would
then just disqualify. So, there's a
couple of caveats around that, but um I
actually found there is a I knew
somebody had built it and I found it
like a week or two ago. It is a price
tracker where you can go in, type in the
name of assets you or on the Unity store
you're interested in and it will watch
it for you and tell you if any of them
get a discount. Yeah. That that and then
they they basically they make money
because they have affiliate links on
some of those. Yeah. So it won't cost
you anymore, but if you use theirs and
then buy it through their link, they'll
make a little bit of money off of
it. And so like I have a whole bunch of
stuff set up on watch list because I
want to see how far I can make that. I
don't know if it's I don't know if I'm
really going to spend five grand, but if
I'm I could easily see spending
thousands of dollars instead of having
to hire a person. Yeah.
But, um, I want to make that amount of
money go as far as it can. Yeah,
absolutely. Uh, all right. I think this
is where we're going to say goodbye to
Janet. Janet, thank you ever so much for
joining us today. Again, comment video
games you want to see down in the
comments. Do that thing. Um, and we will
see you all. Quick shout out if you're
watching this live and go to the art
channel. One of our shorts just went
live and is currently a number one of
10, which is Will. Ready for this one?
Oh dear. Oh, wait. It's over on history,
not credits. Go over to history. It's
called Why Pirates Have Parrots, and it
is a one minute short talking about why
pirates actually did have parrots
historically.
Now I have to go watch it. Um, all
right, great, Janet. We'll see you all
Monday for breakfast. Thanks so much for
being here, everybody. Separate.