Why hasn't the video game industry found some way to integrate academia
the way every other major tech industry has?
[Intro music]
Every major high-tech industry is supported by a robust academic backing.
Everything from pharmaceuticals, to software, robotics, to energy
requires that academic institutions theorize, experiment, and teach in their field.
Because only academic institutions have the proper incentives to do so.
Let me break that down a bit:
High tech fields need academic institutions to do the sort of long term research
or crazy thinkin' outside the box studies that don't provide an immediate profit.
Because in a modern business environment that's driven by stock prices and quarterly earnings
It's getting harder and harder to justify this type of research in a corporate setting.
But in an academic institution, that sort of research IS the path to advancement.
Sure 90% of it may not pay off, or it may be mired in minutiae,
but simply doing those studies and publishing about them counts towards getting tenured
and so academics are incentivised to do them anyway.
And then when one does actually pay off, or when some member of the industry suddenly needs data
on some bizarre esoteric thing, everybody benefits.
Simultaneously the industry needs trained workers, which means that they need
highly skilled professionals teaching students
or at least mentoring graduate students through projects.
Of course, training people on the job is incredibly costly for the industry
but for an academic institution, the cost of training is actually offset by tuition and the endowments
that, down the line, come from the students that they train.
And so these two entities, the high tech industries and academia, have a symbiotic sort of relationship.
But none of this happens in the game industry.
We've been vaguely trying to create some training programs,
but they haven't come together as quickly,
or ended being effective, as anyone hoped.
And I know I've talked about games schools, and game education a lot on this channel,
because, it's so important for the industry in the long run,
but, bear with me, just one more time, because,
I wanna talk about it from a direction we've never explored before.
Mainly, I want to talk about the fact that the incentives and current game academia are all wrong.
I realize this topic about the esoteric nature of game academia may seem a little dull for many of you,
and I promise I will try to cool it with the industry education topics...soon,
but, we wanted to make sure that this got out there,
because, it's part of the puzzle that nobody's talking about.
You see, for all the talking we, and others do about how to fix curricula,
or how to help students,
nobody really talks about how to make sure that great people stay in academia to teach,
and do all that research we so desperately need.
At GDC, Ian Horswill of Northwestern,
brought up a problem plaguing game academia right now.
All the ways we've tried to incentivize PHD students or professors looking to study games,
are completely wrong.
The first, and most obvious problem,
is the fact that building games rarely counts towards tenure,
or, getting your PHD.
Most academic institutions are still mired in the old idea
of publishing in journals, or writing books, as the path to advancement,
rather than participating in the medium itself.
And this is what leads to the sort of incredibly disconnected game studies programs we have today.
And it's not like a precedent doesn't exist for a more active approach.
In the art world,
gallery shows and the like, can count toward your academic standing.
But game professors, by large, still can't make games.
Professor Horswill came from a robotics background,
and he recalled, that, when he first started in that field,
none of the academic so much as touched a robot.
Instead, everybody wrote papers,
because, that was the only way to get ahead in the field of academia.
It's ridiculous, right?
Fortunately, the robotics industry rapidly learned that this was silly,
and now, modern robotics academia is all about proving out your ideas on an actual robot.
About testing out of theory and practice,
rather than letting it remain entirely theoretical.
This is EXACTLY what needs to happen in game academia, if it's ever going to be relevant to the industry.
But, we also need to support that, with things that academia understand.
We need more awards that are specific to academic games,
or at least, academic interactive media.
We need to create fellowships along the lines of the Institute of Electrical & Electronic Engineers,
the kind of guild type organization that presents avenues to publication,
and whose standards mean that achieving certain membership grades, can serve as a good benchmark for academia.
These sorts of societies are important,
because they present a body of qualified individuals working in the field,
both within and outside academia to help vet people in a way a new academic field may struggle with on its own.
We also need new journals dedicated to this work.
Because, while not everything in games academia should be papers and theory,
we don't want to get rid of that stuff completely.
And when papers do get written, we want them to be seen by the people who matter.
Because today, when these papers get published, they often get published in journals that nobody in the game industry reads,
and because they aren't game specific journals, often, even other games academics don't see them.
To supplement that, one of the major institutions doing this needs to,
essentially, create a "Humble Academic Bundle",  or something like it,
that can basically function as an official academic journal of games.
One that fits the medium, and counts toward academic advancement,
We also need more professor of practice positions,
that allow people to easily move between the industry and academia.
Because improving communications between industry and academia,
allowing academics to get experience in the industry,
and enabling industry people to teach or partake in research,
are all vital to creating the academic environment that's both useful to the industry,
and doesn't discourage people from even trying to enter it,
because they see their options as limited.
So, overall, if we're gonna have a games industry academia,
and, we should,
it has to be about making games.
We have to find some way to reward those people,
not just for writing totally theoretical media studies pieces,
but, for testing out their ideas within the medium we work in.
Otherwise, we're never going to get the teachers and researchers this industry so desperately needs.
I know that this video was really targeted at a small handful of you,
but, I hope that it at least, reaches the people that it needs to.
See you all next week,
and we'll talk about something less esoteric, I promise.
Oh, and stick around for a second.
I want to tell you folks about a thing.
Dan: "So hey, do you like game?
Would you like game better if game was mug?
Well, guess what, person with weirdly specific taste?
Today is your day, because, game mugs.
This little friend would like to join you for tea,
or coffee, or, I dunno, what do YOU drink from a mug?
It'll join you for that.
And it's not just mugs, games are taking over the Extra Credits store.
There's plushies, there's shirts, and, to celebrate,
we have put together a special "Because Games Matter" bundle.
Get all 3 game items together, and we will discount them all by 10%.
Be the envy of all your friends, who really, really, like the color green!"