GOOD MORNING, MATT. AH,
>> GOOD MORNING, WILL.
>> GOOD MORNING TO ALL OF YOU.
>> WELCOME TO GAMES FOR BREAKFAST, THE ONLY
INTERNET TALK SHOW. WE TALK ABOUT THIS
WEEK'S gaming and tech news, but that
also is the first episode. That's the
second episode of 2026. So, welcome to
that.
It's the first second episode. Will,
>> what are we hobbit naming episodes now?
>> IT'S MY 111TH
EPISODE.
>> I got bad news for you, buddy.
>> Oh, is it more?
>> We've passed 111 episode years ago.
We're like almost 300, I think.
>> Like, if not more, but we don't also
number our episodes because
>> like we could, but also no. And if
you're on YouTube and you're like,
"What?" We've been doing the show for
years and years and years on Twitch. Um,
same time slot, same vibe, same pretty
much everything since we used to wear
pajamas to do this.
>> We did.
>> Yeah. Um, and then we gave my tailbone a
break because turns out sitting on a
corgi tail for two hours every week is
bad. Um, yeah.
>> Oh, thankful. Grateful greens. We are
thankful for you being here. I will
click it to make sure that that's not
the Neo. I'll get you in a second. Here
we go. That's what I was saying. Hello.
Also, gez, Neo.
>> Yeah. Uh, thank you so much, uh, over on
Twitch, Neo Whiz Master, for the 20
gifted subs. Thank you. Thank you.
>> Hot diggity.
>> Uh, yes. And, uh, we don't know half as
many of you as as well as we'd like. And
we don't like half of you half as well
as you deserve. That's probably true.
>> And that that percentage will change
every first
episode of the year. So, next week,
>> I thought it would change every first
second episode of the year. Well, you'd
think so, but there's only one of those
and so it can't change from here until
the first third episode of the year. Do
you see what I'm where where it's going?
>> Math, Will. Math. But we're not here to
talk about the way that numbers work. I
don't think um I think we're here to say
hi to all of you and ask uh Janet, we
already talked to Brad in the pre-show.
How was your how was your weekends? Did
you play anything good? What was what
was going on in the lives of YouTube
chat aka Janet? And I can while you're
telling me I can I can push down my
coffee. This will be nice.
>> And and while they're telling us I can I
can tell them some more things that I
didn't uh tell Twitch chat. So I was
doing the new Final Fantasy 14 raids. So
that was cool and fun and great. Um and
I also got to go out and play Magic
yesterday uh which was a lot of fun
because I'm really looking forward to
the Lorin pre-release uh this weekend.
I'm going I'm so excited. I'm going
twice. Once to my local game store, once
to my little brother at the local game
store. So, I've got one on Saturday and
one on Sunday. And I'm going to be
tired. So, it'll be good.
>> Nice. I uh I I had a lovely weekend. Not
only was it uh Jaime's official uh uh
birthday party that we had on Saturday
night, which was very nice, but also um
uh Jay and Jess of Second Wind Fame were
up in the city for that and um for the
Labyrinth 40th anniversary screening.
So, we went and saw it in a theater. And
sometime when Jay is on stream, I will
have him tell you a tale of something
that happened at that screening that
might have been the most lovely thing
that I've ever witnessed, but I don't
want to blow up his spot entirely.
>> Okay.
>> Uh we I we'll keep that in the ether.
>> Um and we'll go from there.
>> We did dance a lot of magic dances.
Yeah, that's I mean obviously uh Josh
says you thought we were talking about
Good Place Janet the whole time. That's
deliberately ambiguous.
Um YouTube chat got to name themselves
Janet. Uh that's a thing we we'd already
named Twitch chat Brad thanks to a joke
in a longforgotten Okay,
>> this is old lore. The old text.
>> Yeah, the the old text. Um, Brad got
named because of a fake t-shirt in
Jackbox that says, "Kiss me, I'm Brad."
>> Yes.
>> And chat really liked the idea of a
shirt that says, "Kiss me, I'm Brad."
So, we decided that obviously that must
be because they are collectively named
Brad. And it has it originally had
nothing to do with Rocky Horror. So then
when we started doing YouTube stuff, we
were like, "Hey, YouTube chat, what do
you want to be called?" And YouTube chat
pretty unanimously said Janet. Now they
were like, "Do you mean Janet from Rocky
Horror or Janet from Good Place or a
different Janet?" And the answer was
yes. So whichever Janet
>> Yeah. And I will say um and then when we
post this on Nebula because Nebula
doesn't have comments so you can reach
us at Blue Sky uh the we basically named
them Rocky because Rocky doesn't talk
unless you happen to go off off platform
and go right and chat it with us right
there. I have a feeling uh everyone
watching right now just remember those
things because I have a feeling that
either if it's going to be in the
YouTube comments or Twitch here or even
on Blue Sky. I think today's discussion
is going to get chatty, maybe a little
bit catty and a lot of Will and Maddie.
Uh I think that it's going to get weird.
I do want to go back and look at some
things that people were playing this
weekend. I just saw Fireflower finish
Spirit Farer. God, I want to do that so
bad. Um, Far Far West in his second play
test open. You've been playing that.
Transl. That's awesome. Uh, oh, getting
close to finishing Prime 4. Uh,
>> and a Cube draft. Cube. Cube is very
cool.
>> Cube is very cool.
>> Uh, very, very nice. Uh, I know some
other folks did some stuff as well. I,
uh, I'm still continuing my Final
Fantasy Rebirth, uh, play, and I love
that game.
>> [laughter]
>> There's so much nonsense to do and I
feel like it rewards every bit of
nonsense. It's like something that just
makes you a little bit stronger. So then
like the regular game when you go back
to it, even though I'm not terribly
great at the combat, it doesn't matter
because I've done I've I've collected
all the cactars or something like
whatever the nonsense is.
>> Yeah. Uh anyway,
>> speaking of little nonsense that gets
you a little stronger, uh if you're
looking um forward to stuff this week
before we dive into this stuff
immediately following this, we're trying
a new experiment. I know nothing about
fighting games, so we're going to fix
that. So, I am starting to learn Street
Fighter 6. Um Matt and I played a little
bit last Thursday and I didn't do
horrible.
>> No, you were good.
>> I didn't do horrible. So, I now have
acquired an artifact of power. It's
>> Wow. I got a I got a thumb stick
extender. Yeah, we're getting serious
about this. Um, so that'll be up right
after this over on Twitch. And then, uh,
I saw questions about it. Yes, design
club will be returning this Thursday.
Topic TBD as soon as Jeff and I settle
on one tomorrow. We'll post it over on
YouTube, so you can look forward to that
on Thursday. And of course,
>> Jeff's home.
>> Jeff is home. There is a full slate of
stuff over on Twitch, uh, which you can
come over and enjoy at any point. But
those are the shows. I want to call out
uh Andrew Shine here for designing board
games over the break. Hell yeah. Keep
doing that. Keep making things that uh
people can hold in the hands. I like it.
It's very cool.
>> Make make the things.
>> Uh
>> there's something there's something
lovely about a uh a physical product
made by a human being that uh you can
actively engage with and know that
thought and care went into it.
>> Uh and that has nothing to do with
anything.
>> Yeah. Like, no. It has everything to do
with the bull making their financially
sound decision to buy Warhammer. Rip
your wallet. Someone who used to sell
that stuff.
Oh, wow. I've looked at the prices
recently. Rest in peace, your wallet.
Have fun with it, though. It's a lot of
It is a lot of fun. Warhammer and Magic
are both great ways to trade a lot of
money for a good amount of fun.
>> That's right.
>> But they're both a lot of money.
>> And oopsie, apology accepted. Uh,
[laughter]
I'm kidding. I know the digital stuff
has lots of love and care, too. I was
soft transitioning before there was a
Warhammer thing going on, and then we're
back to square one. So, we're
>> blow I blow up your transition. It's
okay. We can hard fork. Uh, because it's
time uh to talk about misunderstandings.
It's time to talk about uh
flip-flopping.
It's time to talk about the thing that
everyone's been talking about since
probably last year, but definitely this
week.
>> Yeah. [sighs and gasps]
>> All right, chat. We We got to talk about
Laren. We got And and when we talk about
Laren here in this context, we're also
kind of including in it this
there's a little bit of Sandfall.
There's a little bit of like the general
conversation, but Larry's getting a lot
of heat right now. So, we'll focus on
them because there's the most to talk
about with them, but we're kind of
talking about the issue. So, there's
like two things, right? One of them is
AI and the gaming industry. And the
other one, which I think is more
interesting, is how we talk about AI in
the gaming [laughter] industry.
>> Now, uh just just throw this out there
real quick. Obviously, this in case you
can't tell, is a photoshopped image of
of Sven holding up an AI generated uh uh
Balderskate cast, which is nightmarish
if you look too close. Um, but this is
sort of um
it it is a
a a farcical nightmare look at um
when you don't listen to Ian Malcolm.
Uh, I think that's kind of where we're
at with this. So, over the course of
what when did this even start, Will?
>> Uh, oh god, it's long enough that I feel
like in my brain it's just cataloged as
ongoing.
>> Uh, it happened right about the the time
Oh, oopsie. Ian Malcolm is Dr. Adrian
Malcolm played by uh played by um Jeff
Goldblum in Jurassic Park where uh your
your scientists are so worried about
whether or not they could they never
stopped to think they should.
>> Yeah.
>> Um
>> uh this really kicked off right around
the time the [laughter] Game Awards
happened. Um, and there was some
discussion
because
the Divinity trailer came out and lots
of people were kind of scrutinizing the
Divinity trailer and scrutinizing Laren
at that point. Mostly because the
Divinity trailer was so gross. It was
Don't look up the Divinity trailer. It's
>> unless you like a lot of gore and gross
stuff. I mean, then go for it.
>> Sure. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Very gross. Um,
and so it kind of started there and then
it sort of accelerated when Sandfall
lost their uh um dice award for um
outstanding indie and best new game uh
because they disclosed that early on in
development they had used some amount of
AI generated placeholders as part of
the translations keep going back and
forth. My understanding is there were
some AI generated placeholder things
that they took out later and they've
sort of since said that they have no
interest in using AI because they don't
like what it does to the workflow, but
they were trying it out in that kind of
weird nebulous era where lots of
companies thought that that might
actually be a thing that took off.
>> Um
>> Oh, and actually side note, uh that guy
Jamie said something very interesting
here. A lot of people feel they need to
have loyalty to a company because they
bought a game from them. No. Uh well,
yes. Uh I agree. Yes. Um I think that
brings up a really interesting
discussion and we've talked about it
many times here even when we say that
like oh company X is doing something
good or whatever like companies are
essentially groups of people that tend
to shift and therefore uh even folks for
instance that we like what they're doing
right now like steam and valve that
could easily switch on a dime because
that's how people in companies work. So
there is an interesting thing. I think
human beings like sort of an object
permanence kind of deal if we can even
though it never truly exists and we'd
like to compartmentalize things in good
and bad and everything. So actually
that's a very good point to discuss. Um
Laren has gone back and forth a couple
times on what this whole AI thing is for
them publicly and I bet you they're
going to continue to do so. Nothing we
say here today is definitive. We are
going to sort of go over the timeline of
what it was so far and uh we will put
our best sort of wishing caps on to hope
that uh whatever decision they make with
AI is one where it no longer exists uh
at least for that company. However, um
that is a as we all know a very tough
pill to swallow for corporations and we
will discuss sort of the why and the and
the the the messaging that companies do.
Like we brought up, I forget who just
said it, but we put their uh put their
quote up about Microsoft saying to
asking people to please stop calling it
AI slop. Um [laughter]
>> at which point everyone went, "No, slop
bonger. We will not stop calling your
slop slop.
>> Please clap." [laughter]
>> Um
>> just so it's just in the same font as
the Jeb thing. It's just AI exclamation
point.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Um Yeah. So let's uh let's
dive in. So, at first uh uh what this
was, I think right before right after
the holidays,
>> there was an interview
>> with Jason Trier.
>> Yep.
>> And Larry discuss Sven
I'm gonna critique Sven's
lack of preparation and lack of sticking
to a script here.
>> And you said something very interesting.
I want to say this is a good point. Even
right as you get into this, Will, you
said something super interesting about
Larion and Sven in particular not being
used to being on the back foot or doing
something that the community doesn't
like. Correct. They have been darlings
for six probably plus more years. Yes.
>> Uh that could do no wrong and were the
good guys in a um a sort of not a a cold
war with Wizards of the Coast with an IP
for a game that they made wonderfully,
right? like so they're not used to all
this smoke. Uh
I just sort of you you brought that up
earlier, Will, and I thought that was a
really interesting point.
>> So the Shrier interview didn't
really do a great job of tackling
the fact that AR Larian's using AI
and they swear that they're not using it
in the game, but they're using it for
everything around the game. So, they've
kind of like
got this weird bifurcated setup where
like they're using AI for like meetings
and slide decks and emails and
proofreading and idea generation, but
they're not actually putting any of it
in the game.
>> So, let's talk about
>> Can [snorts] you not like
>> Let's talk about that. Let's talk about
that. Let's talk about uh AI and slide
decks and all this. LET'S TALK ABOUT
WHAT A SLIDE DECK IS. LET'S TALK ABOUT
WHAT A PITCH and a slide deck is. Uh for
those of you that don't know, various
projects in the industry have pitches or
slide decks depending on what pro part
of the process you're in. Whether or not
you're trying to convince a company to
make a thing or your or your team to be
able to do something at your company or
an implement an implementation or a
presentation about where you are in a
certain road map of what a project is.
There's a lot of different reasons why
you have to march in a in a to a
boardroom or go online with a Zoom chat
or whatever and discuss uh your project
andor the the the point in time in which
you are in it. Now, uh, many people have
taken the tact of being able to use all
of these new AI tools to essentially
make decks and pitch things a bit more
uh, I'll use I'll even use the term
polished than they would otherwise be
because you don't in these specific
situations often times these projects
are not even started andor definitely
not completed yet if you're giving a
pitch deck or a progress deck on
anything. So, you want to try to show
and excite people um with whatever you
are presenting to make sure that they
keep your project on course or they
continue funding or the company keeps
allowing you to do it or whatever. Um
the shortcut here
plays into exactly what the people you
usually have to give pitch decks to like
and that is shiny stuff. Um, essentially
it it's sort of like being blinded by
the shine and
to make a compelling deck for a project
that is not complete before AI often
took tons of time and man-hour and and
and things probably also jobs for people
to do that. Uh, not even probably. So
now it's becoming this sort of
normalization because it is not a
finished product. It is not something
you are releasing to use AI as a
shortcut here. And um I think when doing
that
you actually
begin to poison the whole process. We
have had people uh not naming any names
but like groups who want to work with us
etc. who have given us pitch decks um
with AI elements in it and uh I'm fairly
hardline on this. I'm instantly like
well there's obviously no vision here
and no one wanted to put enough
forethought into this so no because and
again I'm not I'm not the norm here.
Most people don't I I don't think care
because it's it's everywhere. Um, and
that's everyone's own prerogative. Um,
but like to me that says, "Oh, well, you
want this job or you want this
partnership, but you you don't want to
put in the same amount of work into your
part of this process that we put into
our part of our process." And that's
just someone that I personally don't
really want to work with. Um, so I think
it and I even if it's like normalized,
I'm sorry I'm going on a rant here, but
even if that's normalized in pitch decks
or project decks or anything, you are
setting intent. You are setting up we
are going to make this with the least
amount of thought and the fastest that
we possibly can. Now obviously tools in
tech have have existed to make the
entirety of pro of all of these
processes faster forever. See Photoshop
you know like all of this stuff. Um
but there is a difference when you are
truly
trying to make the bedrock of what
you're trying to convince people you're
going to make. when you are just using
this sort of like slop of places that
you don't even know where it came from
to begin. Does that make sense? Does
that
>> Yeah.
>> Would that ramble fine?
>> Yeah. No, [laughter] I I think it does.
And my my objection is kind of similar.
>> Um though I also want to take a tangent
after I make this point. So don't don't
let me forget. I need to take a brief
very necessary tangent after this. Uh my
point is that it's always going to
result in less creative work because the
way that AI works is that it uses a
statistical model to generate the next
most likely thing based on what already
exists and has been fed to it. So you
get a regression towards an average
towards a mean instead of something that
is genuinely new or exciting or
creative. you're getting the expected
result, not something new, right? And
from like a purely like from a purely
like I want things to be new and
interesting and creative and to stretch
the boundaries of this art form point of
view, it's bad for that. And using it in
places uh encourages the idea of
regressing towards that statistical
mean, the most likely thing, right? And
I'm not a fan of that. Right? There's a
place for formula in games, in movies,
in scripts, in novels, in whatever. But
>> and however you're trying to get across
a narrative to a human brain that's
you're you're trying to have enjoy and
or sell it to,
>> right?
>> There are there are tricks, [laughter]
>> right? But but [clears throat] those um
those formulas are to be used by people
and then bent repeatedly, right? every
story is um there there are no stories,
not even Star Wars, that are exact
copies of the hero's journey, right?
Star Wars attempts to tell a faithful
version of the hero's journey, which is
a kind of formula, but it bends it in
some places, just like a lot of other um
formulas get bent, right? And and let's
also be very clear when we talk about AI
in the industry, Matt and I are talking
about it from like the pure creative
side. That is not to say that there are
not a host of other objections. That's
not the main thrust of our argument
here. But there are obviously other
objections. Some people object to geni
for a whole bunch of reasons which we've
loosely and specifically talked about
before. We've got um power and water
consumption. We've got the ethics of
generating um uh learning sets based on
copyrighted work without compensating
copyright holders. There's all kinds of
other stuff, right? Those are all
objections that each person is going to
find for themsel in dealing with AI.
Those are not really the thrust of our
conversation today. But I don't want
people to think that we're ignoring
them. We're just focusing on what the
outcome of using AI, if you choose to to
if you if you think all those things are
okay and you choose to use it, what the
outcome is. We're we're being a little
outcome focused, but I do want to
address that we understand that there
are other problems that exist before the
choice to use AI
>> and we're using the Larian back and
forth a bit as sort of the framework of
what elements we talk about this with
because look, Larry, you know, the
thumbnail for this episode uh is
obviously a meme, but uh there's a lot
of people that feel that way. I don't
feel like as strongly I think as Anakin
does on that thumbnail about it because
again I go back to a company as a group
of people that can constantly change
based on market forces etc. But um you
know the and and look here's another I I
will I will go a little bit uh to be
fair and balanced here for a second.
Larry made a bunch of really great
choices and work especially with
Balders's Gate 3 and they became a
darling right but the community because
of that and and people on the internet I
have been guilty of this as well tend to
put groups on pedestals and then or
people and then inevitably something
will happen and that pedestal will start
to crumble
>> because that is just the narrative of
being a
a person who is known in a place Right?
Like I mean see every uh Hollywood actor
actress that's been in too many things
and then all of a sudden everyone
dislikes them for whatever reason.
>> Right.
>> Um
>> the past effect.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Or uh Anne Hathaway or you
know whatever. But like, so so
it's funny because like while I think
Larry enjoyed the fruits of being put on
this pedestal, they didn't like ask for
that level of fervor or faith. They just
made a really good thing and then people
latched on and now they're making what
they consider their next best choice for
their business. And now those people are
very upsetty spaghetti. I think for good
reason. But there is that sort of push
and pull of this entire this entire and
I use this in the most hard air quotes I
possibly can relationship [laughter]
uh of a parasocial variety. But that
goes back to Will what you said before
the show about like not being ready for
a level of vitriol when when you are a
darling forever and then all of a sudden
something you do the people that love
you don't like.
>> Yeah. I think that that's that's very
real, right? like um
it there are there are two different how
do I put this? There are two different
kinds of community management and
preparing to deal with a large number of
people, right? And I can use two sort of
examples here on Twitch that in
streaming in general that sort of tell
the story pretty clearly. One of them,
you plan to be on the front page. You
you have some amount of exposure. If
you're not familiar, um you can apply to
be on the front page of Twitch. There's
a carousel that goes around. You get
exposure to a lot of people um in sort
of a very superficial way for a couple
of hours that gets your name out there.
That helps you get more recognition that
brings people to your channel. Cool.
Great. Exc. Awesome. Um you plan for
that in a certain way in sort of a
general good exposure because people
seeing your stuff are probably going to
be at least neutrally disposed to it if
not positively. And the other one is
getting brigaded, right? And you
prepare, you don't really prepare for to
be brigaded at a specific time. You
don't prepare to be like uh to have a
bunch of people who feel negatively
about you come in. You kind of prepare
for that generally and have tools
available to you. You have a script that
you stick to. You have community
management tools that you exercise. That
is a sort of thing that you need to be
prepared for. But
if you've never been brigaded, if you've
never had a whole bunch of people who
are really upset with you come into your
space, you probably don't have those
tools and you don't have the moderation
experience and you don't have the script
to stick to to like tread the the the
practiced line, right? And that's kind
of how a lot of this is coming across to
me with Len, right? Especially because
Larry keeps lip flopping. Sven keep Sven
like fired off like three different
statements in like 72ish hours and it
was not great because
>> so there was the freakout statement. We
can move on to that a little bit. Uh I'm
trying to find the exactly exactly what
he said but it will be our one fbomb we
say for this show. Um do you know where
that which article? Because we're
looking we're we're reading through the
sort of timeline of this based on the
new one from PC Gamer. All this stuff
will be in the show notes. Yeah. Uh, and
then, uh, Video Games Chronicle, I
believe.
>> Yeah, BGC has one. Um, where is it?
>> I'm just going to dig because the
timeline is messy.
>> Uh, yes. And again,
>> yeah, here it is. I found it. So,
following uh, you know, basically they
started with a light touch, I believe.
Uh they're saying that they were
exploring ideas, fleshing out PowerPoint
presentations, developing concept art,
and writing these placeholder text, but
no Jedi content would make it into the
final game. And everyone at the company
is more or less okay with the way we're
using it. Is the quote. Um and then some
people, I think, in the company have
said that they're not, but they said
more or less. So, you know, whatever. Um
and then uh he came back and and said,
"Holy [ __ ] guys, we're not pushing hard
or replacing concept artists with AI. We
have a team of 72 artists, of which 30
of 23 are concept artists, and we're
hiring more. The art they create is
original. I'm very proud of what they
do. I was asked specifically about
concept art and our use of Genai. I
answered that we're using it to explore
things. I didn't say we're using it to
develop concept art. The artists do that
and they're indeed worldclass artists.
Now, um
never a good look when you start off
your statement swearing.
>> Yeah. It's not it's not great
>> because because the rest of that
statement is fine.
Um, but like from a from a psychological
perspective when I read that and you
start with that element and look,
everyone has a breaking point and
everyone I'm sure they're getting they
were getting
>> and they're not again to Will's point,
they're not used to that.
>> Correct. Um,
that is a bit of a flaw that then takes
a lot of the honestly the sugar of what
you're trying to say with your medicine
out of it and makes it start tasting a
bit more like vinegar at that point.
Like it's just you you come off as
hyperdefensive
and then my lizard brain in the world of
the internet is like, "Wait, so they're
obviously lying." like like I I I even
if it even if they're not that's what
I'm sort of like
>> that you poured kerosene on the fire as
opposed to water. Well, let's also I
want to talk about something that's
contained in the statement that is kind
of an important thing that's come up
over and over again and actually relates
to the Sandfall thing and relates to a
whole bunch of other games that have
gotten dinged for this
placeholder elements
are always, and I'm going to stress
this, always going to make it into the
shipped version of your game. It is at
this point.
>> The more complex it is, the more likely
that is
>> it is right. I there have been so many
cases of people swearing that they were
just using placeholder stuff or
whatever. If it's placeholder, I swear
to God, you can use MS Paint Doodles and
Lauram Ipsum. You do not need. And so it
becomes very difficult for me to
understand why professionals feel like
they need high quality placeholders. If
it's truly a placeholder, it can be a
neon pink square that says texture not
found and Lauram ipsum text and it
doesn't need to be it doesn't need to
look like anything. It's a placeholder.
You know that it's going to get replaced
with something later. And so that
defense, the more I feel like Larry is
also
um sort of uh on the back foot because
that defense has been used so many times
recently. Oh, it's just a placeholder
that got out. Oh, it's just a
placeholder got out. No one believes
that anymore. So when they're like, "Oh,
it's just for placeholder stuff, right?"
Like,
>> well, I mean, but let's even let's even
take it at at true face value. Let's
let's let's say that that's entirely
true. It still doesn't help it. like it
doesn't like, oh, it's still placeholder
stuff. Well, okay, but you've now you've
now set yourself up for catch 22, right?
You said we're not going to use no if no
AI will ship in our physical final game.
And to your point, Will, inevitably
something's going to mess up and there's
going to be even if it's like
inconsequential stuff that only the most
hardcore internet sleuth is going to
see, it's going to be there. And then
again, court of public opinion, you are
liars. And it's like and then people are
going to run with it and exacerbate a
problem that might not have been that
hard. Like it's it's all it's
I don't need to tell any of you. Uh we
live in a world where it feels like you
can't trust most stuff on the internet.
In fact, I'll even go out on a limb and
say, "Look, I think Will and I do a
pretty good job trying to be fair and
balanced on the show as best as we
possibly can, but do not take a single
thing that we say for for for like uh I
was going to say for granted, but also
that but I mean like uh that it's the
final word on anything. We are the
arbiters of nothing. We have opinions
and we're talking to you all about it,
right? Like you can go look at these
things yourself and make objective
decisions. That's why we really like
this community,
>> right? And we appreciate when you all go
out and do your own research and
generate your own opinions and where we
can have a oh god and these are all
important qualifiers polite
well-informed
good faith discussion about these
concepts right because they are like
this is this is the Larian thing isn't
we didn't
>> we avoided talking about this last week
on the episode because it wasn't quite
baked yet and I think it needs a lot of
time because um I saw someone mention in
chat that this was like you know just
corporate drama. It's not. This is sort
of emblematic of the probably the most
complicated case of will the consumer
base accept the use of AI in the
industry or not.
>> And we're going to get to so we've kind
of gotten to phase two of this. I want
to get to the most current thing from
the PC Gamer article that again will be
in the show notes uh once those are up
and complete. the um the most recent one
will do you want to take that and then
we I have we have like larger sort of
things to go with it but essentially the
AMA I believe is where we're at at this
point.
>> Yeah. So um they um
they did a Q&A and AMA kind of thing.
Um, and I think that that was sort of
like their big attempt to like control
this and to rein it back in.
I I want to be upfront.
I think this wasn't the best move.
Reddit AMAs have this problem, right?
And and we'll kind of address it where
um you're never going to answer all the
questions and every question you don't
answer feels like you didn't answer it
on purpose. That is the problem with
AMAs particularly for like contentious
issues.
>> Oh, interesting. You're saying like even
if the questions are going by so fast
and you don't see one and there's one
that would maybe put you in some hot
water and you don't read it, then all of
a sudden it's like what are they h Yeah.
But that's Yeah.
>> Yeah. Right. So that that's a problem.
So um the the response is um there's not
going to be any gen AI art in Divinity
according to Sven. I know there's been a
lot of discussion about using AI tools
as part of concept art exploration. We
already said this doesn't mean the
actual concept art is generated by by
AI, but we understand it created
confusion. So to ensure there is no room
for doubt, we've decided to refrain from
using Gen AI tools during concept art
development.
>> Okay. We continuously try to improve the
speed with which we could try things
out. The more iterations we can do, the
better in general the gameplay is. We
think Gen AI can help with this and so
we're trying things out across
departments.
You're so close, Fven. You just had to
stop talking. You just had to stop
typing. You could have stopped typing
there and people would have assumed that
you were good, but you didn't. You kept
talking.
Stop
talking.
>> So, there's some continuation and you
can use this. I want to get the full
context to see it continues on. We will
not generate creative assets that end up
in a game without being 100% sure that
the the origins of the training data and
the consent of those who created the
data. If we use Genai model to create
in-game assets, then it'll be trained on
data we own. Better than a model trained
on stolen. Oh, then the sorry that was
that was the commentary thing. The
writer says better model than trained on
stolen artwork, but still makes nervous,
>> right? And this is this is one of the
places where again this gets hella
complicated because we talked about
there are a bunch of reasons that people
don't want to use Gen AI.
>> And I want to be excruciatingly clear
every time we bring this up. Whatever
your reason for not wanting to use Gen
AI is, good, valid, totally reasonable,
right? Different people have different
objections. And I do want to say that
like just because we're addressing one
part of it in this case, the ethics of
uh generative models sucking in a whole
bunch of data and using it to create
that regression to a mean
does not mean that it answers the
problems of excessive power consumption
or um you know overtimization or
removing tools from uh or feeling like
you're eventually going to end up
replacing jobs with it or whatever,
right? Those are all very valid
concerns. This is just addressing one of
them, right? So, I think that
I still think he should have stopped
talking. Like that's that's my big
thing, right? Because like he he knew
that everyone was not okay with this and
then was like, "All right, you can have
this bit, but we're still going to keep
doing it, right?" And like I don't know
that the feedback that Larry's gotten
has been terribly ambiguous here, right?
I don't know that anyone's been like,
"Well, I mean maybe you could do it,
Larry, you little scamp. You could do it
and it'd be I don't think they've gotten
a lot of that." So like I don't
understand trying to take the middle
ground position here and defend that
like somehow this is going to turn out
okay.
>> Yeah, I like I I do like what J.R.
saying AI tools are also accessibly used
in Hollywood studios including the use
of critical drawings like cinders last
year the training the trains left the
station regulation uh to protect jobs is
needed. Um I think like it's funny I
think one of my big reasons why I push
so hard against this is that lack of
regulation. if there was something put
in place that truly let's pretend for a
moment that that this is viable in our
current political system but that said
like yeah companies you are free to use
AI uh art uh at all but you cannot and
this is so hard cuz how would you parse
this right I don't have the solution for
this but like you know you have to have
a certain amount of like employees in
the jobs that it would normally be based
on numbers of whatever before AI is that
like I'm making stuff up that doesn't
work. This is why it's hard to do. But
if there was some mythical way to ensure
that one, people's work wasn't being
stolen, and two, jobs weren't being lost
based on that stolen work, then I would
I would be like all about it. The
problem is I don't know how that exists.
Um,
>> right. Yeah, it feels like it's a um
it is not I don't Okay, so there are two
problem. There are two kind of problems,
right? One of them is a philosophical
problem and one of them is an
engineering problem. Right? And so I
don't know that the most engineered
safeguards for this kind of thing
overcome the philosophical barrier
of
um it still being a regurgitation
machine, right? Yeah. And so,
>> yeah,
>> I was gonna say like, and that kind of
brings me to the other point, which is
>> tinfoil hat. I need to get one so I can
actually put it on like one of these,
but just tin foil. Like, it's the same
hat. Yeah.
>> Um, but like, okay, obviously, we have
seen a uh now we're getting into some
some dangerous EP territory, but I'll
try to keep it as nonpartisan as
possible. We are getting into a very um
uh uh large class discussion, not a
discussion with the class, a a a
discussion about class. Um
the transferral of wealth through
companies and the way that this works to
the executive class over the last few
years has been literally insane. And
anyone who is paying attention at all
sees that
any use of these tools in the macro, not
the micro, is not to help the artists or
the people doing the work.
>> It is to make the work cheaper so that
they need less workers so they can make
more money making something similar or
or better hopefully to what they've
already had,
>> right?
That's kind of it. And you could even
and I don't like I want to be very
clear. I don't think Larry is actively
trying to be like mwaha, we're going to
lay off a bunch of people and use this
stuff the more money. I don't think
that's happening everywhere. But I think
the general concept of moving forward in
this direction, that's the inevitable
conclusion because even if Sven is the
most kind human being in the world, the
next person who takes control of that
company might not be. And if there's
implementation of things like that that
were at first just to help the people,
someone else might come in and be like,
"Wait, we're actually paying 30% more
than we actually need to at this point."
like like it it's setting up a precedent
of essentially uh crumbling any sort of
trust between uh the owners of a company
and the people that help make the
product no matter what that product is.
cuz cuz the savings is not being passed
down to the worker, the artist or the
consumer.
You you might be saving some time, but
do you think that this is real real
rhetorical question here? It's not like
an artist who is hired by a company gets
to use AI tools. Let's say they were
going to make a piece of art that was
going to take them eight hours and using
that piece of art, uh using AI tools,
they only have to do it for a half hour.
They don't get to go screw off for seven
and a half hours at that point,
>> right?
>> And look, productivity is totally a
thing, but there's also like the human
element of it. So like the savings, the
the true savings
isn't being passed on to them. And also
there is a Oh. Ooh. Ooh. Ooh. Okay. Now,
let's swing back around to sort of the
other the other end of the uh the
cultural the the lost bit of culture
that's getting lost in this slop. And
that is um the way that companies keep
trying to push AI and why I think there
is a ground swell level of it not
working as well as they think it will in
advertising anymore. And that is because
even though it is technically neat to be
able to develop something quickly and
see an idea or have a video of a polar
bear drinking a Coca-Cola that you
didn't have to pay people to actually
like make or like do any of that stuff,
there is a um there will be a loss
I'll say for the for the for the whole
of humanity about the actual
joy and fulfillment of learning a craft.
We are sort of making it harder and
harder to do that. Even hell, we can get
outside of art AI stuff. There is
automation happening with AI assistance
or customer service or even in corporate
jobs or or stuff like that or or places
where you need to start somewhere in the
job market to then move up in that job
market and those jobs no longer exist.
So where how do you climb in the job
market? Like there's there's going to be
a cultural drain of people starting out
and finding a passion for something that
like yeah you're not going to be good at
at first. It's and you you find joy in
the process of messing up continually
until you get good at it. Whereas here
the best if if it just becomes so
ubiquitous, the best case is going to be
trying to figure out how to troubleshoot
all the garbage that it spits back at
you. Like
>> I I I have, by the way, I have a perfect
This is great. Says, "Here, I made a
robot that assembles all your Lego sets
for you so you don't have to bother
doing it."
>> Thank you. You just said it way better
than I did.
>> No. And And that's it. Right. I I also I
want to um let's let's examine just real
quick while we're talking about the the
corporate impact and the corporate
cultural impact. One of the reasons that
both um Laren and Sandfall mentioned
that they experimented with generative
AI is that there was a period in time
and I'm going to be totally honest I
think there are still people who believe
that we are in this period of time
>> where the um
adopting this new tool
late will mean that you are unable to
compete in the market,
which
I disagree with, but I can understand
from someone who is in a fast-paced
industry believing that they uh have a
necessity to pick up this thing to
increase productivity in their minds to
increase um you know uh out um increase
throughput to increase whatever in order
to be competitive in an environment that
they feel that they are always on the uh
razor's edge of losing. Right? Every
game studio is generally speaking
one dud away from bankruptcy. That's
kind of how that we've Jeff and I have
talked about this extensively over on
Design Club. Look, the the way that the
industry works is that you generally get
one
you have enough capital to make the next
game. There are very few companies,
Larry might be one of them, that have a
big enough war chest to survive. We made
an absolute stinker,
>> which makes this from them the worst
part, I think, is because they're one of
the ones that actually doesn't to
survive
doesn't have to do this.
>> Correct. Yeah. And so I think it I
understand why they have that fear. I do
not share it and I disagree with their
assessment of the situation, but I can
understand why someone might believe if
they've bought into the corporate hype
that's going around that this is a
necessary thing on the same level as
beginning to use computers versus
typewriters,
>> right? beginning to use um I'm thinking
about newspapers as an example, right?
Remember newspapers used to be set
manually. They used to have people whose
job it was to literally set the type in
>> the type set. The type setters
>> the type setters all lost their jobs
when uh when the last papers finally
went to digital type setting. Yep.
Right. And um people mourned that loss
of skill, those the loss of those jobs
and it was sort of inevitable that it
did it. Now, do we think that
there was definitely something lost,
right? But people I don't think to my
recollection and understanding protested
against that to the same level that this
is though they are different things. I'm
not I'm not saying they're directly.
Here's here's the interesting and
nothing nothing sort of is right. But
here's the sort of like I think the
reason that you know you can tell at
least at this gener you know level of of
AI art generation or something like
that. You can tell the slop from the not
slop even even if you don't know off the
top you just might not like an image. I
got shipped a um uh I should grab it. Uh
I got like a shipped like a a Blu-ray
physical media catalog and at I'd never
gotten one before. or it was like movies
unlimited or something and I was like oh
I wonder if I ordered something forever
ago. It's a big thick like order every
sort of physical media thing and I was
like neat and then I noticed that the
front cover was like it took me a
second. I was like this is neat like
looks like old Hollywood or like
whatever. But then I was like oh wait
the text is all weird and why does the
popcorn look like broccoli? Oh they just
made an AI cover and and I literally in
my head I was like well I'm I said
here's what I'm going to do. I will use
this to maybe like peruse for things but
I'm not buying from them like and and is
that fair totally to that company? I
don't know. But that is where my brain
went based on everything else that we're
dealing with in the industry. And I
think a lot of people are are getting to
that point. So many in fact that we have
companies like Microsoft telling people
to please stop calling it slop because
this is where I land sort of I think
this is sort of like my endgame argument
if you need to use it to to remain
competitive or or or you have to keep up
with the Joneses and if our company
doesn't do it then that means that the
other company D we're talking in this
like weird absolute.
Here's where that's true. I think maybe,
but I think there's a caveat here. If
your end goal is make all of the money
the fastest you can, yep, you're going
to be behind. But at that point, what is
your product other than making you
money, right? You don't care about the
product. It's it's it's the profit that
you derive from the from the actual
product itself. You don't care. And that
inevitability of not caring about the
product will no matter what tools you
are using make it worse than someone who
actually gives a crap about the product
that they're making. And the act of
making art as a human does it as opposed
to something like AI even beyond the
theft of it proves because of the time
that you put into getting good at
getting you know skilled enough to make
that thing that you do care about it.
Even if it's for a project that you if
you're working as an artist on a game
that you don't love,
your love of art is still present in the
product that you're doing. Even if you
don't like that final pro, like it's all
there and you can feel it.
>> I got it. What do you got, Will?
>> I figured it out. AI is paper towns.
Paper towns are towns on maps that don't
exist that were originally put there by
cgraphers as a way to copyright protect
their map. They made a map. They spent a
lot of time, effort, and energy making
the map. And they put a town on it that
doesn't exist, a tiny town in a place
where there isn't a town at all. and
they named it something a little odd but
not so out of the ordinary that someone
wouldn't copy it wholesale if they
copied the map.
It's not that it might not be
that having the paper town on the map is
itself inherently damaging but does show
that when we see it in the industry
it is a hallmark of a lack of effort
being put into the final product by
humans. No one went out and checked the
countryside when they made the map. They
just took things that already existed
and cobbled it together and called it a
map and expected us to pay for it even
though they didn't do the work. Right?
That's kind of the problem here is that
it's not even if um you don't have
objections for a whole bunch of other
very good reasons and I think there are
again so many of those. They are a
hallmark of people who really care about
the work that they made didn't interact
with this on every level at the depth
that I would like them to.
>> Yeah, I think I think that's sort of my
answer at the end of the day is why are
you a company? Why are you making the
thing you are making? And because
companies change, like we've said, that
too can change. You can start because
you are a passionate group of people
that want to make the best possible
widget. You absolutely can because you
believe that the best widgets will make
sure that people are happier in their
everyday lives and that is what you
value. That can also change as you grow
bigger and your your interests start
becoming more as running a company as
opposed to selling a product. And at
that point it goes into sort of
fiduciary duty territory where the
actual product is is uh shareholder
profits as opposed to the the widget
that you are actually making.
But I think it's very important to call
that out because the whole keeping up
with the Joneses thing is only works if
that is your end goal. Now, is there a
scare of like, oh, well, there'll just
be so much of that slop that um that
your stuff will be drowned out that you
won't be able to compete and all that
jazz. And I think if the content
was good enough, maybe. And everyone
keeps saying, "Oh, it's going to get
there."
But I still don't think like I I'm
willing to bet that
the only places we're truly going to see
innovation in let's even go back to just
like the game space is going to be AND
AND WEIRDLY HOLD ON THIS HAS ALSO BEEN
true forever. innovation comes from the
small places that then the larger places
sort of see and are like oh neat and
then maybe that would be like the next
thing right like and then sometimes
companies can grow and move on and then
I mean hell see Blizzard there's a
journey right see Apple there's a
journey like there's that's the tale as
old as time so like
I just don't buy the narrative of we
don't do it then we'll we're not going
to be to keep up. You might not be able
to keep up with making all of the money
in the quickest way possible, but there
are other win conditions for actually
making something.
>> Let's
God. Okay. As indie trash, right? Ver
verifiable indie trash, right? I would
be remiss if I did not say that I feel
like
they're wholesale missing so much of the
point, right? And like maybe we're just
in a world where the two sides of the
gaming industry, the AAA's and the S
tiers, right? Because GTA 6 is going to
be an S tier, right? Even if um what was
it? Bones, Skull and Bones. The other
thing that someone was like, it's going
TO BE A QUINTUPLE GAME, whatever that
was.
>> Oh, that was Skull and Bones. That was
the That was the the black flag the
Assassin's Creed Black Flag spin-off
game that took the really good pirate
elements of that game and made it its
own game, but it took like 9 years,
>> right? Yeah, that thing. So, um, right.
So, like maybe those have become
differentiated from the indie tier,
right? The the the single A double A um
uh indie tier because God. All right.
I don't
uh comments come at me. I'm just ready.
I don't particularly like Undertale.
>> Oh, no.
>> Don't particularly like Undertale.
Twitch chat ruined it for me. That's a
long story for another day. Um, I defy
anyone
in the industry to explain to me in any
way how any part of Undertale could be
improved by the use of AI. It is a
oneperson emotionally driven evocative
masterpiece of terribly coded game.
>> The game is a pile of bugs, right? And
that is not a problem because it does
not matter because it is about the
emotions that you are experiencing,
right? God, can you explain to me how
Celeste or Outer Wilds, right, would be
improved at all by the use of generative
AI? No. Can you explain to me how they
would sell more copies because those
games sell by word of mouth rather than
by like you're missing the point. You've
got they've gotten so tied up in the big
picture all the money thing that they
have forgotten the emotional resonance
that drives some people to play the
games, right? Like they've missed that
part of the spectrum entirely. And it
may just be that we're going to end up
with two industries, the indie industry
and the AAA industry. And they're not
going to look anything alike. And maybe
AI is the thing that draws the line in
the sand between those two things. and
no one will be allowed to cross that
line by the consumer base. That's
entirely possible, right? But like the
the
we are in a place where I am so
completely befuddled how they think any
part of what they're like Larry in
particular will improve the
emotional resonance of Divinity over the
emotional resonance of everything that
we got delivered in Balders's Gate. I
don't even like Balders Skate. I think
it's a masterpiece.
>> I think I think they're not interested
in that. I think they are. If you ask
the people there that I think are um
again, this is me making up people's
opinions I do not know. So, take this
for as much as that's worth. I think
they would say it's not about increasing
the emotional resonance. It's about
being able to make more stuff that is
emotionally resonant. To which I would
say,
um I don't think that's going to work
out the way you think it's going to work
out. Uh side note, Jake brought up an
interesting point about like sort of uh
and I it kind of picked something in my
head. If they improve productivity, you
would see layoffs at companies can do
the same work with less people. The
interesting part here is with the
infinite growth thing that we've seen
before AI again the myth of infinite
growth. The idea would always be if you
uh if people want to make all the money
that let's we have to start there.
They're going to try to make efficiency
the most efficient thing so they can do
the least amount of people to make the
most amount of product. But as soon as
that cycle is done or whatever they do,
if they still want all the money and
companies want all the money, they would
still hire more people to use the new
system that needs less people to do
overall so they could make more of the
thing. Like it would still there would
there would be obviously the natural uh
cycle of uh job loss, job creation, etc.
The problem with AI is there's no
creation. There's no job creation. You
are essentially just whittling down the
workforce as opposed to like until
eventually it's one very sad person who
calls themsself a prompt engineer
sitting in a broom closet trying to make
the next great America novel by asking
AI feverishly to write the next chapter
of Moby Dick and it can't.
>> And again and again I want to be very
clear. This is if the win condition is
to make all of the money.
There are multiple win conditions.
>> Uh I think I think the narrative that
that companies need to kind of god I'm
this is not meant to be like capitalism
bad but like the it's it's
>> you can win and not make all the money,
>> right?
>> Uh there is balance, there's
sustainability, there's a whole bunch of
stuff like that. Um, but I think a lot
of the arguments come at uh at that sort
of being the end- all beall win
condition. And I think especially when
dealing with stuff like art and video
games, uh, which also is art, um,
we should try to remember that. And
we'll see. Look, it's sort of putting a
bow on this because we've been talking
about this for an hour. Um, putting a
bow on on the laren of it all. I will be
very curious to see sort of where they
move forward. Uh, I would imagine the
smart move here
would be to take Will's patented class
of shut the hell up and just sort of
like keep going, release something that
people like and and sort of do what like
if there's on Steam you need to sort of
uh uh disclose that you use AI and X Y
and Z, do that and then tell people
where you did it and then let people
decide if they're comfortable with that
thing.
>> Yep.
Right. But the back and forth of like
what we might do, oh, we'll never do
this. Oh, this is the only way we're
going to do X, Y, and Z unless we decide
to do A, B, and C. That's going to lead
down a path of distrust and burn a lot
of goodwill that they earned very very
like with a lot of hard work uh over the
last few years. I think it needs to I I
think
less is more here. Don't lie. But also
take the swing. Stop trying to mitigate
what your swing is
>> and see where the chips land if you
believe in it as hard as you do to use
it.
>> That's kind of where I'm at.
>> Yep.
>> Does that make sense?
>> Yeah, I think it does. Uh to put to put
to put a little bow on this, by the way,
I did want to just address this real
quick. We would be absolutely remiss if
we didn't address um this part too. Uh
it does turn out that um Sandfall did
have AI generated assets in game um
early on. They ripped them out. And then
the reason that this came up uh as part
of this whole thing that's sort of in
tandem with Larry is that they got their
um their indie game awards taken away. I
said dice awards earlier because the
dice awards are on my mind, but no, it
was the indie game awards. Um
and uh like so we're we've been
addressing Larian because a their
comments have been in English and the
translation of some of Sandfall's
comments has been not the best. Um and b
there's more of them. But this is not a
uniquely Larryan phenomena. This is not
a uniquely Larryan discussion. That's
just a convenient lens to view the
discussion through as a way to have this
talk with all of you. And please do
again. Good faith, say more comments uh
down below. How are you feeling about
this? Are you going is this like going
to make you swear? Actually, hold on. I
want to see emotes in chat. chat, if if
you would uh is this going to stop you
from buying Divinity, right? Not the
gore, not the anything else, is are the
comments that Sven's making now, or is
all of this discussion about Generative
AI going to be the thing that stops you
from buying further Larry games, from
not buying Balders's Gate 3 if you
haven't bought it already? Right.
>> So, it's funny. I I I'll answer the
question first. As of right now, this
does not stop me because I don't know
what they're doing. I need to know what
they're doing. I will question it up
until the day and I will see if we can
figure out the stuff. But they they've
committed to the only things they've
committed to are things I think they're
going to mess up and probably
statistically be lying about by
accident. [laughter]
>> You know what I mean? Uh, so it'll it
for me this is a wait and see because
they've flip-flopped three times and now
I don't know what to trust. So it's kind
of a holding pattern.
>> And I actually really appreciate that
chat seems kind of um divided and is
generally of the wait and see opinion,
right? Because there are a lot of people
who have who have strongly said one way
or the other, right? because this is the
social media area and everything must be
a strong yes or a strong no and nuance
is dead on the internet. Right. But I
really appreciate that chat seems to be
mixed.
>> Yeah.
>> Right. And that's good, right? That that
is good. And and the most common
response I'm seeing is wait and see see
more about it. Right.
>> Also crush get on Boulders Gate 3. It's
real fun. [laughter]
Um but the um I would at this point
before we move on to I think probably
fake ads and then go into our other
stories. WE DO HAVE OTHER STORIES. Um We
blew through fake ads. We can just move
on to other stuff.
>> Okay, cool. Um, uh, I was going to say,
um,
I really do appreciate the conversation
here. It is, I mean, I don't need to
tell any of you, it is incredibly
difficult to have a nuance discussion
about anything AI. And there have been
people in the chat, and I hope I've been
highlighting enough of them as they come
up, of people that like aren't fully as,
I think, fullthroated against AI as I
think Will and I are, that have reasons
for why they feel the way they feel. And
there has been a like general good faith
discussion. No one in the entire thing,
even the comments that you guys are
chatting back and forth across both
platforms on Twitch and on YouTube, like
we're seeing discussion play out in this
in a polite fashion. And again, I would
love to know more places where
conversations like this can happen
politely because they are rare. So, A,
let me know if you know of any. B, thank
you. Thank you for letting us uh discuss
this and uh not always agreeing on
everything and and being able to have
this discussion on the internet
>> in 2026. We're 12 days into 2026, y'all.
>> This is the first second show of the
year.
>> Yeah.
>> So, thank you. Seriously, I I'm making a
joke of it, but thank you. It means a
lot. This is why we like doing this
show. Um because we can't find places
where the nuance can be discussed.
>> Yeah. Uh okay, let's talk about Are you
ready for a good a good story?
>> Are you ready to just All right. Do you
know what everyone loves on the
internet, Matt?
>> Baby animals.
>> Now,
>> oh, we're going right. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah,
they do. They do.
>> They do love baby animals. Uh Minecraft
has announced their next big update. We
always talk about these because I like
when I like the fact that Minecraft
remains a game that I paid $20 for like
a decade ago and is still getting
updates multiple times a year with new
content. Great. Um, no notes. Uh,
Minecraft is uh going to be giving baby
animals across the entire vanilla game
new appearances and sounds as part of
the spring update. You're welcome,
internet. Now there are now there are
going to be cute new digital animals uh
that you get to scream about as you
wander around murdering everything in
your Minecraft world.
>> So hold on cuz I'm not deep into
Minecraft. There were always baby
animals but they were just smaller
versions of the animals before.
>> Yes. So so essentially a calf was like a
quarteriz cow and just like the same
skin. It was just tiny, right? Um uh
chickens were some of the only No,
chickens I think were even the same
model. Like they were just small
versions of the big thing. Um, and so
moving to um moving to a No, they're
actually different with different sounds
and different like cool um overhauls is
pretty cool. It is really nice to see
Minecraft um doing this sort of like,
hey, we know this has been in the game
forever, but we're updating it because
it needs updating kind [clears throat]
of thing. I like that a lot. Um yeah.
Uh yeah, their heads were bigger. Yes,
that's correct. Uh yeah, they they are
they're smaller with bigger heads and
that's it, but the skin is essentially
the same. Uh kind of like regular
babies. Anything with eyes too big for
its head is cute.
>> That's just how it works. So uh yeah,
that's coming up. Uh look forward to
that in in the update uh in later this
year.
>> Thanks Minecraft.
>> Thanks Minecraft for giving us a pallet
cleanser. Are you ready for a kind of an
interesting bummer?
>> I you know what? I'll take it.
Press F to pay respects to Anthem.
>> Anthem is uh
>> is are the servers still up? The the
rumor is it was either today or tomorrow
that they're down.
>> Yeah. So,
>> I'm going to go to down detector.
[laughter]
>> I believe it will be if you're if you're
not watching this live, it'll probably
be down by the time you see this. And I
believe it is now down. Um
>> yeah. Oh, so I'm looking. Okay. Yeah.
So, actually, down detector kind of
[clears throat]
did an interesting thing. Uh
there were little pings and then there's
a big spike as of uh
as of 11:00 a.m.
>> Yep. Um so the um
they they stopped selling it like a week
ago. You couldn't download it. Like if
you didn't already have it downloaded,
you couldn't download it. And people
were like trying furiously to finish up
achievements and everything else, which
I kind of get, right? Like
>> that is the way that a live service game
that is going away, that's the best
possible thing is a small contingent of
people wanting to complete it in its
entirety before it is ripped away from
everyone getting to play it.
>> Yeah. Um Oh, yeah. That's a great
question. What is Anthem? Anthem is
Boware's live service. Um,
God, I'm trying so hard to
>> It was trying to be Destiny.
>> I was trying to not say Boware's live
service Destiny clone, but it's Bow Wars
live service Destiny clone.
>> Uh, it was also uh the subject of incred
in incredible I think Jason Shrier
again, I think, if correct me if I'm
wrong about this, but he was reporting
on the incredible crunch of of what went
into Anthem and the shifting of that
team and um uh sort of the the whole
story of it. Again, um I don't want to
poo poo on the game itself. From what I
understand, the game is fine. People did
really like the combat. It just was a
bit the the story was threadbear, and
apparently like the Iron Man flying and
combat was really fun. Um and I to be
perfectly honest, I I had thought this
had already gone down. Um but no, that
was uh as of I believe as of time of
recording, I believe it is it is done.
So, y
>> um did anyone here play a lot of anthem?
I would love to chat with you very
quickly about your experience in it
because I never did. Um, I always liked
the look of it, but at at the time it
came out, I did not need another
lifestyle looter shooter in my life and
then it just sort of went by the
wayside, right? Like
>> and I think a lot of people played it at
launch.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. Um, and that I think that was
probably when most people played it. Uh,
what I'm seeing is that the gameplay I
like I like uh Dissonance's comment. Uh,
gameplay fun story me. Endgame
non-existent. Uh, fair. Real true.
>> Well, actually here. Placeholder.
Placeholder. Ah, placeholder. There you
are. Anthem was a fun game. What did you
like about it? I'd like to say positive
things about Anthem.
>> Yeah.
>> I'd like to say like it's it's now going
away. And we've discussed on the show
before like no matter where games, good
or bad or whatever, the problem with a
live service game is eventually you'll
never get to play it again. And that
sucks from a preservation standpoint. I
know there are some groups trying to
make the PC version have like servers
still run and they're trying to
backwards like figure out how the code
works so they could like make something.
Um
uh okay. So you're saying gunplay and
abilities the hard mode missions as
well. Yeah. I again I I heard um I uh I
have heard from multiple people that the
the difficulty spike in the hard
missions was really fun. It was and it
almost made it um I won't say like a
puzzle, but you really had to figure out
your kits and make sure you knew exactly
what you were doing. And it turned from
like a just a
it it felt like it hit at the highest
hardest levels from what I understand.
It hit the same uh uh fun points as a
high tough Destiny raid, right? Like
that was kind of the thing.
>> And once again, Warframe stays winning.
>> Sure. Um,
>> I just like saying nice things about it
now because it's kind of because it's on
its way out. The style was amazing. Mix
the tech and magic suits with something
special.
>> Um,
uh, and there's a lot of potential.
Yeah, the free flying was super fun.
Spent too much time just flying around
the open world. I'll tell you this, Diz,
I spent when this was out and sort of
like coming out and when I was like
debating it, I watched way more YouTube
videos about this because of how good it
looked.
>> Yeah.
Um,
>> yeah. I I think it's it will always be
an example of like
trying taking taking a swing at
something that you think is going to
there's more room in this in the genre
than there was, right? Which I think is
is an understandable swing to take,
right? Thinking that there is room in
this space for another
space ninja wizard shooter game, right?
because we already had two when Anthem
came out, Destiny and Warframe. And
those are not small games to try and go
up against, right? And I think that even
a game that had some good points and had
some good stuff about it was struggling
to find its niche there. And I think it
didn't compete on several core factors
with those. And that's probably what
ultimately led to its downfall in
addition to the crunch. Um.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. Anyway, um this is no, I hope it's
clear by now, this is not to dunk on
Anthem. Uh it is a sad day that any game
uh that people liked is no longer
available for them to play, especially
one that they bought.
>> And again, you you kind of at this point
I think I I want to be very clear even
though I don't agree with a lot of the
corporate practices that uh they did
sort of in the in the structuring and
release of this game. I think
[snorts] from a fairness to to money you
spent on it ratio,
they kept it alive a fair amount of time
before closing the door.
>> Yeah.
>> Um again, I thought this was closed
years ago.
>> Yeah. Um, but it's still sad and uh it's
hope maybe there'll be some some some
fans who really want to try to open that
gate up on PC and see if they can make
their own fan servers and we'll see if
that's allowed. That's always gets
complicated.
>> Yeah.
>> Um but yeah, no, uh sad to see it go.
>> Yep, absolutely. Uh next up, we get to
dunk on Nintendo some more. [laughter]
>> Greg [sighs]
Um, so Nintendo has officially received
a
complaint which alleges um and one was
filed December 17th, one was filed
January 6th. Uh they were filed against
Nintendo and the contracting service
firm Tech System uh who was working on
behalf of Nintendo. um that they
uh violated several uh articles of the
National Labor Relations Act um and uh
were essentially
union busting.
>> Yeah. Again, this is sort of the
accusation of union busting. We'll see
how it goes. Is from Kotaku. Um they
it's funny this article I do want to
talk about it because every one of these
we should keep it like in the discussion
and make sure that it's actually being
discussed. This article I wasn't an
entirely huge fan of because it brings
up the new one that we know nothing
about and then brings up the other one
that was closed and they paid someone
for they basically paid damages to a
person.
>> Yep.
>> So like that's instantly conf conflating
the two stories together. Uh but it also
does keep it relevant like cuz without
that additional thing there's no story
here to make you click through it. So,
this falls into the barely enough meat
on this bone because of relevance that
it's I'm fine with that. It's just right
now this is something that is starting.
Nintendo is not having a gang buster
year in this department. Um or last year
I guess or this year too. I don't know
what is time. Um
>> soup.
>> Yeah. So, this is this is sort of an
ongoing thing. We will see h how these
accusations and these filings uh move
forward as as time progresses.
>> Yep. Absolutely. Uh, okay.
Speaking of union busting,
>> I was really proud of Ubisoft on labor
laws. I just thought that was I thought
that
>> I thought it was I thought it was pretty
good. I was I was a big fan of of this.
So,
>> Ice Did you say this? Did you say this
right before this came up? [laughter]
>> Yeah. SO
[laughter]
YEAH, Ubisoft Halifax uh voted 61 um of
71. So that's 61 votes for 10 votes
either against or abstaining to unionize
in December.
And then
Ubisoft co they swear totally
coincidentally
definitely unrelated. Super unrelated.
Uh shut the studio down.
Totally completely def pinky promise.
Totally unrelated to the unionization.
Um instead um here's their statement.
Over the past 24 months, Ubisoft is
undertaking companywide actions to
streamline operations, improve
efficiency, and reduce cost. As part of
this, Ubisoft has made the difficult
decision to close its Halifax studio. 71
positions will be affected. We're
committed to supporting all impacted
team members during this transition with
resources, including comprehensive
severance package and additional career
assistance.
So
let's give Ubisoft just for the briefest
moment a shred of benefit of the doubt.
Let us for the moment
Let us for the moment suggest the notion
that they were always intending to close
the Halifax studio at the end of the
year and that the unionization just
happened at a time when they were
already about to close the studio.
Even in that world, bro, find the money
to keep him another year and go through
one round of collective bargaining. Do
something. Just don't do this optics
thing, right? Like the optics hit here
is huge. Like even if you were going to
do it, you have to understand and
recognize that the optics here are god
awful. They're so bad.
>> But here's the thing.
>> So bad.
>> Here's the thing. Well, this is Ubisoft
we're talking about. Do optics matter?
Like people still buy Rainbow 6 and
people still buy Assassin's Creed? So
like I'm not saying this is right. I'm
saying like I don't think Ubisoft cares
about optics here. I I just it doesn't
seem like they do.
>> Uh it's so funny because Ubisoft games
were the easiest games for me just to
never buy again. [laughter]
And I was shocked how unsad I was. Is
that happy? I have no idea what that is.
I never neutral, right? Like apathetic.
You could be apathetic and not have it
be sad. Um, but obviously they don't
they don't need my money. Um, I just I
like look there's two there's two
possibilities here. One, they were
planning on closing this division
anyway. It just so happened that they
unionized and oh god that sucks and
whatever. And two, they saw it and were
like, nope. I look
I think it does bring more heat than
they actually need and therefore it this
this feels never assume malice when
incompetence will do. Uh, I feel like
this is a oh no, two things happened
crap. Like I think that's kind of it.
I'm not saying that that it's not a uh
uh benefit for them in a weird way. Uh I
I just don't you'd have to be a special
kind of evil andor stupid to just do
that. And and who knows? I just I
>> I really this
>> I really love I really love this take.
It's difficult to boycott something when
you're already not playing
>> true Jeremy going.
>> True. Just true. That is the difficult
part, right? Um but at a bare minimum,
we can not let them uh do this and have
it go unnoticed.
>> Yeah.
>> So, uh Okay.
>> And I guess the union is like trying to
work through it and see if there's
anything that can be done. I believe
they said they will pursue every legal
resource to defend union members. Uh and
it raises many questions of which we do
not yet have answers. So, Yep.
Okay.
>> Again, that comes to us from Kotaku.
>> Um, in today's episode of uh, Wait, they
figured it out. Wait, these guys figured
it out?
>> Dell figured it out. So, Dell's um,
>> Wait, hold on. Can we stop real quick?
Who's old enough to know this guy?
>> I am. This is ridiculous, but I am.
>> Who's old enough to know this man?
They're [laughter] melting. They're
melting.
>> Yeah.
>> All right.
>> So, KYLE,
[laughter]
[snorts]
>> SORRY, SORRY, SORRY.
>> NO, it's okay. This is great. I love
this. This is a very old Dell commercial
about going off to college and getting a
Dell to be your college PC. And there
was a whole thing called, "Dude, you're
getting a Dell."
>> "Dude, you're getting a Dell." And it
was THIS DUDE WHO TALKED LIKE THIS.
LIKE, IT WAS IT was uh it was actually a
really good ad campaign.
>> Yeah.
>> Um it was a cultural moment for like six
months.
>> Yep. Um [laughter] I like this one. Host
deliberately bombard their audience with
lethal levels of existential damage.
Daru, you're old. H
>> join us. So CES happened and there's a
reason we're not talking about CES
because I don't think anything important
happened at CES, but Kevin uh
Terrilliger
um sat down with PC uh PCG's Dave James
and had the following quote which I just
thought I wanted to highlight amidst all
of the do they not get it or are they
anyway we've learned what we've learned
over the course of this year especially
from a consumer spec perspective is that
they're not buying based on AI. In fact,
I think AI probably confuses them more
than it helps them understand a specific
outcome.
So, now we should be very clear that
doesn't mean that Dell's not doing AI
things.
>> Oh, no. They're totally still doing AI
things.
>> It just means that now we get to know
that they know that we don't like it and
they're doing it anyway, right? Like
it's not a case of misguided companies
who are like, "Yeah, eventually if we
can market this well, people will see
the value in." No, they know we don't
like it and they're doing it anyway.
>> And I like that the the excuse is like,
"Oh, people just aren't understanding
it." Well, isn't that your job to make
them understand it? And perhaps if it's
not understandable, then maybe it's
something that we both and people don't
like it. Maybe it's something that you
probably shouldn't sell.
>> Yeah.
>> But I'll take it. I'll take this. Uh,
it's so it's so silly. And I think this
is going to be the year like because
like I don't know I listen to a lot of
podcasts and there's always like every
pod every commercial on a podcast has
something like Adobe Acrobat has an AI
assistant now and I'm just like okay
like you just hear about all this stuff.
I'm like I don't think this is a selling
point like you think it's a selling
point.
>> Yeah, I agree. It's and I I think Dell
is actually like kind of admitting that
which is at least a tiny step in the
right direction.
>> Yep. Yep. I agree. Uh and then in
[laughter] in case you thought that
everyone got the point,
what if what if they didn't?
What what
I'm just gonna show you this.
So,
also out of uh I believe this is also
Yeah, this is CES in Las Vegas.
[snorts]
This is from Razer.
>> Of course, it is.
>> This is Razer's new I hate every part of
the sentence.
>> Say the words. Gro powered AI digital
gaming assistant
um named called Project Ava
and it takes the form of an AI
controlled anime waifu named Kira.
>> There's a couple other skins but sure
>> that you put on your desk and does Gro
things while you play the game.
In the show notes, you'll be able to see
the article. You can go to Kotaku right
now. There is a video of someone using
it at the at like the booth.
And I couldn't imagine I couldn't
imagine the place I'd have to be in my
life to use this. [laughter]
It would be a dark dark day. Uh it it
just
it it just
I
>> Right. And then of course we're not
going to get too deeply into it because
not because it's not important but
because I am physically incapable of
addressing the topic without going into
an invective profanityladen
hourong diet tribe about the causes and
impact of it. But to couple any sort of
um controllable AI model with the name
Grock right now is probably like the
absolute kiss of death for a product. A
reminder this is the tw if you're
watching this later 12th of January. So,
all of the Gro stuff with
horrible things that I encourage you not
to look up if you're not ready to just
deal with some of the worst humanity.
>> Yeah, there's a reason why we're not
talking about the the Grock thing right
now. Uh, for many reasons.
>> Um, but uh not not exactly the stamp of
uh partnership you really want on your
product at this point.
Also, there was a question about are
these quotes from it? No, these are
these are
>> but I will say these are the vibe I got
from watching the video of it. I think I
think she did say snag it epic pwnage.
Uh I don't think she said the other
ones. Also, also this feels like a like
[snorts] a fascinating beautiful case in
don't recreate the Torment Nexus because
do you know what this exactly feels
like?
This feels like um the Bladeunner
sequel. That's 100% what this feels
like. Like every fiber of my being is
like
>> Yeah, but the Bladerunner sequel is
good,
>> right? But the whole idea of having an
AI assistant that compensates for the
fact that you will never have a real
human relationship and that you will be
defined by your othering and your
loneliness for the rest of your
existence and will form parasocial
attachments with something that is
designed to make you feel loved even
though it cannot love you is like way
too on the nose. Right? So I'm just
feeling like this is a torment nexus
that someone saw that and went, "Oh
yeah, we can have it call them Joe.
Yeah, listen. I I uh I like this. It's
226. I'm gonna say epic podage anymore.
It's so funny. Probably not. Uh I will
say this. I don't know if it actually
says epic podage or whatever. It doesn't
matter. Uh I will say if this is from
the AI person of the man who named uh
their daughter after the strongest Elden
Ring spell, air quotes. Uh I would not
put it past something along those lines.
It seems like there might be some
arrested development in the gamer space
in that way. Uh, so again, I feel like
the spirit of this product is
represented correctly even though the
quotes are not direct.
>> True.
>> Uh, [snorts]
so yeah,
>> I I hate I hate it.
>> Yeah. So, sorry we didn't get to AI news
last week. Um, but
>> did we cover it?
>> Did we Did we cover it well this week? I
wanted to put it in kind of its own
container. Um,
>> real quick, because we do have like
another 15 minutes if we want. Is there
a story? I'm just Let's try this. Will
uh uh Brad Janet Twitch YouTube uh is
there a story that we didn't cover that
you'd like our t the hottest of take on
because we haven't researched it yet?
>> Yeah.
>> Let us know right now. We got we got 15
minutes of play time.
>> Oh yeah. Uh Discord's AI survey.
>> Discord's AI survey.
>> So Discord said
>> Oh, did I see Jacob Geller post
something about that?
>> Yeah, it didn't last very long. Um
[laughter] they posted a survey because
Discord is about to go through an IPO.
Um and they wanted to know what
consumers view on including AI in
Discord was and the general belief is
that it did not go well. Um because the
survey was up for less than an hour and
now you can't get to it anymore. And
that generally means that they don't
think that the data is usable for the
purpose they wanted the survey to be
usable for. Uh cuz no no no zero people
thought it would be a great idea to have
Discord have AI bots in your chat rooms
or your voice calls. So
I I didn't I didn't bring that one up or
include it cuz like it like that's the
whole story. Discord did a stupid and
everyone went, "Hey Discord, you're
doing a stupid and that was the end of
it." Um
yeah.
>> Okay. Okay.
>> Oh. Uh okay. That's a good one. I like
this one. Matt,
can I tell you? I I'll I'll I'll explain
this to you and you'll we'll we'll see
we'll see how Matt reacts. So, Magic is
releasing again
seven sets this year.
>> The Gathering
>> The Gathering is releasing seven sets
this year, which is, let me be very
clear upfront, a terrible, stupid idea.
They are going to burn out a whole bunch
of players this year. That's just how it
is.
>> There's too much gathering there. Uh
there's too much um
>> magic to gather around
>> gathering. Not enough gathering.
>> Not a lot not enough hunting.
>> Correct. Yeah, that's it. So um in in
some feeble attempt to save it and start
things out on the right year, they
return us to an idyllic plane called
Lurwin. And Lurwin is a really weird
plane because it is um daybound and
nightbound. There is one side of the
plane that is always dark and one side
of the plane that's always light. It's
always daytime. It's always night time.
And to explain this, they decided that
they would hire a group famous for well
for explaining
weird fantasy stuff very well. They
hired Hansen Creature Creations to do a
threeinut
like puppeted
musical number to reintroduce the magic
community to the concept of Thorwin
and it's a banger. [laughter]
>> Is it out? I'll watch that later.
>> Yeah, it's it's out. I'll send it to you
later.
>> That's very fun. Um, and it's really
cool and I like it a lot and I feel like
it's great and I feel like Lurin is the
right path for Magic to be starting the
year off on. Um, because immediately
after that we're getting Teenage Mutant
Ninja Turtles which have pizza lands.
>> So in Magic the lands are the places you
draw the magic from, right?
>> I I know that. But what's the
>> I'm explaining for the audience.
>> Hey, no. Wait. What's pizza Why is Why
is there pizza on the lands? So, the
lands instead of being things like a
picture of an island or a picture of a
swamp or a forest or a mountain or
whatever, um they're pictures of drippy
cheese slices of Teenage Mut Ninja
Turtle style pizza with the mana symbol
embedded in the pizza slice. That's the
land.
>> Is it at least like Okay. Like the the
black mana is like olives. No, it's just
the black mana symbol just on the it it
might have some olives on it.
>> I I like Listen, I like the idea. Look,
if we're reskinning it, I like the idea
of Mana being pizza cuz pizza is what
fuels the Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles
and therefore I'm okay with it from a
from a meta narrative perspective, but I
would want the pizza to like have
toppings that would make sense for the
mana that they're trying to make, right?
>> Yeah. One
>> [laughter]
>> You right.
>> That is That is true. Um
>> Oh god, if only I could go back and play
that game again to crush Ben and Adam.
>> Okay, so like there's some of it, right?
Like the the plains has banana on it and
the mountain has pepperoni on it
>> and the islands have
>> uh anchovies on them.
>> Oh yeah.
>> And the forests have green
So like there's some amount of it but
it's it's Matt it's pizza
>> but I like So I don't have a PROBLEM I
LOOK I have a lot of problem with a lot
of different things that Magic does. I
don't have a problem
with that as the fuel for your deck.
It's the literal fuel of the Ninja
Turtles.
>> Right. And I think I think I agree with
you in concept. It just feels like the
most far outlier example of how far
Wizards has gone with the um Universes
Beyond kind of thing. Like how far we've
drifted. Like
>> this is not going to be a set legal
thing, right? This is just like a
Universes Beyond thing. Or are they
making it a legal legal set?
>> No, it's it's it's standard legal. We'll
be playing we'll be you will you will
have a set where like Ang will get
killed by Marangelo.
>> That that that
>> it's becoming it's becoming an unthemed
world. I mean, it already kind of is.
Um,
>> yeah,
>> which is fine. Uh,
if you want it to be fine. Uh, I I I
have less of a problem with the unthemed
world of Magic and more of a problem, I
think, with what you said with the
amount of Magic cards coming out because
inevitably due to marketing deals and
release things and windows and stuff
like that, you're going to do what
happened to the Spider-Man set where you
like tease it. you tease another set
before the first set is out and then
you're like killing a hype of the thing
and you know
>> they crammed all of Lorwin um they
crammed all of the pre-release
information into last week essentially.
>> Yeah,
>> it was all super crammed. There wasn't
time to ingest it. I still haven't seen
all the new Lurwin cards.
>> Um and we're pretty much in for more of
that. And I feel like this is
>> it is Yeah,
>> it is. It's not trying to be.
>> Yeah, it is.
>> They've done it.
>> Yeah, it it is card game Fortnite.
Absolutely. Um, we probably got time for
one more. Any other stories, chat, that
I I missed in our prep or didn't get to
that you think um want uh us our our hot
takes on.
>> You know what would have been really
fun?
>> What
>> is if every mana was pizza except for
green mana and that was ooze.
>> Yeah.
Oh, dark wolf. I haven't seen that. The
Steam Box price leaked.
>> What?
>> Uh, okay. So, it's a leak. And they also
a reminder that a leak of a price
doesn't mean anything.
>> Yeah.
>> Right. Like that's
>> Oh, oo is a token. Jade. Copy. Copy.
Copy.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
>> Is Shredder a Shredder has to be in the
decks, right? Like there has to be
>> Oh, yeah. There's a Shredder. There's
like a whole Shredder foot ninja kind of
thing. I will if they make a commander
deck for Shredder, that will probably be
the one I buy. I'll be part of the
problem.
>> Yeah, that's fair. Um,
>> so if you want a Magic the Gathering
movie adaptation, just watch literally
anything sick.
>> Yeah. Uh, there was a Oh, yeah, that's
right. So, so some stuff got announced.
Um,
the Lego sets just got announced. There
is a uh there's a $650 triple final
evolution uh OG starter statue. Um so
they're doing like Lego Pokemon stuff.
So that's cool.
>> That's if you have excess money
>> Oh yeah.
>> to spend. They're pretty cool looking.
Um the other one that I saw was uh AGDQ
which cracked Chad 2.2 million for
uh their charity this time.
>> Oh, I love Sorry, I'm looking at the
Legos. I love the badge case.
>> Yeah, it comes with the OG gym badges as
a pre-order bonus.
Interesting. Yeah. 2 2.2 million raised
to AGDQ, which is always like a great
>> That's great.
>> It's it's it's great.
>> Um 2.4, excuse me. Thank you, uh Little
Learn Annie. Appreciate that.
Yeah, there there's there's the new um
there's a new Lego smart bricks thing,
which is essentially just a um an NFC
tag in that they've crammed inside
certain figurines that interact with a
brick that makes sound effects. And the
brick is like 20 to $25, which is like
not the most expensive, but it's kind of
a gimmick. So like some people will be
super into it and some people won't care
at all.
>> Yeah.
>> Um
>> that's neat. Like I like stuff like that
because like that's stuff that like some
kid will make something crazy with,
right? Like
>> Yeah,
>> that brick.
>> Yep. Absolutely.
>> Anyho,
>> I think that's uh that's going to do it.
So chat, if you uh have thoughts on the
rise of AI in gaming or other stuff that
we talked about, please do leave them in
the comments below. Shoot us some
message over on the blue ski. Do
>> also if if you're part of the Discord uh
which I believe you can become if you
are a subscriber here on Twitch, if you
are a YouTube membership person, if you
are a member of our Patreon, uh all at
the same levels depending on all the
different perks you can get for
different types of things. Basically,
it's the choose your own adventure of
what you want from us uh based on those
things. Um you can come talk to us on
the Discord and suggest topics for next
week and chit cchaty about all the stuff
and uh generally have a very nice time.
>> Agreed. Agreed. and talk to us on blue
sky cuz that's what's on screen right
now as well.
>> Yeah, you can do that too. Uh which
means that all that remains to us for
today is for Matt to do the same sign
off we do every week.
>> That's right. Because we want to make
sure, especially especially in this year
where obviously
everything's going great. Uh we want to
make sure that uh we start off our week
on the right foot and that we are all
with each other in in in gaming spirit
and breakfast harmony and we all do the
exact same thing to feel like a
community at the end of this show and
make sure that that feeling is spread
throughout the entirety of the
the week and beyond. So if you'd all
join me will you know you know what's
happening right now.
>> Yeah, of course. Everyone, please take
your traditional one cookie by Nick and
Scott Dit. And now take a bite with me
as you will. As we all have them, right?
So, here we go.
Yummy.
>> [music]