At a recent convention,
James and his friends were talking about a type of game that we don't really have a proper term for yet.
But given the fact that they have their own special forms of design and marketing and longer-term development,
we could really use one. Let's go with "Lifestyle Games".
Also, by the way, this is Josh.
He's doing the guest art today, so say hello.
Sometimes, a game is more than just a game -
it's a lifestyle. You play it more than any other game.
Your social life revolves around it. You study it, you talk about it with your friends, you watch other people play it on Twitch.
You make friends over this game
and you find yourself spending less time with the friends who don't play it.
Your humor involves a lot of jokes about the game and
your daydreams often wander to it. League of legends, World of Warcraft,
 Call of Duty,
Overwatch and even Madden often fall into this category
and there is nothing wrong with that -
 within reason.
There are plenty of people who make a lifestyle out of the sort of thing in a healthy and positive way.
It can give people a social circle that they might not otherwise have had
and give them something to always think about and look forward to.
But it's hard to have a good design conversation around games like these
when we've never really had the terminology to help us conceptualize all of these games fitting into one basket.
Usually when we talk about Dota or Warcraft or Call of Duty, we talk about them as a MOBA, an MMORPG,
and an FPS. We talk about how they relate to their genres rather than talking about what they have in common with each other.
So we haven't really talked enough about how to make them better,
both at being Lifestyle Games and at being so in a humane and positive way.
But if we're going to do that, the first question we have to ask is:
Can you intentionally design a game to be a Lifestyle Game?
Is that something that just sort of happens with a large enough fanbase and a lot of luck?
Or are there common elements that these games share which allow them to become Lifestyle Games?
Well, yes, both, kind of - I don't think you can make something that's a hundred percent guaranteed to achieve Lifestyle Game status,
but I do think that there are common design elements which make it a lot more likely.
But, before we dive into these, a quick side bar
Not everybody is going to experience Lifestyle Games as a Lifestyle.
Any Lifestyle Game is going to have plenty of people who play these games for maybe a few hours every couple of weeks
Also, for almost any game you can probably find a small number of people who experience
it as a lifestyle even though it may seem unlikely to do so. When I talk about Lifestyle games here,
I'm talking not about absolutes, but simply about games that a significant amount of people end up experiencing as a Lifestyle.
So with that caveat what elements seem to improve the likelihood that a game becomes a Lifestyle Game
Well it has to have robust social interaction, because we're social creatures,
and even the most introverted of us once at least the potential opportunity
to share something as meaningful to them as a lifestyle pursuit with other people.
Next it needs functionally infinite content.
If it doesn't have that, it cannot become a Lifestyle, because people are just going to exhaust what's there and move on.
Often this infinite content comes in the form of competition against other people, because the people you play against are a
varied, interesting, and potentially inexhaustible well of content.
But infinite content could also come in the form of procedural generation. Or with cases like World of Warcraft it could come in the form
of a lot of things that take a lot of time to do, like
acquiring all of the best raid loot when content takes that long to master,
the devs have time to make more of it before any
But the hardest core players have exhausted what's already there, which leads us to our next similarity between these games:
they have to be regularly updated with new content,
patches, and other supports to give players something to look forward to.
Something for them to think about. Something to provide players with the implied promise
that the game to which they have devoted so much of who they are
won't just end or disappear on them.
Of course, it will eventually end - no game is permanent -
it just has to feel like all of that time and effort that players are investing isn't being wasted.
And finally, any Lifestyle Game has to be deep enough to occupy the players thoughts outside the game, either mechanically or narratively,
and that has to be supported by opportunities to do so.
When the player can't be in the game itself, they need to be able to delve into
reddit threads, or watch streamers or check out new builds, or pour over Wiki's,
or turn on some eSports to watch the pros play.
So those are the common elements - the features a game needs in order to become a Lifestyle.
But now that we have this concept of a Lifestyle Game that we can design for and improve upon,
we next have to ask ourselves: How can we make it good for the player? Healthy?
I mean, I've played my share of Lifestyle Games that felt more like an obsession,
where I put them down after a while
and it felt like waking up from a stupor, where the last few weeks or months or years of my life
just felt like a blur, like the game stole that time from me.
But there have been others that I played where I made lifelong friends, and I came away feeling like
"Yeah that was a massive investment of time, but I got something valuable from that time.
I formed relationships,
I've learned something about myself, or about the world."
That first type of game, the obsession game, those usually involve a great deal of Skinner Boxing.
We've done a whole episode on that topic before, but suffice it to say,
Don't do that, please. I mean, as a designer,
you're probably not going to be able to avoid putting *some* treadmills into a game
that's meant to be played for a thousand hours,
but if the game is *about* the treadmill
- if there's no other reason to play it -
then you've done something very wrong.
But avoiding harmful design like that is the easy part.
The harder question is: How do we actually put positive elements into these games?
Well first you can include real-world skills as part of play.
The simplest is stuff like leadership and teamwork.
Allowing people to practice those for
thousands of hours as part of their lifestyle pursuit is a powerful thing
and I'm sure that many of you have stories of how you learned to work in a team
or learned to be a better leader through play
Many Lifestyle Games also get the player to practice math,
whether it's the advanced math that sometimes goes into figuring out what equipment you should use,
or simply forcing the player to get really good at doing quick arithmetic in their head,
these are skills that stick with people long after the game itself has been put away.
And there's all kinds of meaningful experiences
that you can build into the world and the lore of your Lifestyle Game.
If your game is suited for it, there can even be opportunities for a bit of tangential learning about history or mythology.
Finally, let your game help people build friendships.
Have your company organize events, like Friday Night Magic, or build in tools that allow players to stay in touch and hang out,
even when they're not looking to be super hardcore about your game.
Give them moments of triumph to celebrate not as individuals, but together.
And don't be embarrassed when your game gives them something to laugh about.
So, whether it be Magic the Gathering or Street Fighter or League or Dota,
Lifestyle Games come in all flavors. And yes, they may come from different genres:
CCG, fighting game, MOBA, or MMO,
but those labels don't adequately describe the experience that these games are providing.
So it's time we start thinking about how we can design better, more compelling versions of these games which lives will, for some time, revolve around.
We can get even better at making these whether it be on the practical side, by making these experiences better at being Lifestyle experiences,
or on the moral side, by Skinner Boxing less and giving players something to take with them when they finally put the game down.
We can do better. See you next time!