[Music]
Hey, welcome back. Last week we took a
look at the game Loneliness. If you
didn't get a chance to check it out, hit
the link below or just go here. Now,
love it or hate it, the thing that's
really interesting about this game is
that the game mechanics have meaning.
That the play, not just the dialogue or
the cut scenes, tells the story and
allows the player to explore an idea.
And that is something I would love to
see a little bit more of in the AAA
industry. So what do we have to
understand to bring the idea of
mechanics as metaphor, mechanics with
meaning into other larger games? First,
we have to understand that the designer
has to set the bounds of the experience.
So let's look back at loneliness. Many
of you might have wished that there was
a way to change how this game ends, but
loneliness was focused on exploring how
we deal with true alienation, with
completely being on the outside, being
completely alone. Deciding on this sort
of specificity is what allowed us to
explore the idea more fully. With
multiple endings, we'd be exploring a
different concept, which is equally
valid, but would be fundamentally
different. Remember, as a designer
crafting meaning with mechanics, you
create a space of possibility. Your job
is simply to choose the bounds of the
experience and allow the player as much
freedom to explore as you can within
those bounds. You'll never be able to
delve into everything. So, you should
simply start your project by asking
yourself, what is it worth exploring? In
fact, if everyone on your team can start
at this point, if everyone can agree on
what general concept you're exploring
before you really start development,
you'll find that your project becomes
much more focused and holistic, you'll
find that that exploration pervades the
game, not only in the design, but in the
art, the sound design, the writing, even
how things are implemented in code.
Getting that simple statement clear is
the first step toward creating more
meaningful games. And if you've ever
wondered, that's not usually how games
start. James has been on innumerable
jobs where a game either began with a
mechanic or an art style, a story
concept, a marketing plan, or worse,
just started getting built with no
central idea at all. Deciding what
concept you're exploring before you
begin still lets you start the actual
development from a mechanic, art style,
or story thread, but it'll help make
sure your project stays directed. And if
everyone keeps in mind what central
concept you're exploring throughout the
development process, you'll create a
much more focused, impactful game. that
game company seems to do an incredible
job at establishing what fundamental
idea they're going to be exploring and
making sure the entire team's on the
same page for every one of their games.
This means that every part of the game,
from the mechanics to the music to the
visuals, helps allow the player to
explore the concepts they want to
present. Secondly, you have to trust
your audience. Loneliness makes the
assumption of imagination. It trusts
that at some point throughout the
experience, you'll personify the dots.
You'll think of them as people. And you
know, I bet 95% of you thought of them
that way, or at least thought of them as
representing people. Most modern AAA
games seem to have a sterility of
expectations. They seem to assume that a
modern audience is unwilling to imagine,
that they need everything spelled out
for them in high poly photorealistic
assets. If you can't let your audience
imagine, you can't let them explore. I'm
not saying we should worsen our graphics
or anything, but we do have to be
willing to trust that our audience is
able to make the leap from the ultra
literal. See, this is where Silent Hill
2 shines. They were willing to step away
from the literal and trust that their
audience would be able to interpret what
they were exploring. They never
explicitly tell the player that the
town's a psychic landscape and that
everything in it is representational.
They trust their audience and demand a
little bit more of them. This is
especially evident if you check out the
remake where the fogs removed. Because
they'd originally embraced the technical
limitations of the system and made the
restricted draw distance an integral
part of the gameplay, it became part of
the metaphor for the character's own
self-d delusion and limited
understanding. It also made the whole
thing way creepier and more
claustrophobic, which an exploration of
such a disturbed mind should be. When
the remake removed that fog, it was
almost certainly because they no longer
face the same technical limitations on
the PS3. They didn't need the fog to
disguise their draw distance anymore.
But to any of you who've played it, even
if you didn't think of it in terms of
the metaphor consciously, I bet you felt
the difference. Or if you've played most
of the second rate shooters out there,
you'll recognize this sort of
handholding. They're unable to do
anything interesting with the narrative
because they don't trust the player
enough to follow anything but the most
simplistic and spelled out plot. But you
know what? Be it Portal's environmental
storytelling with that tiny purposeless
room that was clearly inhabited by a
previous test subject or Bioshock's
famous use of mechanics as metaphor by
taking away control during the very
moments when the words coming out of the
screen are a man chooses a slave obeys.
The gaming audience really can think
beyond and interpret rather than just
mindlessly ingest what's happening on
the screen. And you know what designers,
this isn't one of those eitheror
situations. Both of those game moments
are still great even if you're just
taking them in. To suggest that having
meaning in a game will make it less
engaging is just a lazy copout. If you
got tens of millions of dollars for a
budget, you should be able to do both.
And trust me, your audience will love
you for it. But there is one advantage
that loneliness has that I'm not
entirely sure how to overcome in the AAA
world, and that is its lack of an
objective. You, as the player, get to
set your own goal within Loneliness, and
this lets you explore in a way that's
entirely personal. It lets you really
craft your own story. By creating a
goal, you inherently influence your
audience and establish a correct way to
play the game. Unfortunately, I think
it'll take a radical shift in how we
think about game design to create 8-hour
experiences, much less 40-hour ones,
without a clear and defined goal for the
player. Of course, we don't have to. If
we periodically have a few minutes where
we don't have a clear goal, and instead
simply have a problem to work through
and the tools to interpret what working
through it means, we might be able to
achieve this effect and allow the player
to explore a concept without taking away
one of the most powerful and often fun
elements of game design. The Witcher
series has some moments like this.
There's clearly an overarching goal for
those games, but often you'll end up
getting to understand yourself better as
a human being outside the game because
of the choices you made in it that
aren't directed. And lastly, for AAA
games to really embrace this idea, it'll
take us as consumers. We need to start
thinking about mechanics as metaphor. We
need to start thinking about the meaning
that inheres in them. If we can do that,
it'll give creators a powerful new tool
to convey meaning and deliver us the
type of narratives that'll leave us
talking for years after we've turned the
game off. I'll see you guys next
week. Heat. Heat.
[Music]
[Music]