[Music]
[Music]
Welcome to the last episode on The
Walking Dead, at least for season 1. No
promises once season 2 comes out. There
are some things games tend not to do
well. We often try to talk about them on
this show and try to analyze why this
is, but often we're stymied by a lack of
material to reference on how to do some
of these things well. Fortunately, The
Walking Dead did a lot of things very
well, including a few things we haven't
had a good example to point to
previously. So, we're going to talk
about some of those things now. First
off, children and parental feelings.
It's amazing how few games present
children in any even semi-reasonable
way. Not realistic, mind you, just
reasonable. This is because most big
budget games are about empowerment. And
there's very little empowering about
either being a child or having to look
after the welfare of a child. This isn't
to say it's not very rewarding. It just
doesn't make you feel like a badass is
all. which is why a horror game is the
perfect place to explore these ideas. As
we've said before, well-made horror
games aren't about empowerment, but
rather about disempowerment in a safe
space. All right, so let's break down
how children usually appear in games, so
we can talk about why this doesn't work,
and contrast it with the example The
Walking Dead sets out for us. In most
games, children either A appear whiny
and incompetent, needing you to rescue
them and handhold them through the
simplest of tasks, generally being the
worst sort of escort quest, or B,
they're non- entities, serving as random
NPCs whose child nature is only apparent
because they're smaller than the rest of
the characters, and maybe they talk in a
more juvenile way. Or C, they function
exactly like adults. They just look like
children in order to allow younger
players to have something they can
associate better with. None of these
have the emotive impact that children do
in real life. In fact, these all tend to
have the opposite effect. Not invoking
pyos, but rather invoking eye, if they
invoke any emotion at all. And that's
the heart of the problem. In general,
the use of children in media not aimed
at children is to evoke the paternal
feelings in all of us, whether or not
we're actually parents. Motherhood and
fatherhood are certainly underexplored
concepts in games. And as The Walking
Dead showed us, that powerful emotional
bond that a parental relationship
creates can help forge an incredibly
compelling experience, which makes it a
little ironic that Lee may be the best
father in games, even though Clementine
isn't technically his daughter. But this
emotional connection that we as players
feel with Clementine depends on viewing
child characters differently. It relies
on us thinking of children not as
burdens to be dragged around, but rather
seeing them more as adults who happen to
have a lot less experience. And to me,
this is much more akin to real life.
It's not that children aren't quick to
learn. In fact, they learn and adapt
much quicker than most of us. And it's
not that they don't have a rational
decision-making process. They just have
tens of thousands of fewer hours of
living to draw on. Sure, there are other
biological and chemical factors, but if
you're distilling a character for the
purposes of a game, that's a pretty good
way to look at it. And that's why The
Walking Dead succeeds. You see, in cases
where children are simply a burden, they
evoke nothing but frustration. I've got
to deal with this kid again. It's
impossible to create a parental feeling
when that's the only sentiment that
character invokes. You don't care about
that character. You're not emotionally
involved with that character because you
never get to see the positive aspects
that children can bring about. This is
why it's important that the game begins
with Clementine helping you rather than
the other way around. This is why it's
important that she serves as our
conscience, our connection to humanity,
and our source of levity in an otherwise
very dark world. Parenting can be tough,
but parents don't see children simply as
a burden. If all you're ever doing is
keeping a child out of harm's way while
they do everything they can to walk
straight into harm's path, you'll never
create the bond that you need to get us
to truly care. The Walking Dead shows us
this clearly. While we're here, there's
something else I wanted to shoehorn in.
It's something that needs mentioning
about The Walking Dead, but not
something that would take a whole
episode, as we've kind of already done
an episode on this topic. The Walking
Dead may be the best use of race I've
ever seen in the game. The main
character is African-American, but this
isn't his defining characteristic. It
plays as an undercurrent to the
conversations that happen in the game,
and there's a subtle tension that lies
just beneath the surface of every new
encounter, evoked simply by its setting
in the American South. So, it's not that
his race is irrelevant to the narrative.
It just matters as much as it might in
real life. It doesn't have to be called
out. It doesn't have to be what his
character is all about. It just has to
exist holistic within the rest of the
world. Also, The Walking Dead manages to
present us with a Middle Eastern couple
that bucks stereotypes without being
there to buck stereotypes. Of all the
characters in the game, Omen is perhaps
the most interested in American history.
After the end of the world, he still
finds joy in seeing the memorials of our
Civil War past. Who these characters
are, what their background is adds to
our interpretation of their interests
and their actions during the game. But
so far as the narrative is concerned,
they're just another middle-class couple
who was traveling the US when the
apocalypse occurred. Yeah. Okay. So, on
that note, we will leave The Walking
Dead behind for now. While there's a few
other topics we could discuss by using
The Walking Dead as a lens, most notably
The Illusion of Choice, we have spent
long enough here, and there's a myriad
of other games to get back to, and I'm
sure at least a few of them will give us
a window into some of those topics.
Anyway, I hope you've enjoyed our look
at the place of adventure games in the
21st century, the weight a single life
can bring, and how to use child
characters as more than just props.
We'll see you next week.
[Music]
Heat. Heat.
[Music]