YouTube stream that we'd be live on
YouTube. That's I think if if I'm
reading the text specs correctly, I
think that's how this works. Yeah. Uh we
also have to celebrate something uh
right away. Um apparently this worked.
Pavar, thank you so much for joining uh
the extra fans membership over on
YouTube. That's our very first member
live on on the stream. So that's very
cool. Very nice. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
Uh no no Jimmy not canceled at all. We
are we are experimenting. We are doing
science. Um, and that is science
I would say. Okay. Wait, hold on a sec.
We We're doing an experiment to see what
the impact on people's user experience
of not having a countdown is. That's
right. And we have like results that we
are looking at. So, I'm pretty sure this
is by all reasonable definitions
science. You know what? I'm happily
proven wrong. My I rescend my air
quotes. They'd have to go like start
down here and then go, right? Yeah.
Okay. Cool. Great. Awesome. Is that how
you'd rescend? Yeah, let's go with it.
Yeah. Okay. Sure. Right. Awesome. Uh,
welcome to the pre-show, everybody. Um,
again, part of the experiment we're
doing right now. This pre-show brought
to you by No Countdown First. That's
right. With no countdown first, you can
just enjoy the pre-show when we go live
and not skip five minutes or have us cut
out those five minutes and make all of
our analytics wonkadoo. Correct. Yeah.
Yeah. Uh, it turns out that lots of very
strange things happen on the back end
when you cut the first five minutes of a
video. They don't care if you cut the
last five minutes. They really care if
you cut the first five minutes. And we
also thought that we would get So on on
uh YouTube uh friends, so you know on
Twitch I can cut the I can cut up the
VOD immediately when I hit end stream. I
can immediately do a cut up thing.
That's not the case on YouTube. I have
we have to wait 24 to 48 hours for it to
process because of all of the video that
YouTube is processing um and the way
that they process it. So, we can't do it
right away. So, I have to end up doing
time codes multiple times and it's it's
no good. So, we're just not gonna we're
just not going to do that. Not gonna do
it. Yeah, absolutely. Um
hope everyone is having a lovely start
to their week. Yeah. Um, we are just
moving things around, getting things
lighting the lights. Worst dads in
history. Yes, that's correct. That is
that is indeed US Fireb Blaze. Hello.
How are you? Um,
it is really funny. I have I have had
people yell that to me on the street
just once. Uh, but it was very funny.
Okay, that's more times like look look.
You have the hat and you are much more
recognizable due to much more exposure
to our fan base. I've never been
recognized outside of people I knew I
was going to meet up with at a con. So,
you
know, um you tried yelling louder. Yeah.
Uh if correct, by the way, it is not as
if YouTube was made uh with live videos
in mind. Uh that that is that's correct.
Yeah. Um, and and and we're uh I
actually scheduled I'm trying to
schedule anyway um a meeting with sort
of the like the live the live part of
YouTube's team to sort of like learn the
ins and outs and like figure out
what what idiosyncrasies there are where
because otherwise it's Will and I
throwing stuff at the wall and figuring
out what sticks what slides off very
quickly and what uh takes 24 to 48 hours
to re-encode. So we'll figure out what
that is uh eventually. Yeah. Um
absolutely. Uh, I also do want to uh
thank um Janet uh YouTube comments for
uh letting me know about the schedule
and get to go live and that that
actually is a thing that like people
use. See on Twitch we technically have a
schedule but people don't generally show
up ahead of time because of the
schedule. It's more like a general, oh
this is happening on this day. If I'm
around I'll show up. But but on YouTube,
it seems like if I put a thing that says
there's going to be a stream here,
people show up ahead of time. Uh which
is great. So now I know and we're going
to be doing that going forward. See,
we're we're learning all kinds of things
so quickly.
I feel like every one of these uh will
uh you seemed like every little one
there's like one additional thing we're
doing better with it. Yeah. I mean,
listen, we
got without telling them anything,
there's a reason that I'm trying to get
all the tech locked down as quickly as
possible, so that if we did something
new that broke a lot of the tech, I
would at least know what it was supposed
to look like when we started. That's
right. And we will of course not be
doing anything new that will break the
tech in roughly a month and or give or
change a few days time. Yeah, that
definitely not in 19 days. We don't know
the official date. We don't want to say
uh Great. So, I was saying the truth.
It's definitely not in 19 days. I sure.
Yeah. Also, on the Twitch side of
things, thank you for um the eternal
bane of our existence, the hype train.
Now I cannot drink my coffee back in a
French press, baby. Also, Pabara, thank
you so much for the $5 super chat on
YouTube telling us that we can't lecture
you because you're not extending the
hype train. That is true. That is true.
Janet is actually immune from criticism
from the hype train from about the hype
train. You're not immune from criticism
in general. Of course, but like you're
not you're not hyping. So, there's no
hype. Yeah, there's no hyping apparently
over on YouTube. Uh, and we've we've
said multiple times as your two internet
dads talk I guess we'd be the
grandparents to the kids we're talking
about right now. Talk to your kids about
hype before someone else does. That's
right. Um, oh, they did it. Yeah, they
they moved it. Well, you know what I
want to get, Will? This would be good
for the YouTube side of things. We could
put this on the long list down the line.
I would love it if that hype train thing
that we designed a while ago could show
up here so that when we like, oh, they
just knocked out level one, we're at
level two, we could show it off so that
that way we don't seem like we're crazy
to half of the audience. I think I can
do it without adding too many bells and
whistles, but you know, uh yeah. Uh
Coffee Clones, uh us Janets are the
responsible siblings. No, that's fair.
That's fair. Uh and Coffee Clone does
have a point. My my only worry is that
us Jans are missing a precious few
seconds of the pre-show. Uh it is
literally long enough for me to hit the
button, look over, see that I'm live on
Twitch, and then look over and press the
button and say go go gadget YouTube. Um
we are we are reducing that uh to as
little as possible, but I do need to
make sure that each of them
independently is live. Um so that's sort
of a technical uh unavoidable
thing. YouTube learned hyping. That's
correct. And that would have been the
only way that could have been better
generic is if you ended it with dads.
That's right. YouTube learned hype from
watching you dads. Yeah. Oh man. Zariah
says, and I I think this is true. Uh
YouTube live does shockingly well for
how janky the back end seems. Do you
find the chat on Twitch to be a bit
better than on YouTube? I think that's
very true. I think the advantage on
YouTube is the VOD is going to be
better, right? That's just sort of like
the that's one of the big things. If
you're not watching live and you have a
choice to watch between to watch on
YouTube afterwards or Twitch afterwards,
you're almost certainly going to have a
better experience on YouTube,
particularly because I can put chapter
markers in all of our um story titles.
If you go back to last week's episode,
I've got chapters for every single topic
that we talk about, including when the
actual show starts. Um, so that's a huge
advantage and it's cleaner and it's less
annoying to get to and like there's a
bunch of advantages for that because
YouTube is a video platform, right? And
Twitch is a uh Twitch is not by their
own admission. By the way, uh we did
discover this last week when we were um
when I was I went to So they have a they
have a here's a quick pre-show news
story for you. So, so they have a
monthly show called Patch Notes where
Dan Clancy, the CEO of Twitch, talks
about things that are upcoming. So,
there's a bunch of stuff and a lot of
it's very boring and a lot of it doesn't
apply to us, like enforcement actions.
If you've gotten banned on Twitch for
doing something, how is that going to
affect your revenue stream? I'll give
you a hint. We've never been banned on
Twitch and it's highly unlikely that we
ever will be because our
PG-13ness keeps us well within the
bounds of the terms of service. Um,
we've joked about doing a hot tub stream
where Matt and I both wear old timey
like the blue and white striped elbow
and kneelength uh uh bathing suits and
like straw hats as like a joke, right?
That's like the furthest that joke's
ever going to go, right? So anyway, at
the end of it, at the end of it, in
Twitch chat, Twitch, the Twitch account
said in Twitch chat, "If you missed this
stream, look for it tomorrow on
YouTube."
You played yourself,
my brother in code.
What are you doing? It's so insane. Why?
I'm not I'm not saying don't put it up
on YouTube, but you could just say like
we're archiving the VOD right here on
Twitch. You know, the service that you
came to learn about. Yeah. Um, also I
need to look up
uh a quick thing. Oh, is is the is the
magic news coming in hot and heavy?
Yeah, the magic Oh, wow. Wow. They've
decided that Wow. They have decided that
standard can die in a fire.
No just in no bands in standard despite
the fact that uh up the beantock and
monstrous rage desperately need to be
banned in standard. Uh no changes.
Underworld breach banned modern uh
sewing microspawn and troll of ka doom
banned in legacy. That makes sense. Uh
troll was one of the strongest starts.
It was dark rit
uh cycle troll exume and then you had
like a 65 on turn one uh and then a
bunch of changes in popper. Real quick
also sparkling uh makes a good point.
The main reason I watch live stream on
YouTube is solely for the live replay
going back a few seconds without leaving
the stream. Yeah, that's huge. You don't
have to like break the whole thing. It
can just sort of happen which is really
nice. Yeah. Um and popper by the way is
a real format again. Basky buds scale
loath rebirth and deadly dispute banned
prophetic prism and a high tide
unbanned. That's very interesting.
Anyway, well, the hype train has
completed. So, we distracted them by
throwing them news and funny stories.
That's right. We made sure that we we
nipped it in the in the hype bud. Will,
would you like to thank all of the all
of the peoples?
Grass Vortex, thank you so much for 78
months, audio bookmark for 40 months,
Alex for 54 months with Prime. Zerod for
100 bitties. Proshaft for 100 bitties.
Not Cromwell for 60 months. Uh Copper
Chef Kerry and Luna for bitties.
Darkwell for 13 months with Prime. Luna
for bitties. Ranger for 29 months. Roby
for 47 months. And that's a hype train.
Thank you so much for all of that
support.
Yeah. Yep. Yep. Yep. Well, I guess cuz
I'm undercaffeinated. Will, I feel like
we should start the show proper so that
we could talk about all these news
stories and more importantly so I can
inject this glorious beverage directly
into my body. That seems reasonable. All
right. Uh, if you're new on YouTube,
we're going to go to black for ever so
briefly a moment. Panic not. We will
return with with an intro and the the
show proper as it is recorded for
Nebula. Here is an interesting thing. If
we do this and we hit the show open and
it glitches because we didn't load it
preload it into the RAM, voted it before
you joined. Oh, you did it. You're so
good. So, it's not going to happen. It
shouldn't happen. So, 100% chance it
doesn't happen
now. It's going to happen. All right.
Great. Be right back.
[Applause]
[Music]
Good morning, Matt. Oh, good morning,
Will. Good morning to all of you.
Welcome to Games for Breakfast, the only
internet talk show we talk about this
week's gaming and tech news, but that
also our intro graphic never glitches
once.
See, now Rocky is going to think that it
did glitch once because you wouldn't say
that unless it glitched once. But Rocky,
it really didn't glitch. And that's the
funny part. And I'm saying it never has
and never will, right? In a tone that
drips with sarcasm. I I resent that. I
feel like you only resent that because
you haven't had your coffee yet. You're
absolutely correct. I need to just This
is too much. I'm just gonna like You're
not going to see me push it. But see,
this is it. It's going to go below the
desk. I'm going to do it safe so I don't
like actually spray myself. I'm not used
to this French press yet, Will. But I
have it now and I'm a big fan. Okay,
good. I'm glad. I thought you were Matt
and not a large device designed to
propel air around. What is a mat if not
a large device designed to propel air
around? That's fair. It's a large device
device designed to propel air around in
a humorous fashion. Well, well, yeah. Or
loud one. A loud one enough. I'm going
to go with humorous. I'm going to say
that your humor is more important than
your volume. Oh, well, that's very
sweet. Will Well, how was your weekend?
Uh, it was really good. It was really It
was really, really good. Um, very, very
happy. Uh, lots of nerd time. Uh, I'm
all prepared for the f the Final Fantasy
14 Savage tier, which drops tomorrow.
That's right. And the world first race
starts tomorrow, and we hope it doesn't
end tomorrow. Um, because the last one
was fast. This one I based on the normal
raids is going to be much longer. Um, so
that's good. My hope is that they
haven't cleared uh the second raid by
the time I wake up, but we'll see. Um,
so that's Wake up a little early. Yeah,
I'm not waking up early. Woke up. That's
crazy. I got woken up early this morning
by people working directly outside my
window on a thing that's been broken for
years. So, not really feeling the waking
up. My dreams.
No, Matt. It was my will to live.
Anyway, it's your will to It's Will's
will, man. Uh, and I got to do a bunch
of um competitive gaming this weekend. I
um finished out the magic season cuz I'd
forgotten to play in the magic season,
ranked ladder season at all. So, I I
finished that out and I actually got to
play some ranked um rivals. Uh and the
game didn't crash and nobody abandoned,
which are
both have historically been rarities for
me. That's good. Yeah, that's good. I uh
I got to play a game this weekend. Uh I
got to play split fiction a bunch. Ah,
interesting. Uh Jamie and I played that.
It is an absolute delight. Um I will say
real quick uh mini baby tiny review of
Split Fiction. It is a very polished
couch co-op game that you can also play
with your uh with your online friends if
you'd like by the people who made It
Takes Two. Um also I I love the fact you
can own one version of one copy of the
game on your platform and another person
can just download it for free to play
with you. But um the it's it's about two
writers that get sucked into their own
stories. And it's funny because I'm not
normally a fan
of stories about
writers. I I don't know what it is. They
just always kind of bounce off me. But
this is the right level of like clever
character study mixed with like current
day slight cringe and like real like
like odd little tropes that like
shouldn't work, but the perfect mixture
of all of those things make them work
very very well. It is an absolute
delight. And if you have someone in your
life that you like playing video games
with on a couch next to them, uh I
highly suggest split fiction. It is if
you if you have someone that you don't
like playing video games with and you
want to get into fights with constantly,
as always, I recommend Bread and Fred,
which is the most adorable rage game
you've ever played with a friend. Um
it's about two penguins trying to climb
a mountain and trying very hard not to
murder your friends. There you go. Well,
yeah. coffee is telling me uh not my
beverage coffee the viewer is telling me
that I mentioned this last week uh
apologies slash you're welcome because
uh it's that good yeah split split
fiction has been uh split fiction also
and this didn't make the show notes uh
got three Guinness World Records all at
the same time for like co-op games now I
will also say that their Guinness World
Records that were designed almost
seemingly with split fiction
specifically in mind. Uh so, you know,
jury's out on whether that was a a
publicity stunt or not, but it it is
kind of cool. Um yeah, another thing
though, uh brings us to a very mini
story uh that I got to do this weekend
that I do I I don't normally like
tooting horns. Uh but if you are not
familiar with this yet, uh uh Rocky over
on Nebula, I'm sure you are. Um, Abolish
Everything is a phenomenal show over on
Nebula that is basically PowerPoint
presentation comedy that gets p
basically someone has to go up and try
to abolish something and pitch it to a
live audience recorded at a comedy club
at Caveat in NYC and uh then uh a panel
of the establishment of four other
improv comics basically like come at
that person hard to try to dismantle the
argument. Uh this weekend on Friday at
the 10 p.m. show, uh I got to record my
set. Uh I've been mentioning this was
coming for a while. Uh I have not done
standup in New York City in I think
roughly 13 years, over a decade. Uh and
I practiced a lot and the recording
happened and I think it went very very
well. So uh this is my shameless plug
for you two uh uh on Nebula. I don't
know when my episode comes out. It's not
out yet. Obviously, it was just
recorded, but it'll be coming out in the
next few weeks or a month or something
like that. Uh, but there's three
episodes of Abolish Up Everything Up
right now. It is one of my absolute
favorite things I've ever done, and I
hope that you all check it out before
mine comes out and when mine comes out
because,
uh, phenomenal, phenomenal, phenomenal
show. Also, uh, Chandler Dean, the host,
is an absolute delight. And uh Amy
Muller, the um uh the director uh from
Wendover Fame uh is absolutely
wonderful. Who's been on our uh our last
birthday stream. Amy hung out for a bit.
Yeah, birthday. Anyway, uh yeah, I will
not be saying I will not be saying uh
what I will be abolishing uh because I
don't want to spoil it, but it will work
out. It will it will play to the Extra
Credits and Extra History audience
um quite well. I will say that. So,
please check that out. Obviously, use
code extra credits if you're going to
join up for Nebula, but um Oh, God.
Will, it
was like legit magical. Like it was I I
very rarely am happy with the
performance that I give and I think I
lucked into my like broken clock twi
right twice whatever moment and it was
okay. All right. Well, it was really we
have rules against self dep here. I'm
pretty sure that you're right far more
than than twice. Well, my my clock does
have 47 numbers so um sure. Yeah, seems
reasonable. Seems fine to me. Uh, okay.
Uh, Ramy, I am not abolishing heists. I
would never take that away from you. I
just because if I abolished heists, I
wouldn't be able to chastise all of you
for heisting. That's correct. And that's
one of our favorite things to do is to
yell at you for heisting. Also, Matt,
uh, on the on the vibe of heists, um, we
do have potentially, uh, for the next
time that they become relevant, uh, chat
may have accidentally in the Discord
figured out what the teams are. You
see, Team Order. So, if you've never
been to one of our fundraising streams,
there are two teams, Team
Order and Team Chaos.
And we we've discussed that there is
nothing more orderly than a sphere.
Okay. So we have the the spherical cow
team. Yep. And then there is nothing
more chaotic than the notion of an
entire island of crabs crab raving. So
it's team crab. Yeah. I mean that makes
that makes a lot of sense. Team cow and
team crab. That's that's what it is now.
Uh yeah. Okay. Great. Excellent. Oh, I
like this. So, so you're saying this
show is going to be the heist of comedy?
Uh, it's bringing a lot of it. And I
listen, I'm not going to say where it
was uh procured from
uh for legal reasons, you know, heisting
notwithstanding. Yeah. Anyway, that was
just a quick uh a quick self-promo thing
I wanted to do at the beginning of this
because it was an absolute delight and
everyone who's making that show is uh
awesome. So, yeah. All right. It fell
off the truck. Tenant Dan, you're right.
As truck experts, as truck as as
graduates from uh trucku, home of the
fighting trucks, go trucks. That's
right. Um I think that is highly
accurate. And that was that's a nice
transition to bringing us into the world
of video games. Don't you think, Will,
we're trucking right into it. Well, I
was I was going to say that, you know,
speaking of being uh a stop clock being
right twice a
day. All right, everybody. I'm going to
need you to bust out your red string,
your corkboard, your everything. I'm
going to need everyone to suspend your
uh rational thought for just merely a
moment and go with me down this rabbit
hole. I genuinely think this one might
be something. Um, Silkong's metadata has
been updated and that's not new because
the internet collectively loses their
entire mind every time Silkong's
metadata gets updated. Sure.
However, there are two the two pieces of
metadata that were updated in this case
actually lead towards some reasonable
speculation. Um, in this case, the two
things that happened were one, its
description was updated to mention Game
Pass. That's kind of weird because it
was mentioned several years ago that it
was going to be a day one on Game Pass
deal with Microsoft and then the Steam
listing was never updated to reflect
that which was weird at the time and now
it finally has been seemingly for no
particular reason. And then the other
big one is the copyright date was
updated to be 2025.
That feels like more of a something than
any other thing thus far. That is that
is my my um my thought as well is that
updating the copyright dates is the big
deal, right? That that is that is in
fact the the the focus of my oh they've
actually updated things. So yeah, the
most likely time and we're going to be
talking about this a lot throughout the
show. This is uh if you haven't guessed
by the well, if you're in the VOD, you
will probably have guessed by the
thumbnail that's probably going to be a
Switch 2 thumbnail that we're talking
about the Switch 2 a lot this week. But
what if it's not? But what if it's not?
What if it What if it's one of our other
stories? It's true. It could be. Um, now
you've just made me look like a fool.
No, not at all. What if What if you're
right, Will? Then you'll be known as as
a prophet. That's true. That's right.
Will profit of thumbnails. Profit of
thumbnails. Put that on the business
card. Right. Yeah. Um the most likely
time that it gets more we find out more
information is during the switch to
uh live stream because that is likely
not certainly when they will announce um
day one games right that is like
announcing the system is cool but that's
not what sells systems right announcing
the games that will be on at day one
will be part of what sells the systems
because Nintendo is the only company
that's still running on exclusives.
Um, now I'm not saying PlayStation kind
of does, but they're they're they're uh
well timed exclusives, I would say,
because nine times out of 10 at this
point, a year later, it at least comes
to PC, right? And Switch has real
exclusives like permanent. Yeah. Locked
in. Yeah. So,
um, yeah, I think that, uh, that might
be something, but either way, we'll find
out soon. And now I've reported on the
red string. I just love I listen Will
you are our resident um even though I
have played it to completion Hollow
Night on stream I think you got one
ending one of the ending not like the
whole thing but you've done the whole
shebang I believe right I I have I have
Hollow Night patches all over my
patchfest yes right um so you are the
resident uh uh Hollow Knight connoisseur
here and uh Silkong has been a thing
you've been talking about since for I
think we probably the first conversation
we ever had was probably about Silk
Song. So, uh I trust your um wild
speculations is what I'm trying to say.
I'm not saying anything. I'm telling
people what's possible and I'm reporting
on the red string. I'm not trying to
overhype it. It's already been hyped to
Alan back. Uh so, you know, we're just
we're you know, hold on. Um all right.
Uh, next
up, Matt was really spicy this morning
when he did the uh, image chat. What are
you talking about? What are you talking
about? Nah, nothing. What are you
talking about? Nothing at all. Listen,
it's just two good friends
[Music]
um, splitting off a piece of one of
themselves and for $1.25 25 billion and
then but like not getting any
control like I this deal Ubisoft Ted
just bought a a chunk of Ubisoft but
they did it in a really weird way. Uh
not in a weird way in
a what's the word I'm looking for?
Feeling like an overly complex way which
heck when you're dealing with that much
money maybe it does have to be complex
and I'm just being a little hater.
Um well, this story comes to us from
gamesindustry
uh.biz and basically uh what it does is
through this cash infusion, Ubisoft has
split a
um basically a subsidiary based upon
Assassin's Creed, Far Cry, and Rainbow
6. Uh they're dealing with how what that
will still be named. I don't think what
they they know what that is, but like
that's the part that I believe Tencent
bought into, but it's still a minority
share and it's still answers to the
original family behind
Ubisoft. I I'm So, Matt, what you're
telling me is they put three cards on a
table and one of them's a queen and if I
can find it, then I might actually have
some idea of where corporate ownership
of these IPs has landed. But the trick
is that the queen's not on the table by
the time the cards finish moving. I have
no idea. I I truly don't. This is Okay.
Okay. Regardless of if this deal is
great or not. I think I think a we
Ubisoft's uh stock price was tumbling
and I know that Assassin's Creed Shadows
has been getting we're going to talk
about it I think next. um but uh has
been getting really good reviews and
that's been uh honestly a kind of shot
in the arm because Star Wars Outlaws and
what was the other one that did pretty
poorly. The last two I think Ubisoft
games really didn't do that great and so
they were hurting and they needed help
and Tencent come in and swept it up and
that that's good. There was talks of
them buying them but I don't think that
was ever really going to happen. The
thing that got Oh, sorry. I think a lot
of people throw around well X is just
going to buy Y like that's easy to do or
desirable for the companies involved.
Not like
not like that it's ever desirable for
us, right? Because we've talked about
the more that corporations consolidate
power, the less the consumer actually
has a voice or is heard. Um like not
even in that way, but like it's not
really desirable for them,
I don't think. So, uh yeah, I I don't
think buying them is ever on the table.
Yeah. Uh well, I just on this and I urge
you to go in the show notes and look at
the gamesindustry.biz
uh um
article because the thing that got me
about this story, it's not even like
people buy minority stakes in companies
all the time. Companies buy companies.
This is old hat at this point, right?
But the verbiage of the public
statements. Sure. I'm always just
like, how does this excite anybody? Even
Even the corpos like I don't understand
it. Sure. So, so let's see what was my
favorite one. Today Ubisoft is opening a
new chapter in its history said uh Yev I
can
never Gilong
the CEO. Um, as we accelerate the
company's transformation, this is a
foundational step in changing Ubisoft's
operating model that will enable us to
be both agile and ambitious. We are
focused on building a strong ecosystem
designed to be evergreen, growing
high-erforming brands, and creating new
IP powered by cutting edge and emerging
technologies.
Holy mother of buzzwords back. Hold on.
So, but also like wasn't that your job
before? Like, wasn't isn't that what a
video game company does? Continuing on
with the creation of this dedicated
dedicated subsidiary that will spearhead
development for three of our largest
franchises and the onboarding of 10 cent
as a minority investor. We are
crystallizing the value of our assets,
strengthening our balance sheets and
creating the best conditions for these
franchises long-term growth and success.
With its dedicated and autonomous
leadership team, it will focus on
transforming these three brands into
unique ecosystems.
I also have eaten an entire thesaurus.
But like I it's okay.
They make video games. Huh? This is This
show isn't called Ecosystems for
Breakfast. No. And I I really get
upsetti spaghetti when it's treated like
this. And I know it's all business and
corpo nonsense speak, but like it's just
so so so blatant. I will read one more
section because the bud the buzzwords
just keep coming. We are committed to
building a sharper, more focused
organization. One where talented teams
will take our brands to the next level.
Accelerate the growth of our emerging
franchises and leading innovation in
next generation technologies and
services. All with the goal of
delivering enriching memorable games.
They mentioned games once here that
exceed players expectations and creating
superior value for our shareholders and
other stakeholders. very key there. Uh
it's
like oh god it's I
man I could have worn my ET the rich
shirt today and I had it's
just it's just a lot and I know it's for
the shareholders or the shareholders and
stakeholders. Very good that we're
splitting them up now. Uh, but this is a
game that makes uh pixels of light dance
around and let you pretend you're a
um a Renaissance assassin. Uh, and it's
just I don't know. I I get so
disheartened when I read this stuff and
I I get that there's a world like it's
not meant for me or a lot of us. I feel
like this is a more like but
like I will I will turn this frown
upside down and then unless Will you
have anything else to add, we can move
on to Assassin's Creed Shadows. Um I
feel a little heartened that the word
salad that I just read to you kind of
makes me feel icky because if it didn't
make me feel
icky, I feel like I'd like kind of like
myself less. Yeah. Yeah, this is the
this is the it's not ever supposed to
get easier kind of thing, right? This is
the thing that should never be easy.
Yeah. It's it's when people are like,
"Ah, yes, I enjoy the corpo dril. Feed
me more of that corpo slop." And you're
like,
now, you know, giving credit where
credit is due, what this probably did,
what this what this uh minority stake
buyin probably did was save a ton of
people's jobs. Yeah. Um, and I'll be
curious to watch the story as it goes
forward because if we start seeing
layoffs, that's insane at this point.
You got 1.2 billion with a B. You got
you got a really nice uh runway here.
Let's see what you can do with your
existing team and maybe even hiring more
people. Maybe that's what it will do
with with sort of a subsidiary sort of
splitting off like that. So,
here's at least some positive benefits
for the job market uh for game devs.
This spin-off company should be called
probably. Speaking of,
so uh we actually had a comment last
week that asked why we didn't talk about
Shadows. It's because it was too there
wasn't anything to say yet. Lots of
people were playing it and it just come
out and I kind of wanted to wait and
see. I'm not playing Shadows. It's not
my kind of game. There are plenty of
people who are. I have nothing against
Shadows. I just Assassin's Creed is not
for me and that's okay. I haven't played
since Black Flag. This is the first one
that I will probably eventually pick up
in a few months time when my backlog is
clear. So,
um, one of the
interesting things that happens around
Assassin's Creed
is how well they walk the line between
history and historical fiction. That's
been sort of an interesting point for
the whole franchise for a very long
time, right? A reminder when um Notradam
burned down, right, and they needed to
rebuild it, one of the teams they
actually contacted was the Assassin's
Creed team who had made the most
accurate three-dimensional model of
actual factual Notradam that they used
to rebuild the cathedral. Right? There
are parts of Assassin's Creed that have
been very um uh that have been very
historically focused that have taught
things about history. That's really
cool. But there's a line where like I
hate to break it to you. I guess
technically spoilers for um uh which one
is it? Uh the the one in Greece. It's
not Origins Odyssey. Odyssey. Thank you.
Spoilers for Assassin's Creed Odyssey.
You don't get to become immortal by
possessing the staff of Kaduca. like the
the staff of of Hermes. You don't that
doesn't sorry that doesn't work. So like
well I mean Assassin's Creed has always
had a little bit of like magical
wonkadoo in it along with a bunch of
science fiction of Sturggo and the
Animus. Is that what it's called? Um
they are entirely obviously not real
unless we're thinking we're in the world
of split fiction in which case who
knows. Um, but the like I loved I've in
the ones I've played and I've played um
I played one, I played the Etsio
trilogy, I played three, and I played
Black Flag. Yep. Um, and what I really
liked was
the the references to history. Yeah.
like the it I I I the game sets itself
up to not be like a even though the
their elements of the game for instance
their geography and their architecture
as the years have gone on they've become
more and more like wanting to be
exacting with that stuff and that's
awesome. Um but also it's a game where
you relive your memories by plugging
into a your ancestral memories by
plugging into a computer. So, like, you
know, it's there's a balancing act
there, right? So, one of the um one of
the things that I was kind of interested
to see
is this is
weird, what Japanese gamers thought
about the game set in a historically
fictionalized version of
Japan. Kind of interesting, right? Like
there's a there's an awful lot of there
were an awful lot of opinions about the
historical accuracy of the game um from
a bunch of people who
were I'm going to be somewhat tactful
here beyond incredibly but heard that a
character who has major references in
actual Japanese history was included in
a game about Japanese
history. Okay. Um, but the reviews from
Japan are pretty good. Um, generally
people seem to be enjoying it. It's
selling really well. Um, the only other
Assassin's Creed game that's out selling
it that it has um that it hasn't outsold
is Valhalla. And there's a reasonable
argument to be made that Valhalla is not
a valid comparison because pandemic
lockdown. Uh, Valhalla released during
pandemic lockdown and people were
consuming digital media at an
accelerated rate. Um, so we do have to
take that into account. Um, yeah, but
uh, Shadows is doing pretty well and
people seem to like it and think that it
strikes a good balance between actual
history and the fun historical fiction
that we all love out of Assassin's
Creed. And there's been a few
interesting things. I believe there was
a patch because it it um there were
shrines that were u not on not like a
quest or anything, but like destroyable.
Yeah. in in the game. And uh I believe a
few folks uh it might have even been the
government, I don't I don't remember the
story, spoke out in Japan being like,
"Hey, that's not that's not great." And
so they just patched it and made the
shrines indestructible now, which is
great. Like like it doesn't Yeah. The um
there was a bunch
of I'm gonna I'm gonna say
um enthusiastic
dialogue. Dialogue about it. um aka
people shouting at each other on the
internet. Um and my thought on that
whole thing is kind of that a lot of
people are missing
a big chunk of the point, right? That
that someone said, "Hey,
we've historically had problems with
people not understanding appropriate
decor uh decorum in shrines in Japan."
Which is true. There have been cases
recently even where shrines have been uh
discouraging visitors who are not
actively like worshippers at the shrine
because of the impact that tourism has
had on these places, right?
Um and a lot of people were like but
this is you know censorship or whatever.
I was like, "No, they they asked the
artist to change the art to help avoid
an unintended real world impact, and the
artist said, "Yes, seems legit." And
they did it. Yeah. Like I don't Yeah,
that seemed like a good move on my at
least in my mind, right? Like artists
are allowed to change art when their art
doesn't have the real world impact that
they want it to have. And whether or not
we like Ubisoft, which is an entirely
separate question in that, in this case,
they are the artists in question. And
Assassin's Creed Shadows is a work of
art that they
made. So, you know, yeah, we love a
whoops arvad.
Correct. Um, so yeah, I don't know. I'm
I am very It's funny. The the most
Shadow stuff that comes across my
timeline, specifically on Reddit, is
people sharing their screen grabs on the
PS5 Pro. Apparently, it's the first like
game that like really does something
special. And I've been looking at them.
like I I haven't It's hard to like judge
gameplay videos when you're knocking
your res down of what you're looking at
into a 1920 x 1080 thing on your phone.
It's not quite clear, but in the in the
photo mode and the images that they're
doing on that thing, apparently it is
nuts. And so I just sort of nom nom eat
it up cuz I do not have a pro, nor do I
plan on getting one. Uh but it's just
nice to see that like, oh, here's
something that's taking advantage of
that extra horsepower. Here's the other
thing that I absolutely love about
Shadows. If you see an animal, you can
pet it. A+. Great. And then you can add
it to your hideout. So, you can make it
a mission in the game to just pet all
the animals and bring them all to your
hideout and give them all a safe place
to be. That's it. That's That's cool.
That's a thing you can do in Assassin's
Creed Shadows with all the other ninja
and samurai stuff. Great. Awesome.
Excellent. You can pet all the animals
and you can create an animal sanctuary.
Perfect. Great. Yeah, that's right.
Okay. Great. Awesome.
Um, okay. And then on but here's a
reason. Here's a reason why. Yeah.
Transitioning to what we're doing next.
Here's a reason why I'll probably be
buying this game well before I play it.
Uh because a bit ago, I don't even know
the background, nor is it important, but
um wellknown
uh video game playthrough plagiarist
Elon Musk
uh uh started going after Hassan for
some reason because I think Hassan liked
the game or or something, I don't even
know. And then started calling him a
shill advertising a game for money or
whatever. and blah blah blah blah blah.
It doesn't even Right. Yeah. Tell me you
don't understand streaming without
telling me you don't understand
streaming.
Insane. Um but then the official
Assassin's Creed Twitter account came
back with
this. Is that what the guy playing your
Path of Exile 2 account told you?
and and this this
response ratioed him so
hard to the point where the Assassin's
Creed
uh Twitter account has been and other
elements of their advertising campaign
have been using it in their advertising.
Insane, right? And and and I did want I
did want to call something out. So Phil
has a very great um point. I'm almost
surprised he didn't ban their account.
Ah but there Phil, there is there exists
a quandry for him. You see that little
gold check mark? They paid for that
little gold check mark. They paid
Twitter money for the little gold check
mark. And if he bans them because they
said something he didn't want, then
people might stop buying the little gold
check mark, which is one of the ways
that Twitter is barely making any money,
but they're not really making any money.
So, they need to make all the not any
money they can make. Um, and so they're
kind of immune from that, which is
hilarious that a brand account just
absolutely
just it's in and a good look. Again,
Ubisoft as many problems. We've talked
about them a lot on this show, but this
this the community manager to Tyler's
point just deserves a raise. Yeah. Like
who whoever like I'm sure they didn't
ask for approval. They just went for it,
right? Well, it's one of these things
like, okay, I'm not going to get too
much
into this isn't even politics truly
other than everything is politics
because it's the interaction with
people. But like taking away everything
that's going on everything is going on
with Elon right
now. You're the richest man in the
world. Richest man in the world.
Why? Why is this your time? Why is this?
What are you doing? It makes no sense at
all. How How deep I I don't understand.
Hold on. So So So to that
point, because it's so crazy that he's
injecting himself into this space,
again, a space he pretends to be in a
lot. I'm not saying he doesn't like
video games. Apparently he does, right?
Yep.
But he injects himself in a way that is
false in these spaces. And so then to
get but but every time that seems to
happen more and more and I like this,
you're getting called out by it
because the online gaming space has a
lot of um history and interesting issues
that it deals with in in in that
history. But one thing that specifically
I feel like video gamers, for better or
worse, are are consistent
at is a brutal
clapback. So why insert yourself knowing
that you are are kind of pretending a
little bit and get into one of these
situations? I just don't I it's I don't
understand the methodology.
Yeah. Yep. I feel like
[Music]
um in my
mind the thing that Elon is chasing now
is things that money can't directly buy
him.
He's chasing cred and
respect. And so when someone disrespects
him and questions his cred all at the
same
time, it really stings his ego, right?
Because if it could be bought with
money, he'd buy it, but he can't buy
this. Yeah. No, that's a very good
point. And the interesting, it's so
funny because you're looking at all the
things that he can buy, uh, political
power, all you know, all this other
stuff, but the gamers are keeping one
tiny granted an extremely
inconsequential element in check, but
it's obviously bothering. Yeah. Yeah.
Oh, yeah. Absolutely, 100%. Anyway, I
don't want to keep going on it. It just
I I will be buying a copy of Assassin's
Creed Shadows much earlier than I think
I was going to. Kudos to you, heroic
community manager. Um, brava,
Matt, what? What do you got? Do you
remember? Do you remember?
Do you remember? Yes. That the old Real
Men of Genius commercials.
Oh, the real men of Gen. Yeah.
real man of genius.
I want to write one for the Assassin's
Creed community management. Here's to
you, Assassin's Creed community manager.
To you, Assassin's Creed community
manager.
Oh. Anyway, um this bit brought to you
by We're Too Old for This. Oh, yeah. All
right. Next up, uh, in a very rare
move, Blizzard is rolling back some at
their discretion, hardcore deaths. This
is kind of a change in policy from
Blizzard, and I think it's largely due
to Only Fangs, but I don't follow enough
WoW to know for sure. Um, so uh,
Blizzard's been having a problem
recently
uh with DOS attacks. Um, this is not
well, okay, they're calling it a DOS
attack. It might be a DOS attack. 14 has
also been having network problems that
could be described as DOS attacks. So,
this could be a general MMO problem
right now. MMOs are prime targets for
DOS attacks because they prove that
someone can take down a large piece of
infrastructure and gamers complain a lot
when it happens. So, you have proof that
it happened.
Um, but with the interest in WoW
hardcore right now, it has also led to a
lot of high-profile deaths. Um, where
people have lost their characters
because lag happened at the wrong time.
I'm sure if you've ever played an MMO,
you can absolutely imagine the moment
where, you know, two seconds of lag, a
second of lag means that you go from,
oh, everything is fine to, oh, I'm
extremely dead, right? and it's not your
fault. You can't do anything about it
because you you just you lose control of
your character and then you die. So, um
it is kind of interesting to note that
they are walking back this very um they
had a very strict policy. We will not
roll back hardcore character deaths
ever. And then recently they've kind of
put an asterisk on that. And it's yeah,
unless we think it was kind of unfair
and it was probably the result of a dos
and then Yeah. But weirdly, they've also
not done it for things like mages
teleporting or like blinking and
clipping through terrain and falling
forever and dying in the kill plane
below the
map. That won't get your character re uh
revived, but this will.
So, I'm not an expert on these things. I
don't play hardcore MMOs because I don't
have time for that.
It does feel a little weird and
inconsistent that this is what they're
deciding to do. I thought we'll at some
point because I bet you due to
chicainery. Sure. We should
play WoW Hardcore for like an afternoon.
Like there's no way we don't die. Sure.
Do you know what I mean? And we could
even we could even get maybe a bit of
the community together on like one of
the servers, one of the days and be
like, "All right, everybody. Here we
go." uh and just see what happens. And
the stream goes until we die.
I
unfortunately feel
like that might take longer than we want
it to.
Not if I have anything to say about
Okay, that's fair. You've played WoW
before and I'm savage rating in 14 and
looking into getting into ultimates. Um
so it's not like we lack raid experience
or MMO experience. So, you know, kind of
interesting. Anyway, I just I I have not
been remotely interested in playing
something uh WoW related uh well, I play
Hearstone, but I mean like an MMO uh
before before classic hardcore. There's
just something about that that lets that
dragon I've been chasing since WoW and I
had time to play an MMO. Uh I don't
know. It just seems like something that
could be pretty silly and fun.
Thunder remains upset about this, by the
way. This was an entire expansion ago
and I walked into a move and didn't get
hit. Like I I I should I walked bodily
into a thing because I got a little
confused with my left and right. That
happens sometimes. And there's a move
called there's a there's a move that's
cinderwing and it's either left or
right. And I was very sure that left was
right and right was left. And I walked
right into it and nothing happened. and
Thunder has never let me forget it once.
Well, um that's what happens. Anyway, uh
rolling this back, I do think that this
is a good move for Hardcore. The what it
the problem that it does for
Blizzard is now they're going to be
inundated with uh a lot of messages for
people wanting their hardcore characters
revived. Yes. Uh some probably for legit
reasons and others for not. like they've
opened the floodgate now. And I hope
that they have something in place to
kind of deal with that because again,
God, spending days, weeks on a thing and
then having a no like a clipping through
a floor or something to kill you y
is uh kind of insane to the point where
I don't know if I would actually play
this game without a visual record
going like like recording gameplay.
Otherwise, if something were to happen,
you'd have
no re recourse whatsoever. Not to say
that even a video will help you, but
like I don't know, it's a it's a it's a
dangerous world these hardcore players
live in. Yeah. Um, yeah. Anyway, this is
not the first time hardcore games have
experienced this. There's all kinds of
Yeah, right. DS is correct. All
skill-based games have this problem on
unstable networks to some degree and all
networks are unstable to some degree. It
I think it it depends on the am the risk
being
absorbed like how much
um per unit downtime is being risked,
right? So like great we lost this game
of Counterstrike.
Now, it could be a pretty high stakes
game of Counter-Strike, but it's also
only one round of Counterstrike, and
they're they go to like best of 13,
right? Yeah. Um, and so, okay, cool.
Does suck. No question.
But that's recoverable. And you've
Right. Like, you can just go again. This
is hundreds, potentially thousands of
hours in a character being erased,
right? So, I think the the key issue is
how much risk are people willing to
absorb, right? And like it feels like um
woow hardcore characters and hardcore
like Path of Exile and Diablo characters
are sort of the exemplar, right, of the
top end of the risk perspective for
that. I've never done a hardcore
character in a Diablo game and I've
never had any interest. And I if we
could go off on a slight little tangent
here for a second and sort of talk about
the the psychology maybe as to why for
for why I make why I would be excited to
play a WoW character hardcore but not a
Diablo character hardcore. And I think
weirdly, and I'm not talking about doing
this strictly, it comes down to a
certain level of
RP. I don't think I put like personality
or
or build a character per se out of the
archetypes of Diablo characters. I do
builds, right? like I build out a
character to do X or Y, but I'm never
like, oh, this is their like internally
there's no story like for that specific
character outside of being the Nephilim
or like whatever, right? Uh whereas a
WoW character, there's so much lore and
story in the game or any MMO I should
say
where as long as the death was fair,
let's say the game is functioning as
intended and uh during a raid or
something my hard my hardcore character
fell. That would at least be the
completion of a story, right?
And I think I think that's why I don't
know how does everyone else sort of in
Brad and Janet sort of feel about this
kind of thing. Do do people actually
engage in a lot of hardcore characters
or is this something that maybe uh
people are less interested in? Yeah. I
um for me the time loss feels obnoxious
to the extent that like I've thought
about doing like a Minecraft hardcore
series um on the channel and the number
of safety precautions that I get to make
in Minecraft, right? So like I'll give
you I'll give you this one for free.
No series that you see published on
YouTube that claims that a series is a
hardcore hundred days doesn't have
backups. Every single one of those has a
world backup. There are safet there are
tech safety precautions that can be put
in place because you control everything,
right? and the lack of that safety net
and the the riskreward of losing so much
of my time because of something beyond
my control
um doesn't doesn't appeal to me. Like it
really it really actually just seems
like a waste of time to begin with.
Well, so that's kind of this is kind of
my thing and I think uh and we can move
on after this just I don't want to stay
on here too long, but like I find it
fascinating because like I agree with
you
completely in Diablo or in a in a less
storydriven game. Sure. Um because that
is my character and my build is a direct
representation of my time. Yeah. whereas
and you can play WoW this way too, but I
think there's an or an an MMO, but
there's also like just an interesting
thing from the RPG like the actual role
playinging perspective of these
characters like I don't know there
there's because you're interacting with
friends and then like what happens when
an ally goes down like there's there's
something and again it's not like you're
writing a story like that deep along
with it but there are sort of emotional
ties to it. And while I think I would be
disappointed if I had played three
months with a character and then it
died, I
think because of the the nature of what
World of Warcraft meant to me and sort
of where it sits in my sort of public in
my in my mental zeitgeist now, um I
could also once I got beyond the
frustration of the moment be like, well,
that's as long again as long as it was a
fair ending and not a DOS attack or
clipping through the floor or any of
that stuff, uh then it would be kind of
a beautiful gameplay experience and I I
don't think I would consider it a waste
of time. Yeah, but I I I'm I'm still
trying to figure out the line where that
is. I love I love I love Red's take on
this. When I'm driving, I don't buckle
up because of my driving. I buckle up
because of all the other drivers. Same
with our MMO. Yeah. There you go. There
you go. It um It's particularly
noteworthy. It is particularly
noteworthy that this would never work in
14 for one simple inescapable reason.
Healers have a button. That button is
called
rescue. It pulls anyone in your party to
your location by the shortest path
possible. Even if that path would get
them killed. Doesn't work in doesn't
work in 14. Every healer has access to
that button. There's too much
possibility for griefing. There's
already problems with griefing in 14
because of it. Um, I've seen people eat
10day bans for accidentally rescuing a
tank with a tank buster into a party.
Like not like genuinely not on purpose.
Uh, and yeah. Yeah. Uh, question for
Matt. Are you alliance or horde? I was
mainly Alliance.
Um, I have many I had many I guess
they're all still there characters. Uh,
but I was mainly Alliance. Yeah. Anyway,
we can move on. I just I I found this
story fascinating because I wanted to
dive
into the the psychological elements of a
hardcore character in various games. I
think it's fascinating and kind of in a
world of and again I truly from a time
perspective and from a million
perspectives I want games to have safety
rails and backups so that you don't feel
bad playing them. They're supposed to be
fun. But it is nice that there is a mode
that can give you this experience of
danger. Uh I don't know. It's neat. I
dug it. Absolutely. Uh okay. So we've
got less than a minute until ads roll
in. So we'll we'll stay here and won't
start our next topic just yet. A
reminder if you're new over on the tubes
of you, uh Twitch gets ads at the top of
uh every hour to keep the stream
pre-roll free. So when people come in
and join and hang out, they don't get
slapped with a minute of pre-roll ads,
which in my opinion is the worst thing
that could happen to someone coming in.
Um, so instead, we Matt and I will do uh
ads for things you can't buy while some
part of Twitch chat receives ads for
things that you could buy. Um, so we're
gonna we're going to sell you stuff um
while they get sold stuff and then we'll
return to our regular scheduled content
after that. specifically, you'll never
be able to get the stuff we're selling
you. Nor is there any exchange of uh
monetary compensation for goods and or
services. It is completely false and an
exercise in our own futility. That's
Yeah, that's
right. Yeah. I like ads because you
can't be what you can't buy.
True. Yeah. Yeah. True.
Um Oh, uh yes, by the way, uh Micah is
correct.
Um the mic recognizes screenshot. Yes.
This is Moments Before Disaster Strikes
with
Leroy Jenkins.
It's a classic. It's it's it's you can't
go wrong with it. Our the patron saint
of bad ideas. Mhm. Um Yeah. Okay. Cool.
Restroy. Yeah, you should go first.
Okay. Hey everyone, Matt from Extra
Credits here. Say, are you ever going
into a dungeon where you're not quite
sure what could happen? Where you have a
really good plan, but then one of your
buddies just bolts on in and aggros
every welp that you can possibly see?
Well, don't worry, because after all of
the dust has settled and everyone is
dead, hardcore or not, at least you have
chicken. That is right. chicken is
available for you whenever you'd like
because this patron saint, as Will has
said, of bad ideas, has gifted the
phrase to us all that allows us to get
chicken or at least think about getting
chicken and maintain our own health
while being enraged that we all died.
Chicken.
Chicken.
Behold. All right, Will.
Wait for it. Wait for it. You good? as
good as ever. Hi everyone, Will from
Extra Credits here. Uh, selling you on
the idea of backing up your hardcore
world. I know it seems like you're like,
"What?" But it's hardcore. Why would I
need to just back up your hardcore
world? Just do it. Just if you're
playing hardcore Minecraft, you should
be backing up snapshots. You You have a
backup. Every time you play, snapshot
the world. Just back it up. Just do it
because you don't know what's going to
happen. And I know that you don't like
if it's your fault just like die and
like be okay with that. But like back up
your world, right? Everyone does it. No
one is actually being like just yolo in
their hardcore 100 days. Just back up
back up the world. Actually, everyone's
giving me some really good ideas. I'm
going to try I'm going to try another
one. Sure, sure, sure, sure, sure. Hey
friends, Matt Credits here. Have you
ever lost a hardcore account or world in
any of your games? Well, introducing to
you Madden Will's hardcore mode
insurance. That's right. We will come
over and take Polaroid pictures as fast
as we can of your computer screen so
that you can send hard physical evidence
if something were to go ary with your
hardcore character or world to whatever
societal company runs that actual
endeavor. Because if you don't have hard
evidence, listen, you don't know what
can happen. And in a world and dare I
say a business model that is
intrinsically linked to fear, you can't
not afford to buy pay us to pay those
photos. So do that please. Right. That
was word vomit. I started feeling like I
was going to become a Ubisoft
announcement uh message with all of the
words I was just spewing there. Yeah.
No, that seems that seems fair. Shar,
thanks so much for that 46 months of
prime. Also, NXupper, thank you so much
for those 71 months. Thank you deeply
for that support.
Yeah. Um, yeah, chat. No, for real,
every literally everyone that you've
ever seen display a hardcore that's made
their hardcore world into content has a
backup because if they've done content
planning, they've got a backup. As
someone who does content planning around
things, backups. And it's not I'm not
talking about like save scumming for if
they die in a weird way, like some
people do that. I'm talking about if
your world crashes while you're flying
and you die, right? Like I was playing
on a Cobblemon server and I was flying
around and there was a misconfiguration
in the world and most people could fly
most of the time just fine on flying
Pokemon and I was flying in the Nether
and then the game decided you're not
allowed to fly anymore for no particular
reason. We've never figured out why and
I just got dropped into lava. Now
mercifully I didn't die because I had a
totem but
hey listen happens. Has your hardcore
game ever caused you to glitch and fall
into lava and die? Then you're going to
need a pretty good lawyer. Uh, and you
don't just need any team. You need the
Eagle team. So, I don't I don't think I
don't think Devin uh represents hardcore
hardcore game losses. I'll talk to him.
Maybe it's a new It's a new business.
We're branching out, right? Hey, Deon,
we got this pitch for you. Pitch him at
the It'll make you It'll make you $7.50.
We're What? We're entrepreneurs here.
This is what Tree Fetty has inflated
into, by the way. 750. $7.50. Yeah. All
right. Great. All right. Uh, let's move
on to our next story now that everyone
is back from ads. Game Informer's back.
Great. Good. Excellent. Wonderful. Um,
they they've returned. Um, they they're
gameformer.com's back up. They have a
letter from the editor, uh, Matt Miller
about, um, how grateful they are for
everyone's support while they were away.
Um, and uh I'm just like it just worth
mentioning. Um, so
I think it is awesome. Sorry, I got I
got distracted by uh Ian's uh message or
Nebula creator cross promotions a thing.
Uh sometimes uh actually before we were
um on Nebula
uh we did a cross episode uh with Devon
about voting stuff. Uh this was years
ago and we've done stuff with Tears and
a couple other things. Um, yeah, we the
the Nebula group is awesome and uh yeah,
we whenever we get to do fun things with
the crossotion stuff, it's very fun. Uh,
sorry.
Um, Game
Informer. Will, did you read Game
Informer? Occasionally.
I feel like Game Informer
was not as seinal for me personally as
EGM. Sure.
However, in my young
life, I always saw Game Informer in like
stores and it was always it always
seemed shinier. It always seemed bigger.
It always seemed kind of like more
premium in a weird way. And I always
like I didn't always have because I
couldn't like afford to get it all the
time. But uh I did all I whenever I
could I really did enjoy Game Informer.
And when they shut down what uh 6 months
ago, 7 months ago,
that sounds right. Yeah. Uh and also
Philipov hits the nail on the head too.
Get in there. Do the thing. Uh the demo
discs were always really really fun.
Um
the it was sad because uh
look, we are getting into a a world
where everything is a digital
subscription service, right? And there
is something to say about getting uh a
thing actually in your hands to read. Uh
this isn't the same thing. Oh, it's
behind my green screen. Damn it. Never
mind. I had an example, but I'll I'll
save it for another time. Um I don't
know. I I love that their website is
back up. I also loved their game their
uh games of the year show. Uh, I had
friends actually who
um threw parties based on that and made
a actual game show for all of us to play
along with the Game Informer awards. Uh,
and to the point when when they stopped
doing it, they took up my friends took
up the mantle. My friend Patrick took up
the mantle and made a game and video
clips and other things for us to play at
these things at his house. And so I
don't know, I have a I have a huge soft
spot for them and I'm glad that they are
back. Apparently it's 100% of the team
is back. Um, which is a huge feat. And
they're their digital site is up now.
Uh, we'll link that in the uh show
notes. Uh, with the um physical magazine
returning soon. Yep. And listen, look,
print media is is dying if not sort
of cl trying with one hand sort of out
of the grave. But um I think as we
continue
down whatever chaotic nightmare that we
currently live in uh and or I'll say
digital nightmare um I think people will
be sort of gravitating back to um some
physical element that we can engage with
because it's I don't know it just feels
different and somehow magazines used to
feel super disposable
and now I see a magazine and I'm like
artifact like you know you know what I
mean? So uh I don't know I think I'm
very happy to see that game informer's
back and I wish them all the best. Yeah.
Uh at the same time however GameStop is
making a number of other questionable
decisions. Uh which I would well
GameStop and Game Informer are not
linked but correct GameStop had some
role in the Game Informer shutdown. Um,
yes. But now, uh, if I correct Let me
find the I I I I was trying to elegantly
segue between the two. I just want to
make sure that we we weren't
intrinsically linking. No. Yeah. Yeah.
Game Informer spun up on their own and
is doing their own thing. GameStop was
originally part of the shutdown. Um,
uh, they continue to make bad decisions.
GameStop's closing most of their a large
and significant number of stores, their
words, in fiscal year 2025 and are
deciding that the new way that they're
going to invest money to keep their
company afloat is in
Bitcoin. Story speaks for itself. Let's
talk about 2XO. Well, hold on. Before we
do, TR happy birthday. Let's let's let's
get the Bitcoin away and let's just say
happy birthday to you. Abs. Um all
right. Uh, now we can move on. So, Matt,
you've been kind of excited about the
idea of Riot making 2X KO for a while
because you're a resident fighting game
guy. I am. Although, I'm a bad fighting
game guy. I don't have time to get good.
I I was We did a Floyd hunt uh last
Thursday. You can check out the VODs. Is
that a VOD over on Twitch? It is. It
will be a VOD for the next 60 days.
Yeah. Yeah. I It's fine. um where we you
have to do in Mortal Kombat 1, you have
to do a bunch of between 37 different
secret things. You have to do 10 of them
that boot up and change every time you
start the game to fight a ninja that is
pink named Floyd who uh wiped the floor
with me once we got there. Um took
Matt's face and wiped the inside of the
screen. I did however beat him one
round, but that was not enough. Um and I
love fighting games. If I had
time and wanted to get competitive and
was uh a thousand years younger,
fighting games would be the game that I
I got into. I used to run my local
arcades with Mortal Kombat 2. Um I I I
love I love the fighting game community
and I wish I had more time to be
involved with it. I also know a bunch of
people that love League and their
characters seem very very fun and I just
can't really get into uh MOBAs are a
hard thing for me to to sort of dive
into. And so with this in mind uh with
with Riot's fighting game which has been
in development for a couple years now,
I've been extremely excited and uh the
the news just dropped. I have to make
sure I can get to the right. Uh, yeah.
So, uh, 2x KO, which is what they're
calling their fighting game right now,
is going to launch with 10 playable
characters. Now, that seems in in
today's day and age like a bit of a
small roster. Um, and if it was a
different business model than what they
were going for, I would say that's a
little odd. But this has also been truly
a very small team from what I understand
inside of Riot working on this along
with some pillars of the fighting game
community to really try to make it
something that is both accessible and
deep. Um they're going a lot of the uh
Street Fighter 6 route with the
simplified controls so you're not doing
quarter circle back nonsense for
everything or whatnot. Um, and I the the
question that this sort of arose uh
around an IGN article who which we'll
link in the show notes was is this
enough of a character roster to to
launch a game
with. I think it is based on their
monetary model which is I believe it's
going to be a live service game. I don't
know if it's going to be free to play.
Um so like everyone would start with
these 10 and then you could unlock more.
Yeah. Like I don't know if they're going
to just like trickle like because I
imagine they're gonna try to match
whatever League is where like maybe
they'll even have when their roster gets
deep they'll rotate like free characters
for the week and then you buy because
you buy characters in League. Yes. Yeah.
Yeah. Either with currency you've earned
from playing or with real dollars. Yeah.
Okay. It's going to be free to play 13
says. So um
yeah. Uh, and so I looked because I knew
we were going to get this exact
comparison because I knew I knew that
this was going to come up. OG Smash had
12. Right now, there's a big difference.
Right. Yes. OG Smash had 12 forever. OG
Smash still only has 12 forever. Right.
But this is Riot, so it's a live service
game, so it's not going to end with 10,
right? I also think that 10 is probably
a good start for 10 different among
those 10 representing a variety of
different styles of character. Right.
So, so far we know the following
characters will be available on launch
as part of those 10. Ari, Ekko, Yasuo,
Darius, Illaoi, Braum, and Jinx. And
those all lend themselves to very
different styles of character, right?
Um, Darius, to be very clear, when a lot
of fighting games started, this was the
size of the roster. Mortal Kombat had
seven. Street Fighter 2 had 10. Like,
and I understand that we're it's a
growing like it's an arms race in in a
certain sense, but like I don't know. I
I And then Smash what had 12. Yeah.
Right. So, I feel like it's
10 is a fine number here. And to Will's
point, all of these characters look and
fe look look like they're going to feel
incredibly different even among the
chunkier characters, right? Brahm,
Illaoi, and Darius are all kind of big
chunky tank types. Um, and they're all
very different thematically, right?
Braum has a big old shield and ice
stuff. Illaoi has tentacles and Darius
has a big old ax and does bleed things,
right? So like we're in a very like even
among characters that have a similar
frame,
their theoretical move set is very
distinct. So, I think that that's good
because like the thing you don't want is
for matchups to get stale. That's the
thing that kills a game real fast,
right? Is and one of the reasons why I'm
so bummed that like Magic didn't ban
anything in standard today, right? It's
because things are getting really stale
really fast. Um, and so I think this is
enough to prevent
stailness. Uh, okay. Next up, a brief
note. A brief note. Monster of the Wilds
is getting title update one this coming
Friday, April the 4th. Please look
forward to it. Uh they're getting new
monsters. There's a bubble dragon. Not
really a dragon, but it's a bubble
dragon. There's a bunch of other stuff.
We're getting reruns of the final boss
of the main story. We're getting uh all
the things, but the most important thing
that we're getting, Matt and Chad, is
that I'm cleaning Zoe's face. Keep
talking. In the new zone, you can have
cats cook you food again. Cook me food.
Cook me food, Zozo.
Yeah, that's right. You okay? Yeah. She
doesn't have her collar on. I know. It's
the weekend. She's just getting up.
There we go. Sorry, I just had to get a
big thing of gunk out of her eyes. She
good. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Kitty
cooks food once more. That's correct.
Zoe cooked the food and then Zoe cooked
the food and then I agree with Byus. She
said no. So, uh, that is good. Um, it's
going to be adding a bunch of stuff. No
word on if it's going to offer stability
or compatibility fixes to it. I imagine
it would, but that's not a thing they
want to announce because then that makes
people think about it, right? The best
thing you can do is just patch it in and
then it'll get fixed. Um, that's my
thought. But title update one does hit
Friday. Uh, might play Friday, might
not. Might play it next week. We'll see.
Um, but I am gonna take a look at it at
some point. Okay. Yeah. Which means also
uh I sorry real quick.
Same. We talked about it last week.
Same. Yeah. Um yeah, we actually have uh
we're going to talk about the
follow-ups. So, and we we didn't address
this at the top of the show. When it
comes to follow-ups from last week,
we're going to generally do those
towards the end in the comments. Um when
we uh talk about your comments from um
Blue Sky and YouTube, we're going to do
rehashes or new updating stuff from last
week. in that section of the show. Um,
which is a good reminder that I forgot
to do at the top of the show. Okay, next
up,
let's go.
So, uh, Nintendo had a very busy week
last week. Yeah. Um, and we wanted to
dive into it a little bit. So, the first
up is that they were like, "Hey, hey
guys, guys, listen. I know that
everyone's been looking forward to the
April 2nd direct on Switch 2 for like
forever, but what if out of nowhere we
just did a direct on the 27th of of uh
of
March? And everyone went, "What? Yeah,
we're going to do a whole direct on the
27th of March and then you're going to
do a whole another one on April 2nd."
and we're just to make sure there's no
news about the Switch 2 at all in the 20
direct and everyone went
okay I think this is one of to be
perfectly honest I think this is one of
Nintendo's strongest directs in a while
like I think they came out swinging for
the Switch one which is the which is the
exact way you want it to sort of like
begin the end of its life cycle um I
think so first and foremost I don't know
was there anything will specifically and
and Brad and Janet, please chime in that
you were excited about from this
announcement from a game perspective or
did anything really touch your
particular fancy Metroid Prime 4. Um,
always obviously, right? That's that's a
big one. Um, I do at some point want to
go back and replay Prime 1. Um, yeah, I
we started to on stream when they shadow
launched it. Um, and then um they also
have a Dragon Quest one and two HD
remake.
That is the one that I am the most
excited about. Going back to magazines,
I believe it was EGM. No, it was
Nintendo Power. What am I saying? It was
Nintendo Power back in the day when I
think that the Dragon Dragon Quest
um one on the OG NES. Uh I think they
made too many of them and they weren't
selling well. So, you got a copy of if
you subscribed with a certain thing uh
uh uh with the original Dragon Quest 1
for the Nintendo Entertainment System.
And that was the first time that young
little me was like, I'm cheating the
system. Like, my parents obviously
bought the the subscription for me, but
it's like what I wanted for Christmas
because you got this game. And I was
like, there's no way. There's no way
this is real. And that's when I fell in
love with uh turn-based RPGs, to be
perfectly honest. So to see uh honestly
the Dragon Quest one and I never played
two uh the love and the sort of like
2.5D kind of pixel art style that this
is being treated with feels so correct
to me and I am beyond hyped to get this
game or these two games remastered
because the Erdri Saga I believe that's
who the the the Hollowed Knight is. Um,
I have like the memory of it, but I I
have tried to go back and play the
original NES as an adult, and obviously
the magic is not quite the same. Sure.
In uh, you know, in the 2020s.
Absolutely. Uh, and this is something.
Got it. I'm so pumped for it. Yeah. Um,
also, I mean, there's a bunch of good
stuff, and I know a lot of this is, uh,
cross system, and I'm sorry I keep
scratching my nose. It's the cat hair
now. Yeah. Zoe came in and decided that
Matt's nose was the place for all of her
extra hair. Yeah. Uh yeah, Loto in
Japan. Ramy, very good. Correct. It's
Erdrich in uh US. Loto in Japan. Um
Shadow Labyrinth, the Pac-Man sort of
spin-off seems super interesting. The
gritty Pac-Man reboot. So good. Patapon
1 and two seems cool. Obviously Metroid
Prime 4. I was looking forward to uh
Witchbrook and that was cool to see. Uh
The Eternal Life of Goldman uh seems
like an interesting game. There's just a
lot of like fun Oh, then Oh. Oh yeah,
then Pokemon Legends ZA, you know, no
big deal. Well, I I think the ZA thing
was kind of a and also ran sort of
announcement for a lot of us because the
Pokemon Day announcements covered ZA
more extensively. Sure. But it was nice
to see it sort of included here. Y um
yeah, Patapon, uh Monument Valley 1,
two, and three. Oh. Uh, uh, Marvel
Comics
Invasion, another beat him up in the
same style from the team that did, uh,
Shredders Revenge. Now they're doing a
Marvel game. Dope. Yeah. Tomagodachi and
Tomagotchi Life uh, both got uh, news.
So that's good for like the cozy live
service Nintendo crowd. Overall, huge
huge announcements for game for
gamewise. So, I think as the as the
Switch one is suns
setting, I I don't think I could have
asked for a better, hey, this system is
going to be going away soon. Not like
going away going away, but like it's not
going to be the main focus. Yep. And
then they announced And then two
things, both of which are very
interesting for their own reasons. First
up, they announced this thing, the
virtual game card, right?
So, I will admit this is not without its
drawbacks, but it does seem very
interesting to me that they are
specifically spending time and effort on
the notion of lending digital games
around and moving games between and this
is the really important part that I
think we're not fully I think a lot of
people have sort of whooshed
on between two consoles on the same
account. It feels like this is a Switch
2 prep
move because um well so so a little bit
of clarity there. It's not on the same
account. It's in a group that's known as
your Switch family that can be up to 10.
There are two different shares. One of
them is the way that you manage cards
between up to two consoles that are
logged into the same Nintendo and that's
a big deal. And then the second one is
the family thing which is a group of
people and that's got more restrictions
on it. But one of them is just how you
manage which games on which console at
the same time and like you can just play
them at the same time. It doesn't matter
if they're both on the same like as long
as you
which both seem like a good honestly a
really nice move like
[Music]
um that would be super helpful cuz like
I have weirdly even right now I have the
OG switch and the OLED switch so and
before you can't do that at all and now
with whatever update that would be able
to be done which would be great. Yep. I
think the virtual game
cards I'm wondering where where that
came from. I'm wondering from a from
a is a excellently proconsumer
move, but and this isn't like trying to
conspiracy theory or anything like that,
but like it's not necess I'm trying to
think of the way that it makes Nintendo
more money. And again, this is not a bad
Nintendo wanting to make money. This is
a why is this
happening? Like do they is this sort of
a prep thing that will
help eventually once the system is in
place and iterated on and whatever get
the idea of just downloading your game
as opposed to owning a physical thing.
We're already kind of beyond it too with
like cartridges too because a lot of
times you have to still update and
install stuff or the cartridge doesn't
have the whole game or something like
that on it. So I'm curious what will you
thought about that and also what Brad
and Janet were thinking about that.
Uh I like it. I don't think it I don't
like it doesn't apply to me virtually at
all except I guess I could join a family
group with my roommate and lend her
games but we also just buy physical
cartridges and swap them back and forth.
Oh, but a lot of people don't. Like, for
instance, like uh
uh I was at dinner last night and uh
Night in the Woods came up and while I
do now have a physical copy of it, I
didn't when I played it and people
were wanting to try it to see if they'd
like to buy it and I couldn't lend it to
them. And now with the system without
the physical card, I could. And I think
the way it works is it goes off your
system for 2 weeks. Um, and then it'll
come back to you no matter what. Like
you can return it if you want. Like the
person who has it can return it sooner.
But that's just I don't know. That seems
really really nice.
Yeah. Um, but I'm curious what we like
if there's other than the goodwill thing
uh that
uh Spar sort of said before. Yeah, I I
agree. I think
um I I I think the lending thing is
mostly aimed at families. I think there
there is definitely a a use case, right?
But yeah, to me it really feels like
it's aimed at families um with like, you
know, two kids, right? So like parents
have a Switch, maybe two switches, kids
have switches, lend them all out, do the
thing, right? And if you have that Yeah.
Like if you can build out an ecosystem
where everyone in the family has their
own Switch and you can swap games
throughout them, you're going to sell
more hardware. Like that also could be
the play. Yes, absolutely. And then
you'll buy more digital games because
they'll people will buy a game and then
lend it multiple times, right? Rather
than not buy it in the first place,
right? Sorry, drop. Good job. I dropped
my my coin. It's gone now. It's gone
forever.
Um yeah, I don't know. I I really liked
this. I'm glad to see it being done. Um
yeah. And then this the second thing
that got announced was even weirder than
this
because it's a phone
app. So Nintendo announced a phone app.
It's a specific Nintendo centered news
platform you log into with your Switch
account, your Switch online account, and
that's how you get your Nintendo
news every
day. Every day. It's not really every
day, but like every day. Um, and the
first announcement that they
made was that there's good like it was
it was a digital app exclusive. First
announcement was that there is a
liveaction Zelda coming in 2027.
Huh. So, hey, I mean, look, if Nintendo
wants to control their narrative,
correct? All this is going to do is
every news outlet that we normally talk
to or talk about is it like it's almost
like this is the the pulpit, right? Like
this is the thing where if Nintendo has
an announcement, this is where they're
going to
this is where they're going to do it.
Yeah. How serious. Yeah. How serious is
the tell part? They did not announce
that. It's just that's been the And
again, I don't even think it would work
now. I think when he was younger, he
looked you could make him look like
Link. Uh, that was just a little little
little funsies I was having. Um,
well, excuse me, princess. I mean, I
could see Tom Holland saying that. Yeah.
Um, um, I think this is a very
interesting idea. Uh, I think also while
it might not be while many consumers
might not find it to be the most
important, I will tell you that all the
game journalists immediately downloaded
it because now we get the full press
release from Nintendo in a centralized
place and we don't need to go anywhere
else for it. And that's a big deal,
right? Especially
especially especially and I cannot
stress this enough because this way
we're going to be they are going to be
even more encouraged to have their own
language parody because for a Japanese
company when Nintendo proper not
Nintendo of America Nintendo proper
makes a press release they'll have the
translated version immediately at the
same time on the app which has not
always historically been the case for
Japanese companies and sometimes we have
to wait for translations and sometimes
there are big problems because people
mistransate things. So that part I think
is also a a hidden benefit that people
may not consider but is really big for
game journalism. Yeah. I don't know. I I
think it's someone in chat did say this
is a very uh you know oh left tenant uh
well
well sparkle like I I misclicked here
but that is also very true. They just
don't want to deal with it. Yeah. Live
action. It keeps sliding up. everyone's
talking so much. This is a very Japanese
marketed idea. I think I think that's
very true. Um but also I think it's to
Will to your point even the translation
of the articles is super helpful and now
it won't have that delay. So cool. Yep.
Absolutely agree. All right. And then
uh looking ahead, let's look ahead. So
this is three days from now, two days
from now. Wednesday. Wednesday from now.
Wednesday, my dudes.
Um, so, okay, so we've talked a lot
about the Switch 2 since it was but a
glimmer in the eye of an engineer,
and this is the last time we get to make
predictions. That's true. So, we thought
we would wrap this up. And of course,
we're going to be following up with the
Switch 2 news next week. That'll be I
can't imagine a world where that's not
the main story, but correct, who knows?
May maybe maybe someone gets bodied on
Twitter again. I have no idea. Um, if
everything works out, we might have a
small scheduling conflict. Uh, Jeff and
I are currently planning to look through
the announcement on stream for design
club on Thursday, and that's already
posted as a stream in YouTube. So, you
can go and get notifications when that
goes live as well. Um, but the uh that
is the the current plan. So, this is our
last chance to offer predictions, which
means it's also our last chance to bring
this out, which I just love. One of my
favorite Photoshops I've ever done.
Okay.
Um, yeah.
Will, Brad, Janet, Rocky, you can mess
with us some blue sky. What do we all
think? What do we all There's already
been some predictions uh uh in in the
chat here. Uh let's see. Here we go.
manifesting literally anything with Star
Fox and Fire Emblem 4 and Fire Emblem 4
uh would be lovely. Yeah. I I also think
that there's a bunch of um there's sort
of two general categories of of
uh
predictions. I went through like 12 P
words. I'm real tired, y'all.
Um, first is the system itself and
second off is the games that are going
to launch with the system, right? So, I
think a Star Fox remake would be great.
I think a Fire Emblem remake would be
great. I think we're going to see a lot
of firstparty franchises get sequels or
remakes for it, right? Mario Kart 9. Um,
a new Yeah, Mario Kart's definitely
going to be in it. There's no question.
a new 3D Mario. The last really, really
well-reed game that Nintendo did was
Odyssey. So, something in that style,
but probably not the same gimmick. Um, I
don't think we get a Zelda game. No, no,
no, no, no. Unless, Nope. Unless it's
the upgraded port, not of tears, but of
breath, because that's one of the things
that's one of It might be both, to be
perfectly honest. Uh because that the
that was another thing that sort of
leaked in the direct
um news cycle which was what was it
called? It's called um
Nintendo. Uh they were they were giving
a specific name for the type of games
that this SW basically in the in the
virtual game card descriptions. It was
trying to say, "Hey, you can only use
this in two consoles that you own in
this particular way." But they said, "Uh
I have to find the exact thing. Nintendo
watchers are pointing out the fleet of
mentions of these Switch 2 edition games
will only work on Switch 2 or or
something along those lines. And that's
a new verbiage meaning I bet you there's
going to be either a free or a paid
thing like they did like for instance
with um like Death Stranding for the
PS4. Runs great on the PS5 as I was
reading the RS Technical article in the
show notes. They use it as an example,
but you can pay $10 more to get the PS5
version if you already owned the PS4
version. So there's like probably an
option somewhere around that. That's one
of my predictions that there will be on
day one a series of
highprofile games that maybe the Switch,
the original one might struggle with on
occasion that then just makes it
prettier like basically and run better.
Well, and I think they also have an
opportunity to do the thing that they
did with uh the Game Boy, right? So I I
know I know that's old for many of you.
So let me let you know. So, the original
Game Boy, the big gray brick had the
cartridges were not perfectly square.
They had a little notch. And that little
notch was because the OG Game Boy had a
switch that um held it in. It had like a
retaining clip. So, when you turned it
on, it automatically retained the game
so you could pull it out while it was
on. It was sort of a safety. When they
moved to the Game Boy
Color, they removed that notch, which
meant that a Game Boy Color could play
all original Game Boy games, but an
original Game Boy couldn't try and play
Game Boy Color games because it didn't
have the notch. So, it wouldn't actually
turn on. And then later on, they used
the same slot functionality for the
Advance. So, you could put Game Boy and
Game Boy Color games in the Advance to
play them that way. There is some amount
of thought that there will be a similar
functionality here that Switch 2 edition
games are only available on Switch 2,
but that we might get full backwards
compatibility for Switch One, which
seems likely. Yeah, I would say probable
even um that that that's the direction
they're going to go and what I'm hopeful
for.
DS 3DS did the same thing. Yeah. Yeah.
And I'm curious like if there's going to
be something
that at the very least can like up frame
rate in games that kind of choke a
little bit too, right? Like who knows
just because it it will be a more
powerful machine.
Um, I'm hopeful that there's a like I
think that's what they're going to f
especially like that's another reason
why I don't think there's going to be a
new Zelda game because they can just do
a increase draw distance, frame rate,
whatever they want to do with Breath and
Tears and and call it a day like yeah,
you know.
Um, so that's that's uh that's a big
part of it. I also am predicting I'm I'm
also predicting day one um because of
some of the things that we've learned in
the
um because of some of the things that we
learned in that sharing demo about the
virtual cartridges. I am predicting that
you're going to have um immediate day
one uh setup where you boot it up, bring
it in proximity to a Switch One, confirm
your Nintendo account, and it's set up
like your Switch One with all the games,
save data, every I'm predicting a fast
setup to help make it as seamless as
possible to bring people to bring as
many people from the pandemic era switch
one Animal Crossing fandom group into
the Switch 2. And that group of people,
for many of them, the Switch one was
their first console. God, I hope there's
a better way to move your islands and
all of your Animal Crossing stuff to a
new console than there was before with
its separate app. Yep. Ooh, social
brings up a good question. Do we even
know this officially yet? They haven't
said. Uh, my guess because what's the
Here's the question. What does a current
Switch run right
now? I haven't looked at that in a
second.
A current edition Nintendo Switch is
$300 US. The OLED is 340. Uh my guess is
this will be 400. 400 is the current
price for the special edition Ti the
Kingdom OLED Switch. Yeah, I bet you the
Switch 2 will be 400. And I bet you
you'll see a drop in price of the OG
Switch by 50 bucks per edition is kind
of my guess. That's my thought. Um I am
a little sad. I I although we don't know
the full tech specs yet, do we not? Like
uh I'm guessing that the Switch 2 will
not be an OLED screen, which does make
me a little bit sad. But I
think we are sadly in a um a time in
consoles where they I think might be
leaving things on the table to do a
versioning system of whatever thing so
they can sell more hardware. And look,
that's fine. It's a little bit of a
bummer. Um but it seems like that's the
move. So I imagine something like an
OLED screen or a larger thing or this
that and the other thing will be held as
a minor upgrade if you want it midcycle.
Yep. There is also a return of a feature
long thought lost to the
ages. The new Joy-Con, the right one
specifically, has a C button. No one
knows what it does, but there's a button
labeled C on the Joy-Con. Put your best
guesses in chat.
Um, I'm trying to think. Also, I'm
guessing at least from the renderings
that we've seen, the IR stuff is gone.
Yes. I mean, that wasn't widely used
anyway. I know. Which does stink because
there are a lot of applications that I
think it would work really well for.
Yep. I agree. Um, obviously we uh we we
showed a thing up on screen before. The
controllers, the Joy-Cons being used as
mice is something that is widely
anticipated uh based on the sliding
around in that rendering. Um, again,
I've been saying how cool that would be
for like RTS's and a couple other fun
things. I think it turns on cursor mode.
Could be for cursor. Um, It's either see
as there is an additional capture button
chat. The the share button that exists
on the current Switch, the little um uh
circle button also still exists. This is
not an updated version of that. See is
to contact your local representatives. I
think uh Nintendo really
uh going to go hard on that. Yep. Um
yeah. So I don't know. I I I I'm trying
to think if there's anything well. Oh,
and uh I will do this. I'll say this
because I have less of a race in here
than Will does. I think Silk Song will
be a launch title on the Switch, too.
Incredibly likely. I think based on the
things that we talked about at the
beginning of the show and
if there's there's an
actual world where the timelines
especially when they the rumor is that
they rebuilt it after the whole um why
am I blanking on the on the company the
engine company Unity stuff that like to
cover some of that cost or whatever
Nintendo could have swept in like in in
a way to like help with that or at the
very least it is that is the way you
kick open the door to the indie scene on
the new console.
That's just it. Um and so I think
there's a high likelihood that Silkong
will be uh will be on that. See us for
Silk Song. Love it. Yeah. Um I think I
think that those are those are good
speed of predictions. I'm super excited
for Wednesday. Um, I will be watching
that direct with with much anticipation.
Um, and like I said, we're planning on
doing a deep dive into it uh on Thursday
with Jeff if we can make the scheduling
work. And if not, you'll get all of our
thoughts on this next Monday.
Yeah. Which brings us to a sweet story
which I thought I'm I'm quite interested
in. Um, bring regarding an old favorite
of ours, uh, which is now weirdly an old
favorite despite the fact it still feels
fresh and new.
[Music]
Elden Ring mod time, baby. Yeah, Elden
Ring is getting an overhaul mod, like a
It actually already has it. They just
released their new version of Yeah, it's
it's the it's the most recent version of
the convergence, which is apparently if
you've elened all of the rings so hard
that there are no more rings to Eld. Um,
you can get a whole new campaign world,
bosses, everything out of Elder Ring the
Convergence, which has a brand new
version. I love this bit. I love this
tradition. I love the Boulder. I don't
even want to play Balders's Gate 3 or
Skyrim, but I love that there are
modders who were just like, "Yeah, so I
liked your game engine, but I didn't
like anything else. So, I took your game
apart and I put my own story with my own
characters and my own everything, and I
made my own models, and I did this
thing, and here it is. It's a free mod
for this game." I love that. This mod
specifically uh basically has 27
different classes with their own
starting positions. And yes, one is in
Calid uh as PC Gamer is telling us. Uh
that basically is like a re I don't I
don't think there's like a lot of a ton
of like new assets per se with the
exception of some Bloodborne weapons I
think they threw in there, like switch
weapons. Um but it just seems like a
really fun way to remix uh a game that
people have played a lot of. I just
think it's it's cool and I'm looking
forward to checking out eventually again
with all of the free time that we all
have. Um just seems like a very fun uh
thing. Also different uh the the most
what was it? The part that impresses uh
the PC gamer writer the most is that the
boss fights now have all their own music
along with main menu themes. Uh so you
can have like new orchestral things
going on while that's happening. Um
yeah, I don't know. I think it's very
very fun. I love the modding community
and I think anything to keep the Elder
Ring going and again this might this
might keep people sated before the night
rain comes.
Absolutely. All right, and that
concludes our new stories. We do have a
couple of questions from last week or
comments that we wanted to that we
called out we wanted to respond to. So
So as as a as a reminder uh if you're
watching this on YouTube, please uh
leave us a comment and question and we
will get to it the next week. Uh,
however, if you are watching this on
Nebula and or Twitch, you can talk to us
on Twitch. Will's over there all the
time. But if you're watching on Nebula,
please blue sky us. We are right here.
If you have any questions about the
topics of the show or things you want us
to cover or things you thought we missed
or if you just want to say a nice thing
and you like Will's hair and uh you
didn't mind that Zoe got uh cat dander
all up in my nostrils. Yeah, seems good.
Seems good. Also, if you're on YouTube,
I am now obligated to remind you to
smash that like button and don't do it.
Subscribe sub subs subscribe if you have
not. Here's no actually you know what
before we get to questions here's
something that if you are interested in
and if you've gotten to this port port
if you've gotten to this point in the
show in this live stream I I wonder if
you might be interested there are
channelsp specific things about
notifications on YouTube and we can see
how many people have the ratio on all of
our channels and every channel can see
this of how many subscribers have two
different switches checked and there's
one that says, "Oh, I'd like to be
notified when a new video or a new live
stream goes live on a YouTube channel,
but there's another one that mo a lot of
people I think don't know that is
actually on or off and it is the global
switch." So on any not just our
channels, but any of your channels that
you've been like, I'd like to be
notified on a thing. there is a chance
that deep in your settings there is a do
not notify me at all and therefore you
are not getting notifications for things
that you have opted into. So I will just
I will just say if you are interested in
notifications from here or any other
channel you subscribe to double check
that because I I think we saw and this
is apocryphal because this was a like a
month ago and my brain is a bag of cats.
we saw on credits, I think it was
something along the lines of like out of
the percentage of people that have us as
uh please send us
notifications, a whopping something like
47% or something didn't have the overall
notifications on so it's not serving. So
just double check that if you are
interested if not keep it the same way
as is. But that's just something that I
felt like this would be a good time to
bring that up. Excellent. Excellent. All
right. So, uh, on the topic of Switch 2,
or not Switch 2, Minecraft 2, which, uh,
Moying said they're not going to do, um,
we had a very well thoughtout response,
uh, from Skak Zalis, who says, "As
someone who used to play Minecraft a lot
and completely stopped during survival,
I feel mixed about there not being a
successor. On one hand, the free updates
are an amazing deal, and Minecraft 2
could easily be ruined by aggressive
monetization. over Minecraft, especially
on Java, feels incredibly outdated in
ways that likely aren't possible to fix
in this game. The inventory system needs
a major overhaul. The game lacks super
mechanics that give buildings more
purpose. There's too many chunk reliant
mechanics and weird things going on with
Redstone, not even deeper uh not even
necessarily about QC. And just how
clunky and basic the game feels in so
many aspects. Again, the support the
game has gotten in its lifespan is
amazing and beyond anything um they
could ever have asked for uh those 20
bucks 15 years ago, but it still feels
very much like a 15-year-old game. I
agree and I will say in my opinion that
is the point or for for Moyang and
Microsoft this is not about producing a
game that innovates it is about a game
that expands right it does more mobs it
does slightly more features it does more
biomes but it doesn't break anything it
doesn't break a mold it's not ever going
to mods for mods like I've been looking
at Craft to Exile 2. Do you like
ARPGs? Do you like Minecraft? Do you
want an entire
multi-act campaign ARPG with weird
interdimensional boss fights and eight
classes and professions and everything
in Minecraft? Someone made that. That's
I think their point, right? is that they
get people in with the vanilla stuff
just gently sprinkled in. And
particularly with Java, they stay for
the mods. I think it's a mod loader more
than a game at this point, at least in
my opinion. Yeah. And I And that's not
to um take any
um any
uh thing out of uh Skazia Skazzius uh is
uh comment um because like it all
depends on what you want too, right?
Yeah. like if you're looking for
something new or whatever, that could be
disappointing based on the fact that
Minecraft 2 there's not going to be a
Minecraft 2 at least right now and that
they aren't going to go in that
direction. We all can totally be uh
excited andor disappointed by that
depending on what we want out of it. All
of your points are very valid, but I do
I do agree with Will. I think I
think weirdly I think Microsoft would
probably agree with them as well and
say, "Yep, that's the plan." Um but
yeah, interesting points. Uh and and
maybe and look, we don't actually
know the overall I saw this. This is
amazing. Medusa, very good job. Uh we
don't know the overall
ramifications of this tact, right?
like it's holding on strong right now,
but we've seen in the past it just takes
another thing to hit and hit hard to
move things around, but like
again, we won't know until we see it.
Like, is this long game going to play
out well? Right now, it seems like yes,
but who knows? Yeah. Uh, okay. Uh, we've
got some comments from people who have
shown up here in chat today. So,
congrats. You made you made the list.
Sparkling Spite says, "Tossing my hat
into the ring. Leave out the pre-roll,
keep the pre-show and post show." What
we are talking about is for is show
structure. Correct. Um we did that
today. Uh note taken. Uh and we're like
we said before uh we're doing a little
bit of science with that and trying to
figure out what's good and what's bad. I
think the pre-show, and I think Will
might agree with me, uh the
pre-show has the same function as a
countdown. It gives people time to roll
in and not be greeted by a countdown
with just numbers ticking down and some
fun music. It's like actually engaging
with us if you'd like to. So, I'm
curious to see how that uh functions
this week as well. Yeah, we're trying to
do some uh some testing. And then um lot
of finish project says, "I know we're
attached to Watsi, but it is time to
move on to other games like Blades of
the Dark, Savage Worlds, Pathfinder 2,
and other non-Dn TT RPGs in response to
talking about the virtual tabletop." And
I think I I want to be clear.
We both love other TTRPGs. When we're
talking about these things, it is
because for better or worse, at least in
my opinion, D&D is the elephant in the
room. DND is um virtuous because of its
ubiquity. DND is Kleenex. DND is D and D
is Band-Aids. DN D is Nintendo. Like it
is it is D and D is Coca-Cola. There are
other versions of all of these things,
but if you talk to someone outside of
the space, yeah, they would know what D
and D is before I said tabletop RPG,
they would like it's just that's what it
is. Um, there are so many other
wonderful tabletop RPGs that we could
play uh and talk about. The the
interesting thing there is, well,
there's two it's twofold.
one, the the community engagement and
and and what you actually sort of get
out of those conversations tends to be
much smaller. U which is not to say we
shouldn't talk about it. We absolutely
should. In fact, um I would love to
figure out, again, I've talked about
Lancer a bunch. I want to figure out a
way to do some sort of Lancer content
maybe over on Twitch or something like
that. I think it would be fun uh with
Comcon, etc. It's just complicated. But
the other thing that I will say and the
reason why I like talking about D and D
and Watsi is because even though I don't
like the direction that D and D some of
it has taken and even though I think
Hasbro needs to have a stern talking to
um I deeply love Dungeons and Dragons
like I are there is Dn D 5e or any
edition the best tabletop role playing
system in the world? Absolutely not. But
I will say that it has a a the ubiquity
of it allows you to be a jack of all
trades and master of none. And I think
that's that's that is that is its
strength.
And I from
a player and and and DM and or GM
perspective appreciate the ubiquity of
it because not only will the most people
in the space kind of understand it right
off if I need people to click very
quickly, but it also does honestly just
bring more eyeballs. Ag. Um, which
allows us to do all of these things. So,
I think
that what in a perfect world, I'll say
this straight up, I would love to do
more actual play stuff on the Twitch
channel specifically, Dn D will probably
always have a part in that, but if
there's a movement in that in that vein,
that's going to be a, you know, high
tide raises all ships kind of thing. And
I don't just want to do or talk about
Dungeons and Dragons. I would like to
talk about other interesting things and
other things. I would love to do dead
systems. Will I would I would make dark
packs with various
uh malefent powers. Yes.
Yeah. Start the start the bloodletting
if we could run a rifts game. That is a
game that the system is trash and old
and very 80s. But I love the world and
that's what I kind of cut my teeth on
coming up. And uh I would absolutely
lose my ish if I got to do something in
that space. If there's ever a day when I
don't have to produce. So for if you've
never been to one of them, I'm never on
screen during live plays because I'm
running the cameras and the tech and the
everything because I'm the one that
knows how to do those things because
that's my job. Um, if there's ever a
world where I can make that more or less
automated, I want so badly to finish my
hack of Dogs in the Vineyard, which is
another dead oneoff system. uh and and
run a game of that which is um the pitch
is imagine Shakespeare but as a tabletop
sort of weird with like combat
escalation and stuff like and I I think
I think we're we're very much on the
field of like we want there to be more
of those things and we're we're
definitely down to make there be more of
those things but in the meantime D&D is
what's in the news cycle. there's news
about Lancer in the news cycle, I'll
gladly talk about it or, you know,
Blades or Pathfinder or whatever, right?
And we have talked about Pathfinder in
the past. It's probably the second
biggest dog in that room. I like lot
sort of finishing up. It's not feeding
the NGR. It's I think not feeding indie
RPGs keeps them from growing. If you'd
like to do them, it was oneshots, right?
Like the it's it's that lovely sort of
catch 22 about content creation where I
never want to talk about or do a project
based on something that I don't like or
love really like. And that's why I think
I'm comfortable still doing D and D
stuff because I do truly love it. Um,
but also how in my opinion it is all
about time management. How you get more
people in the door for like let's even
talk about our community or or what
we're able to put out there. doing a
bunch of D and D oneshots and then all
of a sudden doing something else which
we will eventually get to is going to be
a much faster growth
uh I guess proposal than uh just
starting with a bunch of different uh
disperate systems. Yep. Because again,
at the end of the day, I truly believe
this. Actual plays, despite the fact we
like various systems, they're not about
the systems. They're about watching
people play characters and going through
the story and whatnot. Or or let me
rephrase, the ones that I engage with
and I'm interested in. I know there are
also very technical actual plays out
there that people enjoy. I come for the
story and the characters and the the
wacky antics, and you can do that with a
lot of systems. So, anyway, yeah, that's
sort of our our treatise. Thank you for
writing in the question. Yeah. Uh and if
you have comments, questions, concerns
about the things that we talked about
today, you can hit us up on Blue Sky or
you can leave them in the comments and
we'll talk about them next week after we
get done talking about Switch 2.
Unfortunately, we are out of time
because Matt has a meeting that starts
now. I'll I'll push it slightly, but we
can wrap up the show. Yeah. Uh which
means uh that I think all that all that
remains to us for today is for Matt to
lead us in a signoff. a signoff that we
do every week that it's sort of a
community building exercise, right? It's
always the same sign off. We do it
together. It's sort of a big and then we
go out and face the weekend tech sort of
moment. So, Matt, yeah, because we we
want the community to be able to do the
same sign off and feel like we're all
saying goodbye to everyone in a similar
fashion that we absolutely know and that
never has any technical difficulties. In
fact, will that's why for this sign off
every time we do put it into hardcore
mode, right? Because we will never lose
it. Nothing bad will ever happen. That's
right. Definitely nothing bad will
[Applause]
[Music]
I expected you to give me more leadup to
that. I was not ready. Well, no, you
could have I would have I was prepared
to just keep rambling, but you hit it
nice and quick. I know. I was like, "All
right, cool." I I That is, by the way,
that is one of Matt and Mai's greatest
assets doing this show is that at this
point we have exactly one brain cell and
it is in super position in both of our
noggin at the same time. That is very
useful. So fun. So fun. Yeah. Um
uh so um thanks everybody for Yeah. What
are you doing now? Uh coming up next
we're doing Robot Philosophy. Um we uh I
played Talis Principal 1 and everyone
loved it. I have Talis Principal 2 all
loaded up. We're going to play that
today and probably on Wednesday. Um so
we're gonna take down YouTube. Uh and
then we'll You're taking down YouTube?
Yes. All of YouTube. Wow. Um, so, uh,
that's going to be happening over on the
Twitch channel, YouTube, if you'd like
to come join us,
twitch.tv/extrarits. Otherwise, we will
see you on Thursday for our, uh, recap
of the Switch to announcement with me
and Jeff. And that's going to be more of
a weirdly, we're going to pick apart the
announcement more than we're going to
talk about the system. I think we'll
talk a bit about the system, but most of
the system talk is going to be here next
Monday, I imagine. Cool. Uh, so
everybody say bye to YouTube. Well, I'll
say goodbye to I'll say goodbye to
Janet, but Janet, thank you so much for
hanging out and being with us. Uh, also,
of course, Brad and uh, even though
Rocky can't hear this, I thank them as
well. Yeah. Um, yeah. Uh, this has been
lovely again, and I can't wait for it to
be lovely next week. Exactly. All right.
All right.