Hey YouTube. Hey Janet is now Janet is
now joining us uh in in this in this
stream as we have just begun and that
yes they also get to see Percible uh the
new co-host for design club. So it's
good. It's good. Um friends well the
perfect co-host. Okay. All right. It's
beginning early. Um
early and often. Yeah. Uh Janet is
online. That is correct. So um yes. Yes,
I know. Okay, let's this isn't actually
gonna be a a major part of the of our
proper like deep dive, right? Also,
Odinir says, "Hi, Janet." Um, the uh
Tenwin is correct. Silkong confirmed
Silkas, I actually wore my Hollow Knight
t-shirt yesterday on stream in
celebration. Um, and by the way, in
celebration, I'm just going to dump a
bucket of water on
everybody. It was 5 seconds of trailer.
It was literally a five second new
footage, all new footage gameplay clip.
That was it. We got more for Enter the
Dungeon 2, which got announced out of
literally nowhere with no hype. But
Enter the Enter the Dungeon. Enter the
Dungeon 2 is going to be 3D, which
spoilers, one of the most interesting
tech things ever. So Jeff, are you
familiar with Enter the Dungeon? Yes.
So, it's, you know, just from you and
Matt's love alone, I feel like the
radiated love off of that makes
everybody within a certain radius just
know about Gungeon whether they want to
or not. That's fair. All right. But, you
know, it's isometric, right? Yes.
There's a trick.
Okay. It's not 2D. They the the team
that made Enter the Dungeon discovered
that doing like a layer priority system
for all of the debris and the enemies,
too much work. Too much work. So they
locked the camera at the isometric angle
and just made it a 3D game with 2D skins
on everything, but they're 3D objects in
a 3D space rather than do a layer
priority system
for a thing I'm thinking about making.
Yeah. Had come to that same thought
independently. Like the development
software and engines are so good now.
Like I want to play with something where
there's a sense of scale. My game should
be 2D if I do it, but just from the
sense of scale, doing it in 3D will let
me look at it on the fly and be like,
"Oh, that feels like it should be
larger." Well, yoink. Well, and there's
that whole new trend of it, right? We've
seen it in um a lot of uh remakes of
RPGs and RPGs that are homages to older
RPGs, particularly the pixels kind,
right? Where they'll have like a faux
three-dimensional thing. um where uh the
characters will be pixel sprites and the
background will be a beautiful
illustration or something of that kind
and they move in like a 3D way even
though they're 2D sprites that's coming
into vogue. I don't know what the proper
name for that is that's actually been
done for a while. Yeah, like a version
of it. The very first game I ever built
levels for
um back before I was a professional game
dev was Marathon, which was Bungie's
game before Halo. Yeah. And they were 2D
sprites,
etc. made in a 3D. Like, isn't that how
Doom does it too? Probably. And
Wolfenstein, they're like just how you
did dev for a certain way because cuz
they're like, yeah, I the computational
power the computers had, right? I I
think what it is is in all of those
cases like the Doom era is it's a standy
if you imagine as like a standy that's
always facing you. Right. Right. So no
matter like Mickey Mouse with his ears,
Mickey Mouse's ears are always perfect
circles no matter which way his head
turns. Correct. They don't do parallax
in Right. Because Yeah. Yeah. That's
because that's part of the brand. That's
the hashtag brand. Yeah. Um so
uh Okay. That's called billboarding
apparently. Billboarding is the term for
sprites that always point at the screen.
Adam from chat. I didn't work on
Marathon. I used to mod it in college.
Yeah. actually got me my first helped
get me my first job in the game industry
a little bit later. Yeah, but um no, I I
never worked on the game. I'm just just
I'm not that old. Okay, that's fair.
All right, so um chat, you're going to
be seeing me hydrating extra today
because I'm pretty sure I'm
dehydrated like chronically. So, we're
we're going to try and fix that. Um
okay. Uh Janet is here. Brad is here.
The ads are over. We have said hello. We
have warmed up. Everyone can hear us and
no one has complained about anything,
which I think is all good signs. So,
um, let's
talk about Switch, baby. Let's talk
about Nintendo to No. Okay. Well, no.
Yeah, it doesn't work. Um, I think I
kind of like that one, actually. I I I
think we can workshop it. We'll take
constructive criticism. Okay. Um,
yeah. Okay. That was a good thousand
yard stare. Okay. What's going on? You
have no idea. Um, so, uh, by the way,
uh, I'm all scrambled. I'm going to take
a second and re and let Jeff know.
Better rhyme. I'm putting that on
screen. Okay. Yeah. Okay.
That's baby. Let's talk about you and we
Yeah. Right. Yeah. Okay. That was Let's
talk about all the consoles and no
notes. uh coming
out. See, I if it had been two years
ago, it would have been in 23, but it's
not. So, anyway, thanks, Pandemic. It's
your fault. Um, so Jeeoff, do you
remember a while ago we talked about uh
changes in monetization in Bizaarre and
how they had they had changed a lot of
that. Yeah, that monetization and the
community was unhappy.
They walked it all back.
They walked all of it back. They took
out the battle pass. They made it a free
rewards track. They took out the ability
to purchase the expansions for in for uh
real money only. You can now earn all of
them for free on the rewards pass and
pay for them with in-game currency if
you want to, but you can't actually
spend directly spend real money. Um and
they said, "Yeah, we're going to work on
premium cosmetics and this stats pass.
we're going to try and make a really
good value where you get bonus XP on the
track. So, you know, if if you consider
that pay to win, it's still pay to win,
but bonus battle pass XP has been a
thing for many games. Uh, so they're not
treading new ground there. And also the
more complicated stat tracking that
MOBAs do. So, good for them that people
people said, "Hey, we don't like this."
And devs listened. Good. Great.
Excellent. Maybe I I'm actually curious
because they took the hit. There's a
certain school which would also say this
is the only way our studio survives or
this is the way we think has the most
chance. We will take the hit now before
we get even bigger.
Yeah. And the it depends how well they
think they can monetize the rest of it
because at some point if you're running
a live service game, you got to get
paid. Sure. And a lot of people are
saying, "Hey, we recognize that you're
doing this. I wasn't a big fan of the
subscription option before, but I think
in light of what you've done, I I think
that I would like to support you with
the subscription option now. So there
there if that helped though, sell away
that wasn't that popular before, then
maybe it's a good move. Yeah. Yeah.
We're going to talk a lot about sticker
shock today, I'm sure. Uh so um if
you're new here, what we're going to do
is we're going to go to a black screen,
then we're going to play an intro. That
intro is so we can record this for our
friends over at Nebula, aka Rocky. But
if you're here live, you get the
pre-show with us setting up and all
that. Um,
or how's my sound? Am I good? Yeah,
you're good. Um, following that, we're
going to do we're going to do a talk.
Jeff has not seen the Well, we'll go
over all of that. Um, we will be playing
a good chunk of the direct, but not all
of it. If you if we're we're also not
going to be doing I don't want I want to
set everyone's expectations. This is not
a reacts video. No. Right. Because
that's not our our deal. What we want to
do is we want to pick
apart like how Nintendo did this thing.
Um and we'll talk about that at the
beginning. Yeah. But like part of my
background besides being a game designer
is I've also been a game analyst for a
while. And one of the most important
things that happens for Sony, Microsoft,
and Nintendo, and then by proxy a bunch
of the rest of the industry is hardware.
Yes. Like the consoles you play on, yes,
set the stage for how gaming will work
in some places for 5 to 10 years.
Correct. The switches and if you flub it
or if you do well has drastic
consequences for your company.
Absolutely. And actually, I'm going to
be saying this again in a minute. So,
that's what this is going to be about,
right? Yeah. Oh god. Oh god. What? What?
Jeff, the Switch is eight.
March 3rd, 2017. The Switch is eight.
I'm old. I remember buying my Switch.
Help. All right. Consoles sneak up on
you on how old they actually are. Yeah.
Because you do. You remember getting it
and then it's just kind of a thing in
your life and you don't realize the time
passing. Yep. Like I still remember my
PS2, my PS1, my PS uh just all of those.
I remember buying my N6 that long ago.
Yeah. Actually, um you'll be you'll be
pleased to hear this. So, uh I dropped
in on Cake Jumper, friend of the channel
Cake Jumpers stream this morning. Yeah.
Because she was uh she's doing a bunch
of stuff and one of those things was
talking about the direct and I walk into
like a very interesting, thoughtful
uh dissection of why people are so upset
over the price of the console. And it
was it was fascinating that she was
like, "Yeah, so who remembers how much
the PS3 was?" And I was like, "I I
remember." And chat was like, "It wasn't
that much." She was like, "It was €650.
Shut up about the price of the Switch,
too." I was like, "Yep, that's correct."
Anyway, um, okay. We're going to go to
Black. We're going to play an intro.
We're going to come back. We're going to
start the show properly. We'll
reintroduce ourselves for Nebula, and
then we'll get into it. Cool. Uh chat
don't I mean you can have a little panic
if you want as a treat but you don't
need to like it's not well you really
need a disco ball that you lower. We
need an animated disco ball. You can be
like okay it is now panic at the disco
and everybody can panic while we cut to
black. No.
[Music]
Hold on. That's not it. It crunched
despite the fact that I pre-loaded it
into RAM. We're going to try that again.
Again? Yeah, it did it. I don't For
YouTube, we've had problems with this
intro stinger. We've re-encoded it.
We've done a bunch of stuff and
something about it just doesn't play
nice with OBS. So, sometimes it makes
that really crunchy gross sound you
heard at the beginning. Um, but it
shouldn't do it again. So, I'm actually
gonna play it out and then we'll play it
back in. Okay.
All right.
[Music]
[Music]
Now, good time zone, internet. Hello and
welcome to Design Club, the only game
design show on the internet that's not
reacting to the Switch 2 announcement a
day late because we're not reacting to
it. Uh, I am your humble Well,
definitely not a dollar short. Yeah,
def. Yeah, definitely not at all. Uh,
I'm your humble host, Will, joined as
always by my pal Jeff. Say hi to the
people, Jeff. Hi to the people, Jeff.
Hey, everybody. I am Jeffrey Zetkin, the
studio director of Extra Credits and
longtime game designer and game analyst,
which is one of the reasons I am looking
forward to talking about the Switch 2
today. Yeah. So, uh, just Who are you?
Huh? Who am I? Oh, I'm Will. I run all
of our live streaming stuff. Now, hi,
I'm Will. I'm our uh analysis enthusiast
over here. Um, I play all kinds of games
here on the Twitch channel and I'll be
the one playing the most Switch 2, uh,
and kind of looking at this, I think,
with an eye towards content and also
what people are saying about it. So, uh,
Jeff's kind of providing the industry
perspective and I'm going to be
providing the, um, gamer on the street
perspective on on this whole thing. Uh,
so, just to time stamp this so everyone
knows where we're at, today is April
3rd. This announcement came out
yesterday, April 2nd, and it's been in
the works for a while. Um, this has been
these things typically are, right? So,
companies don't launch consoles every
year, right? So, or every couple of
years even, right? And people were
talking about how, oh, there's going to
be a shadow drop for the Switch 2. No,
there isn't. No, no, it's impossible.
You can't move enough. never be a shadow
drop for this kind of console hardware
ever again. Or actually even in the past
it's almost impossible.
The production it takes to get all of
these made and the secrecy it would take
to do that around it is makes it almost
impossible to do something of this
magnitude secretly. However, at least in
this day and age with the internet.
Correct. All that having been said, they
did a dang good job of keeping most of
it very under wraps until
um they were ready to announce it. And
we'll talk a little bit about some of
the strategies they used to do that. Um
but we now know that the Switch 2 is
coming out on June 5th. Um and it's up
for pre-order officially on April 9th.
Uh and we could talk a little bit about
that. Okay, good numbers. We do numbers.
I mean, yeah, numbers.
So, what we want to talk about is how
Nintendo is presenting this, right? Not
so much um Matt and I on Monday in Extra
Breakfast are going to talk a lot about
the games and what we're excited about
and what we think is going to get shaken
up. Jeff and I are going to talk about a
lot about the process of presenting a
console and a lot of the marketing
tricks and a lot of the important like
highlevel industry affecting stuff that
goes into this. So, we're going to be
talking about this two days. If you're
more in for like the my reaction to the
Silk Song trailer, which will probably
play in its entirety, all eight seconds
of it on Monday, um because I'm on
repeat for an hour. I'm very normal
about this. Okay. Um that'll be later.
But I I wanted to I wanted to bring up
that uh while the direct for the Switch
2 was yesterday, April 2nd, there was a
very relevant direct March
27th, which was sort of dropped out of
out of nowhere. Um and that shortly
before what everybody was expecting,
correct? And they very specifically said
this direct will not contain information
about the switch to and it didn't except
it did kind of right it it didn't
asterisk all of the things that they
pitched and mentioned on the 27th were
one of two things. There were either a
an announcement about a software update
to the Switch and their um new Nintendo
news app or a game announcement. And I
wanted to bring up when we're talking
about the strategy behind this that
that's actually a really great idea
because it already preps people for some
more technical details for the the
sharing system which is going to be very
big. Right? When when it came out last
week, everyone went, "So, they've got
this new virtual game card sharing thing
that you can do between two consoles,
but I don't have two consoles. Why would
I care?" And then some people went, "Oh,
it's so you can share virtual game cards
between your original Switch and your
Switch 2." So they were doing
groundwork. I I am of the opinion last
week for backwards compatibility. And
then they didn't want like big
announcements for major games to take
the air out of the console announcement,
which I think seems fair, right, Jeff?
like a big game announcement might be
might accidentally overshadow the cool
console that the game's going to be on
maybe. And we can talk a little bit
about the exclusivity strategy and some
of the other things, but I want to even
pull this back for a little bit
because Nintendo's about to do a thing
that Nintendo, Sony, and
Microsoft roughly do every 7 to 10
years. Yeah. And in Nintendo's case,
this is the Switch 2. the Switch 2 that
they need to get take this very popular
console that they've had and convince
people it is time to switch to a new
console and everything that entails. And
for the stakes of the big three who put
out hardware, this is a monumental thing
in the industry that happens only once
in a while. They're about to put out new
hardware that they will anchor their
company to. You can't Nintendo makes
most of its money from selling games on
the Switch at this point. Yep. If they
have a crappy new piece of hardware or
something that doesn't work, pretty much
a vast majority of their revenue is
going to be impacted by this. Yeah. And
that's where you hear things about the
console wars, you know, about Microsoft
and Sony with the PlayStation and the
Xbox, you know, competing against each
other for market share and who has the
most consoles out there so that they can
sell the most games. Like that is how
these divi like Nintendo's a little
different in that Nintendo doesn't sell
a lot of other stuff. Sony and Microsoft
sell a lot of stuff. They have gaming
divisions. They are not a gaming
company, right? Nintendo is a gaming
company, right? And Nintendo has
broadened their scope somewhat in that
they've used their IP elsewhere. There
are um movies, right? Movies and other
things. But the fandom for all of those
accutra mod, the movies, the theme
parks, the merch, the whatever is all
rooted in the games, right? It's not
like Pokemon where the games are a part
of the IP suite. It's the games are the
foundation of Nintendo's IP rather than
being just part of a bigger strategy.
You might go to something called a
Nintendo world and be like, "Oo, I know
what I'm going to see." You wouldn't go
to a Sony World or a Microsoft world
with that same feeling in your heart.
The Sony world would have Bloodborne.
Nope. I'm good. I don't I don't need I
don't need a Bloodborne theme park. Some
of you might. Some of you might need a
Bloodborne theme park. I do not. Thank
you. I'm good.
But anyway, so new hardware is a really
big thing for these companies and new
hardware doesn't happen overnight. New
hardware takes years to design and it's
not just the design. It's the design of
what they want it to do. you know, what
kinds of games do we want it to play?
That impacts how much RAM and memory and
in some cases actually in a lot of cases
the controllers and how they design the
memory and how they are going to design
the stores around that and how much hard
drive space do you need and what's the
form factor and can we bring all of this
in at a price point where if we
manufacture millions of these, they can
be made for the amount that we need to
sell them and Nintendo gets a profit on
that. Uh the Xbox and the PlayStation
are usually sold as loss leaders where
the Wii and the Switch, you know, always
came in making at least a little bit of
money from day one, but all of that and
sourcing and are we going to be able to
make millions of these and keep
manufacturing millions of these? Like
there is a lot
around that that then gets the company's
identity wrapped around it to put out
into the thing that they're like, "Hey,
and here is the Switch or here is the
Switch 2." and even just naming it the
Switch too like but all of it. So like
this was a big deal for my for
Nintendo
and it is not surprising that you are
going to see this media shotgun. Yeah.
For a while with the Switch to the
Switch 2. Yeah. It's just I just wanted
to set the ground the table stage. I
think that's really if they flubbed this
like the Wii U. Exactly.
example of
a thing that didn't go as well after the
success of the Wii and the Wii was
tremendously successful, right? It took
until the Switch for them to
outsell the Wii, I think. Well, I mean,
the Wii U was never going to outsell the
Wii for a bunch of reasons and then the
Switch got uh boosted. We we do whenever
we talk about console uh sales numbers
or game sales numbers, we have to keep
in mind that there's a period in time in
which demand for consoles and games was
at an unprecedented high due to external
factors beyond any game company's
control called global lockdown. Um which
actually I think influenced some of the
features that are going into the Switch
2. And we'll talk about that when we get
there. So um let's shall we shall we
dive in? Let's let's look at this. We've
got that direct ready. Um, we're gonna
we're gonna dive into it. We're not
going to watch the whole thing. We're
going to pause pretty frequently to talk
about things. But weirdly, for
everything that Jeff just said, for
everything that Jeff just said about the
console being the
thing, the direct doesn't start with
anything about the console. Well, it
kind of does. It starts with Mario Kart
World. Mhm. And so let's let's which is
by the way a brilliant introduction in
Yes. because they're saying from the
beginning here is a thing you're only
going to be able to get on this new
thing, right? And it's amazing, right?
And it's amazing because it's on the new
thing, right? So we'll we'll we'll stop
and we'll I think we'll we'll probably
pull out a couple of uh instances of
them showing off uh in the Mario Kart uh
worlds bit and we'll we'll go from
there. Uh, so by the way, um, addressing
this real quick, do you want to talk
about why it's the Switch 2 or should we
save that for later? Um, yeah, I I I
think well, at least in my view, the
reason it's the Switch 2 is the Wii
U. They need to stop being clever. They
need to stop being clever. They need to
be very straightforward because the
majority of people buying Nintendo
products are not the consumer of the
product. They are a parent, right?
because because or a grandparent, right?
They are the a lot of Nintendo stuff
gets gets given as gifts because of
their family focus. In fact, they spent
time in their console announcement
direct to have an animated brief
introduction to the parental controls
feature of their console. That's how
much they care. That is their target
market. That is absolutely their target
market. Okay. So, there was a bunch of
confusion between the Wii and the Wii U.
And the fact that it's the Switch 2
makes it unambiguous. This is two. This
is better. This is And the cartridges
are different. It's the next one. Like,
PlayStation was very successful with
this is the PlayStation 2. Now, it's the
PlayStation 3. parents don't get
confused when they're like, "Oh, the new
PlayStation 3 is out versus, you know,
some of the models where you see like
the thing is like here's the X, here's
the X2, you know, here's the, you know,
collector's edition X." So, and you're
like, and the person buying it might get
confusion. Yeah. On that. And they need
to sell parents also that this is the
next evolution of the thing. So, there
was a note put out. I actually found it
when I was digging around last night on
actually why it's called the Switch 2
and not like
um the Super or something which was what
was the last um Nintendo hardware that
had Super in it? It was Super Nintendo
Entertainment System. Yeah. That wasn't
backwards compatible. And they said that
because this one is, they didn't want to
put the Super in the name because they
didn't think it lived up to their
legacy. They didn't want any confusion.
The Switch 2 will be backwards
compatible with the Switch One in the
way that the Super was not.
And I just that's like very old school
Nintendo thinking of we called it this
once and it didn't have this feature,
therefore we're not going to do that
again. Yeah. And I think Yeah, that
makes perfect sense. Um so for a variety
of reasons, it is the Switch 2. And with
that being said, well, I want to see.
Okay. Excellent. Uh so we're going to
shrink. Make me small. Make me small.
Yeah, we're making I'm making you small.
I'm making you small. All right. Um,
chat, I'm going to adjust the volume as
we go, but this
is the the little animated intro for the
direct, which is very cute.
I saw a D20 in there.
Yeah, this I I this really set the tone
for me. I don't know. I I felt like this
was a very good, refreshing, like little
upbeat little teaser trailer, right?
And and before anyone's like, "But Will,
it's just a teaser. Why does that
matter?" Tone matters so much in this.
They're anchoring. They're absolutely
anchoring you to the tone and stuff
they're going to be using, right? This
is an upbeat game, right? None of the
first party Nintendo stuff was super
gritty, right? They do have gritty
stuff, but it's, you know, From Soft and
whatever, but like they're like, "This
is a fun celebratory event. Go for it."
Right.
All right. So, we roll out of the
direct and into this
Borderlands. Oh, wait.
You kind of think that, don't you? Until
the uh until Yoshi's pops into view and
then we get this. Yahoo!
[Music]
I'm waiting for them to do the thing
cuz Yeah, right now this just looks like
another
kind of right. I I think it does have
some amount of like very
important like right here. No, give you
a better shot. Mhm. Like some of the
scaling of this, right, is much bigger
and much grander, right, than Oh, it is.
But like that's what I would expect on a
new console. Correct. It's not um it's
power different, it's not conceptually
different, right? And that's that's one
of the things too is that while number
go up is good for brain chemicals. When
we're playing a game, when we're being
sold a game, we generally just don't
just want but when we're being sold new
hardware, we want to know what the new
hard they're showing off also the
hardware specs. The Switch would not be
able to handle this and they're saying,
"But look, our new one can." Yeah, I
think that's why we're getting part of
these huge sweeping shots and the
graphics. Yep. Absolutely. Okay, I'm
going to turn the sound down and let it
keep running under us just so we cuz
otherwise we'll never get through it.
Jeff and I are very excited about this
and I'm going to try and keep us moving.
Okay. Ooh, grind. Right. That that whole
thing and this little wall ride thing,
that's their big new shtick is that you
can grind and wall ride. In addition to
the fact that um one of the things that
might not be obvious to a nonfan
um is that underneath all of this um
there
are many new characters in the
background that were not racers before.
There are also new carts. There are new
tracks. There's a lot of new that wasn't
present in the last game. Um dude, was
that a sandworm?
Yes. Yes. Even Mario knows how to walk
without rhythm, Jeff. Okay. Also
important to note, world, not nine, not
super world. And and the reason for
this, and we can go into this a little
bit, is uh it's actually an open world
Mario Kart game,
which is a hell of what? It's an openw
world Mario Kart game. What do you mean
by open world? I mean you can drive
between the courses. The courses exist
as sections of this. So, for instance,
this down here, if you look um Oh, they
can't see my cursor because it's not all
right. If you look down um right here,
you see you see this thing? That's a
course. And you see this up here, that's
a course. And you see this road between
them?
If you have a Grand Prix and you start
in this course and the next race is in
that course, you don't just go to a menu
or a loading screen. You finish this
race and then drive between here and the
next course.
That's cool. But man, I hope they put in
teleporters too that get you there
directly because that could get real
old. It could. Um I believe there may be
a racing component to that section,
right? That the Grand Prix is all of
them and there's sort of a rolling
start. So your start position may be
determined by what order you get to the
new track in. Um, but also there is an
additional mode where you can just drive
around. Like you can just drive around
all over here and find things and
explore secrets and take pictures and do
all the open world stuff. Didn't see any
mapping towers, so we're safe on that
count so far. But yeah, it's an open
it's again world. They're really
focusing on that. And again, this is
another thing the Switch could never
have done, right? It just not it's not
in the wheelhouse, right? that much open
world everything with 24 racers in at a
time. No way. The Switch would crap
itself. That little Switch would turn
into a pillow and explode. Um, so yeah.
And by the way, one of the things that
Nintendo has consciously done as a
strategy for years is say our hardware
is good, but you're not buying this
because it is the best hardware out
there. You're buying it because it is
the right price and has great games on
it. Yeah. like they never were competing
against the Xbox and the PlayStation on
a powerhouse, correct? Level like and
and and let's let's talk about that real
quick. Nintendo has always and this is
going to be more apparent as we do
stuff. They don't care outwardly, they
probably care inwardly what the rest of
the industry is doing. They really
don't. Like they're we're gonna we're
going to talk about a major feature in a
second and everyone's going to go,
"Yeah, of course." But for Nintendo,
it's a big deal.
Um, so they're very inward focused,
right? They don't take pot shots at
other companies. Yeah. They don't they
don't they don't release things in
relation to other consoles. They just do
their own thing and they innovate at
their own pace and they just keep going.
Uh, and Nintendo will outlive us all.
There will be cockroaches playing
Nintendo games after the fall of all of
civilization some several thousand years
from now. Um, so yeah. Uh, okay. So, um,
so they opened with Mario Kart World and
then, and there's more like tech details
on Mario Kart, and we're going to skip a
bunch of that probably. Um, the next big
thing that they did was they said, "Hey,
this is a multiplayer game. We have a
new way to play multiplayer
games." And then, so we don't at this
point in the direct, we only know that
Mario Kart World is a game that exists
that will be available on the Switch 2
the day that it launches. Also, they
haven't yet said the release date at
this point. It's and I think they did
this on purpose. We can take spend a
second on this. Releasing the same day
as Switch 2 or will be released at the
same time as the Switch 2 in every
single
trailer. So that and and there's a
couple reasons for that. One, it means
if any of that stuff gets leaked, the
release date doesn't get leaked ahead of
time, right? and two means they can
change the release date up until the
moment they put this out. They could
have been like fifth is no good. It's
going to be the 12th and and change like
two segments in here. Pandemic shipping
has done weird things and therefore
Yeah, absolutely.
Um so I think that that's that's a big
deal. Okay, so they go through all that
and then we get this.
Next, we'd like to introduce some of the
new features of Nintendo Switch 2. Well,
can you pause a second?
So, this is super obviously
pre-recorded. Yeah. Because, you know,
there are some events where you see them
come up into a big live thing. Mhm. The
fact that he is speaking in Japanese
with a perfect English dub
overdub means that this is just from
that we know this is pre-recorded staged
and meant for consump this is a
announcement video. This isn't a live
thing. Yeah. And I think that it's also
worth pointing out that that's very much
in Nintendo's wheelhouse. No Mario Kart
pun intended, right? Nintendo has a very
tight control over their major
announcements. And they also, and this
is really cool, there are three
gentlemen that you'll see in this. I
cannot remember their names for the life
of me, for which I do apologize, but
they are the faces of the team that put
together the Switch 2. And they are
getting essentially their their big
moment in the sun because they have
busted their butts for I would guess at
least six years. I would guess six years
uh on this. Um and now they're getting
to say, "Hey, we made this thing and we
were a big part of the team and here it
is." Right.
Um, the UK version apparently just
subbed the Japanese
part.
Fascinating. Okay. Um, all right. So,
uh, these are the Joy-Con 2 controllers
for Switch
2. And on the right Joycon 2, we've
added a new C button.
This button was the source of so much
rampant speculation over the past week
because they had hidden it. They
photoshopped this button out in all of
the like there's going to be a switch to
announcement. This is kind of what it
looks like. It was never labeled C in
any of the anything and then the C
showed up in some piece of promo
material and the internet collectively
lost their minds. Like completely lost
their minds. They're like, "What does C
stand for? Is it a cookie button? Do I
press it and get a cookie? Like it was
it was ridiculous. So there So Will, you
skipped a little bit, but they haven't
shown the console yet, correct? They
have not. No. Okay. So they went from
game to Let's talk about controllers.
Well, kind of. The C
button doesn't. Let's take a look at
some new experiences it
offers.
Pretty model playing game, right?
In stock, you know, stock photo house,
right? As as is the way. Mhm.
And this is the first time we get to see
it.
C stands for game
chat. And I'm I'm normally not a fan of
being reductive, but there is no
escaping the
comparison. It's Nintendo branded
Discord on your Switch,
too, which is a big deal because
Nintendo hasn't done this level of voice
chat integration into their Nintendo
actually famously with its I want to
protect kids has shied away from a lot
of internet and connectivity stuff.
Correct. And now they've got um uh
dedicated dedicated hardware space in
your dedicated hardware space. Uh so we
don't there's there's a lot of like this
is the experience you'll have. So we
don't necessarily need to go through all
of it. I can run through the the top
bits of this which is um actually hold
on.
Right. Yeah. That's correct. Yes, that
is Phil is correct. Now they years later
since the last switch they've realized
that the kids are already on the
internet and so they are basically and
here's the interesting part they're
going to bring it in first party rather
than sending everybody off third party
because first party they can build the
parental controls in and sell it as part
of that to the parents. Yeah. But carry
on. I want to see what's Let's see what
C does. Right. Okay. That was you so
quick.
Wait. No. No. No, no, no, no, no, no,
no, no. N, I'm coming for you. No.
Introducing Game Chat. So, they are
really going out of their way to sell
how fun this is, right? Hey, what's up?
Can you hear me? Hello. Hi. Missed you.
And we're getting the tie back into the
communicate with family while playing a
game. Hold on.
Will I just realized they were speaking
English? Yes, this is re-shot for every
language.
Do you think it was reshop for every
language or do you think that they were
just showing off that they figured
English game English speakaking gamers
would be good for really great question
international audience both in Janet and
Brad if you watch this in another
country that isn't the US or in another
language that isn't a were was it the
same models and shots and was it also in
English I'm really cur right because if
it wasn't that means that they had
to in order to keep the length the same
which they're kind of big on they have
to do it to the second like they have to
do that's not that hard for editing they
probably shot five hours of B-roll for
the 90 seconds of stuff that they put on
here. Yeah, correct. Yeah, we have an
entered chat at the top left as well.
Yes. So, um and yeah, and they've we've
got the the standard like oh these are
attractive people having fun in their
attractive bright primary colored
houses, right? playing the game that we
have shown you so far for the Switch,
despite the fact that there are other
games that will be coming out on the
Switch, too. Um, I also think it was
just interesting to me to switch from
Japanese to English, and I'm kind of
curious on the production, but anyway,
that's probably getting too in the weeds
for what we're doing. Yeah. Here, let
let's keep going. Okay. For an
adventure.
While using the game chat feature, your
voice is recognized by a microphone
built into the system.
there. Okay, so this is the one thing
I'm gonna like fault them on. There's a
little hole in the top of the main body
of the console and that's the microphone
with noise cancellation technology in I
was reading about it, right? And they're
going to and they're going to
demonstrate that in a second, but they
are now at a severe uphill battle to
have gamers who are used to these
things, right? or a headset mic or
whatever. Believe that it's that.
However, however, however, however, this
is where I get to remind
people, you are
probably not the target audience of this
part of the
direct. If you're Yeah, like even just
getting into that, I bet they will sell
them. This here is the This will work
for a party. This will work for couch
three people on couch co-op. You don't
have to buy one of these for every per
if you're selling group chat
then you need an ability for group chat
to work
like just straight up like I I can I
will honestly I would bet you strong
amounts of real money that it initially
started out the way you were thinking
and then somewhere along the development
they realized no if we really want this
to be a group family chat with groups
playing together like two people in one
place and one in another and three in
another. This just has to be a general
pickup. Yeah. So, uh just from their
philosophy of what they want to serve.
Yep. Um uh they um P does correctly
point out that there is a headset jack
in the Pro controller. Yes, that is
true. And that's probably what a lot of
people will end up using um because that
that is a form factor that's they're
used to. But you don't and and here's
the interesting thing. You don't need to
buy a peripheral. You could buy a
peripheral and then use your headphone
jack with it, but you don't need to
because it's in the console, right? So,
like they're not immediate. Like, you
can see the place where the experience
might be improved, but they are also
trying their darnest to sell you on the
out ofthebox vanilla experience with no
alterations.
They don't Yeah. They don't want to sell
something where they're like, "You need
to buy this." And the kids like, "Wait,
oh, but you then need this, this, this,
this, and that." Like, right, they're
removing friction. Correct. They are
going to sell us a little add-on here in
a bit. Um, but you know, we'll get
there. Um, also worth noting at this
point that,
uh, it's worth reframing despite the
fact they're showing this with Mario
Kart, it is an OS level integration
because it's hardware integration. This
just works. It will have different sub
features depending on which game you're
playing. Um, but it just it's part of
the console. It's kind of like the Steam
overlay rather than being like a Yeah.
Well, it's what every console has. I
mean, even down to like the Oculus and
others. It's this is the OS level or the
hardware level stuff that you can use
because they also Nintendo doesn't want
30 different chat systems being built
across their architecture by 30
different games that they then have to
somewhat support with how they do
things. Correct. They want the one thing
like this is what you use.
Done. And I I want to highlight this
because I think this is the perfect time
to do that to do this. Nope, not that
one. It's this one. Rice says, "I just
realized this trailer also parallels the
original Switch trailer where they were
showing people bringing their Switch to
parties and playing games around a
coffee table. This is the post pandemic
version of that." Yes. Yeah. This is 1
million% a direct response to the Animal
Crossing
uh pandemic party phenomena. I would bet
a gigantic amount of money on that
because they sold they moved so many
units. They moved so many units on the
back of being able to bring friends to
your island and hang out. I know
multiple people who had multiple
birthday parties and New Year's
celebrations and everything in Animal
Crossing because they didn't have
another way to do it. And they were
using the most godawwful system of like
people on phones propping it up to look
at themselves while they were playing on
their Switch to do voice chat and all of
that. So, I'm will I am very willing to
bet that this is a direct response to
that. I bet that was the tipping point
to just push them over and like things
like the open mic design and some of the
others. But yeah. Yeah. So, we see that
Nintendo is adapting to the current
state of things. The post pandemic
wanting to get people in playing
together. Kids are already on the
internet. Like a lot of this is
reflected the cultural trends in society
are reflected into the hardware that is
getting sold for the next generation.
Correct. Which has happened pretty much
on every previous generation of console
too. Like if you look two generations
ago with Microsoft and Sony saying we
want to be the thing that connects your
living room hub. Yes. And building their
hardware to bring in your Netflix and
your Discord and your YouTube and
everything else before the smart TVs
were doing it. Say this is your central
hookup or actually and Blu-ray player
was a huge one. Like I know any number
of people that bought what was it a PS3
or four? I forget which because it was
the same price as buying a good Blu-ray
player and you also got a console with
it. The three the three was also more
powerful. Sony was lost leading so hard
with the PS3 that at the time the Air
Force bought like a hundred of them and
turned them into a Beaolf cluster which
is a kind of cluster mini supercomput
idea thing. But they literally just had
shelves of PlayStation 3s that they
network together to use in concert to do
number crunching. Yeah. But yeah, it's
like these are never things that happen
by themselves. It was just this is part
of how society goes and how the game
studio game hardware companies around it
look at that to make the thing that they
can sell you. Yeah. So, um Chad's
talking about the mic. Let's let's let
them let's let them explain the mic and
then we'll talk about whether or not we
believe them and why they're selling it
this way. Okay. But you're still behind
me, right? All right. Let's keep going.
Okay. It can pick up your speaking voice
clearly, even from a distance. Look at
this. Jump on
here. All right, let's keep going. Come.
Let's make a left right here. Let's make
a When it's noisy around you, your voice
will still come through clearly, letting
you chat with ease. How did you get hit
by a boat? Okay, nice. Nice. It does
look beautiful. It's And you can use
this feature in handheld mode, too,
letting you easily chat with friends and
family. If you open the chat menu and
turn on game screen sharing, Great job.
Good job. There we go. There we go. You
can also share your game screen. Did you
see someone just like go on top of that
dinosaur? Really? They can do that? They
can do it. You guys, I just did it.
Okay, I want to I want to So, if um as
someone who pays a lot of attention to
frame rates and things for reasons and
also stuff, you will notice immediately
that the frame rate of these stinks.
These are very low
frames. That's probably okay. That's not
really as big a deal as you might
initially think because the goal is not
to like frame perfectly. watch your
friend do something cool. It's to kind
of uh en enhance what we'll call like
the rich presence of like being
together. The other one is that they are
very confident in that mic. They just
showed someone talking into the
microphone with a
blender and their claim the claim that
they are making with that is that the
blender will not disrupt the voice chat.
And I don't know about you all, but
until I move to an independent mixer and
an independent uh high quality mic and
the sum total of my audio equipment is
about
$1,000
US. I that was always a problem and it's
still a problem and I know what I'm
doing. So, I find it a little hard to
believe that that's going to carry
through to the extent that they're
claiming that it does, right? because I
have like custom set gates and noise
monitoring and like all of that stuff
for my mic in my sound setup and I can
tell you that some stuff still comes
through, right? And I don't have
Nintendo's fancy like whatever they're
using like noise cancellation
technology, but it
feels it feels a little much. I will I
will be the first one to own and admit
that they were completely right. But I
am also very much looking forward to the
number of creators who put that exact
claim to the test on day one who like
call someone and then run a blender
behind them while they're talking to see
how good the mic is. Right. Cuz like you
said we could do this. Repetitious noise
like a blender is actually easier to
filter out. Yeah. Kind of like car
noise. Yeah. Like but I actually just
thought of a really interesting hack
they might be doing. Will Mhm. So your
expensive mic setup Mhm. is meant to
capture sound. Yeah. Theirs is meant to
capture voice. Sure. And there may be a
really interesting difference there on
how they process it where if you in
didn't say I need to capture sound,
every possible thing around you, but
instead said all I care about is
capturing voice and everything else I
don't care about. Like there's a whole
different level of filtering that you
could do around the range of stuff
you're expecting to capture and
everything else you could gate.
Yeah. But anyway, like yeah, like
there's tech, but I'm just saying it
could be a different tech solution that
they ended up using on the processing
side just because of what they're
actually trying to capture because
again, they're not trying to capture
everything. They're trying to capture
you talking. That's true. and and and
chat is pointing out that this is an
Nvidia thing that the Switch 2 is
apparently running on Nvidia tech and
that the Nvidia broadcast feature is
pretty good at this. So maybe I'm being
overly pessimistic. Let's see. You know,
even if it just works 90%. That's all
going to be good enough. He's trying to
eat me. He's trying to eat me. Okay, I
got it. I got it.
No, no, no.
[Applause]
Okay.
You can chat to your heart's content.
And you don't have to be playing the
same on the frame rate thing too. We
have to remember this is pre-release.
Like this got captured on pre-release
hardware with pre-release games, which
means that it may actually launch
better.
Okay. I don't remember chat and and I'm
not going to scrub back through while
we're doing this. I need chat to see if
they gave the some screen images are
simulated disclaimer or not. They did at
the very beginning on the Mario part.
Correct. I don't know if they redid it
or if they think that the Mario part
covers all of it because I will also
tell you for nothing that this would be
so easy to cook. Right. And that and
that they're underelling the frame rate
to avoid any confusion
about claims, right? that they're that
they're intentionally that they put it
together in post and that they're
intentionally underelling the capability
of the screen share feature to avoid
anyone being like, "But you cooked it,
right?" Because why would they underell
it? So that's another option. Yeah.
[Music]
Um Okay, cool. Okay. Can stream any game
you're playing. So this is the hangout
with friends, correct? This is the you
don't all have to be doing the same
thing. And of course, it is 100% no
coincidence that the first game that
they show that isn't Mario Kart is
Animal Crossing, right? This is like
this is very intentional. This is okay,
we've sold to the core audience, right?
Mario Kart 8 has sold more copies than
any game should ever sell um given its
install
base. And now that we've covered that
base, the other group that we're really
aiming this at is Animal Crossing. Hard,
right? It's tough. Oh wow. I'm like in
the sky right here. I'm a I fell. I'm
falling. I'm falling. I'm falling. Okay,
we got it. We're safe. We're safe.
Kirby, look. You're a star. That's so
cute. So cute.
You can adjust the size of your game
screen,
guys. I'm lost. Like, where'd you go?
Or expand another friend's game screen.
We got to get above above that uh wall
that's to your left. You're almost
there, though. It's just like the wall.
Like if she gets past the wall. This is
where I have to do a little wall ride.
Okay. Okay. So, everyone can watch them
play. Oh, I think I I think I know where
you are. I think I know where you are.
Wait, wait, wait, wait. Okay. I think we
have
So, what they're showing me here is our
worlds are so big that you can get lost
and I'm going to have to wait for my
friends to catch up on this part of the
raid. Correct. I also want to observe
that I don't think that the models are
actually playing the game button. I
think they're responding to like
pre-recorded. Actually, guys, uh I got a
call coming right now. Having had a wife
who has been captured in things like
this, I guarantee you they may have
shown them the game, but they are Oh,
actually, pause before the camera, but I
guarantee you they got a script, read
some, and then we're basically told to
ad lib around that and the editors all
cut together. Yep, that makes perfect
sense. Straight up. Like yeah, there is
no conceivable reason you would make
them be playing the game to capture it
because you also wouldn't have people
familiar with the game, right? Or
particularly good at it and they
wouldn't be saying what you want them to
say. Like right that is 100% scripted
followed by an adlib version of it's
like cool the thing you just read give
me three or four lines like that in your
own voice. Give me three more. Yeah,
give me three variations. All right. So
then they're releasing a camera and it's
gonna have a bunch of features and we'll
go over the features in a second.
Windows putting out a camera again. Is
this one also going to print things on
thermal transfer paper off my Game Boy?
Like it kind of looks like it too. It's
also very small.
It's It's very small. It's
um It's got like the very narrow stand.
It's got like the cable management. I
don't know whether I like this as a
piece of hardware or not. I want to see
if it has like the screen mount clip or
not. Like leaving all of the continual
like um why do you have a camera for
your console in your living room kind of
thing, leaving that whole discussion
aside, just looking this as a at at this
as a camera, I'm initially not impressed
personally. Um unless this is
detachable, right? This stand super
sucks and isn't very flexible and is
desktop only and doesn't go on a mount
and doesn't go on anything else. Uh
yeah, they're really looking at the
form. Like they're looking at the thing
that they can put down and everybody
will know how to use. Yep. Um no parent
is going to look at this and be like I
don't know how to plug in a thing and
put this down. Yeah, that's fair. And it
is uh I I'll spoil one of the text
packs. It is a USBC camera. It's direct
to USBC. So my question is then the
followup is will any USBC work or does
it have to be this camera? We don't know
yet, but we'll keep going.
This camera to the system.
Hey.
Okay, so this kind of reinforces the
Nvidia thing, right? because this is a
piece of Nvidia tech that they've been
working on
for longer than I've been streaming the
the virtual Nvidia green screen thing.
Um, this is which every web conferencing
app ex etc. has some version of correct
Nvidia's just been working on making it
trying to get it broadcast level.
Correct. the one of the it turns out, by
the way, one of the biggest things uh
that they've had problems with um for uh
that whole thing historically has been
the thing you're sitting on. So, they
probably had to train it on couches and
other stuff, too. So, um the nice thing
is most people don't have a background
that moves around a lot. Yeah. Yeah. So,
you can just track uh track movement.
But yeah, so this is kind of
interesting. What's up?
Hello. Yo.
Hi. How's everyone doing? Good. YouTube
on screen and video. You realize what
this means on here.
We're gonna get Cam girls on the Switch,
too. Oh, okay. I thought you were going
to say we're going to do a show from the
Switch, too, and I was going to be like,
"No, we're not." I'm just realizing you
can hop in with a group of friends.
Yeah. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. No, no,
that's that's 100% going to be a thing.
Well, that's already like Okay. Oh,
yeah. Like Nintendo's not going to say
it, right? But there's definitely like a
more adult audience for a lot of this.
Um, and and they are they're aware. They
know. Trust me, Nintendo knows. They
just don't do anything about it until
they quietly do something about it. Um,
but yeah, no, that's that's absolutely
going to be a use case. What is the I
can't What's the website that um people
get funded on for um a lot of the cam
girls and other things? Only fans.
Yeah. That's going to be an only fans
patron level. Come play games on the
Switch 2 with me. Yeah, you know. No, I
I think I think it is, right? And I
can't Well, okay, but that's already a
thing, right? It's I know. It's just the
I Xbox and PlayStation I expect it like
Yeah, that's true. Everything that comes
along with this is in some cases so
contrary to the Nintendo's
protectiveness around the Wii, the time
of the Wii. Yeah. It's just it's
interesting to see as a company over the
past 20 years how they have culturally
shifted based on how the internet and
everything else has truly permeated
everyone's life. Yeah. Yeah. That's very
true. Yeah. I the executives who put out
the Wii would be running in panic
screaming with their hair on fire
watching this. Yes. If they hadn't had
that past 20 years to experience the
difference. Yeah. Also, chat's asking
about a tech question. Yes. It's Fay on
the far right that's on the couch in the
previous shot. So, yes, she's in
handheld mode and it's a little weird as
a result, but also we haven't
established in any of the fiction that's
going on here how she has instal where
she has plugged in the camera and put it
while she's playing the game on the
couch, which is sort of a part of the
fiction where which sort of is very
thin, right? Everyone else is on a couch
like looking at a television. Fay is
supposed to be in handheld mode looking
down at the thing, but where's the
camera based on what the scene that we
saw? It's like hanging in midair
somewhere. Um, so you know, uh, actually
maybe it has that Google Hangout um,
face tracking and centering thing going
on where it zooms in and, you know, on
you and kind of centers it based on
where you are. Yeah. And it we'll see.
Yep. That's most likely just a fictional
shot. It's there to show that you can
play this in couch mode. Yep. How was
your test yesterday? It was good. Um I
actually think that's all the relevant
stuff. Just the camera feed.
And again, we're this far in with not
having been shown off the console yet.
We're getting shown the experience. Use
your camera feed like this.
So, we do have game specific uh uses for
the camera.
So, like you can instead of Mi's instead
of MI avatars. Correct. Because me
avatars are sort of uncanny valley at
this point. Even when you're apart, you
can play games and hang out as if you
were together in the same room. Play
together or compete in online
multiplayer games.
Also, someone looked um the French
version is a dub or is a subtitled
version of the English one and the
Japanese one is a different
competition or hold a sports competition
between families.
All together, anytime,
anywhere. Game chat.
What did you think? In developing Game
Chat, our goal was for you to enjoy
playing online with others more closely,
including family and friends, almost as
if you're all playing together in the
same place. Actually, will real quick,
this actually hearkens back the the
commercials when Nintendo put out
commercials for the Wii. They almost
never showed the hardware. They showed
the experience. Yeah, they had this
whole commercial line with almost like
two Wii salesmen or like joy ambassadors
showing up at somebody's house or
retirement home or something with a Wii
and saying something like we are here to
play, putting it down, then it shows the
family or the people having fun with the
controls and dancing around. They were
they were Coca-Cola. They were selling
the you will have a great time and
experience doing this. Mhm. with very
few like they had a cool product shot
but like that wasn't what they were
selling and they knew it. Yeah. They
were selling the fun experience. I
agree. This very much hearkens back to
that advertising style of we are selling
the experience. Yeah. You're going to be
having a good time with your friends. Um
which is why they're not showing the the
product because the console doesn't
matter what it looks like in that case.
It's you're going to have a good time
with your friends. Yeah. Um uh Alex
brings up from Nintendo.com.
Connect a compatible USBC camera like
the Nintendo Switch 2 camera sold
separately to video chat and see your
friends faces while you all play. So
some other cameras should work. Thank
you. I'm also going to adjust the timing
on that thing. I need like two more
seconds I think. Okay. Um so uh we got
to get the wrap-up on this and then we
are going to jump ahead. Oh, this is the
parental controls thing.
Good. Okay. Required when a child wants
to use game chat to play with their
friends, right? And again on the phone.
Yeah, it's an app on a phone, which is
that's a huge step because a lot of
parents don't know about digging through
an interface on a console. Correct. But
if it's there app on your phone, there
there are multiple use cases for an app
that are introduced. But I also want to
point out they did a um a mascot
animated introduction to parental
controls. They know who their target
audience is, right? Anytime we're
wondering if Nintendo is aiming at like
the general public or at families or at
both, we have to remember families cuz
they spent the time to do a mascot
introduction to the idea of parental
controls, which is what like Microsoft
and Sony could never, right? They don't
care. They might have them maybe, but
they're too busy showing you Mortal
Kombat fatalities in their trailers to
like really worry about pitching you
parental controls. But Nintendo spent
time in the FL in the launch of the
flagship product for their company to
tell you it has parental controls to
keep your kids in safe in the way you
want to. Different demographics. Yeah,
hugely different. PlayStation and the
Xbox have a demographic that skews at
least a decade older on average than
Nintendo. Yeah. Or than the Switch and
the Wii. Okay. But yeah. Uh Okay. And
then
we'd like to introduce another new
experience you can share with family and
friends.
On Nintendo Switch, even if you just
have one game, you can pass a Joy-Con
controller to a friend and play
together. But on Nintendo Switch 2, you
can play together locally on multiple
systems using just one game with Game
Share. As shown here, even games that
require multiple screens can be played
if one person owns a compatible game.
With Game Share, you can temporarily
share compatible games with others who
also have Nintendo Switch 2 or a
Nintendo Switch system. You can share a
game with up to three other systems at a
time. Game Share also supports online
play with other Switch 2 systems, and
you can use it with friends via Game
Chat, which we showed earlier.
Game share can only be used with
compatible games. This feature is
planned for several titles, starting
with a free update for Clubhouse Games
51 Worldwide Classics on Nintendo
Switch. Game Share support is also
planned for select games exclusive to
Nintendo Switch 2. So, we hope you'll
look forward to it.
Okay, so that's that whole pitch. It's
very worth noting that again, we saw
that before we saw the console, right?
He's about to show us the console for
the first time. And we're about to get
We just saw console shots, right? Right.
We're about to get deep into like the
what follows now is the um this is what
I've called the hardware rundown. This
is like the console, right? This is
finally we're 13 minutes in and we're
significantly longer in on our recording
because we've been having fun. Um uh but
this is their intro, right? So it's very
worth
noting Nintendo's done this before. They
did this with the 3DS and the DS family
where you could like share a version
around. Yeah. Um to like a demo version
or a limited version so you can play
multiplayer together. I think one of the
Metroids on the original DS had it. This
is not new. This is Hey, let me
advertise. Let us show you how to
advertise the game you bought to your
friends so that they might go buy it
later. Yeah. Uh, actually, will before
we dive into this, yeah, I need to go
cough off screen for a moment because
I'm still fighting off a cold. Let me do
that for 20 seconds and then I want to
hop in on this. Yeah, sure. Absolutely.
I will I will uh talk with chat ever so
briefly. So,
um Bob over in um Janet brings up a
really excellent point that the C button
needs a subscription for it to work.
Yes, eventually. It is also worth noting
that they uh the
um
the chat feature is going to be open
until 2026. So yes, you're correct 100%.
They are also doing a year-long
introductory period to do the first
one's free thing. They're also it's also
part of the same subscription pack as
everything else is. and they're trying
they they've been trying to sell
Nintendo Switch online plus expansion
pack, what a mouthful of a name, for so
long that I think it's a natural
inclusion that the user base who's going
to be online enough to play with it
significantly or consistently will
already have access to it. I agree that
you're right that it's really weird to
have a core feature of the of the
console that they're showing again
before the hardware specs for the
console gated behind a
subscription, but I also think that the
people who care the most about it won't
have an obstacle in their way, I think.
Um, but that's that's kind of my my read
on it, right? Thank you for that. The
combination of GDC crud and spring is
still Oh, yeah.
Absolutely. All right. So, uh, let's
take a look. Next.
We'd like to show you the Nintendo
Switch 2 system itself.
Please take a look. That was a nice
magnet snap there. Oh, they added that.
Yeah, it says effect added. All right,
so they start with this, right? And this
is where we're going to like get into
the nitty-gritty. This is probably going
to be the last like major part we do. Uh
if we'll talk about games a little bit
towards the end, but okay. So the screen
is bigger. The console's the same
thickness. I don't know if thickness was
like a real concern of mine, but same
thickness. At 7.9 in, Switch 2 has a
bigger built-in screen. Here's how that
compares to Nintendo Switch. The
system's thickness remains the
same with approximately double the
pixels compared to Switch. You can enjoy
games in greater detail on the 1080p
screen. Actually, real quick, that was
really interesting.
So equivalently double the pixels on the
screen from that and at a higher
resolution. So from a processing Yeah.
standpoint, they're basically telling
the hardware people out there
significantly more powerful. Correct.
And they're also getting to that with
the 120 frames per second on supported
games. Um uh
I'm gonna dash I'm going to dash
someone's hopes real quick.
Uh, CIF says, "If it's the same
thickness, maybe the dock for the
original will work for two as well."
No. Point blank, no. And we'll see why
in a second. The doc actually has
additional processing power in it. Um,
the dock is is more than just
a holder. The dock is another actual
piece of hardware this time. It's not
just And it's going to have to solve a
whole new issue, which is heat, which
we'll get to. Correct. Yeah. The screen
supports up to 120 frames per second,
allowing for smoother gameplay in
supported titles.
[Music]
Um, this is a fascinating way to do
that. By the way, this is this is like
the idea of showing this graphic for
frames per second is fascinating. Um,
so, um, we had coffee acorn who said
screen in inches, thickness in
millimeters,
accuracy, right? inches
is probably good for a screen because
that's what screens are sold in. But
millimeters are like more precise,
right? Because it's they don't want to
be like it's this much this fraction of
an inch thick, right? You want like I I
think that that's a market. Yeah. Yeah.
I think people I think they want to do
like a I think that's a marketing trick,
but yes, you're correct. They did that.
Um, uh, Odir says, "I may have missed
it, but they say what, uh, screen
technology it uses." Not yet.
No, the LCD screen is more vivid and
supports HDR, providing more contrast
between light and dark areas of the
images.
The all-new Joycon 2 controllers connect
magnetically. Strong magnets keep the
controllers firmly attached to the
system. Detach a controller easily by
pressing the release button on the back.
Interesting note about that, by the way.
I looked into it a little bit. Um, the
way that this this works is the SL and
SR buttons are steel. There's a steel
insert and the magnets are in the
console.
H, which is a fascinating choice. And I
think a lot of us older school tech
nerds would be like, "You put magnets
where?" But it works. Oh, actually, you
know what? One of the other big ones is
the console will often be sitting in one
place. The controllers are going to get
moved around. Yes. You don't want
magnets. Kids, yeah. Magnets to move
around. Yeah. Might lead to some very
interesting and poor co poor choices.
Yes, including them getting turned into
toys andor dem or like Yeah. Uh yeah,
like there could be some trouble with
kids wandering around with magnets. So
they're um correct not doing that. Yep.
I don't know that this is really a
selling point, but it is. And SR buttons
are bigger for greater comfort and
control when playing with a Joy-Con 2
held horizontally.
It may just be for differentiz hands.
Sure. The left and right sticks are now
larger. It's
just no mention of Hall effect. No
mention that they have improved the
joysticks. They wouldn't do it here,
right? We can hope that by noticing the
joysticks that we've got less drift, but
that's the hope.
Each Joycon 2 controller can be used as
a mouse to play with compatible games.
Both the left and right Joycon 2 support
mouse controls.
Okay, they don't show it here in in
another place. I don't know that we'll
have time to get to it. The demo, the
tech demo for the double mouse
control is a wheelchair basketball
game, which is a fascinatingly excellent
choice for like 12 reasons. I absolutely
adore that the tech demo for using two
mice is a wheelchair basketball game.
like with proper basketball wheelchairs,
right? Like the proper sport wheelchairs
with the the guards all of the way
around and like you have to like move
yourself and then shoot with mo motion
controls. Fascinating idea. Really sells
the whole two mouse thing and you have
to like turn using the mice. Like you
don't get to joystick your way around.
You actually have to like do that. It's
it's a really interesting idea. Um yeah,
it's it's very good. Anyway, uh, okay.
So, they've got better speakers.
By adjusting the audio balance between
the ranges, sounds from the built-in
speakers are clearer and more natural in
handheld and tabletop modes.
Yeah, it has a built-in microphone so
you can voice chat with friends anytime
via game chat. It also uses noise
cancelling technology to filter sounds
so your voice will come through clearly.
Even if you don't have a surround sound
system, games can be enjoyed with more
immersive three-dimensional sound as if
it were coming from all around you.
Okay.
Place your Nintendo Switch 2 however you
like. Stand doesn't suck anymore.
Amazing.
You can move it freely like this. That
was one of the most common complaints.
So, it doesn't surprise me that they
possibly open. In addition to the USBC
port found on the bottom of the system,
there's one on top as well.
It's handy for connecting a USBC camera.
Okay, this is fine. Or charging in
tabletop mode. This is the big one,
right? This is a thing that so many
people complained about that the only
way to charge it when you weren't
holding it was with the dock because you
couldn't it was underneath. This is like
we listened to your complaints and made
a choice, right?
Um I think that that's really cool. I I
think that this is this is among the
most intelligent choices that they've
made. Also, the fact that it can charge
off of both of those is fascinating and
good, right? Because there's definitely
a world in the past where it would have
been like you can only charge off the
bottom one. If you try and charge off
the top one, the system explodes and
you're like,
"Right, this just goes back to the
kid-friendly." Yeah.
Nintendo Switch 2 comes with 256 GB of
internal storage, 8 times that of
Nintendo Switch for storing your game
downloads, save data, and more.
Reading and writing data is also faster.
That's good. I mean, it's still not as
big as PlayStation or Xbox One to
connect to your TV and enable up to 4K
resolution for compatible games. HDR is
also supported in TV mode.
Actually, we're gonna we're gonna go
back just one frame to that. Okay, we're
gonna stay right there for a second. All
right, so let's talk about this.
So it is
either 1080p maybe 120 Mhm. or
4K60
max and 1440 is I don't
know. I will tell you for
me personally in my capacity as a
streamer that's fine. That's perfectly
fine. uh my capture card uh will only
read 4K at
60, so that's fine, right? Um as like
for my in my capacity as a streamer. I
get wanting more frames. I also think
that 1080 like 108060 is way better than
anything we got on the Switch. So like
in a strict comparison, sure. The other
thing that I was thinking about, and
this has kind of uh been true for a very
long time, is if they design with those
tech specs in mind as like when you're
designing the game, it doesn't feel like
it runs into it. Like the place that it
really runs into it is where those specs
aren't respected when you're designing
the game, right? Like the Master Sword
area in Breath of the Wild where you're
looking at the light beam and everything
just crashes. Um, I think this is going
to be okay. I don't I don't think this
is going to be a huge deal
personally. Um it's still way more than
we got on the previous Switch. Yeah,
it's still a major I think it's a major
upgrade. So, I'm I'm a big fan of of
this as a whole. And they even say frame
rate is fixed to a maximum of 60 fps for
4K output. They didn't actually have to
put that there, I don't think, but
they're disclaiming it right now, which,
you know, yeah, 4K at 120 is break
current topend hardware spec. Uh, I mean
I can make some games go at 4K 20, but
not anything that released in
2025. Like, nor do I really want to.
Also, I have the weird like my
computer's cloning a display at the same
time thing. But, you know, whatever. All
right, keep
going. Okay. The Nintendo Switch 2 Dock
has a built-in fan that keeps your
system cool.
Hey. Uh, hey Nintendo. Hey. Hey. Hey,
Nintendo. Will from Extra Credits here?
Why you need a fan to keep it cool? Hey,
Nintendo. I'm supposed to be holding
that thing. I'm supposed to have that
thing like hand that thing to my kid.
I'm supposed to hold that thing in my
lap. Why does I need a fan to keep it
cool? Nintendo, why is that fair in the
dock? They're letting you upscale
basically only when it's docked. Okay. I
think that's to deal with the honestly
like that is why you're getting that
extra if you're getting extra processing
power.
I agree. I just think it that's not
rendered the most clearly to the
consumer right here. And like if I if
I'm doing the consumer advocacy thing,
this comes across as kind of a warning
flag actually because they're not able
to explain succinctly that part, right?
Yeah, you're right. They probably needed
a transitional line. And with this extra
processing power, you know, when docked,
we've included Correct. But to me, that
makes perfect sense. Correct. Hey, it's
more powerful when docked. You're going
to need extra heat distance. Absolutely.
Just pay the extra heat. Absolutely,
100%. But most people aren't, especially
I completely skimmed over that one
because my brain's like, "Oh, yeah. Of
course, they're going to need that."
Yeah. Um I like I like this one. Uh
because it's going to be one spicy meat
the ball. Yes, that's correct. That that
is correct. That is the correct answer.
Uh thank
you. This helps keep performance
stable. Okay. On Nintendo Switch 2, you
can play Nintendo Switch 2 games as well
as compatible Nintendo Switch games.
Physical and digital games are
supported.
[Music]
Okay, so that's their hardware
review. I think that's a that might be
one of the best hardware overviews. They
don't talk about anything that you don't
need to know, right? Like sometimes
they're they're like, you know, powered
by Qualcomm now with the latest
Snapdragon processor technology, more
teraflops than you can terra fit in your
terraords. Like, you know, whatever. Um,
but they don't need that, right? Cuz I
don't think their audience, excuse me, I
don't think the majority of the audience
cares. Correct. Just straight up. Yeah.
It's like, cool. I've seen they can play
more powerful games. I've seen it's
going to be in a higher resolution. I've
seen I get cool new controllers. I've
seen I get chat. Like I've seen I get a
microphone in it. Nice. Switch 2 has
cool new things. Yes. Correct. Uh and
and like you were saying before, it's
about selling the experience, right? So
that whole thing, that whole hardware
overview was four minutes of an hourong
thing, right? Let me frame it in a
different way, Will. Sure.
So my wife enjoyed the Wii. She likes
group games. That's she she will never
go play Dark Souls or Bloodborne, but if
it's a Guitar Hero or a rock band or a
Wii Sport, you know, any of the kind of
the fun games to play together, she'll
play. If she was watching this, and
she's a smart person, but she's not a
she is a smart and techsavvy person, but
not a techie. Yeah. That hardware
overview would have been interesting to
her. Yes, I agree. Like all of that
watching like cool microphone, play with
friends, social this, like that all
would have been interesting and it
wouldn't have been garbbley. I agree.
Yeah, I think it's it's pitched. We the
people who care get enough information
to make an informed decision and the
people who
don't understand the deeper level or
don't need to understand the deeper
level get a hey it's shiny and it does
cool things and here are some graphics
about how it works. Great. You know what
they're also doing? They'll put it out
in a press release and on the website
and any number of people who really like
the tech will either go look it up or
they'll go watch some Steam person or a
web person do a review Yeah. on the tech
specs and that'll be its own thing. Yep.
Uh, okay. As you just saw, Nintendo
Switch 2 isn't simply an improved
Nintendo
Switch. We redesigned the system from
the ground up and packed in lots of new
gameplay
features. And to help players better
understand the Switch 2 hardware, we're
currently developing this
game. Mr. Kawamoto.
Hi. Hello.
My current location is actually inside
the game itself.
This is Nintendo Switch 2 welcome tour
exclusive to Nintendo Switch 2. Okay,
this is getting the wrong message from
Master's Playroom. Okay, everyone, join
me inside the game.
There are a lot of question mark icons
here. Let's examine them.
This sign reads, "Where are the
magnets?" The Joycon 2 controllers
attach to the system with magnets, and
those magnets are inside the
system. The SL and SR buttons on the
Joycon 2 are made of
metal, so that's how they attach to the
system. A magnetic circuit is formed
between them, so they won't easily
detach. Okay. Least interesting part of
the demo so far. Correct. flown so far.
I will say that this is like examining
signs like these, you can discover all
sorts of secrets about Nintendo Switch
2. So, here's the other thing they
haven't said, and they'll get to this in
a second. This is not ship free with
every Nintendo Switch 2. This is a paid
app. Really? Yeah. Kind of a miss. Kind
of a major miss, actually. Why?
No one should pay for this unless you're
like super into like learning how the
Switch works and then you could probably
just watch a tearown video. Like I don't
know who the target audience for
purchasing a walkthrough app for your
new console
is. I don't get it cuz like the people
who know don't or the people who want to
know at that level don't need the app
and the people who don't want to know
won't buy it. So why did you do this?
Yeah. Without more information or
context, this does feel off. Yeah. Yeah.
Manual sold separately. I like that. I
like I like coffee acorns. Yeah. Manual
sold separate. All right. Cool. Um,
another example, the Joycon 2
controllers have mouse controls. And
when combined with the gyroscopes, you
can even do something like this.
You can adjust the position of the golf
club and aim for the cup by rotating the
Joy-Con,
[Music]
too. By combining the mouse controls and
gyroscopes, things like this are
possible.
There are secrets to discover even as
you're playing mini games and tech
demos.
Moroca, some of the secrets range from
the unique features of the system I love
to tiny details you might not notice
until they're pointed out. There are
plenty. There are plenty. Nintendo
Switch 2 Welcome Tour will launch as a
paid digital game on the same day as
Nintendo Switch 2. So, please check it
out if you're interested.
Now, I'd like to share some more
information. Nintendo Switch 2.
This is the game card for Nintendo
Switch 2 titles.
It's the same shape as Nintendo Switch
game cards, but it's now red and it has
much faster data reading speeds.
Next up is additional
storage. Switch 2 will only work with
micro SD Express
cards. They're a different type of SD
card and will make high-speed data
transfers
possible. Please note that regular micro
SD cards used for Nintendo Switch will
not be compatible.
Additionally, to transfer data from
Switch to Switch 2, you can log into
your Nintendo account to use the system
transfer feature. With this feature, you
can transfer save data, digital games,
and
more. We're also releasing a new Pro
Controller. Mhm. It has a C button,
which launches game chat. And on the
back, there are new GL and GR buttons,
which you can use to assign existing
button controls. Okay.
In addition, an audio jack has been
added. We've introduced a few new
features and after today's presentation,
the
official website will go live.
Doesn't surprise me. Actually, the only
thing that surprises me and maybe they
didn't do it just from an ease of saying
these don't work is to make the old
cards read only. In other words, if
they're worried about data speed and
other stuff off them, it's like let you
read off the old cards but not write to
them. Oh, yeah. To make it easier to
transfer, right? But that also might
honestly have been more confusing than
they wanted it to be. Yeah.
Yeah.
Um the uh and by the way, Chad has
confirmed that the welcome tour is 10
bucks. There will also be an ask the
developer article on the website where
the three of us will talk about the
development of Nintendo Switch 2. We
hope you'll check that out as well. All
right. And now, the Nintendo Switch 2
launch date.
Nintendo Switch. Nintendo Switch 2
launches on June
5th. We're very much looking forward to
the day when you all get to experience
it. So, please wait just a bit longer. I
want that shot right there. Mhm. If you
can find that anywhere. I almost want to
redo our thumbnail. Yep, I got it with
that big red in that um lineup right
there. Yep, I got it. I can do that.
That's nice and easy. Let me write that
down in the note. Um okay, so sorry. Um
a little bit like Will and I design
things around and like we actually
sometimes pre-esign our thumbnails so
that we can put it on YouTube as it's
streaming. Yeah. Or be able to pop it
after. But um the images that we get
beforehand for things like this
sometimes are not as good as the ones
that appear. Yeah, I I I will be
interested to see what you do this one.
I like the dynamic one we had. But we'll
talk about that. We'll talk shop later.
Okay. So So we're 20 minutes in. We
finally got an announcement date. We've
gotten the thing. We've gotten a price.
Yep. Uh which kind of interesting. This
is actually, by the way, really good
marketing. If they launched with here's
the price for the new thing, that's very
different than let's sell you on this
new thing. you're really really going to
want and what only once you want it then
expose you to the price. Correct. Okay.
So, I used to work at at Games Workshop
and if you would know anything about
Games Workshop, you know how absurdly
expensive it is for being plastic kids.
And the the trick the the the sales
tactic that you are taught when selling
luxury goods, this is a luxury good,
right? This is not a necessity.
Necessities are a whole different
category of sales. selling luxury goods,
you need to get someone to imagine that
they already have it. Yeah. And then
tell them how much it costs. Because if
you get them to imagine that they
already had it, they're much more
willing to like to uh envision a world
where like it's a part of their life and
then they'll willing to pay the money.
Now, we're going to talk about one last
part of this and then we'll um we'll fly
this out and we'll talk about price real
quick because I think that that's an
important part. But I do want to
highlight that Jeff is exactly right
from like a from both like a high level
marketing and like a ground level sales
perspective, right? That they need to
convince you that you should have a
Switch 2 in your life. How much is it?
We're not talking about that now. I want
you to imagine playing a Switch 2,
right? And once you've imagined it hard
enough, it will become infinitely easier
to convince you that it's worth an
amount of money, right? Especially after
they just talked about all the new
hardware tech and how much more powerful
it is. Yes. Uh Zariah says that makes
car sales make so much more sense. Yes.
If you are here here is a great trick.
Here's a great trick and car dealers
hate
this. Go to a
dealership, test drive a
car. Go to a different dealership
another day to haggle. Do not haggle
there then because your brain is all
kinds of messed up on the, "Oh, I drove
in that. It's totally my car. I want
that car." Don't do that. Right? Your
brain is all wonked out about I already
own the car cuz I drove it, right? Don't
do that, right? Or or just, you know,
come back another day or do something
else to break that cycle of I own this
thing um before you haggle. So, just a
pro tip. All right. Cool. Um
So, that's that.
Now,
broadly
speaking, on Nintendo Switch 2, you can
play three types of games. Okay, so this
is the worst. The first type is Nintendo
Switch in my
opinion. Okay, these games take
advantage of the performance and
features of Switch
2. The second type is compatible games
that were released on Nintendo
Switch. Nintendo Switch 2 edition game.
Why? Why did you do this? Okay, so there
are Switch 2 games, Switch games, and
Switch 2 edition games.
I I I realize why, right? It's It's So
I'm assuming this is the remastered for
Switch, correct? The these are
remastered for Switch, too. So, the
examples that we have right now are
Fears of the Kingdom, Breath of the
Wild, uh, Mario Party,
Kirby, and I think that's it. Oh,
actually two reasons, Will. Sure. Reason
number one, telling you that this is
going to be upscaled for the for the
higher resolution console. Mhm. Reason
two, so they can charge you again
because I'm assuming that there is an
associated price point with getting the
upscaled version. So there is if you buy
the Nintendo Switch 2 edition separately
and you don't own the original edition,
it's a full price game, regular game.
Okay. If you buy the upgrade, it does
cost some amount of money and it varies
I believe by game. Mhm.
Except except Okay. The two
Zeldas come bundled with the online
subscription.
Oo, which
nice. And a and now that we're talking
about money, the ability to pre-order
ahead of time is also gated behind the
longevity of your Switch to online plus
expansion pack membership.
and the amount that you've played. You
have to have played at least 50 hours in
the past since your account was created
and have the account for like longer
than a month. Okay. To to be in the
first round of pre-orders,
but I think and and while I understand
and approve of the idea of having
upgrades to make stuff take advantage of
the new hardware, right? We've gotten
upgraded versions of many things for
many consoles, mostly PlayStation
because Microsoft doesn't tend to do it
as much, but like all the Naughty Dog
games have been updated and like that's
a standard
practice. This one feels bad because the
naming
convention just the naming convention
feels intentionally
um confusing like intentionally. So, and
that could be a regionalization thing,
but like it might be a regionalization
thing. Yeah. like I I want like you know
this is a Switch Plus game and it plays
on the Switch but the additional
features are available on the Switch 2
or something right but like like oh I
wonder if it was the like enhanced
edition or so like in other words if
they're putting into the name what
you're getting out of it yeah correct
but like I also say like this especially
I think for the Zelda games is
critically important because they want
to keep selling those games and it's
historically and I can speak with some
experience on this. When a new console
comes out, sales of the previous conso's
games begin to diminish. Y and if they
feel like those games still have a lot
of life in them, being able to say,
"Look, it's still that, you know, you
can still buy this new, you know, you
can keep playing the old ones, but you
can buy this new on the new console and
they will be
appropriately speced and rendered for
it." Yeah. lets them keep is going to
make them hundreds of millions of
dollars in continued sales. Yeah. So,
that's all of the stuff that was in this
that we wanted to talk about. Following
this, there's uh 40 minutes of games
uh of game stuff. Um there there are
some more um there are some exclusive
reveals, but this is really like the
bulk of the thi this I think is actually
where people might tune out, right? Like
if you just care about like the console
itself, the rest of this is these games
are going to be on this console kind of
thing. And there are some unique ones,
right? Delta Rune, there are some
exclusives. I mean, what they're selling
you is there's going to be a strong
strong library of games you can play on
this amazing new hardware. Correct. And
so we could skip those 40 minutes and
just say there is a strong strong
library of cool games for you to play on
this new hardware.
Correct. So let's talk about the last
part. Uh, and this has already gone
longer than I thought it would, but I'm
very happy with with this conversation
as we've had it. All right, I'm big
again. Yeah, you are indeed. I have
envigoned you. So,
Jeff, have you looked up how much this
costs? Actually, I put it in our notes.
You know how much this costs, so this
isn't going to work. Um, so the console
itself,
and forgive me international audience,
but we're going to stick with the US
setup here because we could talk about
all of the different markets and all of
the impact, but like it's too much. We
could literally do an entire design club
on pricing things for global purchase.
We might do that later on and arbitrage.
Oh my god. But like right now we're want
to talk about that. But anyway, carry on
later. So to for today we're going to
focus on the US price. The console, just
the console, no games, 450 US. You can
purchase it in a bundle with Mario Kart
World for 500 US, which is a $30 savings
because Mario Kart World is an $80 game.
[Music]
Yeah. The other first party like big
release that they announced, which is DK
Bonanza, which is the other new sort of
like flagship IP title, is only
70.
So needless to say, people are a little
perturbed, I think. So let's let's Why
do you think they're perturbed, Will? Um
I think for a lot of people, the
perceived the the their anchoring has
been disturbed, right? For a really long
time, games have been $60 US, right?
Long until this generation of Microsoft
or PlayStation and Xbox games have
started to go above that. Correct.
And regardless of how much $60 is worth,
inflation, right? Um, people have been
used to paying a flat $60 for video
games. Mhm. Okay. That's that is a
reasonable assumption that many people
go into this with.
Um, and I think the other part is,
um, again, for no particular reason
whatsoever, this episode is being
recorded April 3rd,
2025. There's currently some
geopolitical noise about the cost of
goods moving internationally. And I
think that a lot of people have a lot of
concerns about these prices and their
relationship to those movements of
international goods and tariffs as they
are imposed upon various incundary
markets around the world. Um, and so I
think that those two things in
particular are prevalent concerns right
now. And actually, if you happen to be
watching this live as we're doing this,
one of the things that currently with
the announcements yesterday, the stock
market is currently down
1,574 points.
which is one of the biggest drops I have
seen in
a long long time. Yeah. So people are
concerned about money and prices and
that makes sense. Now the very
interesting thing is that they seem to
believe that they are going to get
Nintendo to lower the price.
Who does the community?
So Right. Right. So, so I I went to
there was a treehouse today, which is
their less formal, more, you know, hey,
here's a bunch of people who worked on
this game. They're going to come play
this game for you and tell you about the
cool stuff and play the first couple
minutes and you can see more like live
action gameplay. And chat was literally
an unfunctional wall of drop the
price from end to end, consistently,
constantly moving the entire time I was
watching the stream.
I don't think people get it. That's the
price. Like people are going to complain
and then they're probably if I'm going
to get going to buy it buy it. Right.
So the and from a cold hard calculus,
let me back up to a publisher level. Y
if this is say $100 more than people
thought actually were they complaining
about the console, the games, the the
per game or both? mostly the game. The
console I think is a little more
approachable, right? 450 is in the
range, right, for a new console,
especially when they're flaunting text
packs like that. I really think it's the
80 buck game that's like really irking
people because Tears was 70, right?
Tears was the first $70 game. The
problem is that Tears didn't deliver. In
my opinion, Tears was a much worse game
than Breath.
Mhm. And I don't think I'm alone in that
perception. There is a non insignificant
portion of the community that just
thinks Tears was fine at best. Now, to
be fair, they're coming off of Breath,
which
was maybe the best Zelda game ever. And
this is coming from someone who has
played a lot of Zelda games on a lot of
platforms over a lot of years. Breath
was monumental, right? This is really
interesting. Whoops. Hold on. Wait, hold
on. It chat, you scrolled too quickly.
There we go. Mario Kart World is 80
digital. Physical copy is
90. Did I see that? I went to Best Buy
actually and looked because if the 8090
is
true that I can completely understand. I
have Mario Kart World for sale at $80 US
as a pre-order from Best Buy. So, that's
that's the price I'm going off of. Um,
it may be different in different place.
Yeah, 8090 is euro, correct? Okay. Um,
but I have the the source that I'm using
is there's a Best Buy. Best Buy
currently has two games up for sale
right now. Mario Kart World for the
Nintendo Switch 2 as a physical um copy
is 80 or $79.99 and Donkey Kong Bonanza
is $69.99. Because what I'm curious
about is if Nintendo at this
point thinks it has enough power over
retail and just the fact that it can
digitally ship people out copies to be
able to say screw it. Our games are
equivalently $10 cheaper digital because
a digital game we don't have to print a
box, print discs. Yep. ship them out,
get them into stores, and stores their
cut. Middle. Yeah. Right. Yeah. The
middleman payment is the huge part.
Yeah. And I could easily see them
pricing something so that people are
just going to be like,
"Oh, you know, it is cheaper to get it
digitally. I'm just going to do that."
Right.
But yeah,
like
realistically I think the other one too
is because a lot of these games are
going like games are a
luxury and games last a
while and the average person who buys a
Switch game doesn't buy 30 of them a
year. like the average one buys a couple
of them a year. And at the end of the
day, when kids like, "Mom and dad, I
want Mario Kart," and they're like, "Oh,
yeah, Mario Kart's okay." I think the
difference
between 60, 70, and 80
is doesn't matter. Like, parents is
going to be like, "Yes, kid. I will buy
you Mario Kart. It is safe. It is a
game. You're going to get it for your
birthday. you're going to get it for
Christmas, right?
Like
um like I think there's a lot less price
sensitivity among a large part of the
portion of the community who actually
buys the games that I agree with. I
think that that is that is the big
thing. Now, we're not saying that you
that's not saying it's not expensive,
right? I'm just saying Nintendo as the
corporate part of itself that knows it
needs to make revenue to pay for this
and wants to make a profit has done all
of the calculus around that run all of
the scenarios and said this is what we
think we can charge based on the market.
I agree. I agree. Uh and I think I'm not
saying I'm not saying I agree or
disagree with it. I'm just saying that
is what has happened. Correct. I agree.
And I think that I have been I have
actually been consulted. I used to run
consulting back when I ran EDAR. Like we
got asked a lot of questions about
historical things. We weren't the people
doing consumer sentiment. We were doing
data anal analytics and analysis but
like we were brought in with some of
those thoughts and they were very much
looking for how do we what they're
supposed to from their point of view.
How do we maximize our profits while
still keeping somewhat good consumer
sentiment? Yeah. Absolutely. Uh, and
chat, I'm sure every it's going to come
down to every person deciding whether or
not it's right for them. I I'm willing
to bet and I'm not putting any of you in
this category, right, necessarily, but I
think a large number of people who are
the most vocal about getting the price
to change um sort of flailing around
impotently in chat rooms where they're
trying to make something happen when no
one's reading the chat room, um, will
just buy it anyway. I think that there
is a more nuanced critique of this
that's going to happen over time and
we're going to see if this is just for
launch titles or just for whatever or if
it changes or whatever or just for
Nintendo first party what they consider
to be a top tier games correct or
whatever, right? And what the percentage
of digital sales is and all of that
jazz. And if you remember the Wii, the
Wii was famous like it it it was $50
games when PlayStation and Xbox were $60
games. Yep. But the $50 games were for
Nintendo first party. Yeah. There were a
lot of companies that sold their games
for 40, 30, and even 20 on that because
there was also so much shovelware that
came out on the Wii. Mhm. But Nintendo
gave people pricing elasticity on what
they could price their title at in the
same way that Steam does. Yep.
And um so we'll see. I expect to see a
wide range of games. And part of it too
is the back catalog for Nintendo is so
strong. Yeah. And they're going to be
selling those for sub substantively less
price that people coming on are going to
have a range of
options to buy even very good games at
significantly lower prices because
they'll just be slightly older games.
But that almost doesn't matter as much
anymore. Y you know getting to go buy
Shovel Knight on the Switch 2 if you've
never played Shovel Knight. You're still
going to get a perfectly good
experience. Yep. I think Aram's got a
really good point, right? Nintendo has
already shown that their games will have
different prices, so they'll not all be
80, right? Because there's a first party
game, DK Bonanza, $70. Mario Kart World,
$80. They're already showing price
disparity. So, I I am very much in the
wait and see. Yeah. But let us know if
it is still a big shock to a lot of
people, I think, because 80 does sound
like a lot. Yep. Absolutely. Uh, okay.
That is unfortunately all the time we
have for this deep dive. We hope you all
have enjoyed it. Uh Rocky, if you have
comments, concerns, hit us up on Blue
Sky somewhere. Um Janet, if you're
watching this in the VOD, leave a
comment below. Tell us what you thought
about stuff. I'll I'll be checking those
for a couple of days. And uh yeah, thank
you all so very much for coming to our
Nintendo Switch 2 direct announcement
deep dive on the Switch to the Switch 2.
Um the Switch to the Switch. Should we
tell them what we're going to do next
week or should we let people be
surprised on the topic for that? I think
we'll let people be surprised. Okay. I
think I think we'll let people be
surprised. So, until next time
everybody. Uh, thanks so much for
joining us. Take care of yourselves.
Take care of each other. We'll see you
all next time. Bye everyone.
[Music]
Okay. Cool, cool, cool, cool, cool,
cool. Uh, sorry, Jeff. We were just
We're running um uh sending you stuff
momentarily.
[Music]
Um, I think uh
I I I Okay, so I'm not getting the I I'm
not commenting on this because I haven't
I've literally seen nothing on this on
the mouse on the presence of the mouse
for the eShop. A reminder that you could
also just update that in, right? Like
that is a feature that can totally be
added that's not hardcoded. So I'm not
I'm not terribly worried about that like
the mouse in the ehop thing. Um, yeah.
So, uh, like I said, if you want to see
more about the launch lineup and Matt
and I's thoughts on the game as like
gamers rather than industry analysts,
um, go to breakfast. Yeah, come come see
us at breakfast on Monday. Um,
otherwise, I think that is going to do
it for this stream. Uh, Matt and I are
actually going to go play some Mario
Kart right now. Uh, Matt's trying to get
every 150 CC uh, course um, three
starred before the Switch 2 comes out,
so I'm gonna help him with that. Um, so
Janet, we will see you all Monday for
breakfast. Brad, don't go anywhere.
We're going to continue stream
momentarily. Janet, thank you so much
for joining us. You have all been a
delight as always. Um, and I will uh see
Janet on Monday. Eras it by Janet.