[Music]
In the wake of the whole PSN mess,
there's been a lot of discussion on the
topic of internet security. And it's a
topic worth discussing, but I don't
think we're the ones to be talking about
it. None of us have a background in
internet security, and there are plenty
of very qualified experts who've said a
lot of smart things on the subject. I
don't think there's a whole lot we could
add to the dialogue. But that said, the
PlayStation Network outage has gotten us
thinking. And there is something we'd
like to talk about. The world we're
moving into. We live in a strange time.
I'm not sure the human psyche was built
to handle the amount of change our world
now undergoes in the passing of a mere
handful of years. I was born without
internet, without cell phones, at really
the nativity of the home PC. Today, I
comfortably talk to my phone and ask it
where to go to get the best cup of
coffee in walking distance, and it
politely draws me a map. That was
literally science fiction during my
formative years. But watching the
response to the PSN outage on both sides
made me realize how poorly mentally
prepared for this reality we are now.
People were totally in the right for
complaining about Sony's response to the
mess. They could have handled it much
better than they did. And you better
believe we'll get to that in a second.
But then I keep seeing people demonizing
Sony for getting hacked in the first
place. That isn't reasonable. Literally,
if one steps back and looks at it, it
does not coincide with reason. Every now
and then banks get robbed. No matter how
good your security is, it happens. And
when it does happen, do you blame the
bank or do you blame the robbers?
There's no sense in hating on the
company that got hacked just because we
don't have anybody else to hate on. But
there's another argument I've been
hearing that I think is far more
interesting in terms of how we think
about the world we're moving into. That
they should have never stored our data
in the first place. Now, I'm as big a
proponent of the first, fourth, fifth,
and 14th amendments as you can get. I'm
an ardent supporter of free speech, and
I actually wish our right to privacy was
better spelled out in the United States.
It's not actually in our Constitution.
It's just been justified through a
mishmash of the amendments I listed. In
fact, I actually wish the government
would enact laws regarding a citizen's
right to privacy in relation to
corporations because right now there
really aren't many restrictions in the
US on what companies can do with your
personal data or who they can sell it
to. Even though it would turn making an
MMO for the US into even more of a
nightmare. European viewers, you are so
much better off in this department, even
if it does mean you sometimes don't get
games or other internet services we do.
But that doesn't mean that I agree with
the idea that Sony shouldn't have been
storing your data. The PSN could not
exist without storing your data. to use
the PSN or the XBLA, one has to come to
terms with the fact that these entities
might get hacked and your personal data
might get compromised because there's no
way around it. I had this realization
when hearing about how Apple was storing
iPhone location data. At first, I was
pretty upset about it, but then I asked
myself, do I really want to have my
phone retriangulate every time I use
something involving my GPS? And the
answer is no. Data has to be stored or I
simply can't have the functionality I do
now. The same holds true of PSN data. On
the most basic level, you don't want to
have to fat finger in your name,
address, birth date, and credit card
information every time you try to
purchase something over the PSN. And
while it would have been nice for Sony
to give us that option, simply not
storing data would make the PlayStation
Store so unwieldy as to be unusable for
most people. But that isn't even the
depth of it. There's a host of legal
issues in various countries regarding
age and the use of services like PSN,
many of which require that the user
validate their residence and date of
birth. Without that data, PSN legally
couldn't exist. Many of our viewers in
places like Brazil will be well
acquainted with these sort of local
legal hassles. Now, why they can't check
your location via IP address, I'm not
entirely sure of, and none of my lawyer
friends had a good answer. If any of you
guys know, shoot us an email or post it
in the comments because that's been
bugging me. Now, we can talk all we want
about quitting these services and
becoming ludites living off the land,
but realistically, most of us aren't
going to. It's just like how many of us
use credit cards or cell phones, even
though both of those devices are rife
with invasions of privacy and carry the
immense risk of personal data loss.
Unfortunately, to say that we want these
massive technological services but
refuse to accept the risks inherent in
them doesn't make much sense. To say I
won't use PSN because they store my
data, that's perfectly reasonable. But
to simply say PSN shouldn't store my
data, just isn't true. This trade of
privacy for service is something we're
going to have to think very carefully
about over the coming century. Where do
we draw the line? When isn't the service
good enough for the privacy we lose? But
we can't simply start asking for these
services to be provided to us risk-free
because it can't happen. But in the
world we're shambling into, where
companies need to demand that we put
large quantities of our private data
into their hands in order to provide us
with the services we desire,
corporations have to view their
customers as their partners rather than
their enemies. What does this mean?
Really, it means little more than open
communication. Take the iPhone tracking
we mentioned earlier. Now, Google does
the exact same thing with the Android,
but they told everybody upfront and they
destroy the data after it ceases to
improve the devices functionality. They
said to their customers, "Here's what
we're doing, and here's why we're doing
it." In essence, they said that they'll
make giving up data as painfree as
possible. But in return, their customers
have to understand that they're going to
need some personal data to make this
thing work. And here's where Sony
failed. Sony showed its 20th century
mindset when it came to this crisis.
They tried to keep their customers in
the dark until it became absolutely
impossible not to do otherwise. They
thought they'd get bad PR for telling
their customers rather than for not
telling them. Now, you could argue that
a company like Sony doesn't turn on a
dime, but the immense hubris of not
having a go-to plan in case PSN got
hacked is just as unforgivable. Someone
should have cracked the glass case,
taken out the emergency protocols, and
read step one, mass email. And all this
email had to do was simply admit to the
possibility of compromised data. And
then Sony did something that really
bothered me. Something that galled me as
a customer. It's not their initial
response, which I might have just
chocked up to being bungled. Rather, it
was something they said later on about
how they were planning to make amends
that made it really hard for me to see
Sony's side in all this. They announced
they were offering customers 30 free
days of PSN Plus service and considering
reimbursing banks for the cost of
replacing credit cards. Now, I own a
PS3. I've bought many things from the
Sony store, and Sony still has a lot of
goodwill built up with me from the PS1
and PS2 era. But trying to give their
customers a free trial account, which is
clearly an upsell, instead of credit on
the store, which would be an actual
reimbursement, while deciding to
randomly give money to banks, who are
not their customers, for the cost of
credit card replacements, which is
something most banks in the US don't
charge the customer for. That's a dick
move. Fortunately, Sony later wised up
and threw in some free games as well,
but that's not something that should
have been added later. Now, this may
very well have happened because Sony
feels like they're over the barrel with
the banks. I mean, if banks don't let
the credit cards work on PSN because
they're worried about security, PSN is
done. But good lord, shouldn't you feel
more over a barrel with your customers
who hold those credit cards right now?
It's like they're saying, "We know you
chumps are coming back." But the banks,
they might not really need us. Sony,
please. We're not Rubes. That was not a
good time to try and throw a one free
month promotion on a service that you
initially advertised as free forever. A
free trial offer is not the way to make
everything right with your consumer
base. It's tacky and transparent. That
initial offer showed a contempt for your
customers that you cannot afford in a
world where you ask your customer to
share so much with you. Yes, I know you
sweetened the deal later with that
selection of free games, and it is an
improvement over that pathetic original
offer. Don't get me wrong, but really,
when most of the games on that list are
early installments in franchises which
already have sequels out that you're
hoping the people you give the free
copies to will buy, the gesture still
feels like another promotion instead of
a genuine welcome back to your
customers. We're not dumb. We see what
you're doing here, and you have to do
better than that. Now is not the time
for promoting your products and
services. Now is the time for winning
back your customers trust and goodwill.
Customers and businesses alike have to
look to the future with a different
mindset, one of trust. And when that
trust is breached, the consequences will
be catastrophic. If that trust can't be
established, consumers will have to take
a long hard look at how much those
services are really worth to them. And
know this, platform holders. If this
console cycle has taught us anything,
it's that it is arrogance to think that
we are always going to come back. See
you next week.
[Music]
Heat.