And now imagine for a moment that we are
live on a different platform
simultaneously,
right? A and uh Theodore says that
they're early. There's something wrong
with the Matrix, but it seems like they
arrived precisely when they meant to.
That's correct. Janet, do not adjust
your screens for this pre-show. There
are three of us. That's right. Hi,
Aaron.
Um yeah. Uh if you all think that this
episode will be normal, I regret to
inform you that when Aaron comes to
visit, the checklist begins with remove
all hinges. You will not need them
and then goes from there. So,
uh I think Erin, you've you've I think
you might have been our first guest.
It was early. It was early. Yeah, it was
very early. Yeah. Um Yeah. Yeah. It's
chaos energy. It is. It is. Uh it's
great. It's it's just it's
not you in your professional capacity.
It's great to hang out with you and like
learn about like what's going on in in
you know, let's see now, movies and
science and Star Trek and uh movie
production and your towering pile of
hats grows ever larger. Um which we'll
go over. We'll we'll do a proper intro
for you, Erin, when the show starts.
This, of course, is not the show, right?
This is just a tribute. Um uh but but
getting to hang out with Aaron as a
person, delightfully unhinged. It's
great. We we Oh, it's so good. Um oh
yeah, the the the blanker of black hole
video. God. Oh god, I don't want to look
at the publish date for that cuz that's
so long ago. It was a bit It was so long
ago, but honestly, I think that might be
the greatest piece of cinema I've ever
been a part of.
Uh those were so fun. Yeah, exactly. Um,
the baseline is zero hinges. Aaron moves
us to negative hinges. You are
correct, Nova. That that is correct. Um,
yeah. Oh, good. We have a hype train on
Twitch.
All the hype train does, Aaron, is keeps
the show from starting and me from
having my coffee. That's the That's its
only. And it helps support the channel.
Yes, M. It was It was totally last
month. Definitely not under put an
announce pinned an announcement on
Twitch that it was four years ago. First
off, how dare you. Second off, well
done. Um,
yeah. This gray beard could talk. I
don't think I had any gray in my beard.
Now I've got like good good or had had
four years ago and now I've got like the
big gray big gray streaks. Yeah. Time
comes for us all in a weird flat circle.
The Jeremy Barmy of our lives. It's
true. And actually Annie right now is is
using time to deny me my caffeine, which
is fine cuz it's helpful.
Man, it's been a long weekend. Uh, okay.
So, so we we have uh I don't know if you
remember this, um, but so we named we
named our chats, right? So, Twitch chat
is Brad because they fell in love with a
shirt that says, "Kiss me, I'm Brad."
And we decided that therefore their name
must be
Brad. Weirdly, I promise you, Twitch
chat is not named for the Rocky Horror
character Brad. However, Janet, which is
YouTube, is named for Rocky Horror. Um,
because we gave them a choice of what
their name was going to be, and they
picked Janet. Like, we were like, "All
right, here's here's, you know, you get
to pick your name. Put it in the
comments." Top up voted thing is what we
call YouTube chat. And they were like,
"We're
Janet." Like, "Okay, great. Thanks.
Awesome." Um, and of course, uh, Nebula,
who, uh, is is Rocky because there are
no comments over there and they they are
silent, uh, until they message us on
Blue Sky and then they're not right.
Exactly. That's really good. They they
get they get one more uh they they get a
they get a song and dance number once a
year. It's very important, right? Um,
yeah. Uh,
What else is going on? What's what's
what's else is pre-show content for the
next three minutes? The next three
minutes of of uncaffeinated uh there's
this the dancing crab. Great. Love it.
Love it. Which does, by the way, per
artist's uh per my request to our artist
sync up with Crab Rave. It is in fact
just an artist's rendering of the Crab
Rave Crab in time. So, perfect. That's
pretty good. Yeah, that's pretty good.
Um, there will be times where that is
very important, I'm sure.
Perfect. Uh, I have a black cat, too.
Yeah. Did you know that? Oh, that's
right. They don't know. Yeah. Toothless
is our little black cat. And you may get
a glimpse of her as she jumps up behind
me to be my lumbar support. And I wish
that I could show you cuz I didn't. All
I feel is that she jumps up and then
just sits behind me for like hours. But
I've she like adjusts. And one time I
had a friend, well fellow friend Jesse
Gender was over here and we were
like in meat space together and Jesse
looked over at me and busted out
laughing cuz apparently Toothless just
sits like a human behind me. like she
adjusts and then sticks her legs and her
hands out and like so now I've noticed
the paws are all in the same direction
and I really wish I could show you when
she does it but it's like too far
down but you may see a little tail come
up and adjust.
Yeah, perfect. Annie wants to know, did
YouTube get its emotes? Yes, you did.
You now have the maximum number of
emotes that is permissible uh for the
current number of members. If you'd like
more emotes, there need to be more
members. That's just how that works
according to YouTube. Um I believe in
five more members we get another one I
believe. Who knows? Uh I I would check.
By the way, did you see that they are
doing a Oh god, we didn't even get to
talk about this when I saw it. They're
doing a shot forshot liveaction remake
of How to Train Your Dragon.
Yes. Oh yeah. Yes. And I'm okay with a
live action bit,
but why are you doing a shot for shot?
Like,
yeah, because that's if I wanted to
watch it, I would watch the movie,
right? Like a shot for shot has never
done well because it
fundamentally misses the point. Yeah. of
a of an adaption or or or remake. Uh
Yeah. Well, right. and like miss misses
the point that like all shots should be
dictated by the medium and intent. And
when you just copy those without those
things, it's like all of those games
that were like we're going to make
combat really hard and then give you
flasks because we want to be like Dark
Souls completely missing why and how
Dark Souls combat is hard. Like Dark
Souls combat is perfectly fair. There
are games that aren't perfectly fair
that give you flash like we're like Dark
Souls and we're like no you're not.
Stop.
do better. Thank you.
Okay, the hype train has completed. We
have slain it once again. All right, I
got I got to thank some people. Then
we'll go to black, then we'll do the
then we'll do the thing. Uh and uh yes,
Red, this is exactly what I'm thinking
of the shot. No, I already did that one.
I listen, I was busy paying attention to
all of the technology on all of the
screens all around me. I missed it. I'm
sorry.
Enhance.
That's You have to do it with three
fingers. Enhance. Enhance. Yeah. There
you go. Yeah. Tom Cruz. All right.
Great. Uh, we got a thing.
Enhance.
No. Unenhance.
I'm gonna I'm gonna I'm gonna back down.
Back down. Back down. Back down. I'm
going to unenhance. I'm going to
unenhance, but I'm going to enhance for
every person that that that you
name. Pre-show will pre-show not
crimewell. Thank you so much for the 61
months. Hippie for the gift sub to Dr.
Eric Whismaster for the 89 months of
tier three. Kurion for bitties. Raymond
for gifting a sub to RC Fox over fire
for gifting a sub to cryo. Dolphin
Supreme for 100 bits. Copper Chef for
100 bits. Rabian for 100 bits. Sasquatch
for 100 bits. Hippie for 100 bits. Luna
for 100 bits. Roller for 100 bits. And
that's the end of the hype train. That
was getting close. That was Pay no
attention to the streamer behind the
camera. Yeah. All right. Also, can we
just establish that Jeff Goldblum is the
best Wizard of Oz?
He's pretty good. He's just like I'm so
glad that they're embracing making him
evil.
Like, correct energy. Correct energy,
right? Like both there and in um Chaos,
which I'm so annoyed there's not going
to be the season two. Like, we don't
need it, but it would have been good.
Yeah, I agree. Yeah, I agree. Yeah.
Well, should we start this show? The
show that we have not started yet. Let
us remind you once more time. Yeah,
that's right. This is this is not the
show. This is just preparation. This is
to prepare you so that when this is like
an inoculation, right? Right. If we were
to do the real show right away, your
mind would be blown and we don't want to
be responsible for that. So, not not
after last time, right? Yeah, it took
forever to clean up the mess. Um, so,
uh, I still hear I still hear the
screaming. Well, it's true. Just And the
smell never really goes away, but no,
it's going to be a great happy show.
You're all safe.
There definitely won't be any
transporter accidents. No. Right.
All right. We're uh for those of you who
may be new, uh we're going to explain
this real quick. We're going to go to
black, then we're going to come back.
Then we're going to start the proper
show with intros and everything else to
record it for our friends over at
Nebula. So, when this goes to black, do
not panic. We'll be right back. Okay,
cool. Great. Awesome. Everyone, you may
now have a small recreational
non-necessary panic as a treat. A treat.
[Applause]
[Music]
Good morning, Matt. Ah, good morning
Aaron. Good morning, Will. And good
morning to all of you. Welcome to Games
for Breakfast, the only internet show.
We talk about this week's gaming and
tech news, but that also we have
enlarged the table. Pray we don't
enlarge it further. We are joined uh by
our wonderful friend Dr. Aaron McDonald.
How are you? That's right. We did it. We
We did it. Not only with the power of
friendship, but with the power of three
gaming chairs and a breakfast nook. Yes,
it is delightful. I am thrilled to be
back. Thank you for making space for me
to wedge myself in between you all.
Yeah. Um, uh, Erin, for those who, uh,
are not familiar with the insane amount
of amazing things that you do, um, how,
how would you, in 2,000 words or less
describe, uh, your your personal
professional life? Uh, so I started out
as an astrophysicist. Uh, I got my PhD
in uh, gravitational waves and general
relativity. Then I moved into television
and I now work as the science adviser
for the Star Trek franchise which I've
been doing for I'm almost at six years
now which is crazy. And uh I've been
working on all of the shows since season
3 of Discovery. Uh they turned me into a
character on Star Trek. So Lieutenant
Commander Dr. Aaron McDonald of
Starfleet Academy is uh here with you.
And um on top of that, I have moved into
writing, particularly screenwriting. Um
and I also produce short films. And some
people might recognize my name from uh
producing Jesse Gender's uh film with
Nebula called Identities. I was the lead
producer on that. So yeah, fun times.
Yeah. Hell yeah. If you have not checked
out Identities by this point, uh Nebula
fam, please go do so. And if not, there
sure are codes out there that you can
find to to nebula.tv. TV/extra credits
or
nebula.tv/jessegender depending on what
you're going there for um to uh go check
that out and all the good stuff over
there. And of course, if you're watching
this on
Nebula, you can go watch Identities when
you're done with this or you can pause
right now, go watch Identities, and then
come back. Good point. Yeah, pause. Just
pause. Just put a pin in it and then
come back. If you're watching
live, you can't pause. We don't want you
to leave, but you can't pause it. I
mean, you can pause it, but then it
won't be live anymore. I Yeah, Erin,
you're a scientist.
How would time work in that particular
No. Is that a It mean No, just don't
don't mess with time. You're going to
get a headache. It's not fun. Yeah. The
endless spiral of doom will come for you
eventually. I I I feel I feel like the
number one thing that people get uh
twisted when when when we talk about
like time travel is that um
the personal frame of reference remains
constant and every and like everyone
seems to be like no it'll just no no no
no no you get to keep your frame of
reference and everything else changes
but you experience time the same way
always and that is the part that people
do not like when you when you when when
you get to it. Um, nope, not so much.
Breaks brains, cry in the shower. It's a
little too early for that. So,
um, Aaron has been on uh before in the
past, numerous times. We we've hung out
with Aaron a lot. We love hanging out
with Aaron. Uh, it's, uh, one of our
Bridge Crew VR. Yeah. Uh, we've we've
done Escape Rooms. Yeah, we did Escape
Rooms. We've we've done all kinds of
stuff. What's the other game that you
turned us on to? Uh Aaron, the the one
with the hexes. Oh, uh For the King. For
the King. For the King. Yep. That was
fun. Yep. That was good. Uh many times.
Many good times. Yeah, absolutely. Other
than those games this year, Aaron, just
so we can get some some uh video game
vibes from you here, what has been sort
of the favorite game you've played so
far this year? Uh so I am also so I
mostly play single player RPGs, but I
also love um management games.
And my favorite management sort of world
is the Twooint uh Twooint Museum,
Twooint Campus, and Twooint Hospital.
And Twooint Museum was just released in
March, so I've been putting a lot of
hours into that. You basically run
museums. You build them. The mechanics
are a little bit different because you
have to fly out and like send your crew
on expeditions to go get like stuff and
bring it back so you can display it in
your museum. So you're not just like
paying cash for that. Like you have to
spend money and occasionally your
explorers don't make it back and then
I'm riddled with guilt when I've sent
them on a dangerous expedition and
they're like they're not coming home.
Like oh
no. Um, but I just got two stars on my
space
museum this weekend, so that was
exciting. Okay. So, then I took a break
and I finally started playing
blueprints, which is a new fun game that
people should check out. Yeah. And by
new fun game, you mean a great way to
liquefy your brain.
So much liquefying like, and so
addictive. And I'm not usually a rog
like gamer, but I can be sucked into
them. And because I kind of hit a wall
with Bellatro, I was like, I need a new
hyperfixation rogike game. Yeah. And
Blueprint is definitely that. Yeah. Um,
yeah, absolutely. So,
uh Oh, we we're on a breakfast show. We
have to ask what's We are on a breakfast
show. Breakfast food. Oh, yeah. Favorite
breakfast food.
Oh, favorite, if I'm being indulgent,
uh, chicken and waffles. That's my
go-to. I love sweet and savory. Spicy
and sweet, all good. That's my go-to.
That's my go-to big one. Uh, the one I I
mostly have is oatmeal cuz my Scottish
roots refuse to die. There you go. So,
yes, oats will sustain me. I have I have
before we actually get into the stories,
I have one silly Star Trek question for
you. Um uh and it has to do with Okay,
so my partner Jamie got this bath mat in
in our bathroom and I used to have like
a big floofy one, right? That like had
uh you know, whatever. But you know, as
time goes on, bath mats get when it's
gross and whatever. The one I have is
like a now it's a stone one that like
absorbs water or whatever. Uh the uh she
gave me the name of it. D what do you Oh
god, she's coming in here. Oh god, she's
coming in. Okay. It's It's called
datamite. It's a datomite bath mat. It's
antimicrobial. It absorbs water. I
assumed Matt would [ __ ] love Oh,
excuse me. Would really like this thing
and he hates it. Yeah. Okay. So, so
that's the truth. All that's the truth.
The swearing included.
By the way, that's the best Jamie
breakin I think we've ever had.
She heard me talking. She's just
standing there now. Um, okay. My
question is because in on Star Trek with
all of this going on, on Star Trek they
use Sonic showers, correct? Yes.
Do they use bath mats on Star Trek?
No, because you're
not you're not wet.
I that's the best that's the best
explanation I can come up with because
like so actually weirdly the best visual
we've given on Star Trek for how Sonic
showers work was in uh lower decks cuz
there's one point where uh one of the
guys walks in and they're trying to be
like all you know I'm better than you,
I'm stronger than you and they start
cranking up the frequencies of the sonic
showers. And so it's the idea that
pulses of sound
uh are basically expelling outer layers
from your body um is the general idea
and that's the limit of science I'm
going to get into how sonic well that's
great. So here's the deal. I think
actually uh Johansson just kind of
nailed it right here. You send a Roomba
over the floor after a sonic shower.
That's sort of the equivalent of what a
bath mat would do. Considering there's
no liquid to soak up or whatever, if
it's shaking the dirt off you, the dirt
does have to go somewhere and therefore
some sort of Roomba would happen to to
go about it. Yeah. But the purpose But
the purpose of a bath mat is not to pick
up all the grime that has fallen off of
you during a shower. It's to absorb the
residual clean hopefully uh water that
is still clinging to your skin as you
get out of the shower. I may be using a
bath mat incorrectly.
So here's a fun So here's this is if you
want to talk about your bath mat really
quick because I'm fascinated by this. So
it absorbs water. So it does like the
weird thing where it kind of like you
feel a little Can you go grab the bath
mat suctioning to it? Hold on. Yeah, cuz
it's a giant piece of rock. So So is it
though? Because geologists have a thing
about licking rocks to figure out if
they're a rock. I'm not licking it. My
feet have been on it too much. No, no,
no. I'm aware. But um so geologists lick
rocks to figure out if it's a fossil or
not. Because if it's a fossil, it'll
stick to your tongue because it absorbs
the water, which is exactly what that
bath mat is doing, which makes me think
it's actually fossil. And sure enough, I
looked it up and it's primarily composed
of microalgae fossils. Oh god, we're
getting a sight. Okay. Yeah. Okay. So,
water's on it, right? Yep. And then it
absorbs and then it I don't want to
block Aaron. I'm trying to lower it. Uh,
put it over here. And then it goes away,
I guess. Does it? Is it going away? Is
it going away faster than a comfy thing
on your feet? So So it's it's taking the
water off of you. It's like suctioning
the water because it is fossils of
microalgae. It's fossils of microalgae.
Yeah. Dietimmacous earth is
fossilized stuff, right? Yeah. So it's
actually a fossil. And then want one. Do
you want one? She can hook you up.
Apparently,
this is a gaming show and I know I did
this and I'm not sorry.
But I feel like this is a good barometer
for where the weird is going to begin.
Yeah. Are you Jamie just came and said
performance tax and took some of my
coffee. Yeah. As she should. Okay. Don't
So the water isn't disappearing. It will
evaporate. It's just taking the water
off of you more efficiently. Right. and
then it will evaporate so it doesn't get
trapped and get grimy ideally. Okay.
Okay. My last question. Do we prefer a
stone bathmat or do we want something
comfy on Wait, hold on a sec. I know
better than to answer that question. I'm
I'm I'm just going to not I'm just gonna
Are both of you just pleading the fifth
on this one? Because Jamie's still
lurking in the Yeah, she is. All right.
Well, that's smart. I'll pay for that
later. Let's start talking about some
video games, shall we? Uh yeah. So, so,
so first up on our on our agenda is a
thing that I'm going to have to explain.
Yeah. Will, when you put this story up,
Erin, did you did you read this? Do you
know what? This is in I don't get it. I
I read the article and it was a lot of
words. Okay, great. Excellent. Okay. So,
yeah, there is a game that many of us
are familiar with called Magic the
Gathering, which exists in three
different places primarily. Physical
cards, which you play with your friends
at conventions or tabletop uh in, you
know, in your in your house or wherever
um game store, play competitively, been
played for a million years. That's how
the game was originally played. Then uh
sometime around seventh edition. So a
while ago we got Magic the Gathering
online which is the same game but with
digital cards that you own and can trade
around and you play the same game. And
then uh more recently we got Magic Arena
which is
um the same game except the rules for
acquiring cards are a little different
but all of them are fundamentally
playing the same game of Magic. Okay,
cool. Great. Awesome. Also recently um
to good and ill effect, Wizards of the
Coast has reached out to other IP
holders and said, "Hey, we want to make
a magic set of your thing." Right? So,
we've had magic sets for Lord of the
Rings. We've had magic sets for
Warhammer 40k. There are Doctor Who
Commander decks. There are there was a
Walking Dead Secret Layer. We have cards
for the kids from Stranger Things and so
on and so forth. Next month, we're
getting um the Final Fantasy Magic the
Gathering set. And yes, I will be
spending entirely too much money on it
because they just made my hyperfixation
blurbos kiss. And I know that I'm being
sucked into that. And you know what? I'm
okay with that. Have you seen the world
outside? I'm going to deal with them
making my hyperfixation floor cast.
Isn't that also the fastest selling
magic set, but it's not out yet? That is
correct. It is the bestselling magic set
that's ever existed and it's not even
out yet. According to Star City Games,
not even according to Wizards. Uh, so
all of that having been said, through
all of these things, it has been one
game. one game that is more or less
identical with a couple of technical
limitations on arena and online and
physical
cards
until this fall. We are getting a set
for
Spider-Man. We're getting an Amazing
Spider-Man set with the whole Spider-Man
and all of his like all of the different
versions of Spider-Man and all the
villains and all the everything.
in physical cards
only. For the first time, Wizards is
saying that we won't get Spider-Man
cards on Arena or Magic Online because
they couldn't get the rights to digital
cards from Marvel because that probably
already as is with Snap. That is the
current surmiser. Oh, so now what
they're doing instead is they're doing a
set called Through the Omen Paths, which
is uh an in universe version of all of
the cards that would normally be
Spider-Man except now they're magic
universe versions of that, but the rules
text is identical. And okay, so couple
of problems. Number
one, there have already been cases, and
this
is sort of difficult to explain.
Sometimes you need to name a card for an
effect, right? There have already been
cases in high level competitive magic
where people have named the wrong card
because they got confused. Now, if you
practice on digital or practice in
physical, you're going to know the names
of the card that does that thing
differently.
So, that's a problem. But, like, okay,
in high-end tournaments and stuff, I
feel like there might be a thing where
it's
like, if that's the case, they could be
like, are you sure?
Yeah, there there's probably going to be
some allowance for that. Um, we're not
entirely sure. The other problem is that
there are lots of Magic players who
don't like the idea that there's going
to be an entire Spider-Man set because
for a very long time, Magic had original
Magic IP and we got really cool worlds
out of it. And they're not big fans of
universes beyond which is the whole Lord
of the Rings, Doctor Who, 40K, Final
Fantasy blah blah blah
sets. and they are upset that the
digital games are getting this Magic
Universe lore compliant card set that
will never be released in physical
because Wizards wants to sell the
physical Spider-Man cards. So that's a
whole It goes both ways. It goes both
ways. So this is just bad all around.
And this isn't the only case. They have
said that this will be the case for all
Marvel sets going forward at a minimum.
though there are later this year Final
Fantasy and um Avatar the Last
Airbender. Both of those sets will be
will have digital physical parody. It's
just the Marvel sets for now
that are getting these treatments. So
this is sort of the worst possible
solution in my opinion. Um
I don't I mean it might still be the
best possible solution if they're making
this set.
Yeah, but you don't mess with nerds and
collections. Like if if people are
collecting stuff in the digital realm
and there's something that exists in the
physical realm that they can't have in
the digital realm, that's really
irritating. In my moral heart of hearts,
I agree. I'm going to put on my cold
corpo hat here for a second. No, late
stage capitalism has entered the chat.
Hold on. Hold on. Let's Let's do this,
right? I just got to see here. There we
go. This is this is Teu Matt.
[Music]
Um,
if
Okay, everyone is right is rightfully
complaining on both sides of
this. Here's the problem.
They're still going to sell so many of
both versions of this thing that they
will not like the anger will be there
and all it will do is fuel stories like
us talking about it so more people know
about it who will probably buy one of
them. I I I it's bad and I don't like
it. So, but if they're going but if
they're going to do this and they and I
guarantee you that there's someone
somewhere in the copyright or the the or
the whoever is deciding what can be used
where that thought when this deal went
through first that it would be fine and
then they found out it absolutely wasn't
going to be fine after some element of
it was signed and then they're trying to
figure out a way around it because the
probably the Marble Snap deal is pretty
exclusive.
Um, so yeah, I bet you they kind of I
bet you different departments locked
themselves into this nightmare that
they're trying to figure their way out
of. Yeah. So I I want to um so new guy
correctly says the only way to make them
stop is to not buy the cards. That's not
entirely true because here's here's the
thing, right? And this is the important
thing. enough existing players have to
not buy the cards to counteract the net
profit from the set from all of the new
people who will come in because they
like Spider-Man and want to check out
Magic the Gathering and uh from the
increased cost of Univers's Beyonce
because Universe Beyonce also cost more
because they have to pay the licensing
fees so they cost more even though
they're also standard legal, All right.
By the way, this isn't like a fancy
tournament set or a commander only set.
These sets will be um legal in every
tier of competitive play. Uh which is
Okay. I was going to ask that. Yeah.
Okay. Yeah. Um so, uh yeah, it's um it's
going to be very interesting. I'm I'm
I'm certainly not looking forward to all
of it. I'm just gonna sit in my giant
dragon's horde of Final Fantasy themed
Magic the Gathering cards and merch and
apparel uh and be happy with that and
[Music]
then try and figure this out when it
happens. I actually don't Oh, I don't
know because I I'm not I'm not in it
enough anymore. Um h how much of the
community engages in both like like
collections wise, both arena and
physical magic? I imagine it's actually
kind of a small amount. I imagine
everyone dabbles, but like it feels like
you pick one and you you you go in that
late cuz just from a cost perspective,
well, it's much easier to get into
um like a new deck in arena before you
get into it in paper. So, for instance,
there's a new card
um called Corey Steel Cutter, which is a
new card that came out in the most
recent set and it's bonkers powerful.
Uh, I'm doing some I'm doing some
research right now. In arena, it costs
four rare wild cards to make four Corey
Steel Cutters, right? Like that there's
a one to one, right? Um, and the
cheapest version of Corey Steel Cutter
is $16 in paper. So, that's more than
$60 just for those cards. And you can
pay less real money to get them on
arena, right? So, there's a lot of
advantages and disadvantages, right? In
Arena, you're playing in slightly
different formats. You're playing with
digital rules and you're not getting the
in-person experience, but it is easier
to do deck testing.
So, so Will, what's your go-to like
Magic the Gathering? Is it in person or
is it online or is it arena? My my local
game store stopped doing Magic during
the pandemic and never picked back up.
So, I don't have a place to play. So
what? So how would you feel then if they
released the Final Fantasy on physical
only? Uh I would understand I think um I
I like I kiss. Yeah. I But they were
kissing. Will they were kissing and then
corporations took them and said your
love isn't you can't do it. Sure. But
because I I mostly play arena and I also
do have a physical collection though I
don't use it. I would still get the good
brain chemicals from just acquiring.
Right. which is like not ideal, but
still a thing that I'm down for, right?
Um,
and I think that it Yeah, it'll be
interesting. So, um, ju just to to
uh, can you stack duplicates of the
Marvel versions in the universe
functional copy? No. From a rules
perspective, they will be the same card
printed differently. So, the way that
this works is sometimes car when cards
have been printed in the past that have
a um like a an IP version, right? So,
like there was a Godzilla crossover for
when we did the dinosaur set, right? And
there was Godzilla Tyrant King, right?
And everyone was like, "That's not a
real Magic card." Uh, and you're right,
it's not because the magic card was
named Zora Strength Incarnate, and it
was just an alternate art treatment
called Godzilla, King of the
Monsters. Got it. So, okay, my last
question on this story because I don't I
don't know cuz they it feels like they
got themselves into a corner here and
there's no answer that will make
everyone happy. I bet I think it feels
like even in the in the little bits I
poked around the article and the post uh
that's on Magic's website and uh like
replies to it, there's lots of
complaints. I have not seen what a
solution would be that is like a real
one. You know what I mean? Like a
plausible one. I think lots of people
were hoping that they would rewind the
clock and not take any deals. Like I
think the hope is that in the
future digital rights are now a
contingent part of printing a universes
beyond set that like the set won't get
printed unless they can guarantee
parody. Right. Yeah. Right. Because the
parody is the important part. I just
don't know if in the current media
landscape if something big enough came
through. I like a Marvel. I I don't I
don't know what's bigger than Marvel
right for this right. Unless Unless, and
I don't think it's going to happen. The
only Dark Universe, the only other one
that I can think of that might generate
more money than just Marvel
is if they got a Star Wars crossover. I
was about to say it. I was about to say,
which would also fall probably under the
same opaces because um I'm willing to
bet it's not actually Marvel directly.
I'm willing to bet it's Disney lawyers.
I'm so willing to bet it's Disney
lawyers, which means that they're gonna
have this problem with with all of them.
Um, yeah. Well, Star Wars has its own
damn uh collectible card game. So,
Right. Well, and and the other um the
other, by the way, the other problem
that that emerges from this, right? Um
is what are they going to do? Because
and this is sort of a conceptual design
problem more than like a functional
problem. Spider-Man is a spider human
hero. That's his creature type, which is
a mechanical part of the card. Sure.
Which means that Magic now has to make a
spider human hero who is not Spider-Man
and who is legally distinct enough to
not get sued by Marvel and
Disney, but still conveys that
idea for enough to be on a card and be
like a recognizable part of Magic Blur
for Through the Omen Paths. And that's
just one, right? There's going to be
like Green Goblin and Mysterio and you
know Croc Killer Croc and like all of
these other ones. Killer Croc is Batman.
How dare you?
How dare you? What am I thinking? There
is a Croc guy. Spider-Man has fought a
giant crocodile dude in the sewers of
killer croc. Whatever the lizard there.
Sure. Dr. Kurt Connors. You'll forgive
me for forgetting. Are you going to sit
here? This is a fellow This is a fellow
doctor.
giant thing is called killer croc and
which one's called the lizard.
Notoriously wellnamed villain. Weren't
we just talking about how nerds get
really mad about stuff that doesn't
matter? Isn't that what we were saying?
Uhhuh. Yeah. This is me doing it. Yeah.
Right. Yeah. We saw it. We saw it in
your eyes. The activation kicked off.
Yeah. Right. All right. Well, hopefully
uh people enjoy proxies. I don't know. I
have no I have no solution here. This is
cra I mean it's interesting that this
happened now. Um and it is due to IP
license. Yeah. This is the first time
that they've not had simultaneous
digital and physical card releases. Not
exactly, but to this scale, yes, the
Warhammer 40k and Doctor Who Commander
decks are experiencing the same thing.
because that only affects two for two
real formats in one format. That's an
excuse for two adults to throw money at
each other until someone gives up. Um
uh there's less been less outcry, but
this will affect these cards affect
every competitive format. So the
commander decks are only legal in
commander, which is the most popular
format, but mostly played in person and
not in digital. Uh legacy and vintage.
Legacy players are used to this cuz
legacy is kind of weird like that. And
vintage players will just cry themselves
to sleep on their piles of money because
vintage decks start with the power nine,
which means that a vintage deck starts
at a greater cost than a car. So, I
really don't care what the vintage
players think.
Um, that's fair. Yeah. So, the this is
the first time it's affecting standard
and everything else. Um, Got it. So,
yeah. All right. Yeah. Interesting. Hope
it works out for Yeah, it's it's super
weird and I wanted to talk about it and
I'm I'm sorry that I just I saw the
glaze. It's okay. It's fine. Just I
learned so much about Magic Ga the
Gathering just now. Like don't don't
apologize for that cuz I I think it's
fascinating. And like honestly the IP
stuff I know we'll move on but like the
IP stuff was the first time ever the
Lord of the Rings one for me was just
like maybe I should give this magic
thing a try. Yeah. and then I didn't
because money. But like I get why
they're doing it and I do think it is
drawing in new players to your point of
like the amount of people who will buy
it because of Spider-Man will offset
people protesting it. Anyway, oh there
there is also a digital only set, but we
don't talk about that because it was a
mistake and continues to be a mistake
and they should never have done it. So
anyway, uh next
up, Oblivion.
You can hear the music. That's right. We
don't have the rights to it, but you
could hear it in your head, right? Uh,
yeah. So, that happened. Um, that was
So, first, real quick, just before we
get into what happened with the Oblivion
remaster, Shadow Dropping, uh, just as a
sort of recap with Will, but then Aaron,
because I'm not sure your history with
the series from both of you, like, did
you play the original back in the day?
Are you playing this new version? No end
and no
I did u I'm trying to remember the first
one. What was before Oblivion? Morowind.
Morrowind. I played Morrowind all the
way through. I tried Oblivion. I don't
think I finished it. I tried Skyrim. It
was too open world for me and I
panicked. I've started it a thousand
times. But if I if I touch a Bethesda
game, I break out in hides.
So, it I I I don't think they're bad or
anything. I just
am like I've never I've tried multiple
Bethesda games multiple times and every
time I've tried them, I just like my
brain just experiences like static and I
just stop. I get it. I shut down. It's
the same like yeah, it's an actively
like I must keep forcing myself to play
this type thing. But the funny thing
with me was that I heard about this
release because like within the two
hours of me just sitting at my laptop, I
saw about five friends start playing it
and I was like, "Oh, I guess that came
out just on my Steam notifications." So
yeah. Okay. So So I I back in the day
played it quite a bit. I I almost beat
it and never did. Honestly, the Oblivion
sections of Oblivion were were famously
punishing and and and rough and the uh
I'm not a terrible fan of the way that
the um the enemy level scaling works. We
actually done an EC episode on that
forever ago. Uh what I did love about it
though, and I'm so I'm lost in it again.
Like I am in this is for me this is this
is the right amount of nostalgia. I
think Will you might have coined this
last week, but it's basically like they
released the game that you think you
remember like Yeah, that was that was
chat I think. and and me refining chat's
idea. But yes, uh it it has been an
absolute delight. And look, I I'm I'm
playing it on PS5. Uh on playing on
controller is a bit clunky in my
opinion, but like I that's how I played
it back on the Xbox 360. Like I I'm just
used to it and the the code of paint
makes it feel good. There's a that you
can actually uh run in it now. You can
dash. That's nice. Um I there are so
many problems with this game. I don't
care. And it kind of put it into an
interesting category for me because like
I've gotten to points even while my
playthrough I'm like well this is
frustrating. Will on stream last week
when we like did the quest in a wrong
way and then we had to like figure it
out or reload or whatever. It was like
you know Bethesda games can get in their
own way and trip on their own shoelaces.
But overall uh I think this is
phenomenal. I find its creation more
fascinating than the actual game uh to
be perfectly honest. And and I there's
been a lot of talk and I am not uh of a
technical mind of this to really know
the exact way, but a lot of people are
like either praising or or um yelling at
cloud about um the exact level of jank
is still in this game because it is
basically the the brain of the game is
is the old school engine and that it's
sort of being uh there's a rapper of um
of Unreal 5 and
uh first of All it's interesting because
everyone's sort of talking about that
and I think it's because it's
specifically a Bethesda game. Games do
that kind of thing all the time. You
take the core of a thing and then you
put it in a different like it that just
that's just how a lot of stuff functions
right now. So that's not the terribly
interesting part of the story. It's it's
the conversation that I'm actually
interested in in in both in Brad and
Janet and Rocky and both of you here
when doing a a remaster here because
this is not everyone's like this should
be called a remake. I don't think it
should be. This is a remaster. is a
fresh coat of paint. They've adjusted
some. Final Fantasy 7 was a remake.
Final Fantasy 7 is a remake. Like there
it's a different game than you played
with the same story, but not really. Um,
this is the exact game, but with quality
of life improvements and a gloss of
paint that is very, very, very, very
pretty. So, like I'm just curious like
when you're looking for and I'm talking
about specifically a re like Oh, no.
Actually, let's go here. Do you prefer a
remake or a remaster or is it sort of
different based on like whatever uh IP
or genre that we're talking about?
Well, I can speak to this from the Mass
Effect perspective because they did that
recently. Um, and I think it was to some
extent even less than what Oblivion just
did because it just repackaged it mostly
and made the graphics a little shinier.
But I don't think it was even a full
engine remaster. Like it was just you
can access all three games in one place
now. And the streamlining between them
and the save files is just a little bit
better. But they didn't change any
mechanics. It's the same game. It's the
same game. Um, and for
me, that's fine, but I've already played
them a thousand times. Like, and and I
will play them again. I did like the
fact that it made it an easier cell for
me to keep harassing friends to play
Mass Effect to go, you can get it all in
one spot now and it's got all the DLC
because like your your DLC management as
a Mass Effect fan and your save file
management was legitimately a nightmare.
Like anytime that you wanted to start a
new game, you had to start with one. You
had to make sure you didn't switch
consoles. You had to get all the DLCs
imported. You had to play them in the
right order. And like that's what I
think the legendary edition wrapped
really well together and I think that's
why it was necessary, but it didn't
ultimately improve the game. But what
you're talking about was like if they
had made like a Final Fantasy 7 version
of Mass Effect that was essentially the
same story but a totally different game.
That's a hard maybe. It would really
have to scratch the same brain itch.
Yeah. Which is a high bar.
And I don't know. Yeah. if they can do
it with something like Mass Effect 2.
Mass not not Mass Effect 2, Mass Effect
as well, meaning all three of the
original games. Um, they're still of a
time period
where I I I would imagine that I mean,
there's always a chance. I would imagine
that they wouldn't be interested in
making something that's so different and
so over the top that's a different sort
of mechanical thing because when it was
made it still had the fidelity of
essentially like a great sci-fi film,
you know, already like Final Fantasy
7 is um is is is uh very very blocky and
stagnant and has a beautiful story and
it's well written, etc., But like, and
it did the best it could for the time,
but it's not pulling on the exact same
heartstrings as people anymore because
people are used to other things. Um,
yeah. Will, what about you? I uh like I
only like remasters for games I haven't
played.
Yes. Like I I I I like I like uh
remasters. So, like I loved that we got
a uh Super Mario and the um Legend of
the Seven Stars RPG remaster, right? Cuz
I'd never gotten to play the original
cuz copies are stupidly expensive and I
don't have a system that plays it,
right? So, like I got to play a game I
didn't get to play otherwise. And for
that, I like remasters.
But for games I've already
played, I want a remake, right? because
I I very much suffer from
trying to step in the same river twice
cooks my brain instantly, right? So like
trying to go back and replay Breath of
the Wild, right? I absolutely love
Breath of the Wild. I like love
everything about Breath of the Wild. We
do not talk about Tears of the Kingdom.
We love Breath of the Wild. Okay, great.
Awesome. Excellent. I love Tears of the
Kingdom.
We know the interventions later. Um the
uh no um that's okay. It just it
completely missed me, right? Uh and so
I've tried to go back and replay Breath
of the Wild and I find that it's not
like interesting or possible to really
do it. So for me, the need for newness
means that I want a remake of something
that like if I'm gonna replay something
that I loved, I want it to be remade
like in a new way. Well, yeah. And I
think to there was another quote you
popped up before I didn't catch their
name, but about asking for like a Mass
Effect one remake with because what what
they did was like they got they got
better at the mechanics from one to two
to three. They got rid of the makeo.
They got like your overheating versus
like ammo packs. Like all of that made
the game better. And so if they were
like all the lessons we learned from one
to two to three, let's go back to one
and do all those mechanics and get rid
of the freaking Mako with the weirdest
center of gravity ever designed. Like
yes. And that when I first heard that
they were doing the Mass Effect, that's
what I was hoping they were going to do.
That's what I thought they were doing,
but I guess they I didn't play the the
rem the rem. But what you said though,
like in terms of system, it was really
hard to get friends to play Mass Effect
one because it was like Xbox 360, right?
like it was an old old game that you
know, yes, you could backload it, but it
wasn't it wasn't clean. So that's why
I'm glad that they released it on new
systems, but anyway, sorry, I didn't
mean to jump. No, that's it. I mean,
that's kind of conversation. Yeah,
that's kind of the point. So, so with
this, I mean, I I I think for a for a
game like Oblivion, I think this is the
perfect like this is the perfect way to
reexperience it or experience it for the
first time because it
is for everything we've said, for every
reason that I've said I've loved it, for
every reason everyone has said that
you've bounced off it. That is what the
core of this game is. It has not
changed. And I did the quest last night.
It was the It's so dumb and boring and I
love it. I don't know why I love it.
It's You're in a castle in Charle or
Coral and uh you have to like help the
the the queen or whoever she is like got
a paint a painting stolen. She gives you
a key to the castle. She's like go be an
investigator and go invest tell me which
of these six people is the person who
stole my painting and you have to go
interview them and find clues. It's the
it's the least like the game's not made
for it. It's so boring in the way that
you have to do it, but I'm like, I'm
gonna find out. I'm gonna find out who
stole this painting. And like, I don't
know. It locked me in because I I don't
It brought me back to the place where
like these games sort of like feel like
anything can happen and like, oh, now
I'm a detective. Great. Is the mechanic
of me being a detective super janky?
Absolutely. But I was just in a in a
troll den earlier being a sneaky Bowman.
Like, this is all very different stuff.
Um, I don't know. I I appreciate that
they did this. I I I worry that Bethesda
may have learned uh the wrong lesson
here. Uh and I know there's a Fallout 3
version of this sort of coming out soon,
which could be good, but then other than
that, unless I
mean maybe New Vegas, but like other
than that, I don't know if there's
anything else. And Morowind would be
lovely, of course, but like they're
going to they can't go back to this well
too many times. I think I think this is
special because it it hadn't been done
yet. And I think there's a generational
marketing thing that they're trying to
do too where it's like we we old now and
we have kids now and like there's an
element of like I want to introduce you
to this beautiful game that I played
when I was your age and then they look
at the graphics and they're like no I'm
not playing that. And this is like a way
to bring in younger players to games
that they may have heard of but like are
just inaccessible because of graphics.
That may be the marketing. Yeah, I think
so. Big part of the marketing. Yeah. Uh
also Smashing Grab, you say Daggerfall.
Listen, that would be lovely, but that's
a remake. Like you can't do what they
did here with Oblivion and just put it
into Unreal and call it a day. It Yeah.
And it is also worth noting um that this
does
not interfere at all with Sky Oblivion,
which I know was a concern. Um in fact,
Bethesda sent the Sky Oblivion team
copies of the remake of the remaster and
said, "We know what you're doing. You
have our blessing. Here's what we did.
Good luck." Which more than anything
else about this classy. So classy. I
like that. Yeah. Like Yeah, I do like
that. Moders for the win. Yeah. Um, last
thing I did want to talk about here real
quick and modders are already starting
on this Oblivion thing. There's a couple
articles. We'll have them in the show
notes about uh sort of like they're
already trying to to uh figure out how
to mod this correctly. Yeah, I see. I
saw that someone was modding it to be
the OG graphics and I'm like, why the
point?
Why modders? I think that's a real
Jurassic
Park. Uh, you know, just to see if we
could, not not if we should sort of sort
of thing. But hey, more power to him.
Um, I want to talk a little bit about
the concept of Shadow Drops. I know this
was leaked. I understand
um a week or two before, whatever it was
when we were talking about it.
I have increasingly loved when stuff
just comes out of nowhere and appears. I
think there's so much hype around so
many things that like I've come
to I I this is not like water in in
MadMax Rear Road. When there is a lack
of hype, I do not come to
um to reg uh to what is it not regret
its absence. Uh this is I forget it.
Lament lament its absence. I love its
absence. I love that this just got put
out into the world and it became like a
big splash thing for a week and a half.
Like it felt really really nice. Um I I
so I don't know. I think and I've said
this for a long time even in movies like
could you imagine a world where Avengers
Endgame had no trailer? Yeah. And they
just they just released it when it was
done. Like I know that can't happen for
a lot of different reasons, but how
special that would be. And I feel like
the Oblivion remaster is getting a lot
more love because of that. Like there
wasn't like six months leading up and
nine in-depth videos about how it was
working and like what you'll get to do
in the painted realm and like all it
just it doesn't it just felt impressive
because it was just thrown at us all at
once almost. How are people feeling
about the the shadow drop in general?
I mean, I've been pro Shadow Drop for
forever. Like, in indies do this more
frequently where they're like, "All
right, cool. Game's done. Here it is."
And you're like, "Oh, I had no idea this
existed 10 minutes ago, but now it's my
whole identity for like three weeks."
Great. Yeah. Panic panic calling the
work to take time off.
Yeah. And I for me, I think um I wish I
love it for video games. I think TV
streamers are missing a beat with it. I
think cuz the method of TV right now is
that they release six maybe eight
episodes of half a story and then we
wait two to three years and then we get
another part of a story and the all the
hype kind of makes it feel like a little
bit of a let down. Whereas like if
something like House of the Dragon was
just like, "Here you go. It's we we've
done the next bit of the story, then I'd
be super excited and I would sit down
and watch it and then I wouldn't be as
frustrated
uh if I had to wait another few years."
I don't know. I don't know. I think it's
possible with TV streaming and I think
that would be a better word of mouth
than a lot. I'm I'm break it real quick.
Everyone's going to be able to to hear
Aaron still. I'm just going to make her
disappear and reappear real quick. Oh,
wait. Hold on. Am I glitching? Sorry.
[Music]
There we go. Much better. All right.
Yay. Testing. Yeah. All right. Every
time that happens, if it happens again,
I'm hitting that button. Um, no, that
makes total sense in the streaming
space. I would like to see that. Uh,
I don't know. I just want to I I think
what I'm missing is surprise. I just
want I just there's so much neat thing
like so much neat media all around. I
just want to be surprised by stuff when
it comes out. And this was a lovely one.
I don't know. All right. Uh let's keep
moving. We're gonna talk
about wars, specifically the star
variety. Uh so we got two pieces of
news. One, the prophecy has been
fulfilled for this upcoming
season in renowned multiversal game
Fortnite. You will be able to play as
Darth Jar Jarar the Wise called Jar
Pinks. That's right. Uh they are doing a
Sith version of Jar Jar in the upcoming
Fortnite season. That's all you need to
know. That doesn't mean you should play
Fortnite. It just means that they're
doing it and I'm happy that they're
doing it over there where I can look at
it and not play Fortnite. Thanks. The
other one uh is this new announcement of
a new IP or a new I guess property in
the Star Wars universe. Aaron, you you
really want to talk about this. Tell
tell us about ZCOM.
I I'm so excited. So, it's technically
called Zero Company. Um but they are
more Star Wars video games is always a
good thing. Uh we're happy to have more
Star Wars video games. Uh Jedi Fall in
Order series has been fantastic and
that's great. uh single player RPG, Star
Wars, I'm here for it. But uh also love
turn-based uh games such as XCOM, which
has been a delightful a delightful game.
And if people haven't played the new ex
I guess new big ass air quotes around
those, but like um those have been
great. And then so they are coming out
with a turnbased tactical Star Wars game
of just mercs and mercenaries. as much
as I could get from the trailer. Um, but
it's basically the mechanics of XCOM and
they called it Zero Company, which is
ZCOM. I see what you did
there. And it's it looks pretty and it
looks awesome and I cannot cannot wait
to play it. Um, I'm sure I will throw my
controller across the room when my 99%
likelihood of hitting misses. Yeah, it's
fine. It's the thing where you've got
the blaster like pressed against someone
and then miss and you're like, h how how
it's so horrible when that happens. But
it happens. And that's what we sign up
for when we play these turn-based
tactical games. Um, some games are
better at it than others. I think of the
remasters, XCOM 1 was better than XCOM
2. Uh, XCOM 2 had a lot of those
percentage issues. I think they tried to
be too smart with the statistics and
ended up screwing themselves over. But
yes, yes, Midnight Suns 10 out of 10.
Uh, although I still wish I they would
let me romance people in Midnight Suns,
but that's Do they not? I thought they
did.
There's the No, you can talk to
everyone, but it's more of like you're
just easedropping on stories and like
you can build relation like you can
build
relationships in terms of like going out
on missions
and they they really overhyped the RPG
aspect of Midnight Suns. Okay. Yeah. And
I think that's mostly because um they
were going off of Marvel's Bible and
because it's um because it's build your
own
protag. They don't want to deal with the
ramifications of going off Bible far
enough to make individual characters hot
for protag. And that's kind that's kind
of a weird
um like a weird problem that they have.
But we've got it bad. Got it bad. Got it
bad. We're hot for protag.
Whoa.
No.
I I don't know. After after the blue
suede shoes thing, I don't know that
anything's ever going to follow that.
Like that's fair. Yeah. Um Oh. Oh dear.
It has arrived already. Time has flown
at the part of the show where we sell
people fake things while they get sold
real things. All right, Aaron. I don't
know if you were here the last when we
started doing this. Okay, so we need to
roll 3 minutes of uh of ads on Twitch to
keep this pre-rolls, which are garbage,
off. Um, so we're going to we're going
to pitch things that the audience can't
spend money on, but wish they could. Um,
like So, Matt, would you would you do a
demonstration of of of this our style of
advertisement? Yes. Give me a second,
chat.
It's the bathmat, right? We're all on
the same page. Who's going to get the
bath mat? Right. Okay, great.
All right, we good? Yeah. Yeah, please.
Please go right ahead.
Oh, wow. The music came in loud. Hi
there, everyone. Matt from Extra Credits
here. Don't confuse me with the item
that I'm selling you that you can't buy.
My bath mat. That's right. You can't buy
it. I wish you could. But I'm going to
move it over here so it's not hitter in
the face. Uh, I wish it was fluffy,
right? But it's not. And therefore, you
wouldn't even really want it. It look,
it does its job well. It does everything
it's supposed to do in a non-sonic
shower. It makes all the Look, the water
that was on it before is gone. It only
took an hour. It's like magic. And my
feet are cold. You can't buy it. I just
wanted to take this time to let you know
that you can't have it. And I hope your
feet are warm and soft. There we go. I'm
saying that's how we do it. That's how
we sell the things we can't sell.
Delightful.
I will not lick the bath, Matt.
Okay. I do a lot of stuff on this show.
I I I I have I have I have mine. Matt,
if you if you would. Here you go. Hi
there, everyone. Will from Extra Credits
here to pitch you a new tool of
scientific inquiry vetted by an actual
scientist. Lick it. That's right. If you
find a rock and you're not sure what
kind of rock it is, apparently you
should just lick it. That's right. You
could find out if it's a fossil, like a
rare and dead thing. That's apparently
how actual scientists do the thing. So,
it's really science if you just have a
clipboard, you pick up a rock, you're
like, I wonder what this rock is. And
then you lick it. And that's that's just
how you figure it out. So, that's
apparently a thing that you aspiring
scientists should have in your toolkit.
Try just licking it.
When a problem comes along, you must
lick it. I don't know if that's entirely
accurate. Uh Erin, would you like to
sell something in rebuttal to what Will
has just said? You don't have to.
We are back for beds. By the way, I I
have something that that people probably
actually could buy, but it's the first
thing I saw on my desk. So, roll the
music, please. Okay.
Hi, everyone. Dr. Aaron McDonald here,
here to sell you the screaming goat.
When people try to tell you to lick your
bath mat, you respond in tears of
screams, uh, terrifying those around
you. I don't know if this will work or
not.
That's what your response should be when
people tell you to lick your bath mat.
So, buy one of your screaming goats now
so you can respond to those who have
subscribed to the Lick It franchise.
All right. I like it. It's very good. We
could just fill the rest with goat
screaming, but I will not do that to the
rest of uh the audience. Yeah. Okay.
Cool. And that was back from meds. Yeah.
Excellent. Very productive. All right.
Uh time for our next story, which I uh
go some rocks in my backyard. Lick it.
Do it. All right. As everyone knows, I
am our resident support main. I play
supports in every video game you can
possibly play support in. Yes, including
that one that you think you can't. Um, I
do this because I enjoy the sort of play
style of playing support in all these
different places. Rivals has had a big
conversation recently about the nature
of supporting uh or being a strategist
is what they call it uh in in Rivals and
it has sort of come to a head and has
led to a support strike or a healer
strike as they're sometimes called where
people are refusing to queue as supports
or healers because of toxicity in the
community regarding um regarding the
role. And it's sort of kind of an
interesting it's sort of an interesting
phenomena that keeps coming up over and
over and over again. In every game that
uses the
trinity, right, the healer tank DPS,
healers get flack.
In everyone I've ever seen, um I suppose
in WoW, tanks get can get slightly more
because aggro management's much more
important than it is in some other
places. and if you screw up as a tank,
everyone dies. Um, but that's also true
in a lot of places. Um, but healers tend
to get a lot of a lot of flak. I have a
theory just real quick coming from uh my
my long ago past as an editor. Um uh
there is a term that is used in a lot of
different things and that is uh [ __ ]
rolls downhill and when something goes
wrong in pre-production or production or
in parts of post-prouction
uh all of the sudden the editor is there
being the last line of defense. And if
that even though they might have been
given something that is completely uh
you you can't do what the people in
charge want you to do with it. uh they
are given that task regardless and it
can be rather thankless. I feel like if
a tank is the first line of defense and
DPS almost like their job is getting the
the other team down fast enough so that
the healer can still kind of do his job
or their job in the background. Then if
that all fails, there's no one left
alive to blame except the healer. It
it's it's it's it I've never sort of put
two and two together, but I feel like uh
healers are uh the editors of first
person team-based shooters. Yeah. Like
um I can listen, I can cloak and dagger
all day. I can heal people. I can, you
know, get people in out of trouble. Um
because cloak's right click is stupid.
Um I can buff people's damage. I can use
my alt. I can do all those things. But
if you keep running in out of my line of
sight and then complaining that I didn't
heal your Iron Fist, Psylock, whatever,
when you are on the other side of the
entire map in their backline, that's
that's between you and those who dwell
above like I got I got nothing for you,
right? Like so the there is sort of this
mentality I think that that it always
comes down to support diff it always
comes down to this other thing. And then
the problem is that people's toxicity
about it is kind of rampant, right?
Yeah. I'm in their spawn. Why aren't I
getting healed? Exactly. Exactly. I I do
think like yes, I think the support
harassment is prevalent across all of
these sort of games. However, I also
think this is a rivals induced issue is
why it's so big. So, I tried playing
Rivals. I don't play a lot of these
games, but I'm a sucker for IP and
multiple things being merged together. I
gave it a try. It was a nightmare in
terms of like the amount of stuff that
they don't put in like the guide of how
to play the game that you have to look
up stuff online to learn how to play
each character properly. means that like
like you can kind of do the basics, but
people there's obviously stuff and
combos that folks have like assembled
together collectively. I don't know. I
found the tutorial and the training and
the accessibility for coming in to try
to play a new character a nightmare. And
I do think like as a support, I can't I
never even tried playing supports. I was
just straight DPS. Like I'll just try
try this out. And I could do a couple
things, but obviously not on the level
even at the right scaled for ranking and
everything like it was. And so I I can
see like being a support there's stuff
that you're trying to figure out that
isn't obvious when you unless maybe if
you play these games all the time, but
yeah, it wasn't obvious for me. And
there is also a unique rivals problem
which is that the answer to why is there
an Iron Fist murdering our backline is
not DPS turning around and doing like
and taking care of the Iron Fist. It's
to run triple support which
is probably not a sustainable solution
long term but but even what even what
you just laid out right like I don't
know that like like do you know what I
mean? Like I think that's sort of to
Erin's point like I I I did feel this
with Rivals that I didn't feel with
Overwatch back in the day is like I was
able to pop in and pop out of Overwatch
and within a game or two I'd be like,
"Oh, if after not playing for a while
I'm like, "Oh, the meta's here. Oh, we
got this. Oh, okay." I I you can kind of
like through pure gameplay in a few
matches where rivals and listen maybe
it's my bones being dust but like I have
a real hard time figuring out what is
supposed to be happening like even be I
played like five games I felt like I
didn't like in a row lately and I'm like
I don't know what this meta is and no
one is taking the time nor is it their
job to but taking their time to explain
it to me in these low-level unranked
areas. You know what I mean? the the the
triple support meta is only really at
higher rank tiers. You can run uh 222.
I've also seen one three uh two one
tank, three DPS, two support like it's
it is more flexible than that. It's just
there is this additional support
theoretical slot that's happening a lot
because Rivals is pretty big on dive.
The interesting thing is that while both
of you have incredibly valid points
about not explaining things,
um the
um the rival team has actually listened
and the next mid-season support patch is
including uh or next mid-season
rebalance patch is including support
buffs. Um, which
I think is going to end up being a
problem cuz I'm I'm going to I'm going
to give you all a spoiler right now. I
don't actually think the supports need
it. I don't Well, so this is the
interesting thing. If you buff supports
too much, your games get longer. I mean,
it dep if if they're not timed, right?
Like do are every match timed? Uh, yes,
but sort of loosely. your let me
rephrase then then that your your your
volleys or your exchanges or your
battles within that time get longer and
therefore there's less different
pushpull moments. Yeah. Like that's just
how the timing will work out, right? Um
which might not be great either, but
again I don't know. I don't I'm not deep
enough into it. What would be the
solution that is? Is it Would it just be
will it just be people to stop being
dicks? Amazing. Yes. Oh well. How do you
patch that into a game? uh you know you
you go on strike apparently. Um, but I
think it is important that
like when this like idea when when
people get harassed for doing their the
best they can at a role and then taking
all of the blame. Like the number of
times I've been blamed for like healer
diff when no one else on my team will
heal and I have a
Spider-Man like and I can taste the web
because I just keep dying and dying and
dying on respawn and no one's covering
my my route from respawn to the thing
and Spider-Man just keeps solo killing
me.
Like people need to have understanding
and empathy for what is going on, right?
Well, I wonder if this even speaks to
Erin's point, weirdly, in in the rivals
of it all, right? Like, and again, I I'm
not deep enough into into team shooters
at this point to really do it. And so,
Brad Janet, start chiming in here. Let
me know when when I am off course. But
like it feels like because Rivals is
such a
a free-to-play game and b just um uh
phenom of popularity, right? Um that
that means that the player base is going
to be much larger than say uh a $40 buy
it even for the original Overwatch one.
Okay. Right. Because you there's a
barrier to entry to play Overwatch one.
Uh or one more. There's a few, you know,
you get what I'm saying. So, like it
feels like by its very nature, I think I
talked about this actually, weirdly,
this all ties together, Erin, with
Bridge Crew with uh the reason why I
felt comfortable, and it's a completely
different game, of course it is. Um, but
the reason why I always felt comfortable
going into VR and playing Bridge Crew
with
strangers is because the buyin set
myself up for more times than not being
linked with people that are want the
same experience I do. They they have a
PC with a VR headset and they bought a
Star Trek game. That's a big that's a
lot of checks and balances to get to a
point to get to a player base that I'm
probably going to relate to. And again,
I'm not saying that every game should be
this. Absolutely not. I'm saying I think
problems like what's happening in Marvel
Rivals comes from the fact that the
player base is so huge and there's no
true buyin other than hardware. So, you
have a player base that is so large,
it's harder to latch on to what a proper
meta or comp or anything would be
outside of external research. And
therefore, you're going to get more
toxicity as eventually one of the two
teams feels like they're getting
steamrololled because the healer messed
up, right? There there's also another
interesting problem, right, which is
that Overwatch 2, while it has taken a
couple of very significant knocks, is
still
running fine, right? is in no danger of
shutting down, which does mean that
there's a weird mix in rivals of people
who moved from Overwatch 2, people who
dabble in both and people who have never
played Overwatch or any other hero
shooter at all. There you go. And that's
another big one, right? Because if my
favorite,
right, Jeff is probably the best example
of this, right? if I'm playing Rivals
because I like the cute little shark kid
who can nom up the entire enemy team and
then yeet them off the map because dear
god he needs a different ultimate.
That's such a stupid thing,
right? I'm playing a healer because I'm
playing my favorite character. I'm not
playing a healer because I want to play
a healer. I'm playing a healer because
my buyin for the game was that I had to
play a cute little shark lad, right? And
so I think that that is potentially also
a part of the problem, right? is that
like gearing
the gearing people to these roles is
done inefficiently as Aaron points out,
right, with like the lack of really good
in-game tutorial and does depend on you
having synthesized a bunch of knowledge,
right? Like I know a lot of this stuff,
but that's because I was playing TF2 in
college as a medic main. So y'all
whippers snappers who are like, I played
Mercy, whatever.
Get off my lawn. Right. So many hats and
so many shades of mercy. Shame there,
right? Yeah. No, so many hats, right?
But like I've been playing hero shooters
for a very long time, so I adopt to this
support play style really well. So it's
less of an obvious issue to me. There's
also the issue that like
um not all characters are equally hard
like new guy points out with Spider-Man,
right? Well, but that's the thing too,
right? So Overwatch, you come in and you
pick based on what character like
probably the start like the look of that
character, but you you're not
emotionally involved with any of those
characters if you're new to Overwatch.
Here if I need to be the Punisher for
whatever reason like I'm going to play
the Punisher even if I suck at playing
the Punisher, right? Like there's your
character. Yeah. Like that's your guy.
Yeah. Which we we're going to unpack
separately from this, but that's I'm
sure it's not my character. Although
board again, Frank Castle Okay, great.
Awesome. Is is legit uh pretty badass in
that show. Yeah. Um regardless, that's I
think I completely agree. Yeah. Yep. Uh
I think um and it'll it'll it continues
to get weirder with new characters and
new especially because we've had
um we've had Invisible Woman and Emma
Frost, right? when I know Emma's not a
support, but she's a tank and healing
her is weird, right? Like, can she be
healed in diamond form? Yes. Oh,
interesting. But the way that she goes
in is not or inaccurate. Um, actually, I
don't know. But I do remember there was
a time in the comic when Emma Frost got
her arm broken off when she was a
diamond and she couldn't turn back right
away because if she did, she'd bleed
out. Yeah. Right. Um, so there Yeah. I
mean, there's a bunch of the like the
evolving state of the meta also makes it
harder and harder as they add more
characters that cause people to jump in
to jump incoherently. Yes. Right. Like
it the complexity ceiling is rising with
each character and they're talking about
adding more characters quickly. Well, I
have an idea. I have an idea for a
stream. Okay. What if we did because you
have a you have a very good amount of
knowledge based around this game and
compositions and what's going on, etc.
And I know some of the mods do too.
Yeah. What if we did something where me
and Aaron, you're welcome to pop in here
if you'd like to as well, and and you
know, a couple of our internet friends
pop in and you basically give us what is
essentially a Marvel Rivals boot camp.
Okay? Do you know what I mean? Because
like we're all coming into it with
different stuff. I'm coming into it with
a whole bunch of Overwatch nonsense
baked in. Like people who haven't played
a lot of the like I don't know. I feel
like that could actually be something
that is helpful for people wanting to
get the most out of this game. I think
that would be Yeah. Okay. So, we've
already had three mods uh volunteer
immediately. Great. Great. Okay. Great.
Uh yeah. Yeah, we can definitely we can
definitely Of course, we'll only be
playing the Punisher. No, it's not true.
Oh my god. Um yeah, Marvel Hall of the
novice. Exactly. So, you know, maybe
we'll we'll we'll figure it out, but it
is it is kind of interesting to talk
about. Okay. Yeah. I'm gonna keep us
moving because we do need we do need to
keep moving because uh yeah. All right.
Um I should have put another not me
story here because neither of you this
um but okay. So uh this is Claire
Obscure. There will be no Clare Obscure
spoilers here. Thank you. Nor should
there be in the comments. I will see
them and I will erase them from
existence, which is fitting. Um, so, uh,
Claire Obscure is a French RPG, uh,
taking a lot from the tradition of
JRPGs, and it is a bonafide hit. It is a
game that a lot of streamers have been,
[Music]
um, steadfastly refusing to shut the
hell up about for like the past three
months. Um, I have been one of them, by
the way. I've built I built a huge chunk
of the stream schedule around getting
everything done and getting thing
filling the space until Clare Obscure
came out because I was like, "This
game's going to slap. This game's going
to slap. This game's going to slap." And
I was right because this game slaps. Um
yes, this team is actually a bunch of
French developers that left Ubisoft, I
believe. Um so, uh it is getting
critical acclaim. It is getting all of
the reviews. It's uh on it's doing very
well on um here on Twitch. Uh I am
playing it on Twitch. You can come over.
I'll be playing Monday, Wednesday,
Friday. I'm taking Tuesday to play
Blueprints and Thursday for Design Club.
Um but I'm playing a lot of it here. I
think it's great. It has a really
refreshing take on turn-based that keeps
the game um fastmoving and interactive.
I love the art style. I love the
theming. I love everything. It is dark
as hell. It comes with a long list of
content warnings which they are not
hesitant to deliver on very quickly. Um,
and the best part and my favorite part
is that it's already passed a million
copies sold. Yeah. Awesome. It's
probably going to be people's game of
the year. It's I was I was looking at
this. I hadn't seen much of it until
honestly yesterday I watched a gameplay
trailer and what I really loved about
the turnbas of it which is the thing
that kind of turns me off to a lot of uh
turn-based stuff these days is it seems
like all of the abilities or the most of
them when they drop down when it's time
like actually tell you what exactly it
does like in detail in the in the cool
art style that feels like Persona kind
of made uh the norm. Yeah. Uh and it has
Jennifer English in it. So yeah. Uh and
and the uh the the main protag that you
play for most of the game, Charlie Cox.
Oh, yeah. Awesome. Yeah. Yep. Awesome.
Uh so I I remember seeing this on a list
of games that were like games to look
out for in 2025 and then it completely
dropped off my I think I just didn't
clock what the name was and so I didn't
even Yeah. until sort of yesterday. I
was like, "Oh, this is that game." Like
and the JRPG element looks great. It's
like a JRPG with QTE like uh yeah, kind
of if you think um Okay, I'm going to
I'm going to which I don't hate to be
honest. I'm I'm going to do I'm going to
do it like X but Y. And I know that
people know that I'm not the biggest fan
of those, but Okay, hear me out. Hear me
out. How dare you break your own rule.
Is it like is it like Killer Croc, but
the Lizard? Yeah, that's it. Exactly.
No. Um,
it's if Thousand-Year
Door had a uh had a even darker because
Thousand Your Dor is actually pretty
dark. um had a uh darker sort of off uh
offshoot um descendant game that was
given to the most French people who had
ever frenched in French to raise and
then given just like a whole heaping
helping of all of the trauma that was
too maturated to fit into any Final
Fantasy game. Uh then you would have
this game. Um, there's a deep
undercurrent of the action command
system from the Mario RPGs,
um, that I think is really key to
keeping it moving in a in an interesting
way. Um, and in the same way that, um,
Mario RPG does, all of your characters
have different
mechanics. Like, it's
not right. It's not like Final Fantasy 1
where you're just like mash attack,
right? It's each character is unique,
has unique mechanics, has unique skills,
has a unique like thing. Allah later
Final Fantasy, which I think what's
funny, I I have a it Final Fantasy 7
remake kind of does that. Like everyone
does have different things, but they
control the same. Like it's more of a
role based thing, but the mechanic is
similar. There's sometimes where it
breaks away from that, but like uh and I
find that I tend to until I really stop
myself keep playing them all the same
where it feels like something like this
you'd be like no no no the game is going
to be like you have to do this now you
have to do this now you have to do this
and it plays to the roles that the
characters are doing. Yeah. So it it's
very important cuz like so and there's a
mage character um uh a bruiser character
and a fencer um and the fencer whether
you like it or not will be in a
stance and if you're in the wrong stance
you are just going to get wrecked right
because your stances aren't going to
flow. The mage needs elemental infusions
to do to have her spells do the things
you need them to do. And if you're not
using them then it's she's not really
effective. Right. And the bruiser's got
charge up for a big move. And if you're
using him incorrectly, then his big move
is not going to do as much and he's not
as effective and you're going to lose
because the game is difficult, which I
also like. Cool. Yeah, it gets it gets a
10 out of 10 for me. It will probably be
in a year with South of Midnight
Blueprints and this to say that I will
have a singular game of the year is
laughable, but this is definitely a game
that I will be recommending and refusing
to shut the hell up about for a
significant period of time. All right.
Awesome. All right. Uh, this just
in. I've kicked my meetings a half hour,
so we're fine.
Breaking news. Breaking
news. Matt upsets his co-workers, but
they were very nice about it. Um, all
right. Great. Yeah. Uh, okay, cool. Um,
next up, it's time to talk about a very
weird week for Discord.
Oh, do I Who started? I mean, I can
start our moment of silence. Yeah.
Moment of silence for Discord. Um, I've
been talking a lot. I was I just wanted
to, you know, I I'll keep going. Um, so
two two things have happened uh this
year. This year, this week.
Isn't that the vibe though? It's been a
week. For real. Um, okay. So f first the
first is that Nintendo is actively
trying to get Discord to roll over and
give up personally identifying
information for the people or for the
person or persons who perpetrated the
giant Pokemon leak from last year.
Right.
Um this is kind of a
weird this is a weird spot to be in for
Discord, right? It's not really like
there's there are two sides to this,
right? One, we don't want Discord to
give up people to companies because they
say
so, but at the same time, Discord kind
of has to comply with subpoenas. So,
there's there's this like multifaceted
thing where like I mean, there's no way
they won't if they get subpoenaed,
they'll do it. Correct. But we don't
want them to do it until they get
subpoenaed. Right. Right. That's that's
the line, right? Um, so that'll that
will be interesting to see uh because
Pokemon Company is still large upset
spaghette over that leak, which is
understandable because it was the
biggest Pokemon leak ever and leaked a
whole bunch of details about things that
hadn't been released yet. Um, and
Nintendo and the Pokemon Company are
both very big on controlling their
messaging. Very, very big on controlling
their messaging. And so when that gets
tweaked, they're not happy. And the
second
one is that uh Discord wants to grow up
and be a publicly traded company. They
want it so bad they can taste it. So
they got a new CEO.
Aaron's face is correct. And they got
that new CEO from everyone's favorite
place that's shedding executives like
it's going out of
style.
Activision. Yeah.
Also to be clear I believe uh let's see
what is the name of uh this person
uh uh Saknini I believe I I I might be
butchering that and I apologize but
basically before this yeah Humam Sini uh
before this they were uh chief strategy
and talent officer in 2009 at Activision
Blizz following the acquisition of King
they became the company's uh CFO and
then president uh a position he held
until 2022 when he became vice chairman
of the Activision uh Blizzard board.
Then he left in 2023, not long after
Microsoft finished its takeover of the
company. This all comes to us from PC
Gamer, by the way. It's in the show
notes if you'd like to read more.
Um the the the
text I'm going to read
it. It's like, okay, I want to make it
very clear. Nothing he's saying here is
strange or weird. It's
just it doesn't feel like it's what the
majority of people that I interact on
Discord want Discord to be. Um they say,
"I'm incredibly excited to join Discord
at such a pivotal moment. Discord stands
as a massive foundational part of the
gaming ecosystems that millions of
players, developers, and publishers rely
on every day." I'm going to pause here.
They're setting up the ransom note. Uh,
continuing on, uh, when Jason and
Discord co-founder, uh, CTO Stan, uh,
Vish Vishnki, I'm sorry again, I'm
butchering that, have built is what they
built is truly remarkable. A platform
with an undeniable product market fit
where hundreds of millions of people
connect around their passion for gaming
and shared interests. I won't continue.
But you get where like they're like,
man, this this this
this beautiful pristine piece of earth
sure will make a great granite quarry.
Like it's very it's really bad. Um and
and again, this is this person's job and
and they come from a long line of
managing the money of a publicly traded
corporation. I don't see this
um going well for Discord
um or or us on Discord, the users of
Discord. Um I think it's going to go
great for their seuite, which look
in a legal sense is fine. On a on a
personal and moral sense, it gets real
depressy. Um, yeah. And and I've already
seen the the big question is so where to
now? Yeah. And the answer is hold,
right? You got to hold. This is sort of
the lesson that we've learned from
leaving the bad place, aka Twitter. Um,
yeah, which is you need to hold until
everyone knows where we're going. Oh
god. I was holding. Do you see? That was
not a technical glitch at all. I was
just holding.
Now I'm real funny because Aaron cleared
up as you do great. Weird. Erin, did you
take my bandwidth? We're tag teaming
bandwidth right now. Yeah. Um I Okay, so
like I appreciate that Discord has
Nitro, some paid service. You want more
shiny things? Great. I love that it's
optional. If Discord wasn't going to
become public and they reached out and
said, "Hey guys, Discord's really
popular. This is costing us a lot. We're
going to charge you a
one-time software fee of like up to $10
is probably what I would pay for Discord
and that's it. I would probably buy it."
That's like my my economic limit for
Discord.
If if they introduce another freaking
subscription service, I'm going to lose
my mind. I'm going to lose my mind. I
cannot anymore. So, as someone who has
Nitro because I moderate our server and
I'm on Discord,
um if I'm awake, uh
like I think that's fair, right? I think
I think it's fair that there like the
the amount that you use it, right,
really dictates whether or not like you
get value out of it.
Um, and I I I agree. I think that a
onetime fee would for most of the user
base would probably be better,
but
I I don't know. I get I get the wanting
to leave, right? I get the I get the
wanting to go and like be done with this
and uh move on to other
projects, I guess, for me. Like I
understand the the All right, cool. We
want to get our money that we've earned
after like making this
thing. We're done now. Yeah. Right. I
wonder it's funny because this happens a
lot. We talk about stories like this a
decent amount over the years of doing
this show and
like has there been I know there has I'm
just blanking because my mind is a bag
of cats. Has there been a buyout of a
company like a a service or something
that didn't go full public but like sold
it in a in and this is the the most
wrong way of saying this but like in an
ethical way. And by that I
mean it maintains the the initial drive
and reason why the thing was popular and
became a staple of whatever it was while
also making the people who made it to
sell it like get a decent bag for
themselves and be able to dip. Like has
that happened? I think you probably have
to go back at least 15 years because
that's not our economic model anymore.
I'm sure it has but it's but not
recently. Yeah, by any means. And I
think yeah, the golden parachute aspect
of it like that I because I saw someone
in the chat mention like the
transparency with the money. Yes, that's
great. That's a good thing for a
publicly traded company, but they don't
care about that. There the idea of
publicly trading it is to make a whole
bunch of cash and then sell it off and
leave. Yeah. There's no top. Yeah.
There's the the reason why that happens
is I mean you get you get funded in so
you can build out more but all that's
doing you're no longer beholden to your
users you are beholden to the
shareholders and while the users tie
into that a little bit there's ways to
make it what the shareholders are going
to do is try to pivot their user base to
the most profitable user base that is
and that probably isn't going to be a
lot of people that they use Discord for
right now and therefore it'll kind of go
all over the place. Sorry. Now, when
stuff gets publicly traded, we stop
being customers. We start being
consumers. Yeah. And that's it. And
that's Yeah. I can guarantee you the
patch notes are going to not be as
frequent there. Yeah. It's It sucks. Um
Yeah. I hate it. I hate it here. I want
to get off the Earth. This is It sucks.
All my toys are being taken away. I
know. I know. You know what's
interesting? Medusa says if one of these
things back in the day, YouTube maybe.
um when it sold to Google possibly. I
mean, the reason we have the creator
ecosystem we have right now is because
it was sold to uh to Google. I think
I've told this story before. I was in
the lobby of 1515 Broadway when I was
working for MTV when I heard that Viacom
passed on the buy for YouTube. And I
think back to that day and where I am
right now in my life as like a very
strange like moment of like, huh? Yeah.
Because could you imagine? Could you
imagine if Viacom bought
YouTube? I don't know, man. Uh like
zoink scoo. Um it does not feel like it
would be good. Yeah. Uh they're my corpo
daddy, so I'm pleading the fifth. No,
no, no. That that's totally fine.
Listen, but they're not though.
Paramount is Paramount bought Viacom.
Like that's fine. Um, and I have plenty
of people CBS. Yeah. Yeah. I have plenty
of people that I know that work there at
fairly uh decent high up stuff. I'm not
saying that there's a I'm saying in my
time back when Viacom God, what year was
this? In the in the early to mid 2000s.
I was going to say I think ' 05 or
something. Yeah. Uh, it was a very
different landscape and there seemed to
be a few misses across the bow and then
that happened. I was like that seems
wrong but I'm thankful that it went that
way. Yeah. The other one that uh a
couple of people have brought up uh is
this one that ARFL brings up which is
Mojang.
Mojang's probably the the closest um to
a Yeah. But but I will also say that
Mojang is in a unique position because
Microsoft is aware that the way to
extract maximum money from Mojang is to
shut up and leave them alone. They are
cooking. Continue to let them cook. 300
million copies plus of Minecraft. It was
300 million copies last year. 300
million units sold. When you have that,
you shut up and leave it alone. Yeah.
But I guess that is my example then,
right? Because like they've said there's
not going to be a Minecraft 2. Common
Parlament of this space would be like,
"Oh, of course you need to make
Minecraft 2. It's so popular." Um, the
movie obviously just came out. We will
did an excellent episode of the podcast.
uh go listen to that. The only podcast
about movies wherever fine podcasts are
sold. Uh and by sold I mean given away
for free because podcasts make no money.
But um the like I don't know that that
does it feels like a juggernaut like
Microsoft buying
Mojang and being like oh man they
cracked
something put it down. I mean, it feels
like the Minecraft movie with Jack Black
and Jason Mamoa would not have happened
if it was not a Microsoft property.
Like, so it's elevated it in other
um in in other elements to be able to do
things. But it does feel like that might
be the
most it's not ethics, it's not morals, I
don't know. Like original heart of
whatever the product was intact after
getting a bag and bailing like so maybe
that is it. Yeah. Yeah, that's a good
answer. Yeah, that's a great answer.
Anyway, we'll see. We'll see how this
goes. I don't know. But that's the key
though. That's the key though is like
cuz that that wasn't necessarily buyout.
This is going to become like a public
company. this CEO and yeah, the key is
to not touch it, but like you said, the
you're fundamentally changing the
structure of your company once you
become public. And so that's it's going
to change it. That's the nature of it.
Yep. Okay. Which leads us to another
thing which we've all come to expect to
be terrible in
2025, just pre-orders. Now, should it be
terrible though?
Okay, hang tight. Hang tight. I got I
got to establish our bounding box. I got
to give us a bounding box first. Okay,
and then I'll let you. Okay, great.
Awesome. Will needing a bounding box.
What? I'm literally in a box right now.
I can't get out of anything. They're
breaking the fourth wall. Break the
fourth wall. Okay, so um we're going to
talk about this because of the Switch 2
pre-orders, but we're not talking about
the Switch 2, right? Or its price or any
of that. We're talking for instance,
tariffs. No, we're not talking about
tariffs. We're done talking about
tariffs this year. We're talking about
So, we're talking about what we're
talking about here is the very
relevant systems in place that allow
American consumers to pre-order limited
merchandise as exemplified by the Switch
2
pre-orders, right? But what we're not
talking about is why that's a big
problem because of the Switch 2 or um
we're not talking about the, you know,
scarcity uh scares because of the
tariffs or any of that. We're just
talking about the infrastructure and the
methodology around pre-orders. Okay.
Just so everyone's on the same page.
Even though there's a picture of the
Switch 2, we're not talking about the
Switch 2 specifically. It's just an
example. Cool. Great. Excellent.
Awesome. Matt, go ahead. So, uh right
after Will says we're not going to talk
specifically about the Switch 2, the one
thing I will talk about is Nintendo. The
one way that they've been doing it is is
a bit on one hand draconian, but in the
other way, we'll see how it works. Um,
you can order it directly obviously
through them, but you need to have at
least at some point in your history a 12
month history of being signed up for the
Nintendo uh online service, whatever
that's called. There's a couple other
prerequisites, and that is to basically
make, and I think it's one per account
through your Nintendo account. That's to
hopefully ensure that scammers
can't um not scammers um although yes um
scalpers thank you the other sword um
can't just buy in bulk a bunch of things
and I think that's great if you can
supply the amount of supply that is
going to be demanded right now it's a
lottery and those go out uh starting May
8th I believe to see if you've been
accepted though Nintendo has also said
that some of those might not go out
until at like well after the systems
release. So that's not great. So what
the the when it's something like a video
game console that has a
history doing something like that I
think is correct. I wish the supply was
greater but that's a different thing.
But that's it feels like Nintendo as the
distributor here is the only one doing
something to really combat any sort of
foul play regardless of of uh supply.
But everywhere else, like the other
places this is sold, Walmart, Target,
Amazon, Best Buy,
Newegg, um Costco, eventually Sam's
Club.
I'm trying to think. GameStop. Was it? I
don't think
GameStop. Um sorry, the the name becomes
ash in my mouth.
Um it just feels so broken. Like I This
is the other part. I I'm going to poo
poo on a lot of these online uh
retailers, but we also have to remember
that this isn't their only game in town.
Like, they're selling an infinite amount
of things. And do I wish they were ready
for stuff like this? Absolutely. Does it
make sense in the corporate hellscape
that we live in that they're not ready
for this? Absolutely. Um, so it seems
like there's no clear like they want to
sell the thing obviously they want the
traffic, they want the business, but
they don't want to make anything in
place to make that sort of easy andor
safer for actual consumers to buy it
because I I truly believe they don't
care. They're they don't care. Yeah,
they don't care. That's the problem. We
are not customers. We are consumers.
They don't care about us. If someone
buys, if a thousand bots buy the game,
buy out their supply, they don't care.
They made the money. They made the
money. They They are not They think And
that's what I like about what Nintendo
did was it's like it actually feels like
they cared about me as a consumer of
Nintendo products. Like they're like,
"We see you. We value you." And you're
right, lots of other things. But in
principle, how they're approaching it, I
think is absolutely right. And the like
that's what irritates me. Obviously, the
bots, the automation, and I'm glad you
gave us this box, Will, because like I
think it's a box that a lot of these
articles aren't talking about. There's
too many other factors for them to be
like, but this and also this and also
this. And it's like, no, our system is
broken with these high-end, expensive,
high demand products that bots and
resellers have just taken over. That's
the only seller. We cannot compete. It
used to be resellers would have 8,000
tabs open and a few people on their
phone and they'd be refreshing and
they'd be manually buying things. But
that doesn't exist anymore. It's one
piece of code that they hit enter, they
buy everything within 30, not even 30
seconds, 30 milliseconds, and we're all
left to just eat dirt. And I hate it. I
hate it. I hate it. So, I I I actually
I'm going to I'm going to take uh I'm
going to take a step back and say that I
think that part of the reason that the
pre-order system in the US sucks is
Black Friday.
Well, that was the start. Yes. Right.
What in the world do you mean by this?
Black Friday is probably the most
American example of American
consumerism, right? There are stories
going back to when I was a kid of
parents dying in Walmarts over tickle me
Elmo because they had to get a limited
product and there was no system, right?
There was no There was no Now, the
sequel to Tickle [ __ ] by the way, there
were pre-orders and they pre-ordered at
the same time that the Wii did. And I
know this cuz my dad got pre-orders for
Elmo and the Wii at the same time. And
then there was a second Elmo. Oh, yeah.
Was it called Tickle Me Elmo 2? I don't
remember. But the reckoning as Jamie
just yelled from the other room. That's
right. Yeah. No. Um, so yeah, there were
like it it sort of exemplifies the way
that we do um pre-orders and shopping
and everything else, which is a very um
adversarial, right? It's non-orderly.
It's very adversarial compared to Japan,
right? Where standing in line is the
norm and people politely stand in line
and wait their turn and have fandom also
runs deeper in Japan. I don't know if
you all have noticed that, but like
fandom for the thing that you're a fan
of runs much deeper um into people's
lives as a sort of bedrock of their like
identity. Um and so that that also
contributes to this. But I do think that
the adversarial way that we do shopping
as a whole, as exemplified by Black
Friday, carries over to pre-orders and
is one of the reasons why it's this sort
of wild west style like who can bot
fastest to get their thing, right? Yeah.
There's no respect for like the social
order at all. Like it's just you see one
person break the rules and people don't
yell at that person. They go, "Oh, it's
a free-for-all, so I can do that, too."
Like that is how our culture works and
it's getting worse. And it's Yeah. We
don't go, "That person should be
shunned. We should not be doing that.
That is a bad thing to do." Um and they
shut it down quickly. They go, "Oh, it's
open season. One person did it. Now I
can do it." That gives them social
license to do it. which is how our
society is structured. And the anonymity
of an online retailer as well, like
there's no no one the chances of someone
hunting down and getting mad at or or
getting recompense against someone
running a bunch of bots to get these and
be scalpers is probably much rarer than
someone cheating to get to the front of
a line or doing something else in a
physical space. Even though Erin, a
thousand% true what you just said about
those things. Now we're just adding the
anonymity of the internet to it and it
makes it much much easier.
Um what Okay, we've outlined the problem
and how this has happened recently and
is still going to be happening until the
Switch 2 gets released. Um and and the
and the why. How do we
think using our best guesses or or
whatever knowledge we have of this
space? What is something that could be
done? Like for me, for instance, I I've
been thinking about this for a minute
and uh I'll give out this idea for free
uh because I actually think I don't I'm
trying to think about how this would
make money, which is why it's a free
idea. But like could there you know how
like there are um sort of like bridging
apps like to different things? like
could there be something where um a
supplier
uh basically I'll just use Nintendo in
this example would set a series of
criteria to a third-party thing that
then hey everyone you buy like Walmart,
Best Buy, whatever you are buying all of
your stock through this third party
thing and if you want to sell this and
no this isn't going to work. I was
trying to think because like after a
certain amount of difficulty, big boxers
would be like, "No, we're not doing it."
Like I'm trying to think if there's a
way to make that work. I would I would
say the biggest analogy I've seen at
least in American culture is probably
the fan convention scene. Sure. So like
I feel like Comic-Con, San Diego Comic-
Con, Wonder Con, they have their It's
still a Hunger Games. It's still an
unfair practice, but at least it's not
bots most of the time. You have to have
a verified account. You have to stay in
an online queue. And that's the problem
is that Walmart, Best Buy, none of these
have the infrastructure for online Q
systems like hotels and like tickets. I
mean, at least like Comic-Con ticket
sales. I think they're the only one I
know that deals with the high demand.
Everyone else, it's always hotel
reservations.
But they've figured that out. But it's
on a scale of maybe 200,000 people
trying to get a spot, maybe half a
million at the most. Nowhere near on the
scale of everyone trying to buy the
Switch. So, I think there's um there's
definitely a place for big big scale
pre-orders of
like something like that queuing app,
but something that either roundrobins or
takes the the the queue load off of all
the websites because that's the other
problem, right? There's a huge
infrastructure problem. GameStop, uh
Best Buy, and Target, I know for a fact,
all had their websites crash the moment
pre-orders went live. We've got 503
errors. Some of them went like down to
404s. Like all of everything like that
the infrastructure just isn't there,
right? Because most of the time it's not
worth it and it's only effective, right?
That like it's only necessary in those
times. So instead of gearing them up,
let's make a central company, right,
that does the queueing like the con
quueing except it distributes
pre-orders at a fixed price.
to be fulfilled
by companies. So you don't buy directly
from any of the other places. You buy
from this third party company and they
say, "Here's this block that goes to
that is guaranteed to sell from Best
Buy. Here are the people that want to
pick it up in store. Here are the ones
that you need to deliver. Here's all the
ones that are going to GameStop. Here's
all the ones that are going to Target."
Right? and you choose your retailer and
everything else through one centralized
platform that a company who is producing
the product chooses to go
through. I think that would that would
do it. But there needs to be an
incentive for it. And that's the thing.
The only incentive there is the the the
the price the retailer gets of the
markup like the suggested retail price
that goes to the actual uh store because
the the the value prop and I imagine
there's actually not a huge amount for
these consoles that are going to these
stores the the what they get out of this
deal is news stories and foot traffic or
foot traffic internet traffic right like
that's what they get. So, if it's a
third party doing it all in their just
fulfillment, still might not be worth it
for them cuz they're not getting the
they're not getting the cache of being
part of the news story or being part of
the uh of a place you can get this
thing. So, maybe they'll buy other stuff
there. Here's here's what we should do.
I have a fix. Okay, we're going to take
it all offline. You've got to go into
the brickandmortar store. You have to
sign on a piece of paper that says,
"I'll be here at midnight." And then you
get your ticket. Do we remember big book
releases back in the day? You went into
the store the day before it was released
at midnight. You got a ticket. You gave
your money and then you got in that line
and you waited. And again, nerds, I
think, are a little bit better than the
general public Black Friday chaos. Not
always, but stores can sometimes be
prepared and handle it a little bit
better. I know I'm being facitious about
it, but it's like I think it's less
facitious and more wishful toward the a
time long gone. Like I remember uh
skipping school uh for when the
Dreamcast came out. I had a reservation,
but I went to the mall during the day. I
was very sick and um I I went there and
I got in the line and I did the thing
and rock and roll.
Um it those sort of felt magical or
midnight releases etc. the PS2 or like
I'm just trying to think of consoles in
particular. I know you were talking
about books. Um it's all Yeah. Yeah, I
mean, I've stood in line for video
games, too, but
like there's also truly an accessibility
thing to be discussed there as well, but
not everything works all the time. I
just I
I wish there were I wish the story was
like, oh man, this was really difficult
for like this one thing because of a
technical glitch. Not like this didn't
work anywhere because none of the way
that we have a high demand order for
something functions the way it should.
Um, uh,
oh, this is actually, but it's but it's
also it's not it's not because they
don't have the infrastructure because
it's a lot of people. They don't have
the infrastructure because it's a lot of
bots. It's a lot of automated coding
systems that are crashing their systems
so people can flood the market like
that. Those are I think two different
things. If this was all human beings
trying to access a website, that's a
different conversation. Then how do we
fix the fact that they're getting pings?
They're getting 20 million billion pings
at 1200
0. Like that's what's breaking the whole
system. I wonder then
like what's the
incentive for these companies to fix it?
There isn't any. Yeah, they don't care.
They're still selling all their
products. This is I'm sorry. I'm being
very defeist about No, listen. There
doesn't have to be an answer. I just I
I'm I'm trying to I'm trying to design
my way around this thing and it could
just be I mean Well, this is actually
interesting. So, Matthew S just says
this. At what point would it Nintendo
not just take over the direct sales? I
bet you Nintendo would love to do that
if they had the infrastructure like an
Apple, right? But they don't and they're
they're they're much too small to do it.
Uh I was actually shocked that they were
doing their own uh distribution. The the
Nintendo store and their own
distribution is a relatively new thing
within years, I believe. I don't think
you like I'm trying to think perhaps
with the Switch might have been been you
can all correct me when I'm wrong there
but like you didn't used to be able to
go to Nintendo
and buy buy things directly from them.
Yeah. Um like the Wii U had a store.
Yeah. Okay. They had digital stores
first but well after the other consoles
did. Yeah. So yeah, like they're
definitely late to the game on that
front. Well, like PlayStation still as
well as a thing. It's funny. I don't if
I ever need anything PlayStation, I
don't I don't buy it from retailers. I
buy it from PlayStation. Yeah. Yeah.
Um Yeah.
I don't know. Yeah. Either way, uh
that's Hey, if you think of something,
you know what you can do? You can leave
a comment uh on this video or if you're
watching this on Nebula and you're like,
"Where's the comment thing? It doesn't
doesn't there's no button there." We
have a solution for that as well. You
can message us over on Blue Sky uh where
you basically can let us know what you
think the solution for this is because
we just talked about it for 20 minutes
and we can't think of it. Uh okay, I am
going to keep us moving because we're
already over time and we're going to go
even more overtime probably. Uh we'll be
fine. Yeah, we'll be fine. So, uh I'm
I've got I've got one sweet dessert
story and then uh we have we have a
tradition to uphold. Um so the first Oh,
no. The first is uh Oh, I love this. I
love this story so much. All right, so
everyone knows that NFTTS are a scam,
right? Cool. Great. Always have been,
always will be. They've been a scam for
gajillion years uh since they were
incepted. They're a way to perform an
old art scam where you sell art yourself
to make it look more valuable and then
you sell it to some sucker for a
overinflated amount of money and then
the market crashes and it's worthless.
Well, the market crashed and they're all
worthless.
However, however, it gets better.
So, recently, one of the iconic
collections, which was originally
sponsored by
Nike, lost access to all of the images
on the NFTts. So, as a reminder, that
the NFT doesn't actually include the
image. It's just a pointer file at a
thing, and you claim ownership because
you own the NFT.
Well, because they were migrating off of
uh
Cloudflare, Cloudflare blocked the
images as being hosted as high-res media
from the NFTts. So, the entire NFT
collection went
blank because the thing that we told
them would happen eventually happened
and all of the crypto bros got all
shocked. Pikachu faced that the thing
that everyone told them was the
fundamental problem with NFTTS turned
out to be the fundamental problem with
NFTTS. And
I I'm living for it. The amount of um
copium that is being circulated through
crypto blogs uh is hilarious. I mostly
found traffic for this on social media
because there's nothing to talk about
unless you go to crypto sites and then
they're like, "Well, we're migrating to
like a decentralized hosting platform so
you can't lose your images again." And
then we're like, "Yeah, you can totally
can." Like, it's it's just funny. And
that that's just really funny to me. So,
reminder, NFTs are scams. Uh, always
have been scams, always will be scams.
There is no ethical way to do anything
with NFTTS. Don't do them. They're
stupid and bad. Great. That was
delightful dessert. Thank you. I did
that. All right. And now, well, Erin, we
do have to to fulfill the pact being the
fir being, I think, the the person who
was guested on this show the most
actually at this point. Um uh we made
the game last time which was blank or a
black hole which you can go if you
search blank or a black hole um um on
the extra credit site you can see the
animated version of that. It's very very
lovely. Please go check that out. Uh
this time we didn't want to do that. We
didn't want to we didn't want to we want
this to be a casual like sort of
nonsense game. So we developed a game uh
called Trek or Quest. Oh, no. And and
and here's what it basically is. We're
going to give you the name of something
and you're going to tell us if it's an
episode name of Star Trek or a quest in
an MMO. Now, you don't need to tell us
what season or what show of Star Trek or
what MMO. We'll tell you, but that's how
this game will be played. And we'll see
just we'll see where you land on all of
this. Right. And and for clarity, I I
will I will rein it in from all MMOs
ever to Final Fantasy 14, WoW, Elder
Scrolls Online, and Star Trek Online.
It's one of those all of you. Okay. But
I have said about four times in this,
not to mention previously, I don't play
MMOs. No, that's okay. That's okay.
That's okay. You We're relying on your
Star Trek. I know you knew that. I know
you knew that. That's That's why we're
doing this. Yeah. Great. It's really to
just test my knowledge of Star Trek
episodes. Yeah. Uh, and and I may have I
may have spent too long on this, so you
know, it's fine. I love it. So, let me
give you some examples. Just this is
like the starter pack. This is not a
question. This is just sort of what it
would be. So, for instance, the inner
light obviously is a nextgen episode uh
season 5, episode 25, I believe. And
then, uh, in the name of the light is a
World of Warcraft quest, right? So,
there there's there's similarities.
They're all over the place. You'll get
the gist. I'll keep I'll keep score.
I'll keep score. Wait, hold on. I need
something to write on.
Okay, here we go. Will, if you would
please. All right. Uh, first up is First
Flight.
That is a Star Trek episode from
Enterprise. Indeed, it is. Excellent.
Correct. Enterprise season 2, episode
24, Matt. All right. Next one is Far
From Home.
That could be
either. I'm gonna guess MMO, but I but
I'm like 7030 on it. So that's your
final answer. Yeah, MMO. MMO. I'm sorry.
That is an episode of Enterprise. Uh,
season 2, episode 24. Far from Home is
Discovery season 3, episode two. One up.
Um. Oh, I sorry. Yeah, I read the wrong
thing. Yeah. All right. A show I worked
on. Great. Thanks. Oh, it's fine. All
right, next up. A matter of tradition.
That's an MMO. Indeed, it is. Correct.
But a matter of honor, a matter of
perspective, and a matter of time are
all TNG episodes. So, that's a real good
dodge you just did. That one's uh that
one's from Final Fantasy 14 from AR.
Okay, great. Uh, next up, A Sign of
Hope.
Unless it's a disco. Unless it's a disco
episode. I think it's an MMO. MMO for
Sight of Hope is correct. That is a
classic WOW episode. Aaron is 321 right
now. All right. Okay. A welcome guest.
That's a Star Trek episode. I think. Oh,
hang
on. It's either Oh, no. I'm going to go
MMO. I'm gonna go MMO. Correct. It is an
MMO. That That one's from the
Shadowbrers expansion of Final Fantasy
14. Okay. Is an unwelcome guest. A Star
Trek
episode. I believe it is. I I believe
Erin, I said I spent too long on this. I
literally have the list of every Trek
episode ever just up on my computer. Um
I love Okay. Uh the next one is The
Enemy Within. Oh, that's a Star Trek
episode. Please. It's both actually.
I will give you a half point for that.
It is both. It's both a Star Trek uh uh
episode and uh sc uh quest in The Elder
Scrolls Online.
All right. I mean, it's a good quest
title. I don't blame them for that.
Right. Yeah. Absolutely. This one uh is
is one of my favorites. Oh, no. You I
just did one. Sorry. You just did one.
Uh this one is A Fistful of Gorn.
That is a That is a Star Trek episode.
Incorrect. It's a quest in Star Trek
Online. Starre online.
Oh,
it's okay. It's okay. You're still Well,
that was that was why STTO was in there
is cuz I knew I could get you with one.
You're still well above par. So good.
That's so good. Okay. I can't be mad
about that. That was brilliant. Here we
go. Here we go. Well, cuz they had a
fistful of datas. Correct. is a TNG
episode and the and the episode that has
the Gorn in it isn't actually doesn't
reference the Gorn in the title. No, I
thought there was a Lower Dex episode
titled A Fistful of Gorn that was
combining the two. It would make total
sense. It would. Yeah, it sounds like a
Lower Dex episode. All right. All right.
Uh, Heart of the Matter.
I'm going to go with MMO.
That is correct. That is an Elder
Scrolls Online quest. You're doing great
here. All right. I mean, I'm basically
saying MMO in lie of not a Star Trek
episode. That's the That's the game.
Yeah.
All right. Triage.
I don't think that's a Star Trek
episode. It is indeed a a WoW classic
quest. Perfect. Nice. And now finally
the last
question. All good things as we must
end.
I mean it's obviously a Star Trek
episode, but I'm wondering if you've got
another double in there with me. Yes. Is
a Star Trek episode is TNG. It's the
finale. Yeah. And you're going you're
are you're going with double or not
double? That's what I need to know for
No, I'm going with just Star Trek. Yeah,
just Star Trek. Uh it is also a Final
Fantasy 14 quest. Of course it is. Of
course. Okay, so the two halves
canceling each other out. You are six
and two.
Well done. Amazing. Well done. Thank
you. Thank you. Oh gosh. You know, it's
nice to know that like my my
hyperfixations does pay off sometimes.
Yeah, it was it was just funny. We were
thinking about what we could do and I
was like, you know, it's really funny
how many MMO quests sound just like Star
Trek episodes and vice versa. It's a
That is a good This was great. Yeah. Uh
that was fun. And that, dear friends, is
our show for today. Erin, thank you so
much for coming back to the to the
Breakfast Gaming table and uh gracing us
with your presence. Where can folks find
all of the amazing things that you do?
Uh I can be found on all of the things.
I can be found on the socials, Dr. Aaron
Mack, D R I N M A C. on Instagram and
Blue Sky um promoting the next thing I'm
doing is a short film um called Long
Away that is written and directed by
Tilly Bridges and Susan Bridges if any
of you are familiar with them. Uh that
should be released in Juneish, but we're
doing a festival run for that. But just
stay tuned for fun social announcements
with it because it's a trans sci-fi film
and that feels really good to work on
right now these days. Um, and uh,
otherwise I'm on the YouTubes, Dr. Aaron
Explains the Universe. You can find some
old classic stuff there. And yeah, thank
you. Thank you for having me. I
apologize for the technical glitches and
stuff, but I appreciate your patience.
And I suppose Matt and I can share
bandwidth sometimes. That's right. What
are friends if not uh, people you can
share bandwidth with? Yep. Absolutely.
Uh, like I said before, uh, the rest of
this week is going to be a bunch of
Clare Obscure. Tomorrow is more
Blueprints because a I really like
blueprints and b I'm don't want to play
four days of Clare Obscure in one week.
That sounds like a really great
conversation to have with my therapist.
Um, and then uh later this week we're
also having Design Club. There is no
time with me and Matt this Thursday. He
is detained by matters of the universe
which require his undivided attention.
So it's just design club on Thursday and
CL I'll be shopping for a new bath. bad.
That's right. Yeah.
Um and yeah, so a reminder, uh Janet and
Brad, don't go anywhere. We'll be right
back. Rocky, it's time for us to do for
you the same sign off we always do every
time. Uh Matt, would you please lead us
in this communal sign off? That's right,
Erin. Uh it hasn't changed, I think,
since you were on last time. We do the
same outro that we do every time on
every show as a community building
exercise. I'm sure you remember what it
is, right? Like everyone, we all have
it. We all know it. So, if you'd all
please join me. Yeah.
[Laughter]
Get over here. Let's see. Okay. All
right, everybody. Have a wonderful rest
of your Monday.
It's not a fossil.
[Music]
Not a fossil. I knew it. I I absolutely
knew it. Not a fossil.
All right. Cool. Cool. Cool. Uh Erin,
thank you so much for being here and for
for doing this nonsense with us. It was,
as always, the highlight of my day. Uh
thank you so much. Thank you. This was
fun. Yeah. Yeah. Always great. Brad,
Janet, great seeing you all. Yeah. Yeah.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Do the thing. Do
the thing. Do the thing. Um, we're gonna
sign off from Janet. So, Janet will be
back on Thursday for Design Club. You
can come on over to Twitch if you want
to watch