It's taken us a long time to get this episode ready.
Because we re-rewritten it like a dozen times.
This is an incredible milestone and one we literraly could not have achieved without you.
So ultimately we decided that we wanted to honor that fact.
We started <i>Extra Credits</i> because we believed that games could be better
if we talked to each other about what better meant.
Not just about measuring graphics and gameplay,
but about discussing the fundamental design, the principles, the artistry...
All the little pieces that come together to make games such a special experience.
Since then we've expanded into History.
Trying to take all the things we've learned making games into using them to educate.
Trying to prove that it's not that the people don't want to learn
or that certain subjects are just inheritely boring
But rather that it's important to think about how we teach it.
And when we decided to try making <i>Extra History</i> a regular thing on the channel,
we had some Youtube experts warn us that doing so would be a big mistake.
To which we said :
"You don't know this audience."
I'll be honest. Making a Youtube show is tough.
The many all nighters, the panic when something goes wrong...
It wears you down overtime.
And we have been doing this for a good long time.
But you have kept us going.
Not only by watching and supporting us, but by writing to us.
Sending encouragements or telling us how many cool things you've gone on to do.
More than your views and your clicks, your words have kept us going.
Words like:
"After two years of work, we're finally ready to ship our first game"
"<i>Get Wrecked</i>"
"None of us were game designers and your videos saved our game multiple times."
"It took years of self improvement, but May last year"
"I managed to get myself a face-to-face interview."
"And then in July I found myself in Seattle, working at Wargaming as an asistant producer."
"I wish I were a game designer or a legislator"
"who could implement some of these ideas and improvements that you guys pose on a major scale."
But while this is not the case, I am a teacher
"who can introduce new methods of interactive education to my students."
We get so many wonderful messages like these from you folks.
"I saw your second <i>Games You Might Not Have Tried</i> episode many years ago."
"Thanks to that episode I found <i>Monster Hunter</i>."
"The third game helped me overcome my depression while immigrating"
"and being unable to work or easily find new friends in a new country."
"making armor sets and learning all of the tales of the monsters in combat game something to focus on."
"The fourth inspired me to make local friends and start a local group"
"and helped me cope with the loss of my dog."
"<i>Monster Hunter</i> continues to help me find and make friendships even while battling depression."
"Back in high school I used to hate History."
"This series however has taught me so much."
"It's really taught me to appreciate History on a whole new level."
"We met in Stuttgart in 2015."
"And you gave us a lot of good advice for our game, <i>Mergimals</i>."
"It's about breeding little creatures."
"Well now we finally made it to the app store and are featured in over a hundred countries."
"In the category : New Games We Love."
Or this one.
"I'm a student in middle school and after many conversations"
"I was able to convince a handfull of teachers to use your videos to help teach their subjects."
"One even asked me to give a lesson to the class about the Punic Wars."
"i don't really know anybody in the game industry, or the alt scene so..."
"I turned to Extra Credits to fill that gap."
"Your emphasis on inclusiveness was what I needed to feel like a part of the field."
"And now I've completed my own game : Little Bug."
"I wanted to say thanks for showing me the cool parts of History I never knew about."
"And for expanding the ways I see a game and the ways I see the world."
"And most importantly..."
"Thanks for being my friend."
And of course questions like :
"Hi, I wanted to say thank you for what your show is doing for me."
"Because of you guys, I am a 9 year old crafting video games."
"Thanks for that. And for something unrelated."
"Do you like butterscotch or cinnamon?"
The answer to which, Alex, is that most of us prefer cinnamon"
"a few of us prefer butterscotch"
"and James can't answer that without equivocating."
I cannot express how much it has meant to receive emails like these.
Or to meet some of you in person and hear this sort of things at cons and panels and talks.
That encouragement has helped to keep this train running.
So we just wanted to return all of that kindness and love you've shown us over the years.
Because really, far more important than anything we do here
is you.
Spreading these ideas and talking to people.
And having these conversations at the dinner table or over coffee with friends.
At conventions, in universities, over Discord and with those you love.
So, Thank you.
None of this, could have happened without you.
If Extra Credits has any sort of legacy,
it is your successes.
Thanks for being so great.
See you next episode.
Subtitled by Hugues Vieu