Taxonomies are great. They're not the be
all end all of understanding your game,
but as a player, these systems are
useful to understand what types of games
you like and to better see what the
designers were trying to get at when
they put the pieces together. As a
designer, taxonomies are incredibly
useful in sussing out why your game
systems are having problems or figuring
out what you should focus on to make
your game really sing. And it's been a
while since we've done a full-blown
design theory episode. So, we're going
to indulge James today and go over one
of the categorization systems he often
uses, which I'm going to call plan,
practice, improvise. While that may
sound like a good set of life
instructions, or like something that
belongs on a depressing office breakroom
poster, it's actually one of the ways
James categorizes how games are played.
Pretty much all games can be broken down
into how much they rely on each of these
three types of player behavior: plan,
practice, improvise. Knowing which ones
your game focuses on heavily and which
ones your game is weaker at is essential
for making design decisions. Sometimes
it'll tell you which areas you need to
shore up. Sometimes it'll tell you which
areas you should focus on exclusively
completely casting the others aside.
It's different for every game, but it's
always useful. So, let's talk about
these three types of play. First, let's
talk about improvisational gameplay as
it gives some context for the other two.
Improvisational games are games where
you don't have any idea what's coming
and so you're figuring out what to do on
the fly. Roglike games are probably the
typical example of this with games like
Spelunky being the extreme case and
games like Rogue Legacy trying to bring
more of the two other types of play into
the roglike genre. In these games, the
players continuously adapting to the
situation at hand. The joy of the game
comes from using whatever game elements
you find around you to solve whatever
problem the game happens to present to
you. Be those elements, a block of
cover, a magical potion you just found,
or that rocket launcher you've been
saving for a rainy day. Heavy
randomization is usually indicative of
improvisational play, but it's not
required. Anybody who's ever
accidentally triggered an army of cops
in Grand Theft Auto knows what it's like
to have to improvise. You're grabbing
whatever car is at hand, turning down
any unblocked street you can, trying to
lose the police, using weapons as you
find them, hopping over fences without
having any idea of what's on the other
side. You haven't practiced this moment,
and you sure didn't plan for it. You're
adapting to it as it comes to you, and
it's awesome. Any section of a game
that's intended to be beaten in one go
is generally improvisational in nature.
So that's improvise. Now let's talk
about practice, as that's sort of the
polar opposite. Games that emphasize
practice are games which have static
scenarios that the player expected to
play over and over until they learned
them thoroughly. Dust Force or pretty
much anything in the bullet hell genre
might be the epitome of this, but it's a
common element in games ranging from
Mario Brothers to Dark Souls. The joy in
these games is in mastering an area
through repetition. Because the
environment, the placement of the
enemies, the shot patterns, and the
power-ups all stay in the same location
every time through, the player naturally
gets better at an area the more times
they play it. In any section of a game
focused on practice, the expectation is
that the player won't beat it in one go.
As a general rule, anytime where that's
the expectation, you have practice
gameplay. The joy in practice games
comes from the mastery of an environment
or an encounter, from the experience as
the human playing the game, of improving
at the task the designer set before you.
These games tend not to allow the player
to freely level up or increase in power,
as the designer needs to be able to know
the tools the player will come into the
area with in order to create a level
that demands practice to complete. As a
correlary to this, these games also
require very finely honed design. The
difference of a pixel or a half-second
change in timing can often ruin a game
built around practice. These games
frequently require more testing on the
micro level than on the macro level.
It's more about level or encounter
design rather than the broader system
design. Practice games are also some of
the games most likely to accidentally
frustrate the player. It is always
important for a player to understand why
they failed, but it's even more
important for it to be crystal clear in
these types of games, as most of the
enjoyment comes from the player's
improvement as a human being. Which
leads us to plan gameplay. Planning
gameplay is sort of the hybrid between
the other two types. But, and I want to
make this very clear, it's not simply a
mixture of the two. Each of these is its
own distinct type of gameplay, and you
have to conceptualize them as such in
order to use this framework. Just trying
to add some improvisational gameplay and
some practice gameplay will not, I
repeat, not result in planned gameplay.
This distinction is subtle, but it's
really important. And it's a problem
that I often see new designers struggle
with. Okay, so what is planned gameplay?
Planned gameplay is when the player has
a good enough sense of the challenges
they're going to be presented with in
order to formulate a general strategy or
plan, but then has to adapt to
circumstances as the play evolves or has
to use high levels of skill in order to
keep their plan on track despite adverse
circumstances which they might not have
been able to anticipate. Collectible
card games are one of the better
examples of this. In constructed play in
games like Hearthstone, you have a
general plan for what your deck is
designed to do, but then you have to
wrestle with an opponent and the random
draw of the cards to keep that plan on
track. One of the reasons that it's so
easy to confuse planned gameplay for a
conflation of improvised and practiced
gameplay is that very often planned
gameplay relies on minor randomized
elements. In most tactics games, you'll
find that if you do the same actions the
same way over and over, you don't end up
with the same exact result, preventing
you from learning it by wrote and
mastering a section through practice
alone. But the randomization isn't such
a major factor that it prevents you from
having a generalized strategy to
complete your goal. The joy found in
planned games is in trying to make a
plan come to fruition. Seeing your plan
come together validates all of the
thought that went into it reinforces
that you're clever enough or in touch
enough with how the game works to adopt
a winning strategy and a droid enough to
execute it. These games lends themselves
to having learnable generalities but not
learnable specifics. The problems they
set forth have a generalized path to a
right answer but not a specific right
answer. They don't necessarily force
adaptation in play, but they encourage
it. As the player becomes aware of small
ways to tweak their overall plan. If the
player isn't able to formulate thoughts
about how the gameplay works because the
system or the mechanics are too obtuse,
planned gameplay just falls apart.
Lastly, although it may not always be
the primary focus, planned gameplay is
important in many different types of
games from Tetris to Call of Duty. So,
don't get caught in the trap of thinking
of planned games as something exclusive
to tactics or strategy. So now that you
understand this taxonomy and you can
hopefully identify these elements within
a game, there's just one thing to say
about this particular system for
observing an aspect of games, and that's
that there is no universal right way to
apply it. Some games choose one of these
elements to focus on in their entirety,
and anything that doesn't serve that
focus needs to be cut. But in most
games, you'll find that they incorporate
a balance of the three, perhaps focusing
on one primary type, but not by any
means excluding the other two. Some
games focus on one central pillar, but
use the other gameplay types to break up
the play and provide a difference in
kind, like the GTA example we listed
before. Some games specifically try to
introduce other types of gameplay into a
genre or a set of mechanics that's known
for delivering very heavily on one of
these. So, as a designer, you have to
assess your own games and see what
mixture of practice, planning, and
improvisation is right for you. I'll see
you next
week.
[Applause]
[Music]
Heat. Heat.
[Applause]
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]