on. Now we're live on YouTube.
Hopefully, baby, possibly. I think
indeed we are. They will. Guess what I
just did? Guess what I just did? Uh, my
camera just failed. Did Did you remember
to resubscribe? I did before somebody
got me, which meant I got to watch an ad
for Death Standing 2, and it actually
looked pretty it looked cooler than I
thought. Death Standing 2 has been like
a a topic of much conversation uh
recently, and I am fortunate in that it
just misses me. Like none of it has
looked particularly interesting to me,
which is nice because Jeff, there are
too many games. Like there like, let me
be clear. There are the right number of
games in the universe and there are too
many games in my life. I can't play all
the games. Jeff, I have to sleep and eat
and do other things. Um, we got a nice
picture with us today. Will
Oh, yeah, we do. We do. Well, I I figure
we're going to like Hi, JJ. JJ's here.
Hey guys, use camera. My bad. My camera
just died. I'm working on getting it
fixed. This is why we go live ahead of
time so that this isn't in the recording
for posterity.
Um, you are waiting for the stream to go
live before gifting. Jeff, your plans
have failed. Haha.
I will be right back. Hold on. Hey,
Will. I have a question. Is recording
for posterity really just taking
pictures of your butt?
No. That'd be recording of poster. Okay,
never mind.
All right, let's get JJ's frozen face
off the screen right now. Hello
everyone. Uh so today, uh as soon as JJ
gets all of this stuff fixed, um we're
going to do some stuff. Uh one of the
things that um
uh we've we've been talking with JJ
about is this uh CSOT game day
experience room thing. Uh and that is um
a uh room for kids to play games in. And
so what I want you all to be doing while
JJ gets his camera fixed and while we
get rolling is what games were comfort
games for you when you were a kid.
Right. Let's start with that. Right. So
uh for me Spy Fox. Spy Fox in Dry
Cereal. Right. We got Putt Putt. We got
the humongous entertainment stuff. We
got uh Jumpstart. We got uh Backyard
Baseball and my man Pablo, right? who
was the allstar of every backyard sports
game by the way. Um, right. So, uh,
we'll we'll be thinking about that. Um,
I'll be scribbing notes so that we'll
pass them on to the M team once, uh, all
is, um, once we're done with this, but
that is that is in fact the plan.
Hippie, by the way, thank you so much
for gifting a sub to the chatbot is
appreciated. So now it by the way
actually will since we're still
starting. Yeah, we should correct the
title in Twitch because hospital's
missing an L.
That means it's also missing an L in
YouTube cuz I copied and pasted it out
of I think I copied and pasted it out of
our doc and I don't know why it didn't.
But you know what? It's fixed now.
Awesome. Can I tell you, by the way, how
excited? So, while we're waiting for JJ
Yeah. Uh, League of Legends just um they
do basically multiple seasons within a
year. Sure. And they just made a quality
of two quality of life changes that I'm
super excited about.
Um, yes. Oh, there we go. Missing an L
cuz all we do is win. It's correct.
You're just absolutely objectively
correct. That is a good line. Continue.
By the way, Jeff, number one is I no
longer It's invisible. I can't show my
sticky note. I no long This sticky note
has 10 champion names written on it.
Mhm. Because part of the way you go
through the season pass to get your free
stuff or if you paid to get your free
stuff plus your paid stuff was on
champion mastery and they would pick 10
champions for you and as you got mastery
points you would earn extra prizes.
Okay. Not all of them would be champions
that you played. They specifically were
like champions you played plus some we
think you might like but since you
needed to get high grades on them like
you needed to get an S tier grade what
that meant was like six of the champions
you'd be okay with the season and four
you'd be looking you're like I'm never
going to get an S tier on a game versus
other players with those. Yeah. So I'd
have a little sticky note so I could
remember, okay, I have four on Velcos. I
don't need any more with him. Now it's
time to go get Vagger. And they got rid
of that with this patch. It's just like
any 10 champions
do it. You're fine. Like the game will
just recognize it. So you can just play
the people you want as opposed to the
people league thinks you want. Yeah.
Okay. The other one is on ARAM. You know
how you would get a roll or possibly
two? Um, so you'd start Aram and you'd
have a champion given to you. Yep. And
you would if you you would get one
reroll every X games or if you had
enough champions unlocked, you'd get up
to two rerolls.
They got rid of that. Now you start a
game and you get shown two champions.
You pick one and the other one just goes
up for everybody else to grab. So you no
longer have to say, "Hey people, if you
have a roll, please remember to use it."
Right? And if you every once in a while
if you have enough champions unlocked,
it'll just show you three. You select
the on the other two automatically go
where everybody else can grab them. Oh,
that's cool. So you no longer have to
remind people about that and there is a
better pool of champions to select.
That's a big Q. All right, JJ, are you
with us?
Are you muted? I think you muted.
Did you mute him? I did not. He's not
muted. And uh I I I checked that. That's
the first thing I checked.
But yeah, he he'll be back. He will. I I
think that that's like a really cool way
to do that, right? Um I get to tell you
about a MOA thing you might be
interested in as well. And we yesterday
we checked out um Crash Punk. Crash
Punk. Clash Punk
starts with a C. Hold on. Corunk.
Corunk. Cor. Okay. Coror Punk. Uh, and
it is a game that uh the that is a MOA
but also an MMO
mobile memo. Yeah. Well, I want to call
it an MMO but like that's like pin
number, right? So, it doesn't quite MMO.
No, I want to call it an MMO,
right? But like it doesn't quite work.
Um,
yeah, Core Punk. There we go. Thanks,
chat. Uh, my brain is not with that.
It's busy trying to make sure that I'm
not missing a sign from JJ that he needs
help with something. Uh, and um, so
instead of having RPG equipment slots
Mhm. you have six slots, you have the
six slots of an of a MOBA. And when you
level up, you don't you level up like
you do in a Boba. And you choose one of
the things and at level six, you get
your ultimate ability and you only go to
level 20. And then after that, it's
horizontal progression. But you can
sort of like you reset all. No, there's
a bunch of horizontal progression at the
top and there's another system on top of
it which is like a ranking system. So
like you only level up to this and then
you engage in different progression. I
haven't gotten to the end. I only got to
level 10. Here's the fascinating thing,
Jeff. You would think
you would think that um
it uh would be all about combat or
laning or something. No, it's about
quests. It has so many quests. Everyone
you talk to has a quest. They're like,
and some and of course the first quest
is rat butts. Rat butts. It's actually
rat butts. It's rat tails. uh let's go
fetch me some rat tails to prove that
you have killed enough rats to you know
there are rats in my grain kind of
thing. Um and we're gonna play more of
it tomorrow. It's very interesting. I
don't know that I'm going to play it
longterm but I'm fascinated by it. Uh
especially because it's MMO combat sort
of but it's really mobile combat because
one of the most important things you can
learn is orb walking.
So you and like different weapons you
can get and upgrade your character with
have different attack delays. So like I
found a purple weapon, right? Because
they have white, uh, green, blue,
purple, and assumably orange. I haven't
seen orange, but I found one with like a
super low attack delay, and I just start
attack moving everywhere. And it's very
cool. Um, I'm a little curious
because in a MOA, one of the hits you
get is you get to level up, you know,
say 18 times in a 30 plus minute match.
I can see you. I can't hear you though.
Me? No. Oh, JJ. Okay, JJ.
Keep going, Jeff. We're We're vamping.
Wow. I can I can see JJ on another
screen. Just keep vamping.
And so I'm kind of curious like if they
go to level 20 and say you you said you
hit level 10 in one day. So
Right. But it was level 10 at the end of
like five or six hours. Right. So it
wasn't even say then it takes you
another that long to get to 15 and twice
that long to get to 20. Yeah. So what
we're talking about is 20 hours in. Yep.
Hear me? Yes. Yeah. We can hear you.
Okay. Cool. Perfect. Great. That's
awesome.
Sorry about that. No, no, you're good.
Uh, so, so, um, it takes 20ish hours to
get to level 20 to max your character
out. And that almost makes like why
don't you just start them out with all
their ability and like you're you're
going to if you say you're most you play
a thousand hours, let's just say. Mhm.
Like 20 hours in you've maxed out your
levels. It feels weird. Like progression
is a big thing. tutorial.
I would argue I would argue that it's
fundamentally tutorial. That the point
of the rapt
has a tutorialization point, which is
you are walking in expecting an MMO, but
what you're playing is a MOA. So, you
need to learn how to play a MOA and also
how to play. And it's very like crunchy
in terms of like um bits that are
designed for PvP. So, like for instance,
you don't heal faster outside of combat
unless you use an item or a campfire and
like
getting you used to all of those weird
mechanics and the idea of orb walking
and how your gear progresses and what
all of the different um trade skills are
and all of that. That's all part of the
overall tutorialization. I would I would
argue that one through 20 is their
tutorial and that I would imagine that I
get into the real game after that cuz I
still haven't left the starting town.
Gotcha. So, and grass is basically
saying similar to how in League, they
don't let you play ranked until you're
summoner level 30. Yes, correct. Except
your character won't go embarrass
yourself and make all your teammates
flame you. This does also have summoner
spells. Like you have the four spells
for your character. Each character has a
special unique uh passive that it shares
with all of the classes inside that
character, and there are three of those.
And then you also have summoner spells.
like you they're straight up like flash,
heal, mana, shield.
Heavily inspired by League and it looks
like Warcraft. Yes. Um it's great. I
love it. Uh it's fantastic. Uh I can't
wait to play more. All right. So, now
that JJ is here with us and we got all
the tech problems fixed. This is why we
do this early. We're going to do an
episode. So, we're going to do the thing
where we go to black. We're going to
come back. We introduce JJ proper. We're
going to explain why JJ is here and then
we're going to start talking about what
makes a good game for the kids. So chat,
I want you to be thinking again if you
if you bopped in a little late while
Jeff and I were vamping, the your goal
is to be thinking of games that you
enjoyed as a kid. And maybe we're not
necessarily going to recommend those
games, right? Cuz like Spy Fox is old,
right? Freddy Fish is old. Putt Putt is
old. These are old games, right? But the
things that they have in common will be
useful to us as we talk about the things
that make a game right for M. Right.
Cool. Great. And I'm going to come in
and say most of what Will just said is
going to end up being trash. And I'm
going to say that early on for fighting
words because those aren't necessarily
games that are good for kids in
hospitals. And that's going to be the
differenti that we get to. I start
talking. I wholeheartedly disagree. And
I will fight you with both fists. Um uh
all right. Um, let's All right, so chat,
worry not. We're going to black. We're
coming back. Uh, be back momentarily.
That was a good rhyme, Will.
[Music]
Good time zone, internet. Hello and
welcome to Design Club, the only game
design show on the internet that this
week has a special guest star. I am your
humble design club host will joined as
always by my pal Jeff and this week by
our very good friend JJ. Say hi to the
people JJ. Hi to the people JJ. Yes.
Excellent. He did it. He knows the line.
Great episode's a success. Everything
else is is we're done. Thanks for coming
everybody. That's it. We're done. It's
it's perfect. Um so uh hello Jeff to you
as well. How are you doing today? Good.
I am excited to be here with JJ. I've
known JJ off and on for a while now um
as a somewhat regular orbiting around
kids charity or excuse me myself being
someone who kind of orbits somewhat
regularly around kids charities that
involve video games because I am
fascinated with them and have a good
history with them and JJ and team do
some really cool stuff for the CS
hospital. Um
JJ, could you introduce yourself? Yeah.
Yeah, sure. Uh my name is JJ Buchard. I
am a certified childlife specialist, a
certified rec therapist, and currently
my role here at the hospital is I am the
manager of our therapeutic gaming and
patient technology department. And I
work very closely with our patient
technology specialists who provide video
games and other um recreational
technology for our kids here in the
hospital. They work with our nurses and
doctors to integrate that uh fun
recreational uh technology into their
therapeutic practice.
Okay, cool. That's that that is that
that's a good bite-sized definition that
I think you practiced a lot. Um
so, a couple questions. So, first of
all, where is CSOD? Uh we are in Ann
Arbor, Michigan. And how long have you
guys existed or been around roughly? So,
our child and family life department,
which is the group that like makes all
the fun stuff happen in the hospital,
they have been around for we just
celebrated our 100th
year. We're the first Wow. um hospital
to have like a playroom in it, like
nationally recognized. My the patient
technology program that I started here
um started back in 2015.
So, we're coming on our like 10 year
anniversary. Nice. Nice. And is your
team's goal roughly to keep kids amused
while in a hospital? Do you interface
with the therapeutic group to aid in
their recovery? Like what is your team's
kind of core mission for what they do?
All of the above. Uh it's it's mostly
what we are the line the elevator pitch
is that we um help integrate uh
recreational technology into the uh to
help kids reach their therapeutic goals.
So we yeah, we play video games with
kids to let them have fun while they're
here in the hospital. Okay. Awesome.
Sounds good. So, uh that's that's the
general pitch, but something special has
happened recently uh that brings you on
this week in in specific because we
could, you know, we could have had you
on for all kinds of things, for all
kinds of reasons, but this week is
special. Tell us about the game day
experience group. Yeah, so I am super
excited. We for the last 10 years have
primarily been a bedside program. We
have lots of carts, games on carts on
wheels and things like that that we go
bedside to kids. We come right to them
or we work in the the smaller playrooms
that we have. Um but we just had our
grand opening for what's called the
Michigan Game Day Experience. Um it is
an indoor playground and it's been
around for about 10 years, but we just
kind of refurbished the space and added
a whole um gaming center, video game
center um to the space. So there's a um
uh it looks like a press box, like if
you were at a football stadium. Um but
it also looks like a streaming booth.
It's got four high-end PCs um that are
just primed and ready to be loaded with
lots of uh fun games for the kids to
play. We've got a few of them on there
like Fortnite and Minecraft, some of
their favorites. Um, and then we also
have a what we we're calling the gaming
lounge, and it's a it's a large space
with a 75 square inch TV um that is
available to patients and families from
9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. It's currently
got a Nintendo Switch 2 connected to it.
Um, and the furniture is all movable and
accessible so we can make space for kids
to do fun more motion based interactive
games or to allow wheelchairs access to
get in there. Um, but we're hoping to do
like virtual reality, um, Just Dance,
uh, different type stuff like that. We
can also do like tailgate parties and
movie watches and stuff in there. But
that's what I'm super excited about.
What I tell people is imagine
Chuck-E-Cheese without the rat or the
pizza. Um, and it's much cleaner. Yeah,
it's not hard to imagine a space that's
cleaner than Chuck-E-Cheese. To be fair,
it did inspire an entire genre of
horror. Uh, so, you know, there's that.
Um, okay. So, so we've got we've got a
gaming space. I like, by the way, that
you totally snuck the it's a press box
cuz Michigan's big on on football,
right? Yeah. So, it's it's a it's a
football press box, but really it looks
just like a streaming setup for esports.
It's an esports room. It looks like an
esports setup for four people. It's
great. Mhm. Before Before the revamp, it
it was supposed to be a press box, but
it's just like wood that held up. It
looked cool, but we were like, man, we
could make that look way cooler. And
luckily, everyone was like, "Yeah, let's
go with the press box. We'll just put
nicer computers in it." Sure. It's You
guys need to figure out a way to get a
fifth in there. Then you can field a
professional league team or an amate No.
We're here to contribute to kids
recovery. League is right off the menu.
You call. No. Nope. No. Wrong.
Incorrect. See desist. All right. Thank
you. Um we we want kids to leave better
not needing blood pressure medication.
Uh so so the room is is the room done?
Is it right? Like is it launching soon?
When is when is the room ready? We had
our grand opening last Thursday. Um but
it's it's we the way we designed it was
so that it is always changing, always
evolving and because you know tech is
always evolving and that was that was a
big point um for us was that we wanted
to be able to adjust and adapt to
whatever the new tech is and to the new
ideas that we're having. Um so that was
that was a big part. So yes, it is done,
but it's also we're in our first week
and we're still learning like how the
kids are using the space, how we're
using the space, how our nurses,
doctors, and physical therapists are
using the space. Actually, that walked
very nicely into the next question I
had, which is who's the target audience
for the room or who uses it? Both the
kids and the staff. Um, can we learn a
little about them? Yeah. So that's the
best part about the room that makes it
so different from everything else in the
hospital is that it is really meant for
everybody in the hospital to utilize.
It's primarily always been a space for
um both inpatient and outpatient kids to
come, but also it's a place for their
siblings and families to come while
they're waiting for kids who are going
through procedures or we get a lot of
families who's are coming to b like
visit a baby in in our NICU, our needle
intensive care unit, and they come to
say hi to mom and baby, but then there's
nowhere for them to go. And so a lot of
them will come and basically spend the
day there almost like they're like going
to a picnic at the playground or at the
park or something like that. Um so we
have a wide variety of people with
different abilities and different
reasons. It's also a great space for our
physical therapists and our occupational
therapists to get kids to go to one
either just to get out of bed and move
but then also because it's such a big
space like we have a we have a hopscotch
there, we have a por square there, we
have a basketball hoop there. Um and
then again we want to integrate all our
fun technology. So, you can play Pokémon
Go there. You can do virtual reality
exercises down there. Um, we have You
got a gym registered in there yet?
We're working on it. Okay. You can Oh,
and we have a we have a wheelchair
swing, too. We have a wheelchair swing
down there. Yes. I'm at Pokemon gym.
There's a way to to submit an area
through Pokemon Go, I think. I think it
might be. We have a lot of gyms
registered. Like when Pokémon Go just
opened up, we had a lot of spots there
and I our gym might already be a part of
it. I'll have to go back and look. I I
was just curious because like one of the
downsides to Pokémon Go is you have to
move around. So hopefully there's a
couple that the room touches otherwise
you're going to be taunting those poor
children. One of the really cool things
and this might help fuel for what we're
going to do later is a lot of our
nurses, doctors, and even families, they
know how much people love Pokémon Go
here. So they're constantly like using
lures and just like throwing stuff out
there to attract Pokemon to the
hospital. So kids are still getting up
and doing stuff, but they don't
necessarily always have to like leave
their room if they can't. But then we
also we have a statue of Big Bird that
everybody goes to. And that is a gym
like kids go there to to battle and
stuff. That's really cool. I'll throw
down at Big Bird. That's right. That's
I'm meeting you at Big Bird at 12:00
noon. Let's go.
get to show up with your Pokemon and do
the flex and do Yeah, it's great. Okay.
Um,
two kids with their phones. Ready,
partner? Draw. Anyway, so big room, some
video games, some physical activities,
everybody from families coming in to
visit to kids who are actually in the
hospital, their families, physical
therapists, doctors. Um, and so one of
my next questions you kind of already
answered, but how long is your average
person there? And the reason I say this
is for kind of game recommendations. If
it's people coming in for the day,
something like Mario Kart is good. If
you're dealing with a kid who's going to
be in the hospital for a month, then you
start talking about you could do a game
like um one of the recent Zelda games or
something that you know the kid wants to
come back every day to kind of continue
along. But also then there's the
question of how much hardware. If
there's one switch, you're looking for
community games people can play. If you
had like 15 switches in there, you you
know, Johnny can come back and continue
exploring through Hyrule. Yep. And I'm
going to throw a couple curve balls at
you on that one, too. Um, so our kids in
general, um, like I said, we have those
we have what are some like lovingly
known as frequent flyers. So, those are
the kids who, um, probably visit two or
three times a week because they have a
clinic appointment and then they'll come
afterwards and, uh, hang out with us.
And so those kids will typically stay
for like an hour or so. Um we have our
kids who uh basically live here for
anywhere from like a week to a month to
some for a year or more. So we
definitely have those kids who are are
here for a long time and have their like
that's my game, that's my spot, that's
where I want to go. Um but I'd say um
the typical uh folks who are coming down
to the space is a is a good mix of both.
Now, the curveball I'm going to send to
you guys is we can't keep any patient
identifiers on our systems. So, no kid
can create their own account with their
own name on it in any way, shape, or
form. Um, the other tricky part is that
we deep freeze our computers and reset
them every day. So, our PCs, um,
whatever was put on there the the day it
was played, the next morning, it's all
wiped and reset. So, that again, we're
not giving away any patient information.
or if we we have a lot of settings on
there to keep it them from being able to
see things on the internet they
shouldn't see but you know kids are
sneaky and smarter than adults. So we
have to we try to reset that every day
to make sure the computers are clean and
safe. Um so those are two things that
are compression. Yeah, those are two
challenges that we we come across every
day is these are systems that are
designed to be very personal and we have
to figure out a way to make it like an
arcade system. Um, and we do have some
checks and balances. So, so one thing
you guys should know is that for every
one of our accounts has a or every one
of our PCs has an account that is
identified as like M one or M 2, M 3,
and that is consistent. That's the same
thing with our our Steam accounts and
our Xbox accounts. Um, and so you could,
for example, if, not that we're going to
say Monster Train is a game to play, but
for example, if we said Monster Train is
a game to play, you could have somebody
play up enough to unlock all the clans
and etc. And then that save version
would be the one that it got reset to
every day. Yep. And we do have we do and
and so we do have some consoles too that
are we have ones that we take bedside
and and that are patient technology
specialists who work every day with
those kids. if we know a kid's going to
be here for a year, we'll like create a
little like save thing for them. Um, and
then in our big 75 square inch TV, we
usually have the the Nintendo Switch 2
like is the default system there, but we
can also swap out systems depending on
who if we know someone's coming and
wants to do PlayStation VR or wants to
play Monster Hunter or something like
that, we know they're age appropriate.
We can swap that out, too. That's very
good. And Monster Hunter is weirdly age
appropriate now that I think about it,
right? Cuz it's all it's all like big
scary monsters, but when you get hurt,
you just get knocked down and that's it.
Like the worst thing that happens to you
is you fall over and faint and have to
go back to camp. That's actually pretty
good. Um, and I don't know, like I think
a little side bucket for us too as we're
talking is we are going to open a teen
room, like a room for teenagers and
young adults like 13 to 26. Um, that's
completely separate from this that it's
just a space for teenagers to hang out
with. So if we're as we're talking if
there's a game that we're like h that
might not be appropriate for all ages
but that might be something I I save for
later for this space this new space as
well. Okay. But just so I know you were
saying though that like M one might be
connected to M1 Steam account. So, does
that mean that cloud saves would work?
In other words, if I'm playing a game,
the 6 hours I play on that game, if it's
cloud saved to Steam, I'd still have
that the next day because it's connected
to M one on Yep. Y and and like we use
that for like Fortnite. So, each each
account, like that's actually some of
the fun stuff that we do with the kids
is we're like, "Hey, see if you can
unlock everything for the next kid
because they would love it and they'll
never be able to be as good as you." But
then we also have to balance that with
like again Fortnite. If we're if we're
at a really high level, it might be
really frustrating for a new kid joining
Fortnite to be like, you know, they're
not playing against bots, they're
playing against sweats. So just being
mindful of that kind of stuff. Okay.
Yeah, that is an interesting balance.
Like that works better for like single
player strategy games where things are
unlocked so people have choices rather
than competitive online shooter. Yeah.
Yep. Mhm. Okay. Uh, that's an I said I
just I was kind of curious because that
all of this informs the kind of games
that get recommended. Um, just and
that's a lot of detail that I think
people don't always think of necessarily
even like basic things like session
length or you know how long is a kid
there. Yeah, it's it's been the biggest
challenge for us since I started. When I
started, we we the reason my job got
started was we put Xbox 360s in every
room. And so it was I had a whole like
library of discs that I had and I could
like say, "Oh, you're a teenager. You
can select from here." And we put it in
and then it's out and we delete
everything. Um but now that everything's
so personalized, it's really like upped
the challenge of how do we make this
stuff all work in the hospital and
everything's digital which is good and
bad for the different reasons. And kind
of final one is um what are kind of the
average health or impairment factors to
consider? Like do most of your kids have
full mobility for their hands? Um or um
you know, do you have a lot of kids
coming in that are on serious drug
regimens and therefore are kind of have
impaired cognition?
Yeah. And again, I'm sure it's a range,
but it it is quite a range. I'd say that
the majority of the kids who are coming
down to the space right now have um
pretty good mobility, but they're
they're they get tired very easily. Um
and like you said, like they a lot of
them are on like a lot of different drug
regimens that give them different levels
of cognition depending on when they're
at. Um the space is designed to be
adaptable. Like a lot of kids come down
in wheelchairs, not necessarily because
they need it all the time, but just
because they're they're tired or they're
trying to a part of the goal is to get
them moving, get them up and standing.
Um, but they will get too tired before
they can get back to their room. So, um,
but there are kids who who have issues
with like like uh with different limbs
and and mobility issues with like um
spinal cord injuries and things like
that. So we do and we work to adapt the
space for them as well. Even basic
things like an IV hookup, like a
wheelchair makes it easier to kind of
wheel that around behind them so they
don't walk too far ahead and yank it.
And yeah, and that's and that's the
other thing is some people think, oh,
the kids have an IV in their hand, so
they can't play Just Dance or they
can't. And that's not actually true.
Like so and in fact, we encourage them
to do it. We just have to as
professionals have to keep an eye on
them and make sure they're not running
away from their IV. Yeah. Yeah. Okay.
Okay. So, we've got um we got a range of
considerations. Uh something we wanted
to kind of talk about is what was the
game selection process before this? Like
was it was it like what have you
historically used to pick games that are
going to be in in in your program in
your space that you're going to use?
Yeah. So, I mean I think the most of it
is our own preferences like from what
we've done as kids and as adults and
working with kids. So, it was pretty
much I mean when it started it was me.
It was me just asking the kids, "Hey,
what's fun this today?" Like, um,
"That's how I learned Minecraft. That's
how I learned Roblox." Although, we
don't allow Roblox and we'll get into
that later. Um,
uh, yeah. And or or things like we've
had lots of discussions about Fortnite
because it is a shooter and we are a
public space for children. You know, do
we allow it? Don't we allow it? Why or
why not? Um, uh, so those the ESRB
ratings are a big factor into what we
do. And then another big one is what's
what kind of what you guys were saying
before is like what is the time factor,
you know, like are the kids coming in to
play? Are we using this as a distraction
or a therapeutic tool? Um, but like deep
dive menus are usually not great. Um, a
game that takes 30 minutes just to get
into, uh, it's not great for most
spaces, but if we know the kids's going
to be sitting there for nine hours
waiting and hungry and waiting for
something and needs a good distraction,
then maybe we throw them into Zelda.
Maybe we throw them into, you know, uh,
The Last of Us, but not in the space,
but we've done that before.
It just depends on them. It's a really
interesting to think about. I actually
have, so some of my history with it is
back when I used to run EDR, which is my
video game research studio, uh, we ended
up partnering with um, Child's Play um,
the, uh, charity. Yeah. Yeah. We work
with them a lot. Yeah. because I knew um
there Robert Coup who was running the
business as well as Mike and Jerry. One
time I pitched them since we were doing
research. I'm like hey how do you guys
pick your games and Robert was just like
we pick games and I said hey do you want
us to do some research on it? And so we
ended up with my research studio writing
this huge hierarchy and because we
looked at every game that came out we
would fill out all this recommend all
this information that could then be used
for selection criteria. And I know they
used to do it as a physical pamphlet and
now they just post it online. But um
some of the categories we'd selected
were spec were
symptom dependent but condition
agnostic. In other words, we weren't
like you're in for a broken arm or
you're in um because you have pneumonia.
We had categories like pain, boredom
short-term, boredom long-term, anxiety,
sadness, or cognitive impairment. So a
doctor could come in or a nurse could
look at the flip book and be like, "Ah,
this kid is heavily drugged up and is
10. So cognitive impairment, age
category, what are six games that might
be good for them?" Or, you know, like uh
pain, what's a good game that engages
you so much that it distracts you from
the pain? Like, so we kind of oriented
it around symptoms like that. And even
though I sold the company years ago, I
believe it's still up and running.
They're still updating. And so like
there's different ways of approaching
how you pick the kinds of games. And for
them, they don't have the big room
because they're kind of just giving
stacks of games to different hospitals.
And so they needed a flip book because
they also don't have experts in like you
guys who can look at a game. They needed
to be able to have any nurse or any
doctor look at a kid and say, "What is a
reasonable game to give them?" because
they specifically didn't have
specialists in the hospital who knew
about things or were even proficient
with computers and technology. Yeah.
Yeah. And we've we've used that huge
advantage. We've used that actually
because it is a very quick easy way to
say hey these are some like we give them
to parents who are like what other games
would be good for my kid. We're like
well take a look at this. Um because
that is a really great resource. Um, uh,
and it's funny because like you said,
that's all the stuff that we just do in
our heads and then to see somebody
actually write it out loud on paper is
really nice. That is that was one of the
things I'm proudest about of like just
helping was, you know, getting a chance
to actually think on that. And that was
one of the reasons I'm so excited
decided to talk to you guys is because
you you're coming in with the subject
matter expertise where we were trying to
write this for somebody that had none.
Yeah. Yeah. And that's just a big
difference. Oh, yeah. So, let's um let's
make this a little easier. Let's pull in
uh let's pull in another screen.
And I've got I've got some notes here,
chat. So, uh this is this is engagement.
Rocky, if you're watching later on
Nebula, this we're we're we're making
the most of our friends over in Twitch
chat and YouTube chat to help us fill
out a list that I'm going to be scribing
down and giving to JJ later. So,
generally speaking, what makes games
good for mods? We've got a couple of
factors, right? Let's just go over this
real quick. Computers get reset daily
back to a back to a state. That state
does not have to be zero in every game,
but it means that personal progression
won't carry over. Can't have personal
identifying information. That means no
named save files, for instance, right?
Um, cloud saves might be possible.
That's sort of on a case- by case basis.
Ratings, E for everyone's great. Some T
stuff. I would imagine M's are like a
rarity and need to be like that thing
that we're like why is this actually M
um kind of thing we will take
recommendations for those and we'll
stick them in the teen to adult room and
again even there they need some amount
of discussion right because these are we
want the most
it's not I would imagine a great feeling
to have a big locked box full of all of
the M games that kids want to play and
can't so it's better to just not have
them like there's also a political issue
there like If a parent wanders in and
sees a a kid playing a mature game, the
somebody like JJ has to explain why.
Yep. Where if it's a teen game or below,
that's just an extra conversation you
don't have to have. Correct. Because
different different parents have
different things that they're happy to
or not to expose their kids to. Correct.
Uh and as chat is pointing out, we do
need to even consider content within
because a reminder that Final Fantasy 14
is rated T and shouldn't be. The ratings
are wrong sometimes and we do need to
consider that content, right? Because
it's T for online play. Thanks. Oh, and
things to Well, and things to remember
to It shouldn't be higher.
Like a big one that came up for us was
um uh It takes two is an incredible
game. It's so much fun to play together,
but it does talk about divorce. And so
some of our kids, we have to be very we
have to be aware of like the game
content. So we joke it's like our
homework to play games. And I take a lot
of games home and have my kids try them
and see how they play them and what
their reactions are. But but that is the
kind of stuff like if you're if you're
if you're suggesting games, maybe give
us a heads up if like, hey, you might
want to play this one till the end or or
even Spider-Man. Like Spider-Man's
amazing, but they drop some some swears,
not hard swears, but some swears that
some parents wouldn't be uh appreciative
of, and it's just like in the background
while you're swinging, you know, like,
"Hey, what the you know?" Um, so, so if
you're aware of that kind of stuff, like
that's helpful to know for when we're
playing because we could have a kid
playing Spider-Man with their with uh
headphones on and it'd be no problem.
But if if the it's loud on the big
screen TV and everyone can see it, then
it might be an issue. Yeah. Spider-Man,
what the heck are you doing? Exactly.
Right. Um, yeah. Uh, Split Fiction is
not a good game. If you haven't finished
the game, you don't know why, but I'll
tell you for freezes that Split Fiction
is definitely not a game that goes on
this list.
Um, and and you can finish the game
yourself and find out why. I watched an
excellent play through uh with Alchemy
and Jen and Jenna is online and I can
tell you for free, not on this list. Um,
I had a a great conversation with my
daughter about that cuz we played that
together. It was the last game we played
together, which we loved, but it it led
to a really good conversation after
that. Yeah. Okay. Um, so, uh, we've got
E for everyone some tea stuff.
Platforms. Uh what we're primarily
looking for today, it sounds like uh is
we're looking for computer stuff, right?
PC/Steam.
Uh and then we also have um how much
mobile are we talking about? Like are we
looking for mobile stuff or do you have
mobile covered? Like what's that? I I uh
I wouldn't I would say more we're
looking for like console stuff. Okay. Um
like like you think PlayStation 5, um
Switch one and two because we still use
the Switch a lot. Okay. So, PS5, Xbox um
one.
Yeah. No. Or Xbox Series, whatever they
are these days. I can't keep track
anymore. Um I mean, we have we have
pretty much everything. So, I'd even
take if you've got if you know a really
good iPad app, we Child's Play charity
supported uh uh we have a huge um iPad
library that we lend out to kids. So, if
you if anybody happens to know any good
iPad apps, we'd be up for that, too.
Okay, cool. So chat, um, that's sort of
our our our that we have set the stage.
We have set the stage. Begin the the
recommendationing. I have one that I
will start with and I will be absolutely
gobsmacked if you don't have it already.
Y'all got Rocket League, right? We do.
We do. That is a favorite. But let's
let's talk about Rocket League as a as
like an example, right? Rocket League is
a game that has so many different skill
thresholds, right? You can have two kids
just messing around with a ball. You can
have as they get better, right? There's
access to more difficult um computers
and to play online, right? It's totally
clean. It's a fun game that anyone can
play. Teens love it, adults love it,
kids love it. It's a great example of
like the kind of thing I think we're
talking about, right? So, I'm really
glad to hear that you already have
Rocket League as that uh like Well, are
you going to start making a list of
things as we mention them? I I I have a
list. It's It's off screen because
there's not enough screen real estate,
but I have it. I can uh I'm going to
describe but I can also share it with
you. I'm going to throw in what I think
is the most obvious of all of them since
we've talked about Switch and other
things. Mario Kart 8 um and for the
Switch 2, the new Mario Kart um like
Mario Kart feels like one of those games
that again everybody can play. You can
play as a group. There's no prog you
don't need progression and you can do
short or long like a short set of
matches or long. JJ, does that is that a
game that fits well or Mario Kart is the
most played game in our hospital by like
thousands and thousands of hours and for
all the reasons you said and that's
that's a really good example. Both of
those are great examples. Um they get
everyone together and and those are the
kind of games that get people watching.
That's the other thing I'm kind of going
for is like you guys are old enough to
remember arcades where everyone would
just stand around the case and yell at
each other while we're playing Street
Fighter or X-Men or something like that.
Um, that's the vibe we're going for and
those two games get parents yelling at
the screen and that's what we really
want. That's a lot of fun. So, yeah,
those are those are great examples. Um,
uh, so we've got a question about speech
apps for kids who are nonverbal. Um,
that uh maybe um that's not necessarily
in scope for what we're talking about,
but like if if we have games that might
assist in particular therapeutic
endeavors, that might be a thing that we
can also talk about. like we want this
kid to get moving. Just dance, right?
Like to to the extent they're able and
comfortable, Just Dance is probably
great for that, right? Especially
because it doesn't have the DDR pad
problem. DDR pads are you can't do DDR
pad in a hospital. You can't just Just
Dance is one that we use that the
struggle we sometimes have is that it
does need internet connection and so we
have to like constantly update it. But
it is a really fun one. The good thing
about Just Dance 2 is that like be if
it's with Switch, um, you don't
necessarily have to be standing up to
play because you can just move your arms
to it. So, those are those are Yeah,
that's a great one. Um, okay. Uh, let's
see. For some reason, I'm not able to um
this. Yeah, I I saw I'm fixing it. Okay.
But, um,
we had a question from Dark Wolf. Are
there any Rock Band or Guitar Hero? Um,
do you guys have kind of the hardware
set for that? You know, we when I first
started working here back in like 2005,
that was the game. We had kids who were
amazing with Rock Band, but all that
stuff is is kind of gone now. We don't
have the systems to make it work. I I
keep hoping it comes back. So, if you
guys have any
recommendations of where I can get it or
if there's new version at this point,
it's like eBay and garage sales. And
there's some third party groups that
make it. But one of the things actually
I learned at the tail end of um working
you know running my research studio was
the games sold a lot but retailers also
kind of had a lovehate relationship with
them because the instrument packs were
so large that you know you could put a
hundred games you know little boxes on
the shelf for every one like guitar band
or rock band package and so there was
kind of this constant issue of shelf
space for stacking the peripherals on.
We had a when I was an intern here back
in like 2005 or something, we had a full
rock band set set up so that kids could
go and play the whole thing. It was in
one of our playrooms, but it took up
like a whole section of the space and
and that's all gone now. But but I've
really been trying to to find something
equivalent to that. So yeah, if anybody
has those recommendations there there's
there's a couple of um yeah, there's
there are some on PCs chat. I will tell
you that those are not great suggest the
the clone hero it works and is not a
great suggestion because
it's a hospital with corporate lawyers.
Clone hero true clone hero is is is in
the gray zone at absolute best.
So like and in the same way right like
okay if we talk about BeatSaber right
for VR stuff right Beat Saber's good
gets your arms moving right when we say
BeatSaber we mean out ofthebox BeatSaber
not the BeatSaber that you're probably
playing like when I play it which is
modded from high heaven to low hell
because again that's a legal gray area
right we need to be squeaky clean out of
the box everything is entirely
unambiguously above board, right? Not,
oh, we could mod it and it's probably
okay kind of stuff, right? Just so that
we're all on the same page, right?
Because those are good suggestions if we
don't have that caveat and we should put
that caveat in. Um, yeah, that that is
an excellent caveat because um hospitals
don't want to get sued. Yeah, correct.
Um they have better things to do with
their time. Yeah, we've had some very um
passionate uh uh mothers and fathers who
are like, "Yeah, I could totally mod
this and clone this and make this and
give you guys this thing with
everything." And we've had to Yeah, like
you guys have said, la I couldn't hear
you say that, right? Um, okay. So, uh,
Track Mania is sort of the grown up.
Okay, great. Excellent. Trackmania was
an excellent suggestion. It is an online
game, but it can be done asynchronously
online. That is to say, you're racing
against other people's high scores.
Imagine um Mario Kart but as a Formula
One sort of physicsdefying racer. Um
it's it's like a little live service.
It's got some stuff on it. Trackmania
might be something to look into. I don't
know how much of the chat features you
can rip out because there is chat and
that is a concern, right? But I imagine
that there might be a way to do that um
where you can make it uh safe. So, I
I've got Track Mania on on the list. Um,
and that would be on Steam. That would
be on Steam. Yes. Okay, cool. Yeah,
we'll check that out. Actually, though
I'm not a big fan since we're mentioning
racing games, you know, um, Forza 5 and
Gran Turismo 7 are both just games that,
if you like that kind of thing, are best
in class and have literally infinite
gameplay, right? Like if you have kids
that are super big into cars, right?
Like neither Jeff or I I don't know if I
don't know if anyone in chat knew this.
Neither Jeff or I exactly giant gear
heads, right? We're not we're not like
up to our elbows in engine grease. I
would much rather be up to my elbows in
my computer. Um but if you have kids
that are, and there are some kids that
are, those are good good. Uh yeah. Yeah.
That's that's the kind of one of the
things that like I love is there's kind
of this certain level of like hey you
know game is good in this category and
there's always kind of the best-in-class
examples best-in-class you even get
people who don't like that kind of thing
that usually enjoy those kinds of games.
Yeah. And those are the best experiences
we have. Like I there are so many game
genres that I personally never thought
I'd enjoy until a kid in the hospital
introduced me to it and I had to learn
it to help him or her and then they like
ended up teaching everyone in the
playroom. So any of the like those
little niche games that maybe like
you know like you guys said like we've
never heard of I I I think kids also
just love the idea that they're testing
the game for the first time or they can
show another kid those games. Um, if
you're looking for best-in-class, um,
Will Will Will likes this little game I
don't like a lot or never really heard
of called Shovel Knight that um, I I
have I've never talked about Shovel
Knight, but Shovel Knight is good.
Shovel Knight is definitely on the list.
It's an old school platformer. Um, and
instead of a sword, our our brave
emboldened hero uses a shovel, so it's
it's about like digging for treasure and
pogo going off of things. And Shovel
Knight's very good. Um, chat has
suggested Tricky Towers, which is a
multiplayer wallless Tetris. Uh, we just
discovered that and kids love it. That's
a great one. Yes, thank you for that
reminder cuz we haven't put it in game
day. We have it. We've used it at
bedside, but I forgot about that. So,
thank you for that reminder. That's a
good one. Um, let's see. Um people
talking about you like Overwatch too
much or is it or Overwatch 2?
It uh we definitely have kids who
request it. Um it would be one I think
we would tuck away on our PC. So like
this was actually this is an interesting
design idea. So when the guys set up all
the PCs, they had it set up the way you
think your PC would look like with all
the games down the side and these little
tiny boxes. And I said, "I want you guys
to hide all those games and just put the
four most popular ones in really big
boxes across the way an iPad is set up."
And um that's a good idea. And and Dylan
and Andrew were a little irked by that
cuz they're PC guys and they were like,
"What? No, the kids aren't going to like
that." And I was like, "Yeah, but
they're not most of my kid most of the
kids were introducing to this place are
not
gamers like PC gamers. They're like iPad
gamers." And we were introducing them to
the PC. And also the staff who are
supporting that area when we're not
there are not used to that. So we wanted
to make it as accessible like two clicks
and you're in the game as possible and
then hide all these other games down low
so that when us like super nerdy know
all that stuff are there that's there.
So that's another kind of aspect of
design just to to like and for an
arbitrary thing like if you ended up
with like six really good PC ones, it
could be six. Like you're just saying
you're limiting the selection to the
things you are most like think they are
most likely to enjoy and that will give
you the least amount of problems. Right.
Well, it's more just like okay, these
are the four games we know kids are
going to play and as we get more
recommended, like you said, we'll put
four, five or six. We probably wouldn't
go above six. And if we notice one's not
getting played a lot, we'd rotate that
out. Or we'd maybe we want kids to try a
new game. Like let's say like Turkey
Towers is one that we like, we know no
one's ever heard of this, but they might
really enjoy it. So what if we put it on
there, they might click on it and and
try it out. You're doing a lot of uh
you're doing a lot of VCR design here,
right? Which is uh something that we've
talked about in the past, right? Where
you you make the big friendly buttons
out front and there are more buttons and
you can do other things with it, but you
don't need to do them all the time. you
just put the things on because then you
get that that choice paralysis that we
and we've noticed that with our iPads
like when we put too many things on
there the kids are like and they just
like it's like Netflix just scrolling
and you never actually watch the show.
Can I suggest a really stupid hack that
um make a make a background image like
put it there and be like core games icon
and then you could throw the four icons
there. like game of the week like for
the picture throw the other icons of the
thing. Yeah, we could you could actually
just make a background picture that you
load on as the desktop background. So
it's like that has however you want to
box it or something. So it literally is
written on the screen for the kids like
mostlod games or something, you know,
you have four icons sitting right above
that. Yeah. and I say game of the week
or whatever else you want like you know
cool new game it's in its own like box
where you've just like 60% of the screen
is black with the letters you know 40%
has you know one or two says game of the
week whatever but that'd be a super easy
thing to make and it would also direct
the kids too because they'd look at it
they'd see the most loved games or
whatever you want to call it with the
icons like fun things to kind of just
hack your way through that's yeah that's
a cool idea and that's something we've
been That's another thing we've been
trying to be like is what are we going
to do with the background? Right now,
our background is literally the the four
icons and then the name of the user uh
for that computer cuz that that was
something we learned right away. We all
started playing and we all tried to play
Fortnite together and then we didn't
know which account we had. That's a
really good Yeah, that's really So, we
put the account name on each computer.
So, this is like M one, M two. Keep
going. Sorry. Yeah. Yeah, you're good.
Okay. Um Chad has other suggestions.
Chad, I'm taking them down as as I get
them. Um, uh, any of the Lego games, any
of the Lego adventure games, right? Cuz
you can you can I believe there's a code
to unlock all the levels which you could
put in ahead of time and and then you
know you've got your Star Wars, Lord of
the Rings, Marvel, DC, whatever, right?
Um, those are great great suggestions.
Is there one right now that people are
like that's the game? I used to use like
DC Heroes a long time ago and Star Wars
I used a long time ago but I'm not sure
Skywalker Saga I think is the most
recent one I've played and it's all nine
movies of Lego. Oh nice. So that that
might work. Um uh Mini Metro.
I've never heard of that one. Okay,
great. I'll I'll do I'll do a chat. By
the way, if if um I can't succinctly
elevator pitch it, I am going to look up
all of these games and get JJ links to
places he can find them when we're done
here. So, if we don't if we like allied
an explanation of your game, that
doesn't mean it's not on the list. It
means I'm going to do a little more
research and put it out there. Um
Splatoon, uh for Okay, Splatoon, lots of
lots of fun painting colors, put stuff
everywhere. Um okay. Are you familiar
with a game called Crypt of the
Necrodancer?
That is my favorite game. I love that
game. Excellent. Crypt of the
Necrodancer. Um check check. Uh people
were also talking in that same vein
about Hi-Fi Rush, which is a um
beat-based sort of action uh beat him
up, but you're fighting robots, so
you're good on that count. And you're
Can I ask a question? So, I'm familiar
with the game, but I have not played it.
Is it do is it frustrating if you can't
stay on the beat? You can turn that bit
off. Oh, perfect. Okay, cool.
Really enjoy that challenge, but then
also get really frustrated. That's been
a big question in accessibility circles
is how um
how tight timing can be before it's an
accessibility hurdle. For instance, uh
it it is not on the recommendation list.
I'm using it as an example, chat, before
anyone like gets a nose bleed. the one
of the games that is slated to be the
game of the year, Clare Obscure, um is a
turnbased game, but it has very tight
timing windows for parries and um like
quick time events while stuff happening
on screen. And that's caused a big
discussion about accessibility, like how
tight the timing can be before it starts
to become a problem for people with
slower reflexes, people who don't want
to play QTE, that kind of thing. So,
just just and just I guess for the chat
to know like Clare Obscure is a perfect
example of a game that I wouldn't put in
this space, but I would use it for like
a teen who I know is going to be here
for a long time who who can stay within
those par like cuz that's something that
they could really just sink their teeth
into and we would get them their own
system for that. Or we might put that in
our teen room and just let the teens
know, hey, we're all working together on
this game. but because you know it's a
storydriven game with like really
interesting stuff that could really help
someone who's going to be here for a
long time. So just just for everyone's
awareness like we would still use a game
like that just maybe not in that space.
And it's funny because you get games
like that. Um one of some of my favorite
games are high learning curve games like
Civ 5, Civ 6, Slay the Spire, Monster
Train. They're games that you learn by
playing a whole bunch and you get better
and better at them because you play. But
those are also some of the hardest ones
to put in a space like this because
somebody who's never played a civ game
sitting down starting a 4X game like
Civ, they're just going to be lost. Mhm.
The same with something like Slay the
Spire. Slay the Spire is amazing, but
you're also going to die like on floor
four the first time because you don't
know what's going on and slowly get
better. So, it's interesting that like
some of my favorite games for this are
also not good like pickup games. Yeah,
kind of master games of mastery are hard
to put in a place like this. That was a
big learning curve for my team when they
first started working yours because they
they love like Zelda, all these get deep
deep games and like you can't play that
play Final Fantasy 14 with half of your
team, I think. So, like, yeah, I'm
familiar. Yeah. But what's great, too,
is that because they have that
knowledge, when we do get those kids who
don't know or or who are here for a long
time, they introduce them to something
that becomes their new passion. And and
like we've got kids who are now like
developing their own kids. They're like
teens, almost adults who are developing
their own Twitch stream now because they
got so into Final Fantasy. Watching you
guys play on Twitch sometimes, you know,
like Yeah, that's awesome. Um let's see.
Uh chat's all suggesting Peglin.
Peglin's a good one. It's on pretty much
What's that one? Uh Peglin's an older
game. It's um sort of a brickbreaker
game except it's gravity based. They're
like, you know, in in like um some of
the brickb breaker games where you have
like the paddle and you bounce it back
and forth. This is you shoot it from the
top down and it's big and brightly
colored and it's got and you're trying
to destroy all the orange blocks or pegs
and it's kind of puzzly. Um it's not
terribly long and tolerates being reset
pretty well cuz you're just playing like
the same I think dozen levels or so.
It's relatively cheap. Um cool. Is it on
all consoles or Steam or I believe it's
on Steam. I think it should be on Steam.
It might also be on mobile. Um, which is
also good. Um, oh, Mario. Um, oh, go
ahead. Sorry. Mario Wonder also, if you
don't have it already, is the very uh
playful u has like relaxed time limit
kind of thing for the latest 2D Mario
sidescroller, which is good. And people
were also suggesting Odyssey as like a
longer form thing, right? Because
Odyssey like you do, if you had to reset
it every time, you'd never get very far.
But I suppose like if it's a different
kid, it doesn't super matter. Odyssey
and wonder. So again, think if you're
thinking in that line, those are the
kind of games that we would if we had a
kid who like they came and said, "I'm
waiting. My brother's in surgery all day
and I'm just going to be here for six
hours and I want something fun to do."
Like I think we would like to throw a
game like that in. Wonder is one of
those games where when we put on the big
screen TV, we never like it might be fun
and everybody gets along or all the kids
start fighting because they're knocking
each other off the
like it's one of those we got to pay a
little more attention to. But games in
that vein, too, that's the other thing
we're looking for is like if you're
like, "Oh, Mario's great, but here's
something like like Rayman or another
game that's of that genre that no one's
played." Those are things that we try to
introduce to kids, too. So, if you got
any good suggestions there.
I have a question and this is an I don't
know would a game like Monument Valley
um which is an iPad game. Is that a good
game for this kind of thing? That's a
that's a wonderful game. Okay. Um
it's it's a wonderful game for iPads. I
actually I we have them on our iPads,
but I I would love to see if Can you get
that on Steam or something like that on
our big screen TV? I think because of
the way they integrated touch in Yeah.
But I know there's a Monument Valley 2,
I think, at this point as well. There's
a three, too. Oh, okay. But yeah, just I
remember showing that to my niece and
nephew as like intro games in and like
working through the puzzles with them
and watching them do it. And that
actually kind of converted my sister to
letting my nephew and niece play video
games. Like I was like that's as much of
an art piece as it is. Yeah. But again,
I was just kind of curious if that made
a good pickup game. No, that genre is
also really great for like if we're just
trying like a chill sesh. like cozy
games are also like I'm always up for
cozy games. We've got uh two very easy
pitches in that vein. Then Journey and
Flower, both of which are by that game
company. Uh they're they're what I would
call gallery games. Monument Valley is
also in that. Very minimal UI, very much
about the feeling and the expansive
thing. Not terribly difficult, but
rewarding when like you get the cool
moment. Um Oh, perfect. So, uh, and I
would say that Journey and Flower are
like if someone if we ever had to have
the argument that video games were art
and all video games are art, like that's
easy, right? If if I have to put forward
an example, Journey's like at the top of
that list of like Oh, okay. of a movie.
If you like Monument Valley on just
you're like, "Wow, this is just a nice
piece than the way it's done." Journey
hits that same vibe. Yep. Absu
is very good. Um, Abzu, Abzu is another
uh it's an underwater game. So, kids
with philosophobia probably not, but it
is a it's another one of those very
gentle um sort of lots of like light
music, lots of swimming with manta rays,
lots of light kelp puzzles and floating
around, no real time pressure kind of
games. Oh, wow. Okay. Is that And that's
Steam. Uh, yes. most of the I I will uh
I will tell you where you can find some
of these cuz some of them I'm not sure
on. I will have uh I'm going to go chat.
I like JJ and everything they're doing
so much. I'm going to find links to all
of these and I will when I send you the
doc I'll have a link to every single one
of these where you can get it. That's
amazing. Thank you. Yeah. Uh let's see.
Um Chad's got uh not grie is too heavy.
Grie is about grieving and loss and
death. No, it's beautiful. It's great.
Remember, we're pitching games for kids
in a hospital. So, I saw someone mention
Dragon, right? Yeah. We're not doing
Dragon Pancer. No hate on that game, but
that is not one that I Sorry, I'm being
Yeah. Yeah. Um, it's that's a Yeah.
Yeah. Untitled Goose Game. That's a
favorite. We use that one a lot. That's
a great one. Uh, Goose Game is good. Um,
unpacking.
Ooh. Oh, that might go over kids heads,
but I think that would be okay.
I I think that might be a good one for
the teen room. I think it is, too. It's
one of the only games that's made me cry
in two hours without saying a word. It's
It is a phenomenal piece of art. Um Oh,
I saw another one that was really good.
Um what was what was it? Oh god. No. No.
Oh. Um,
I had it in my head. Oh, a little to the
left.
I don't think I've heard of that one.
It's an unconventional puzzle game with
multiple solutions to every puzzle. And
it's about organizing household objects.
So, for instance, if you have a
collection of pencils, the pencils might
be different lengths. And you can either
arrange them into groups based on
characteristics about the pencils or by
length. And both of those are valid
solutions. And you get points for
finding both of them. And it's very
calm. And like there's one where you
organize a junk drawer. It's very easy.
It's on Switch and PC. A little to and
it has DLC and they're coming out with
like daily challenge levels. A little to
the left. Phenomenal. Uh absolutely. I
know five kids right now. Actually, I
should say I know five teens right now
who would love that game. That That's I
That could go in either space. I love
it. I'm going to try that one. Um that's
awesome.
Guys, chat, you all are you all are
batting a thousand. Um, here. Pico Park
is a simple lightweight co-op party
platformer.
Pico Park is a little hard, but I think
for like a team room or like a a night
where the other problem is it really
needs eight and they only have four
devices that can connect together, but
Pico Park might make the list. Um, so,
oh, here's another cool thing we do
though, because there we're not the only
hospital who does this. We're the only
one with this school playroom, but we
there are people like me at other
hospitals all over the country. Child's
Play actually helps connect us all. And
we do something on Fridays called Fall
Guy Fridays where kids from hospitals
all over the country play Fall Guys
together. Um and so something like Pico
Park, we might have like a Pico I'm
trying to think of another Pico
Tuesdays. I don't know. Like like a fun
Tuesday.
There we go. Yeah. Yeah. So, so those
kind of games are are on the table. Like
we could potentially like team up with
another hospital or play with enter one
Pico leaves. Correct.
That's cool. That's a good Okay. Yeah.
Multiple people have suggested Kadamari
Damasi. Um if that's the one with the
like rolling around. Yeah. It's the one
with the Yeah. The the um you are the
the prince of the stars and you have to
roll things up to make planets and it's
very silly. That's a tricky one actually
for a hospital. It's there's some just
like some books like I remember reading
Zalansky's Nine Princes in Amber when I
was like 12 with a fever like reading
through my mom's sci-fi and fantasy
collection and it sticks in my head as
this weird fever dream. Kadamari Damasi
for a kid who's coming in with a little
like drugged up or some cognitive
impairment.
It's weird. Yeah, it's it it is extra
straight up weird. Yeah. Um, uh, what
the golf is another good one, although
that one could be a little rageinducing.
Um, what the golf is. You're playing
golf.
Promise. It's all golf. The goal of
every level is to get a thing that could
be called the ball into a thing that
could be called the hole using a thing
that could be called the golf club. Oh,
now I'm now I'm very interested. And it
stops being very sensible very early on.
Um, yeah, it's technically golf. Um, and
would this be like is it multiplayer?
Uh, no. That this one's kind of like a
solo thing. There is golf with friends.
Um, which I believe that's I know that
we like that one. That's a good one.
Matt's favorite walkabout golf, which is
VR that Yeah. Um, VR. Oh, yeah. VR VR is
on the table, too. So, if you guys have
good VR suggestions, we're looking for
those. Katon VR, in my opinion, is one
of the best VR games that has ever been
made. I love I love Katon. Um, we'll put
that. Sorry. I That was the last game I
dev joining um extra credits and extra
history as studio director was we did
the VR official VR port for um working
with Claus Tuber's sons Benny and Gito
to make it and um Oh man, I'm so
jealous. That's I I play iPad VR all the
time because I my friends don't want to
sit and play play Katana with me for
nine hours straight. Yeah. Well, if you
have if you have anything in the meta
ecosystem, it's on it and is um it's
good.
It's an it is a very calming game. So,
if you're looking and you can play with
people or just against the AI. So, if
you're looking to put kids in a calming
VR environment, I will actually
recommend the game I did.
Okay. Um uh let's see. Uh TK suggests
Jackbox. Jackbox is one of those ones
that needs a fair amount of setup ahead
of time to like make sure it's all in
the right vein and can go off the rails
pretty quickly as we've demonstrated,
but also has some really good stuff in
it. So, that's one we've been wanting to
try on our CCTV and like I think my
vision of that, and you guys can tell me
if I'm way off base on this one, is like
having a live group in our lounge area
playing it, but then also broadcasting
it Yeah. on our CCTV cuz you use your
phone, right, to like There's a
controller or voting mechanism. Okay. Y
um let's see. Uh he ho keep
are you talking about keep talking and
no one explodes near Keep Talking and No
One Explodes is
that's like more teen I would say. Um
pretty much anything by Shell Games is
going to be good. That's one of the
Shell games one VR games. Um Yep. Yep.
Yep. Yep. Uh okay. Sorry Chad. I'm I'm
going I'm going through all of the all
of the stuff. Um, can I eat the roads at
Katan VR because that's how I win by
blocking anyone from getting longest
road. No, you're not allowed to eat
them. Um, we mentioned you can
definitely block people though. Like
that is solid katon strategy, right? Um,
uh, people were mentioning um,
um,
gecko game. What was that, Will? Yes,
exactly. uh Astrobot and Astrobots
Playroom if you haven't already. Like
and people were mentioning mascot
platformers in general as like decent,
good, light, fun, approachable games,
right? Um yeah, later on this year,
we're getting a new one. I don't know
when it'll be out, but uh Niko Dero is a
is a mascot platformer uh that is very
much in the style of old ones, except
it's not leading a platform. It's just a
mascot platformer. I'm very excited for
that one. Oh, will Powerwash Simulator?
Powerwash Simulator.
We we had Fortnite going on three
computers and Powerwash Simulator on
another and kids were lining up for
Powerwash Simulator. I was surprised. I
thought everyone would be fighting over
Fortnite. But that's a that's a that's a
good one. That one's on a lot of
different platforms. I was going to ask,
do they make it for the Switch? Because
I've only seen it on PC. I'd be shocked
if they don't. It's I know it's on Xbox.
And if it's on Xbox, I'd be surprised if
it's not. Yeah, I think it's a Unity
game, which means it should be on
everything. Mhm. Um, uh, people are
mentioning the remaster of Spyro.
Oh, yeah. Oh, Spyro 1, two, and three
got remastered. They put out a trilogy
on the remaster, didn't they? Yes.
Oh, we'll have to get that. I don't
think we have that. Nice, Jeff. I I see
it, chat. Hang tight. Hang tight. I'm
gonna do a thing. I'm old enough to play
the OG Spyro here in the hospital, but
Gosh, when I ran a playroom, I had like
a whole basket of all the Skylanders
characters, and the kid's favorite thing
was just to switch them all in and out
to watch them pop up on the screen and
disappear. Oh, that's awesome. Uh, okay.
Um,
Tony Hawk for the teen room. Yeah, I
would say Tony Hawk Tony Hawk's Pros
Skater 1 through four have all been
remade now. Um, that's pretty good. I
think I would hide it on our like I' i'd
put it on our PCs and hide it and just
have a kid wear head headphones if
they're playing it in the lounge.
You can also nerf some of the the level
of the music like
like what you know how mature you want
it to be. You can edit individual tracks
in and out. Oh, cool. I didn't know
that. Yeah. I I had to do it when I
played it on stream because there's a
stream safe uh audio mode because
copyright claims. Yeah. Um,
that three and four are soon. That's
true. Yeah. Repo.
Repo. Yes. Okay. So, all right. So, so
let me explain repo. What if you were a
little robot helping your friend move
their couch out of their apartment? And
by friend, I mean someone who's
definitely uh who who you owe a bunch of
money to called the tax man. And by your
apartment, I mean increasingly haunted,
weird, random like places. There is
there's like it it's kind of scary, but
it's not unapproachably scary. And all
of the characters are really fun. And
it's like everyone is a little
pill-shaped robot. And when you you can
um one of my favorite accessibility
tools is every character has text to
speech and your mouth moves when you
text to speech. So you can Yeah. So like
for kids who are non-verbal but need to
communicate, that's it's a really great
tool for that. It is a little on the
scary side, but it is good. Uh, I would
say we do have a whole group of kids who
love scary stuff and yeah, um, like
Connor set up a ghost capture camera for
a kid one time because they wanted to
like they were convinced their room was
haunted and wanted to catch a ghost. So,
yeah, we have we have kids that that
would that would be right up their
alley. Remember remember chat remember
that one of uh Gen Z and Gen Alpha's
favorite game series is Five Nights at
Freddy's.
I don't get it either, but that they're
like all about it. So, kids love tween
love jump scare. Like they they they
love to be scared. That's something I've
learned. And I can't sometimes I'm like
I can't watch this, but you can. Like if
your mom said it's okay. Um, Peak,
something like Vampire Survivor or
another bullet heaven game might be
really nice for twins or actually I I
could come up with some good bullet
heaven games like the games where you
are not the one who uh your opponents
don't bullet, you bullet and you like
have all these weapons and eventually
you just turn into this, you know,
whirlwind of pixel effects and
everything else and try and melt your
graphics card. Um, there are some I like
Vampire Survivors because even though
you're killing lots of things, they're
all pixelated and they're all like just
tiny little bats and ghosts and stuff.
There's also some that have lighter
theming like the Temptem one. There's a
Tempem one where it's all like legally
not Pokemon, but they're totally
Pokemon. Uh, and it's it's got that
theming of like, you know, stuff faints,
you're capturing new temps, that kind of
thing. Um, there Yeah. And there's as
far as like video game violence, there
is that balance that we're always
finding like Fortnite sometimes we
justify it's a simulation and everybody
plays it. But um uh but there's not a
lot of gore, you know, they fade out.
There's not blood flying everywhere.
Same thing with like Halo is sometimes
we can get away with that one because
it's like lasers and aliens and it's not
as as bloody. Um so but and the
pixelated stuff sometimes though the
pixelated stuff's almost more graphic.
It just you know depends on the game.
It's there's a certain level of
suggestability where when you fade out a
little bit, your mind fills it in. So, I
can absolutely see that. And but from
what I remember, Vampire Survivors is
No, that one's fine. I've played that or
I've I've I've watched it. I haven't
played it, but I' i've kind of been
curious if that would be a good one. It
is surprisingly engrossing for a while.
Mhm. Yeah. It doesn't last forever, but
it's good. Um, let's see. We got Gunfire
Reborn.
Bastion.
Oh, Bastion. Ba B B B B B B B B B B B B
B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B
B B B B B B B Bastion's probably the
only one of the
Super Giant games that makes the list,
but Bastion's real good. Bastion. Okay.
Um it it gets the in my opinion gets the
award for half the symmetric um
adventure explorer
little bit of platformer. Um,
yeah,
it's just actually it's the narrator
makes the game like it's a fun game, but
there's this narrator with this deep
voice that narrates the actions that
you're doing and then slowly and it
slowly starts disagreeing with some of
the stuff you're doing or giving extra
commentary and
and then you find the narrator and then
the narrator becomes a character, right?
It's it's really good. Um, the narrator
and the music. Yeah. Uh, that is true.
Bastion can be a little rough. Yeah. Um,
maybe it's Team Room. The other ones all
have much more
solid no reasons, right? Like I can run
down all of the rest of Super Giants
collections. Um, Hades might No, Hades
doesn't make it for the teen room. Uh,
there's definitely some landmines in
Hades um that I wouldn't like. The
problem isn't that they exist. The
problem is that knowing if a kid's going
to run into them is really hard, right?
And like that's the hard part, right?
Like they're deep in there, but there
are definitely some weird things in
Hades. Um, and uh, Py and Transistor are
both straight out uh, for very specific
reasons. And if you've played either of
them, you know why. And if you don't,
you should play both of them because
they're both amazing, but not for this
setting. Um,
oh, how about some of like the Lego
Batman Star Wars? We talked about this
while you were up. Oh, okay. Sorry.
Yeah. No, no, that's good. Um, so what
how do you feel, JJ about hot seeding
long-term games for kids? So instead of
having like a um instead of having this
kids island farm, whatever it's the
rooms Animal Crossing island, the rooms
Stardew Valley farm, that kind of thing,
right? Stardew Valley. I like that.
Yeah. Okay. It's it's it's definitely
certain kids will be very like, "Ah,
that's mine." But we we are kind of
exploring and experimenting like this is
this is game day's village and we're all
sharing and just know that there are
other people using this space that uh
has Minecraft been mentioned? I assume
that every device in CSBOT Children's
Hospital that can install Minecraft
already has Minecraft on it? Yep. And
all four computers are connected to each
other and can play together. We're we're
exploring and creating our own server um
server. Yeah. We're just not sure what
the legality and all that is. Hit me up
when you get to setting it up. I've done
ours before. Um Oh, sweet. Okay. Uh
Magika is probably not it.
Magika is probably not it. I would say
the humor is a little adult. Um
there was a motion for blueprints.
I don't know that one. I would say yes
for the teen room. Uh, Blueprints is a
first person uh, house building rogike
where you are drafting rooms to build
out a mansion with 45 rooms and your
goal is to discover the 46th. It's a
very deep puzzler game. Um, okay. And is
one of the things that has a weird
amount of meta progression because once
you know something, even if your save
gets wiped, it's okay because now you
know that thing, right? Yeah. Does that
make sense? Right. Um, yeah, blueprints
would also work as a group activity.
That's very true. Oh, cool. Oh, that's
great because that's the other thing
we're looking for is like group ideas
for like engaging groups or encouraging
kids to come down and play together. So,
that that's to put in that bucket. Cool.
Um, uh, let's see. Not Outer Wilds. Um,
for the same reasons that you all want
me to play it on stream. Not Outer
Wilds. Uh
yeah. Hey Jeff. Mhm. Your camera's
lagging a lot and I've tried to fix it
on my end and I don't know what's up but
it's let me act and squirly. Let me do a
refresh.
Mist.
Mist is an interesting one. The remake.
Oh, they remade it recently. Like the
original slideshow would never hold up.
Um oh. Uh Christopher Walka says, "Has
anyone said overcooked?" Of course that.
Yeah, overcooked. Um and unrailed,
derailed. There's another one that's
like trains. Um
Will, I just sent a key frame. Am I
doing better a little? I I imagine it's
something with your connection because
it's it's been pretty persistent. I
don't think it's like a one time thing.
You're a little cleaner now, but I just
want Let me do a internet speed test
while we're checking. Uh, okay. Um,
Spelunky,
uh, Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles for
like a fourplayer beat him up. That's a
good one. That's I can't wait for beat
him up day cuz that's that's my jam. Um,
there's the new Scott Pilgrim
which is also which is a more modern
take on the same idea. Um, Scott
Pilgrim's based on that era of beat him
ups. Um, would it be appropriate for all
ages or would that be a teen room one?
It's very cartoony. It's extremely
cartoony. It might be te. I think it's
E. The movie and graphic novels are
probably teen, but the game the new game
is not. That's why I asked I've seen the
movie. I've read some of the novels, but
Okay, cool. Yeah, I'll try that one.
There's a new Power Rangers, I'm sure.
Yep. Yep. Yep. Yep. Um
Oh, uh, good question. Do you in general
avoid games where you try and learn
something like typing or piano? Good
question. No. Okay. So, we don't know
what Yeah. Well, well, anything and
everything as long as it's appropriate
and it's something. So, so like Yeah, if
it's if it's educational, that's not a
bad thing. Okay, cool. Great. We'll work
on that. Uh Connor says uh that Unrailed
and Overcooked games going to have
controllers being thrown. That's true.
Um that's why you have this the wrist
strap. The wrist strap isn't so you
accidentally let go of it. It's for when
you try and let go of it and you forget
that it's on. You can't. Is that my
Connor? Maybe cuz he's the one who
recommended those games before. Um, I
don't think it's Gloom Haven. I don't
think it's
Oh, yes. The Pokemon Okay. Not Magic.
Magic's got too much baggage. The
Pokemon game. The Pokemon trading card
game client on PC. Yes. And the reason
is you can't spend money on it. Oh.
There's no way to do microtransactions.
Um, and because it's fast and light and
fun, the kids could build the build
collections for each computer and you
could set them up with as friends with
each other so they could play. Um, and
there's like there's really approachable
ones like you don't have to build the
deck. You can play one of the starter
decks and you can only play against
other people that have the starter deck.
Right. Right. So like that's so it's
it's like like Pokemon like the card
game. Yes. But it's all digital and it's
just on a computer and it's a onetime
buy. It's free. It's free. Is free as in
Yes, it's free as in lunch. The way that
they make money off of it is that you
can get if you have physical Pokemon
card packs. You can put in a code to get
a pack in the game for every pack you
buy in real life, but Pokemon makes so
much money that it's essentially free
advertising for the game, but it's free.
Um I tried to put money into it and
couldn't. Like, okay, it's Yeah. Um Oh,
yeah. That's a Yeah, we'll get that. The
kids will love that. Um Yeah. Pokemon
TCG live, not TCG Pocket. Yes. Correct.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I know. I'm I'm
talking about live, not Pocket. Correct.
I should say our med students will love
that. We've had a lot of med students
who are are Pokemon fan. Like they they
are the perfect age for when Pokemon
really hit. Um Okay. So, we got a great
we got a great question, uh which is
Kerbal Space Program.
Okay. So, how many of your kids want to
be astronauts? And how many of them want
to be astrophysicists?
Because like Kerbal gets to the level of
you need to be a rocket scientist. Is
that the one where you build a spaceship
and try to land it? Yeah. It I think it
would be an exercise in frustration for
a lot of kids. Yeah. Um I think it'd be
a very specific kid who would really
love that. Yeah, that's definitely the
lock away and recommend a specific kid
kind of game. I'll put that in the the
teen games list. Um,
by the way, chat, you all are knocking
out of the park with this both chats.
Um, uh, okay. Uh, oopsie brings up a
good one that someone else brought up in
Twitch chat earlier, but I didn't get to
at the time. Balloons. You familiar with
balloons? Okay. My son just discovered
that and now he and I play together and
I've I I am trying to figure out a good
way to bring that into the hospital.
Okay. Balloons TDC on Ste. You could do
it on PC, right? Yeah. Okay. Because
I've only played on on the iPad. But
yeah, if we're recommending Tower
Defense, in my opinion, the single best
tower defense game ever made still is
one called Defense Grid, which came out
like 15 years ago on Steam. You can
probably pick it up for five bucks.
Cool. Number two I thought was good but
not as good as number one. But um it it
is again for my money still the best
tower defense game ever made. It's a
tower defense game with a story. Yeah.
Tower tower defense are good to a point
for people who like maybe can't move
fast but you know you can set it up but
then you do get to that point where you
have to like hit stuff or I don't know
just it really depends on the game. But
I think balloons is a good example of
one that I think would would fly really
well. Yeah. Um Oh. Oh,
this one there for the for the teen
room. Mhm. Orcs must die. Yeah. Orcs
must die for the teen room is a good
one. Um
orcs must die. JJ is um imagine you're
getting invaded by a horde of orcs
through your castle and you're like a
mage with a crossbow or spells or other
things, but you have a budget to spend
on traps. Oh, cool. Traps, shock traps,
and it's it is third person over the
shoulder shooting and you run around
placing traps and shooting things. Yeah,
it's like Fortnite Save the World. Yes.
Oh, here here's here's one. Uh, I
apologize in advance for the
productivity hit the entire hospital
will take when I say the word Batro.
I love that game. I told Connor to put
it on all the iPads. So, I think we
might have it, but I have not. We
haven't put it on the PCs, though. And
that would be a good one, especially if
we're trying to get the kids to calm
down a little bit. Yeah. But you have to
know poker well enough. Is it too old
for I don't think you do. I don't think
you do. Yeah. And it tells you it tells
you what the hands are and shows you
like it is actually a good way to do
like math stuff too. Like Bellatro is
one of those really great games that's
not really edutainment, but man, if you
don't learn some math while you're doing
it, um it's a it's a great waiting room
game. Um uh Okay. Yeah, but it's it's
trying to the hardest part with that one
is trying to get people to try it. Once
they play it for like five minutes,
they're hooked. But it's just trying to
convince them, no, look, it's different.
If you tell them it's kind of like
solitire, they they I sometimes jump on
it. Actually, it's funny, JJ. I have
three games, Will's heard me say this,
that live on my iPad for my I'm killing
time. It's Bellatro, Slay the Spire, and
Monster Train. Like, those are my three
that basically can take an infinite
amount of time and all are very good for
that and have great iPad
implementations. Yeah. Um, Plants Versus
Zombies is another like if it's not on
everything, it probably should be. It's
super approachable, very easy, very
light.
Um, that's a that's that's an oldie but
goodie that I think we forgot about and
we should put back on. PvZ one, for the
record, PvZ 2 is good and then after
that they went like down into
microtransactions for every plant like
kind of level and I was like no no stop.
You had a great thing going why do stop
doing this? It's like Angry Birds. Angry
Birds was the app that we used for
everything here for a long time and then
Angry Birds 2 kind of ruined it. Yeah.
Um,
Connor, I am also taking notes. So, you
I have I literally have a doc that I'm
going to send uh I told JJ this that I'm
going to send to JJ with links to all of
these games when we're done. That's my
project for tonight. Um or tomorrow
maybe uh but soon. Um
um two point. Yeah. So, someone
mentioned AI, someone mentioned two
point. I think those are both too
progression based. AI is also a little
scary. That's probably a team room game,
but it is also heavily progression
based, right? And remember, we've got
this this like reset problem, right?
Ory. Ori is a that's like a a certain
kid kind of game. Like if if I know a
kid stuck in their room for a long time,
I would I would introduce them to Ory if
that was their jam. Um, yep. Uh, okay.
Two point was free on Epic last week and
is on all of your computers already. All
right, cool. Uh, excellent. I have a
quick question, Will. Yeah, since my
computer connection something like I've
tested. I'm not sure what it is. Do you
want me to drop and come back in so I'm
not like a fuzzball on the right? Sure.
Okay, I'll be back in a minute.
Um,
keep them rolling, chat. These are these
are all really good. Uh, and and I know
that we're having problems with Jeff,
but fortunately for us, we've got JJ
here and also it's a super chill day, so
we're not super fussed about it. Um,
let's see what else. Um, someone
mentioned open uh OTTD. I I think that's
Yeah, that's a little much.
And also does run into the the um the
legal uh question that Luke meant. Yeah.
So, um yeah, not too much progression
based content is correct, right? Because
we do have these things, right? We have
daily computer wipes. We might be able
to do some cloud saves. I do like Slime
Rancher. Slime Rancher is good. Um yeah.
Yeah. Castle Crashers might also be
good. Those are good. Slime Rancher one
and two are both um very cute.
Um
Little Kitty Big City.
Little Kitty Big City
uh is a good one.
Um that's a game where you explore uh a
a city as like a kitten. It's very cute.
I think I downloaded that on the Switch
for my daughter, but I never actually
played it or watched it. Um, but that
sounds like something that would be a
big hit in our on the big screen.
Not. Is that a oneplayer game? Uh, yes.
Not Undertale. No. No. Incorrect.
No. Try again. Um, that would be a teen
in their own room with permission.
That's That's like a whole thing. Un
unironically. Yes. Hello Kitty Island
Adventure. Unironically, it's actually
turned out to be a really good game. Um,
by the way, uh, I want you to know, um,
I did I did this alphabetically and
we're now on triplem, uh, for a list of
games. Um, so we're I'm I'm probably
going to prune this a little bit. Um,
yeah, you need to experiment with Team
Cloud types. Cool. We're we're trying
Dan to do this in such a way that like
there are definitely games where you
could put in an unlock and then just
freeze freeze the game with everything
unlocked and just call it good like
Bolatro, right? Cuz there's a thing that
lets you unlock everything in Bolatro.
Um
so uh Okami is yeah way too
progressionheavy. Also Okami gets a no
because of Eun. If Eun could be yeated
directly into the heart of a dying star,
then Okami would be a great game. But
because you have a pervy sidekick for
the entire game, it's a no. One of the
reasons I hesitate to recommend Okami
despite the fact the game is beautiful.
Um, have cat has cat quest been
mentioned? Cat Quest is good. Um,
one deck dungeon maybe. Oh, what's that?
Uh, it's a like a dungeon crawler, but
it's like playing cards. Oh, okay. Like
create a dungeon. Um,
what about worms?
Is that the one where the little worms
are army guys? Yeah. And they It's like
a strategy game. Yeah. Killer Queen
Black.
Fascinating idea. Oh, I love that game.
I never thought we could play it here,
but with that big TV, we could. Well,
you got you need 10 controllers, right?
Cuz it's Oh, we got 10 controllers,
right? But what runs it? I mean, we
could try it. I I I will put killer
back. Yeah, it's on the Switch. Oh, but
you need
H. We might be able to figure that out.
Come back. Uh, Golf with Friends is
already on there. Uh, stuff. Yes. Enter
the dungeon.
No,
the whole like gun that kills the past
thing is a little much.
It's a little much.
I'm going to say probably not based on
what I know of Gungeon.
Gungeon's probably the furthest in that
direction I would go. Obviously, some
stuff in that genre is right out, right?
Isaac is beyond right out. Um,
Gungeon's iffy. Yeah, maybe. Yeah, maybe
not in a US hospital. That's a really
great way to put it. That's a really
great way to put it. Thank you. Maybe we
we we tucked that into this is for that
one special patient whose mama said it's
okay. Yeah. file. Yeah,
not going on the 75 square inch TV that
any kid can see and play. Moonlighter is
a maybe, but again, that's really
progressionheavy, right? We're I I want
we're we're we're getting a little deep
on long games. Let's back up a step and
go to fun, light, short games. Um there
is if you've got a group of kids that
are coming in together, there is a new
one called Sunderfolk.
It's a
campaignbased RPG that plays on a big
screen that you all control with your
phones. So like if you had like a
consistent group like a therapy group or
some other group of kids that you were
working with, you could do like you
could do like a session kind of thing
and that breaks down into sessions kind
of nicely. Oh, cool. Yeah. Legally, not
Portal game with the glove.
Legally. Okay. I'm going to need you to
What? Yeah.
Portal is a great one. We've used that
one before. Portal 2 also has co-op.
Yeah, Portal. Yeah. Um, both excellent
games.
Yoink. Yep.
Jeeoff, I think it's just your
connection today. You came back in and
I've got a color indicator for signal
strength and yours is red as you
entered. So, who knows? That is so
weird. It It is. Why don't you just
leave me off screen then so I'm not um
being fuzzy on screen? Uh I can do that.
Do that. Uh hold on hold on hold on.
Where's That's so odd cuz my internet
connection on a speed test is aces.
Yeah. Well, see like now you're fine,
right? But like you will go fuzzy. But
yeah, we can we can leave we can leave
Jeff off for now. Um yeah. Uh
disembodied voice. Um
I am the voice of the chat. Professor
Will is the voice of the chat. I thought
that was a I thought Dismbodied Voice
was a game recommendation. I was like,
"Oh, I haven't heard that. That might be
cool for visually impaired, maybe." I
don't know. Robocraft is dead.
Civilization.
No, we talked about the reasons not Civ
earlier. Actually, Civ Revolution, which
is is a lighter version. Yeah. Like that
would be the one for
I don't know. Yeah. It's much more
cartoony and much uh lighter on
mechanics. Mhm. Um,
these are all great chat. You all are
doing uh great.
Um, there is a game that's coming out
for blind people.
It's a game uh I'm going to go have to
go find it. There's a game that's coming
out where you play as a submarine sonar
operator
and their goal, it's by a company that
used to be outsourced to do sound for
other games. And because they're leaning
into their strength, their goal is to
make it so that you can play and
navigate the entire game without needing
any of the visuals. Oh, cool. because
it's about sonar, which I think is such
a phenomenal idea for marrying a
constraint with a concept to make
something really cool. I think that's
dope. I'm going to see if I can find it
again. I don't remember what it is. Um,
not bar trauma. No, not Barramama. Uh, I
have hexarchy on the list already. Crex,
I'll look up Azamandius.
Um, see
maybe one of the the F1 games we uh
Luke, we suggested
wh not that one, this one. Um, we
suggested much earlier on we brought up
Track Mania, Forza 5, and Gran Turismo
7. Is there another racer you'd
recommend in with that group? Um,
are there any good arcade racers? cuz we
we've got the like the Mario Karts and
the F1s and I'm trying to find a good
racer.
Um there most of the cart racers have
been sort of pushed out because why
would you compete with Mario Kart,
right? Well, that's what I'm saying.
Like I'm trying to find something like
Rad Racer or like Outrun, you know, like
something that's kind of an in between
the two that's like a fun arcadey racing
game.
Cruisin has an 01. Cruisin. Cruising.
Okay. Not psychonauts. No. No. Probably
not psychonauts. Definitely not
psychonauts. Um,
uh, Rally. These are good. These are
good. These are good. Um,
Star Wars Episode One. Pretty much
anything by PopCap and anything by
Humongous Entertainment.
Uh, you can get the entire Humongous
Entertainment Bundle for like dollars, I
believe, uh, on Switch. Uh, not on
Switch, on PC. And you can play like all
of the Freddy Fish, putt putt, all of
that stuff. Um, I mention it because
it's low cost of inclusion, both in
terms of space and in terms of dollars.
That might you might find a kid who just
loves putt putt, right? Like in the
right age group, and then you've got
they're nice by size. You don't care
about saves. They can play one every
time they're there and then you move
them on to Freddy Fish and Spy Fox and
everything else. And you know, um,
uh, yeah, that's Freddy Fish, Pup Pup,
Pajamas, Sam, um,
Fatty Bear,
and Spy Fox, I think. Yeah. Um, Glass
Masquerade. Okay, I'll look at that one.
remember there's supposed to be a new
game that's sort of like Rage Racer.
Incredible. Oh yeah, that's what I'm
looking for.
Okay,
we're now on to Triple Z's chat. Y'all
are defying my wildest expectations
here, by the way. Um,
Clenoa. Oh man, that's uh I don't even
know if there's a nonadvanced version of
Clenoa that's available right now, but
sure. Um,
Cruisin Blast is the new one. Okay. Oh,
I'll have to check that out. Blast is
the new one. Um,
one of your buddies been asking for the
Steam ID so you can give bad rats.
Correct. Vetos. Um, good job. Uh, the
pedestrian is a good one.
something like silly chat. What's like a
silly like
So I can give you here's an example of a
sim like a game that we're looking for
that's similar. Ultra food mess is
probably one of the kids' favorite
games. You can just jump in play with
one like like it's literally just you
just play with the Joy-Con or the
joystick. You don't even use any
buttons. Um, and it's fast and easy and
everyone laughs and yells at each other
while they're playing it. So, that's
like What was that one called again?
Ultra food me. I probably said it wrong.
The guys make fun of me because I always
say it wrong. Um,
if Conor's in the chat, he'll correct
me. But, uh, not one finger death punch.
Uh, we mentioned Worms a couple of
times, maybe. I don't know if there's a
current version of worms. Ultimate
chicken horse. Oh, yeah. We we use that
one a lot. That's a good one. And stuff
like that. if you if you got other
Switch game. Got it. Thank you, Dan. Um,
yeah, any anything that's like one stick
control is probably good. Um, right. Cuz
like
the fewer things you need to do, the
easier it is to make that accessible to
everyone, right? Mhm. Um, he said it
right. Best four bucks we ever spent.
Okay, that's all right. Thanks for that
validation. Uh, Pokemon Snap is a good
one. Oh yeah, it's a shooter that isn't
a shooter.
It's right cuz Pokemon Snap is a light
gun game. So everyone's on the same
page. Pokemon Snap is more or less
exactly the same game as House of the
Dead
Mechanically, right? They're just the
skin is totally different. Uh and it's
great. Um
motion controls. Yeah. Yep. Yep. Yep.
Yep. Yep. Yeah. Chat. Chad wants to Chad
keeps suggesting truck simulator.
No, Chad, we're not having kids in
hospitals learn to become longhaul
truckers across the United States.
I mean, if they want to. Sure. It's also
the I am also trying to be conscious of
um
anything we suggest take the cost to get
it and multiply it by four. That's true.
Right. So, I am also trying to be
somewhat conscious of that like in the
background. I'm sort of filtering for
that just so you all are aware. And
Truck Simulator has hundreds of dollars
of DLC to make it a good game. So, no.
Seriously? Yes. Truck Simulator has
hundreds of to thousands of dollars of
DLC. Like, you can get DLC per state.
Like, it's it's wild. Um,
her attack. Okay. Desert bus simulator.
Stop. Get some help. Um.
Uh, yes. I'm denying kids the chance to
go to truck university, home of the
trucks. Go trucks. That one. Yes. We
mentioned over Overcooked.
Um, train simulator costs more than some
houses. Correct. That is true.
Um,
do a desert bus event on the big screen.
I mean, there's already desert bus for
hope. When you said truck simulator, I
thought it was just another version of
bus simulator. Desert bus simulator.
That's why I was like, "Oh, maybe truck
simulator is like actually full on like
real truck calculating jobs and dollars
per mile and fuel weight and like
inspections and not getting pulled over
by the cop, like everything." Um,
could do roadcraft or snowr runners.
Okay. We did have a kid beg for Farming
Simulator once. Okay. Interesting. Oh,
you're I remember we did. That's funny.
It sounds like a kid of legend. Um, all
right, chat. I'm gonna say Oh, goat sim.
Oh. Oh, yes. that code Simulator is the
is the spiritual successor to um
uh is very much the similar the
spiritual successor to Tony Hawk. That
one has exactly the same bones as Tony
Hawk. Fight me. Um that that one's got a
lot of play at my my house personally.
My kids and I play that game a lot. So
um Checkex Quest Dive Kick I will dive
dive kick is a two button fighting game.
Oh, okay. Yep. Uh, we're not doing
Turnup Boy robs a bank or its sequel
Turnup Boy commits tax evasion. We're
not doing either of those, chat, behave.
Um, Bug Snacks is significantly more
than Mile Body Horror. Thank you, Chad's
starting to remind me of some of our
kids now. Hey, can you get me? Yeah.
Yeah. Yeah. All right, chat. I think
this is good. We got up to quadruple
letters. Um, so we're we I have a long
list of games to research and and prune
down and send to um No, we're not giving
the kids papers. Please stop it. Get
some help. Um, I think that is a good
place for us to to wrap up our list. But
I do think this has been great. This has
been a very good interesting sort of
exercise. And I do really like that you
all have been um like really into this.
and for the most part, aside from games
endorsing felonies and also papers,
please been pretty on with all of your
suggestions. Um, yeah, and also, yes,
chat, a game about replacing body parts
is a touch on the nose for some of the
kids. So, uh, you know, maybe maybe
don't um maybe maybe don't do that. So,
uh, that I think is a good place for us
to end for today. Um, oh, so well, our
final one is in schedule one as a
recommendation. No, we're not get No,
no, we're not. No, stop it. This is why
we're ending this is because you all
have gone. You've gotten too silly.
We've gone to plaid. You guys, this is
how our our patient tech meetings go.
Like when they're hour or two and we're
like, "Okay, guys, we got to wrap it up.
We're um belonging chat. I encourage all
of you to get some help and maybe play
some other games." Uh, you all have the
dark humor of clinicians. I appreciate
you. Yeah, right. Exactly. Um, chat, uh,
thank you all so much for participating
in this. Uh, if you think we missed
something, hit us up on Blue Sky or in
the comments below on YouTube. Uh, I
will be curating a list and sending it
off to our friends over at Mott. Um, I
have quite a bit of homework to do on
that front because I think this is going
to be a cool thing. Um, and I'll be
checking comments and blue sky messages
for other suggestions for games uh, that
could be appropriate. Um, also as a
programming note, this is our last
stream until the Monday after next over
on YouTube because we are off all of
next week. So, our next stream on
YouTube will be Monday, July 7th.
Monday, July 7th is our next stream on
YouTube. So, um, please look forward to
that. Uh, if this makes it to to Rocky,
Rocky, I hope you've enjoyed. Um, and I
think that's it. Uh, JJ, thank you so
much for joining us and for for doing
this. Um, and Jeff, thank you as always
for being the disembodied voice. Uh,
usually I'm an inbodied voice, but I
will play the disembodied voice lurking
in the back for today. Yeah, JJ, for
real, like these kinds of things are
always great. Um, just it gives our
community a chance to learn about other
uses of games and game culture, which I
think everybody really enjoys. Yeah.
Well, thank you guys so much for having
me on and for chat, for all of your
recommendations. I have a lot of games
to play and I'm really excited to try
them out with our kids. So, thank you.
All right. I guess all there remains is
for uh JJ and Jeff to say bye to the
people.
You first. JJ. Bye to the people. And
bye to the people. Thanks everybody.
We'll see you in two weeks.
[Music]
Cool. Do me a favor. Throw me back on. I
want to see if I'm better. I'm Or am I
still redlining? Uh yeah, yeah, yeah,
yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. Uh, hold
on, hold on, hold on. I was I saw myself
fuzzy. I checked the other one. I'm
like, I don't want that on the VOD, so I
was just like, yeah, no, it's fine. Um,
yeah, cool, cool, cool, cool. That went
longer than I thought it would, but
actually I should have expected it to go
longer. Yes, make JJ play repo. Send us
clips. Um,
do it. Do it. Uh,
yeah. Sorry, we're not actually done.
for anyone who's new at this, that ends
the recording and we we stick around and
answer any other questions that we may
have missed. Um, so yeah. Uh, great,
great, great, great, great. I think
that's that's going to do it though. Um,
we do have, uh, stuff with me and Matt
coming up. So, if you're over on
YouTube, pop on over to Twitch uh, and
we'll be playing some Elder Ring Night
Reign coming up next with uh, people
from the community. Matt and I have uh,
revenge to take upon some night lords.
So, please look forward to that. Uh,
let's say bye to YouTube. We'll see all
of you on the 7th. Please enjoy the
time. Until then, bye YouTube. Bye,
YouTube.