Good morning, YouTube. Hopefully,
is this okay, cool. This is indeed
working over on YouTube. I apologize,
YouTube, if you're seeing this later
because you went back because you got
here late to start the VOD over. I'm
sorry it wasn't posted ahead of time,
YouTube. Or you're welcome. Or you're
seeing it twice. Like YouTube YouTube
not not being uh cooperative uh this
morning, unfortunately. Um so that was,
you know, fun and interesting. Uh, I
still have not seen a live source come
up on the thing. I'm I'm working on it.
Uh,
oh dear. Well, well, welcome one and all
to what we're colloquially calling
whatever this is. Um, JJ is with us from
from CSM. We're going to be doing a full
intro uh, of course, when the show
starts proper. How you doing, JJ? I'm
doing great. How are you guys doing?
We're all right. We're all right. Thank
you guys so much for having me. I'm so
excited. breakfast. This is awesome.
Yeah. Listen, we're gonna we're gonna
get into it. We're gonna have some We're
gonna dish deliciously. Um
I don't know if I like that. Black
Phillip like all of a sudden. Yeah, now
I like it. See, I did. I wasn't sure if
I liked it. And then talking about the
goat from the film The Vitch. Um have
you seen The Vitch, JJ? Are you into
horror movies at all? It's It look the
the previews looked really scary. Yeah.
Uh, it's great. Also, it takes place in
what is essentially I either forget what
year it takes place, but what is
essentially in the backyard of the state
of New Hampshire where I grew up. Uh,
and I'm always like, "Yeah, this reminds
me of the woods." Uh, Matt, yes, I am
required by uh, international law to
tell you that you may have to relaunch
Social Stream. I don't. Ha. Great. I
relaunched Social Stream and that solved
I think the problems. It seems to work.
I'll wait and see if one pops through.
If anyone is watching, uh, actually a
few of you are. I can I can I can see
you. Uh, comment on YouTube, please, so
I can know that the comments are
working. Or I can just do that. Will did
it before any of you because I don't
have stream delay. Amazing.
Um, chat
chats plural.
This is going to be a banger. I'm I'm
calling it now. hubristically. Maybe I'm
gonna I'll call it early. Uh this is
going to be a banger. Um even if uh
Twitch chat is conspiring to make it so
that Matt doesn't get his coffee. Um why
what's happening? Uh there Well, there's
a hype train.
Uh there's been a hype train for a bit.
I've just distracted you from that fact.
So JJ, we we have this thing where we're
not starting the show until Twitch chat
finishes hyping. Um because we're always
disappointed in them for hyping
irresponsibly on the internet. It is
irresponsible. And YouTube, you can you
could sound off. I Well, I don't know.
Maybe. What's your nicest wizard swear
for the hype train and we'll put it on
the screen. Um also, uh I'm going to
preempt some news that won't make it
into the actual show, uh but that I'm
very excited about. So, um and we'll
talk about this on the show proper
because Nebula needs to know too, but
there won't be a show next week. We are
on vacation.
Uh we are taking a break to largely I
think sleep in front of an air
conditioning unit for a week. I think
that's the I think that's all of our
plans. Uh given the forecast for the
East Coast for the next week. I think my
plan is I'm going to turn my shiny new
AC unit on and I'm just going to sleep
in front of it for a week like a bear in
torper. It's going to be great. The
thing that I'm upset about, and we may
talk about this the week we come back
because I'm so excited about it, um, is
that we're going to miss talking about
why Magic's banned and restricted
announcement is going to be such a big
deal. Um, it didn't make the cut for
this because it involves a lot of me
talking, a lot of technicalities. Uh,
and I didn't want to watch two people's
eyes glaze over. I'll watch one person's
eyes glaze over. When Matt glazes over,
that's fine. He's used to it. It's in
his contract. But I don't want to do
that to JJ. So, um that's fair. But
also, oh, go for it. Will suffice
suffice it to say, uh the most recent
Magic tournament sucked. Uh and uh the
BNR is hopefully going to fix that.
Hopefully. I Magic players, rise up. We
have hope. Kyle Kyle Matthews did a good
wizard swear. I would have cast repel
maidens, but I could see another wizard
beat me, too. Wow.
Wow.
Got him. I love it. I love it. Also, uh
Will, I do agree with Roller here. I
don't know if you want to do it live in
the pre-show. I feel like I don't know
if I smell bad. Everyone seems to be
moved away from me. Okay, it's possible.
No, no, it's fine. No, no, I showered
for this, JJ. I assure you I I'm No,
it's fine. I only I only did all this
set up ahead of time. No, it's fine. I
can I'll I'll change everything because
Twitch chat wants me to. No, it's fine.
No, it's it's cool. I'll just I'll just
take all the work I did and throw it out
the window. Well, it looks No, it's
fine. No, it's fine. It's fine. He did
spend a lot of time trying to get all my
stuff to look good, too. Yeah, he took a
lot of time.
Take that, Twitch chat.
Um
uh let's see. It's a steamy 33° C out.
Yeah, it's supposed to feel like a
hundred here uh today with like all of
Maryland has a statewide heat warning
which is weird. You guys, we're supposed
to get up to 104 and we have to after
this I'm spending eight hours on the top
of a um a parking structure for the Ford
Fireworks Festival. We're doing like a
tableabling event there to Oh, wow.
celebrate all the stuff we're going to
talk about. But it's it's going to be
it's going to be uh nice and hot and
humid. Yeah. I I recom I highly
recommend getting like one of those
excellent t-shirts and fashioning it
into like the thing that you put under
the hat to protect like the back of your
neck and everything. It's good. Yeah. Uh
it's only 29C there. Yeah, cuz that's
better. I mean, it is better, but not
significantly better. Uh Will, is the
hype train dead? I believe the hype
train is perishing. Yes. Wait, hold on,
hold on, hold on, hold on. I have to
consult I have to consult the thing.
Supposed to feel like 105 in Vermont
according to Zav. That's um that is too
many degrees.
Uh no, the the hype train will perish uh
soon. Hype train,
I will shoot my camera.
Then you're going to Matt, if you shoot
your camera, you're going to screw up
all of the work that I just did live
because you said that we were in the
wrong place. How much longer is the hype
trade going? Like a minute. It's fine.
Also, I like that Dan is just out here
trying to convince everyone the hype
train's over by reposting a hype emote.
I know he already has because it's a
goose hit in the gritty and that's among
the best hype train emotes that has ever
been created. It's just a gritty goose.
And that that is Look at this. Look at
this thing. Look at this thing. Look at
it. It's insane. Hold it. Ridiculous.
Side note, YouTube, we are working on a
thing to let you know when the train is
rolling in for the hype train. Uh, and
so you'll you too will be able to shake
your fist at it from your back porch.
Um, although we're also working on a
thing that may mean that you don't see
the hype train at all.
There could be a lot of different
things. There's a lot of things. One of
the things I'm working out over break is
some cool graphic stuff. Uh so yeah,
it's 35 in Canada. What?
You know how you know how I know we're
getting old. We've talked about the
weather for like the last five minutes.
Okay. Wait, wait, wait. But hold on a
sec. Hold on a sec. Hold on a sec.
There's a difference between like, oh,
it's pleasant and oh god, it's the sign
of the oncoming apocalypse. Everybody
stock up on deodorant and coat your legs
in it. Like
there's a difference between those heat
wave. There's a difference between those
two things. Matt, I'll shoot the sun.
It won't work. That won't help either.
Well, if if we are being broadcast into
space, there's no reason why a single
Nerf dart couldn't change the course of
human history. You know, it's it's the
butterfly effect. Yeah, JJ gets it.
Yeah, of course. That's why I have a
whole arsenal of Nerf guns in my shed.
It's most of what my shed is, isn't it?
It's your Nerf shed. Mhm. Yeah. Oh, I
should call it that. Yeah, Chad, we're
fine.
Science,
does it exist?
No. Would Oh, Miss Witch out here asking
the real question. Would shooting a Nerf
dart at the sun make it hotter or
cooler? It would make it cooler the
status ele.
Oh, see. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I would
say it would make the the actually it
would make them both cooler because how
cool would a Nerf gun uh Nerf dart be if
it made it to the sun, right? A second
Nerf dart fired with the large hydro
collider might do something. That's
true. That something might be end the
universe as we know it. Listen, Will,
you asked for science and I feel like
it's getting done. Also, Smaz with the
real facts. We need a butterfly gun. All
right, the hype train now having been
completed. Everyone is here. Everyone
has gotten their mandatory breakfast uh
items of food, which are whatever items
of food and or beverage you're consuming
while you watch the show. We are now
going to begin the show. We're going to
go to black. We're going to do a thing.
We're going to introduce JJ properly to
all of you. And then we're going to do a
show that will last some hour and 45
minutesish. Please hang on to your
butts. Pull your extremities inside the
show. We don't want any hands getting
caught on stray posts as we go down this
information highway. Yeah, we can't.
Well, I can. Well, you can cuz I have I
have a bigger camera angled. All right,
great. No time to explain. Everyone get
the show. All right, great. Um,
chat, don't panic unless you want to and
you can have a little panic as a treat.
Okay. All right, great. We'll be right
back.
[Applause]
[Music]
Good morning, Matt. Ah, good morning JJ.
Good morning, Will. And good morning to
all of you. Welcome to Games for
Breakfast, the only g show on the
internet where we talk about this week's
gaming and tech news. But that also we
have a special guest.
Everybody, please welcome to the
breakfast table, the nook. What do we
call this? The kitchenet. I think we've
called it our virtual kitchenet enough
times that that's stuck, but also that
has like no RZ to it. No, not at all.
Anyway, to our wristless table, JJ
from CSA Children's Hospital. What up,
buddy? Oh, thank you. I love your
Rizless tablenook slashkitchet
area. Yeah. Uh, thank you guys so much
for having me. I watch you guys all the
time. I'm so glad to be here. Uh we have
been uh um circling each other's
professions for quite some time. I feel
like sharks. Um but happy ones that help
people hopefully. Um no, not different
sharks. Oh yeah. Baby sharks. Not baby
sharks. Not the the sharks versus the
jets. Not even Vin Diesel's seminal
work, Street Sharks. Um
we we we've been uh we've done some
episodes with you guys. We've worked
with you on a couple initiatives. Um,
we've been on Have we done panels? I
feel like we've done panels because
we've gone to each other virtual virtual
panel for PAX during co. Yeah, that's
right. That's right. There we go. God, I
see that whole that whole time has just
like erased itself from my memory. Like
I had some good like all that remains is
the emotions, right? But like the actual
events gone like completely. I don't
know if anyone else is experiencing
this, by the way. That's normal. It's
okay. Yeah. I don't want to derail too
much, but but Aqua Vin Diesel was not in
Street Sharks. His first acting gig was
in a uh almost like an infomercial, and
I think it was actually for
corporations, not for like uh
television, where it's him, young Vin
Diesel, like playing with and showing
off Street Sharks action figures. You
can find it on the internet. It's I saw
it on real live TV. I was old enough to
like that was prime me time. Ninja
Turtles, Street Sharks. Yeah. Well,
there you go. The rat guys. the space
rat guys. So, if anyone's interested in
that, you go find that on the on the
wayback machine. But we're not here to
talk about Vin Diesel's career. Not yet.
Anyway, uh JJ, for for those not
familiar with all of the myriad of
wonderful work you do, uh what what what
is you do now for fun and or help? H
that's a good one. Uh I do a lot of
different things but primarily uh I am
what's called a patient technology
specialist and uh I am one of the first
of its kind although we are growing
quite a bit all over the world but um we
have a program here at I work at CSM
Children's Hospital in Ann Arbor
Michigan and our goal is to integrate
video games and other type of
recreational digital technology into the
therapeutic practice. So, we work with
nurses, doctors, uh childlife
specialists, um physical therapists,
occupational therapists, basically
anyone at the hospital who they're
trying to get kids to do something um
and feel healthy and do all those things
they need to do to get out of the
hospital or make the hospital feel
better. Um we kind of advise them and
work with them um using video games or
virtual reality or Legos, robotics,
coding, all that fun stuff. Um, we help
advise. We go in with the kids and and
play games with them. Um, and find lots
of different ways to just make the
hospital a more pleasant experience
using the technology that they know and
love.
Nice. That's pretty awesome. Uh, and
it's a dream job. Yeah, absolutely. And
so, uh, you're not just here because we
managed to make the schedule work.
You're here because you all have have
gotten something really cool done. Uh,
it's actually I'm I'm a little jealous
as a as a former sick kid. Uh, I'm a
little jealous that this didn't exist
when I was sick and in the hospital all
the time when I was young. Uh, so JJ,
could could you tell us a bit about this
this thing that y'all have done?
Yeah. So, if you could kind of imagine a
Chuck-e-Cheese minus the rat and looking
really nice and clean. Um, so big
awesome playground. Um, something that
looks something that looks a bit like
like this, right? Where we have like
this. This is a this is a good shot of
it. That's a good one. Yeah. Yeah. So,
it's a it's uh we just opened this place
we we call the Michigan Game Day
Experience. Um, it's actually
refurbished play space. Uh, it was just
a play. Well, I shouldn't say just. It
was an amazing playground that used to
look like the inside of the Michigan
Stadium. It's a pretty, if anybody
watches football, it's a pretty famous
space. Yeah. So, um, it was really nice,
but it was very blue and it was getting
old. It was built about 10, 12 years ago
now. Um, and during co, it didn't get a
lot of use. And so, um, I we actually
invaded the space, our patient
technology team. And, um, in order for
kids to do some co-op gaming together,
we kind of had them at two different
ends of this big large space, and we
were having them play games. Um, we
played um some Pokemon and and had kids
like uh broadcast on our CCTV and have
kids call in and name them and it was a
way for us to socialize using video
games. And I kind of used that. Our CO
of the hospital saw that and I said,
"Hey, you know, this is a really cool
space, but we don't really use it to its
fullest capacity." And um me and a few
other people were advocating for the
space to kind of get renovated. There
were some donors who were interested in
helping us. Um, and what we ended up
doing was creating this amazing space
that has this really big, fun,
accessible playground. It's got a a
swing that a wheelchair can go on and
and move on. It's got a lot of um places
for kids to move around. That big circle
thing you see in the middle. It's kind
of like the game Simon, if you guys
remember that game where the lights come
on and you have to hit them in a certain
pattern, but it's like a full body
activity. So, it's really all about
mobilization and socialization. But then
in the other corner, the other side, it
used to just be some lockers and a
picnic table. And um and what used to
what looked like a press box in like at
University of or at the Michigan
Stadium, it looked like a like a press
box there. And we had set up a couple
Nintendo Switches there um before the
renovation, but we said, you know, we
could do a lot more if you you guys
helped us out a little bit. And um we
ended up creating this whole streaming
booth. So it's it's a it's got four
high-end computers. Um, I got to look at
my notes here because I'm not a PC guy,
but it was uh Power GPU actually like
built those computers for us. We
actually were able to like fly out to
them and see them. They've got all kinds
of fancy lights on them that we can
change all the colors and make it look
amazing blue for for Michigan. Um, but
the idea was that kids would come down
there and play in that space and they
could play online with their friends and
family at home, but then they can also
play together like almost like a land
party. Um, and so we've got all the game
we're we're well that's going to be part
of our challenge. We have some games on
there right now. Um, but the idea is
that kids can socialize, engage with one
another. Um, but then they also have our
team there to help support them, making
sure that the internet is a safe space
for them, making sure that the games on
there are appropriate for the kids who
are playing and helping them get through
all of the like, you know, like how do I
get through Steam or Xbox Live or that
kind of stuff, navigating all that
stuff. And we can also teach them like
3D printing, uh, web design, fun stuff
like that over there. And then there's
one other corner, um, if you step out of
the press box, um, where it's set up, we
call it the lounge, and it's really set
up to be, it's got a 75 square inch TV.
It's got a Nintendo Switch 2 that we
just ran and got. Poor Connor and Dylan
or Connor and Andrew stayed up late and
stood in line at GameStop just like the
good old days to get themselves those
um, so we could get them for the kids.
And so it's got a Nintendo Switch 2 in
there, but we can also switch out some
other games. Uh that TV is on uh from
9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. and anyone can go
in and play, but then we can also have
like movie nights in there, tailgate
parties. The whole space is really meant
to be a place to encourage mobilization,
socialization, and community engagement.
And then we're also hoping to have like
uh different groups come in and do
different types of of activities with
the kids there. And look, Matt, they've
even got uh they've even got wall art of
your hat there in the in the corner.
You're like part of the exhibit.
Oh, the the buttons on the controller.
Anyway, I got a lot of slack for those
controllers up there because none of my
staff knew what they were for and I've
played every single one of those.
How dare they? How dare they? Um Oh,
Will, go for it. Uh so, um first off,
this is amazing and Chad agrees that
it's amazing. Um this is just a really
cool thing. So, it's it's not just
it's kind of interesting. Playing video
games in a hospital feels a lot like
tricking kids to eat their vegetables
like in the way that you're doing it,
which is like, "Hey, do you want to play
this game?" It'll also get you to move
instead of laying in the bed or just
curling up in a ball doing a thing or
like, "Do you want to come play video
games with this person?" cuz like you
haven't interacted with anyone who
hasn't been a nurse for like three weeks
and we need to like not have you do
that, right? So like it serves like a
real like a real meaningful purpose, but
also it's just video games, right? So
like it's this it's this very
interesting thing and like as a you know
as as the resident streamy boy, I got to
say I love the booth. The booth is just
great. Like no notes no notes on the
booth because you've got essentially
what amounts to like a tiny esports
setup which is really cool. That was the
goal. Well, that was the vision. That's
a Thank you. I'm glad. Yeah. Um I was
going to say this also does something
cool. Um it does a lot of cool things,
but what I really like is a in a lot of
these things we've talked about before
is like, you know, using games in
hospitals to help kids feel better as
they get better and help with sort of
things like that. Like a lot of it is
like it seems like at least in in our
discussions or with other discussions
I've had with people, it's like getting
the games to the kids in the rooms
through gaming carts, through other
things. and those are awesome and they
have a wonderful place. This feels like
the other side of that coin. This feels
like the you know if it if what they
need is movement and social activity
then this is a perfect space for that.
And I feel like I haven't heard maybe
I'm not in the circles um but like I I
just haven't heard that discussion as
much as as you know the other ones which
again the whole field as you know and
are innovating in is just growing. Uh
it's sort of in its infancy doing this
in hospitals. Um but have you have you
noticed like I mean it's only been open
what f five days, four day uh uh we
opened Thursday. Okay. Oh well I guess
technically Friday. Thursday was our
grand opening but it was like select
kids who could get their pictures taken
and then we were showing it off to the
staff. Friday was our first real day and
within 4 hours we had 20 kids come
through and play all of the games which
is that that's that's that's pretty big
for in a hospital getting people to get
out of their beds and down. Yeah. Dan
says that the Switch 2 is 4 days old and
has 20 hours of play time on it already.
So like Yeah. Yeah. Oh yeah. So that's
Andrew. Um that's left-handed. Yeah.
That's Andrew. He's one of our patient
tech specialists. He's been working with
me. I mean, even before I could
officially hire him, he was volunteering
with us. So, he's been with us for
almost 10 years now. Um, so this was a
big dream come true for both of us, and
he was a heavy lifter in making sure all
those games and systems got set up. He
helped me get my all my setup here, too.
So, shout out to Andrew. We actually
have one of your former We have one of
the former kids from M in chat. I had no
idea that Mine was was one of the kids
that went to Mott in in Flint. That's
that's really cool. That's really
awesome. That's awesome. So So I mean I
was a former kid at Mott, too. Like I
played my very first video game here at
this hospital. So to be able to like and
was on the Atari 2600 guys pitfall. It
was uh so to be able to to be here and
see these kids in a streaming booth is
pretty amazing. That game is in my
storage unit.
Yeah. Okay. So, so in the midst of
telling us about all these awesome
things, you did mention a challenge. Uh
you mentioned a way that our our our
diverse, weird, distant community uh
scattered all across the internet might
be able to help with this. Um could you
tell us a little bit more about the kind
of help that you need?
Yeah. So, one of the biggest humblers
for me starting this job was realizing
that like I thought I was a gamer and
everybody at the hospital thought I was
a gamer until I started going to PAX and
hanging out with you guys and I realized
like oh what I know of gaming is about
this much even and actually even just
hanging out with the kids and my staff.
We're getting old. We're getting old. I
try to hire them young but they stick
around. and we built this sweet amazing
space. And again, our goal is
socialization, community, and
mobilization. Just getting kids up and
coming together. Um, and our challenge
is we we need your help. Uh, we need
your community's help. Your community
has been wonderful. They've helped us
financially in the past. They've
motivated us to do a lot of really cool
things. This place wouldn't even exist
if it wasn't for all the amazing
fundraisers you guys have done. And um a
lot of the hardware you see in there was
purchased using that funding. But what
we want from you guys now is something a
little more fun and we're going to make
you do a little homework. Um we need
help figuring out what to put on all
these computers um and all these
consoles. We have pretty much anything
under the sun that you can think of that
we or we have the ability to get that.
We want to make sure we're getting the
right stuff and we want to we want to
kind of break out of just our own
mindset of like what a kid can play in
the hospital. And so what we're asking
the community to do and to join us on
design club later and will you can give
them the details on that. But like we
want your ideas. We want to know one
what games do you love to play and what
games do you think our kids and when I
say kids I mean 4 to 26 technically but
we've got adults, brothers, uncles,
nephews, uh sisters, all that fun stuff.
Um,
so, so games that people would play, but
games that might encourage movement,
socialization,
um, games that can be adaptable, uh,
because that's our biggest thing is
we've get, and when we think of
adaptivity, we think of everything under
the sun, whether it's a physical
disability or, um, cognitive or um,
eyesight, anything under the sun. Our
our our motto is everyone plays. And so
we want to know what are you playing?
What do you think the kids here and the
adults would love to play? Um, and what
are some of your ideas on what we could
do with this space? And I and I really I
think my pitch is the whole space. It's
not just like what game can we put on
the system or what cool gadget do you
think would be would make something more
accessible, but also like we we do a lot
of stuff with community partners. So I
have some students from the University
of Michigan who are developing a virtual
reality game where kids get to play with
a puppy dog. Um, and they come in uh
twice a month now, but with this space
open, they're going to come in and let
kids play the game and um give them
direct feedback about the game and they
get to watch the kids break their game,
which is the most fun part. Uh, and they
learn a lot from that. And so having
some of the out ofthe-box ideas of like
what can we do this space? We can also
um just another a few other things and
then I'll I'll be quiet. Uh but uh a
couple other things that we could do
with the space is we do have um uh
broadcasting capabilities. Um so we can
uh broadcast live within the hospital.
So it's a CC closed circuit television
so that only people in the hospital can
see. That's cool. Yeah. So we can do a
lot of fun shows and actually the studio
I'm in now is our music therapy studio
and we we can broadcast from here. We do
like music themed stuff like music bingo
and things like that. But if we could
think of some fun shows that kids could
do themselves that are video game
themed, um, we would love to incorporate
that. We'd love your ideas because you
guys are all so creative. Um, but then
also fun stuff that maybe doesn't have
to be broadcasted. Other kinds of cool
things we can do in that space that are
um, just, you know, video game, but also
just like nerd us type of people, what
what we like to do for fun. I got two I
got two pitches for you. Okay. Right off
the bat. one for the closed circuit
thing because the closed circuit thing
is such a cool opportunity. It instantly
brought me back. We didn't have this cuz
I'm that old, but uh I know some people
uh beyond me uh in in high school and
middle school even maybe had like a
closed circuit like morning show like
almost like of like the the day events
or something like that. And if you could
have the kids, especially on days where
like there was some larger event in the
space or something like that, like if
there were kids that did like a rotating
like that wanted to to read like the
daily like happenings of the hospital or
the space like almost doing like your
morning announcements kind of thing
because that's a real fun way to get
people involved and and and get people
to get maybe like the the the creator
bug or like on camera stuff like that
starting in a space like that,
especially to a group that is so tied
with like everyone there is there for a
re there for a reason. It might not be
the same reason, but it's to get well,
right? So like everyone's it feels like
everyone's in a middle school to go to
your classes, everyone's in, you know,
that sort of thing. So when you have
that paired down reasoning for be there,
you can rotate people through and people
that want to do a show like that, I
think could be really good like
community engagement and let people know
stuff that's going on in the space or in
the hospital. I think that'd be very
fun. I love it. Yeah. So, so Twitch has
a list that they are working on, but I'm
going to tell Twitch chat that I love
their list and I will give JJ your list
later, but
um the uh the big important thing is
that um it's not just today that we're
going to have the M crew on. We're going
to have JJ and maybe some other folks uh
on Thursday, 2 p.m. Eastern for design
club. Jeff and I are going to also put
our heads together and come up with a
list. We're going to talk about like
more of the dive in on like how these
things are used and what what makes a
good game for this, right? Cuz like
everyone's like, "You should put
Minecraft on there." Duh. Right. Like
And Jeff's also done a little bit of
work uh through EAR. Was it that ER? Is
there some other company? I don't know
if he can tell you on Design Club. Yeah.
He he's he's worked in in in groups like
this uh for in the past. And so we're
going to we're going to sit down. We're
going to talk about it on Thursday. So,
please join us for that and, you know,
keep developing your ideas and I'll make
sure that JJ gets as much of the list as
I can find out at Twitch chat when we're
done. And my my last pitch because I'm
not going to be there on Thursday. I
know. Yeah. Mac Matt gets special
privilege because he can't be here
Thursday. This is your preview. Yeah.
Um, okay. It's a It's no less like, oh,
what games go on the systems kind of
thing, but what if you did something a
little bit meta before that word was
bad? Like, what if you did what if you
did like Oh, okay. You know how like
Xbox and PlayStation and all that stuff
have like achievements?
Like what if activities in the room and
these aren't hard like they should be
stuff that everyone can have access like
could literally be like play a game on
the computer or do you know some
something like that. What if there was
like I hate to make more work for you
but what if there was like ways that as
kids could go through it they unlocked
achievements or achievement points that
allowed something else to happen. like
it'd be like it just no one's competing
but they're competing against themselves
or against the house in a way like that
that would be awesome and that kind of
goes with our whole like vibe with um
we're part of the child and family life
department and we never deny kids things
but what we like to do is kind of like
slowly reveal things as they're they're
getting better at things or they're
doing something like you just said like
it's an achievement you just unlocked
this new achievement now now we can move
on to this thing. Yeah. Um that's
awesome. I love that idea. Yeah, those
are those are my two ideas. Morning
announcements and and children's
hospital achievements. I don't know if
it's you should name it that. I think it
should be named something different. Uh
but why why is the only thing in my head
now Troy and I bet in the morning.
Okay. Um so, uh that is that's really
cool. I I know that. Congratulations on
opening the space. That's really
awesome. Thank you so much. Uh, and it's
really cool for our community because
you're right, we've been working
together for a long time and a lot of
the folks here, uh, I before I told them
that you were coming on,
the the the press release about this new
space had already made it into the
Discord and people were celebrating
before I told them you were going to be
on. People are following the the journey
of CS Children's Hospital. They're
following your work and they're excited.
And not just because I tell them to be
excited, which you know I can make them
excited, right? Chat, get hype and it's
easy, right? Don't actually hype. We
already did that. It was in the
pre-show. Also, real quick, I think
Lurker named the achievement system Oh,
Matt's achievement team Matt.
Okay. Anyway, before we stroke Matt's
ego anymore,
um, uh, get heists. No, no heist. Stop
it. Behave. Um, yeah. So, join us
Thursday, 2 p.m. Eastern, 11:00 a.m. uh
Pacific. We're going to be sitting down
and talking. Uh, and that'll be that'll
be on Thursday. And we'll have more
opportunities to talk about games and
their roles in in uh healing and in
hospitals and like what what the goals
are and about all the games that we're
going to suggest. So, uh, with that
having been said, JJ, you've seen the
show, so you know, kind of we're going
to be going through
a bunch of topics that happened in this
week's gaming news, right? Oh, I'm
excited. All right. I can't wait. I I
always talk to you guys, but you never
hear me. Okay. Time to type. I'm usually
like washing dishes or doing something
when I'm watching you guys. So, now you
get to hear all my thoughts. Perfect.
All right. I also this time around for
this special edition. Oh, I've done ice
coffee in I I just decided to put it in
the French press. Don't worry about it.
It's fine. I'm just trying I'm trying to
get some. There we go. Oh, perfect.
Yeah. No. Oh. Oh, perfect. All right.
Uh, so first up, JJ. Um, do the kids
there play Pokémon Go? I feel like
that's Pokémon Go is like one of those
games that like was for a while deeply
embedded in like kids in hospitals,
right? that they were like putting extra
Pokéstops and gyms in retail hospitals.
We were kind of a big deal cuz when it
came out we were kind of the only
hospital that was allowing anyone to do
that and
people were using it a lot and uh they
therea today might have done a little
piece about us. Um
and but yeah, they use it and they still
use it today which is kind of the really
cool thing because I don't push it at
all like we used. I didn't really have
to ever push it, but we kind of opened
the doors and made way for it. Um, but
it's still you you see doctors, nurses,
and kids just kind of it's just a part
of life here now. Cool. Excellent.
Excellent. We got a lot of great spots.
All right. Good. Good. So, um, they
they've got they've got this new update
and I want I want your thoughts. I want
Brad's thoughts. So,
uh, a little bit of background in the
world of Pokemon. There have been stats
since time immemorial. There are two
kinds of stats. There are Eevees and
IVs.
I'm gonna oversimplify this. Some
Pokemon nerd is going to get really
upset in the comments. That is okay. I
won't. No one ever gets upset about any
minutia about a video game on the
internet. Will, you gota Yeah. Right.
Okay. Okay. Okay. So, um, in Pokemon Go,
Ivy's are the big inherent values are
the big uh thing. You get them when the
Pokemon is caught or hatched or
whatever. And you can't can't really
change them. They're just what they are.
And that's part of the the fun is
getting the best one, right? You're
aiming for a perfect um a perfect
whatever. And the best, of course, is a
perfect shiny legendary. And everyone's
like, "Oh my god, I got the perfect
shiny legendary." Right. And it's great.
Okay. Wait, what are they like?
Oh my god, I got a perfect shiny
legendary.
I need that for my soundboard. Right.
Okay, great. Awesome. Um, so
they they decided that the process of,
and by they I mean the folks over at
Pokémon Go, um,
decided that they were going to
make it less of a chance that you would
get a Pokemon with perfect stats. And
they they've introduced this new item,
the golden bottle cap, which you can see
prominently displayed here by everyone's
favorite good guys, Team Rocket. Um,
so the the golden bottle cap is an item
which allows you through a series of
quests to raise a Pokemon stats to be
perfect,
which sounds great
until you find out that the only way to
get a golden bottle cap is at the end of
a paid battle pass.
And now we start getting into feel bad
territory, right? Cuz like
is that so the the the the I should I
should be clear. The head of uh the head
of Pokemon Go is on the record saying
this isn't pay to win. It's not pay to
win. Uh because I I I don't actually
know that I follow any of his arguments
on what this is. I mean, we can read
them.
Where was it? It's
We got this from IGN.
Uh, we have to be really careful about
the design of bottle caps. Uh, Shrianka
is their name told IGN. This is from
IGN. Um, that's something that if we
weren't thoughtful with the integration,
it could really destroy the economy of
the game. An item like a bottle cap is
only going to be available very, very
rarely. And because of that, we don't
feel that players will be able to just
spend their weight to having the best of
the best of everything. And even once
you've obtained a bottle cap, it's
actually going to be quite a lot of
effort for people to hyper train their
Pokemon to get their stats up. Will,
what is hypertraining? That's a really
great question, Matt. That's actually
after my time. I left Pokémon Go when
they decided they were going to sell all
of the map data to Saudi Arabia. Um, so
I'm not hip with it, as the kids might
say. Um, but there is I do know that
there is a I believe that is the name of
the the process. So, there will be um
things that you need to do with the
Pokemon in order to raise their stats.
You don't click the the shiny um you
don't click the golden bottle cap and
then immediately have perfect stats. You
click the golden bottle cap and then do
a bunch of work and then you have good
stats. Um and so that process is I
believe what they're calling hyper
training. you need to like use it in
battle, use it in uh you know wandering
around and spinning Pokéstops and doing
all the other stuff that you do in
Pokémon Go, which is like three things.
Catching things, battling gyms and PvP
and spinning Pokétops, and that's like
it because it's So the only way you can
get these is with the battle pass right
now, right? Yeah. Okay. So,
you can't in theory, as it is listed out
right now, just buy a bunch of golden
bottle caps and crazy jack up all your
Pokemon. You get one every How long is a
Pokemon Go season? Uh, a bit arbitrary.
It's it's it's it's arbitrary now. Um,
the passes last different lengths.
They've never really been consistent
with it. Yeah. So, season pass is it
saying three months is? That sounds is
right. Yeah. Um, so they can't actually
this is actually Let's see if uh S
Edwards has said this.
You have to grow. Yeah. So, here we go.
Is this pay to win or is this an
additional entry cost for competitive
play by another name? I don't do
competitive Pokemon only because you
have to grind for hundreds of hours to
have competitive stats. Yeah. So, Jeff
and I have talked about this before.
This was actually a huge deal back at
the last World Championship because a
whole bunch of people got DQed for
instead of naturally getting the Pokemon
that had perfect stats. They um edited
them in. They edited. Now, I should be
clear, they edited in completely legal
Pokemon, right, that were within the
range of things they could have caught,
but they didn't spend hundreds of hours
catching and training those Pokemon to
have exactly those stats, right? So
there's there's a
it's sort of counterfeit Pokemon but not
super powerful Pokemon if that makes
sense, right? The issue is a little more
fine than like oh my god these Pokemon
are roided out to high heaven and low
hell and you know all that. Um so I
guess yes this this does feel like that
because there is PvP head-to-head
battling like your stats will matter.
Your stats will matter quite a lot
actually. Um, and uh, having dabbled for
a time in Pokémon Go's PvP, I will tell
you that it does actually matter quite a
lot uh, when the meta is pretty
solidified. So, I do think this is like
another paid to entry thing. The problem
is that
this is a game for kids
among other among other groups, right?
But it's a game that is in marketed
towards children, right? Yeah. It is a
game that is marketed towards children
with like a competitive floor that
requires you paying money to get an item
to make things better. Right. I think
the double-edged bad sword. I think it's
a game that's both marketed to kids and
to adults. And in different ways, uh, a
battle pass system in that is a a rough
one. Um,
you could break it down a bunch of
different ways. I don't want to I feel
like JJ you what what h how are you
feeling about this this change to our
our good friend Pokemon Go.
You know I I I struggle with all the
battle pass stuff and it because I love
the fact that these games are free to
get into but then you know that's their
that's their method and it keeps getting
more complicated. I can tell you just
like playing here at the hospital we we
love it. We've done some stuff with
Niantic. Um but it is a struggle because
the kids will get excited. they'll throw
out their 20 Pokeballs and then it's
done and then they either got to sit
there or they got to pay money for it.
And I wish there was like a a better way
to go about doing that to keep that
engagement up. Um,
but yeah, it's it's it's especially the
kids who are competitive, like you if
they've if you got to pay a certain
amount of money to win that that just
kind of takes all the fun out of the
game. But I don't know. I guess is it is
it like buying Pokemon cards then? Like
you just keep spending money until you
get that card that's better than all the
others. Well, yeah. And in a way, you're
also pay like you're not paying money,
but if you want to get this high stuff
uh as one of these things, you're paying
with time. Oh, yeah. Um and in this
case, it's both. You need to pay with
money and time. Well, yes. And I mean
far less time. You're paying It's it's
it's the it's the Ubisoft method, right?
It's like, hey, pay this money to play
our game less like it in in a way like
or or get maybe it's not quite that
because the goal of this I think is to
get them to play more. Um
but because this has a I would say for
instance like I never understood like XP
boosters in in single player experiences
because I'm like don't you want me to
play it? This is a multiplayer thing
where either competitive or when you're
out in the world you can continue to use
your better stats. Um,
look, I
this is not going to cause rampant pay
to win. That does not mean that it is
not pay to win. Yeah. Because what's
going to happen I think over time
especially and and again this is a
problem that they have slowed I think uh
with their implementation of these
bottle caps. If you get and I'm I'm
making this up maybe the seasons are
different lengths than three months. If
you get if pay to win players or pay to
pay pay to play players I should say get
one golden bottle cap every 3 months
and they're and they're also the ones
that are hyper competitive and and are
playing out hundreds of hours etc. Those
people will eventually become the
powerhouses for as long as they're
paying and playing right more so than
just the person that is playing 100
hours and not doing the battle pass. So
you are, no matter what they say,
rewarding people who are paying money to
play the game. Now
you, it also has kind of probably been
like that forever. JJ, to your point,
you only, if I remember correctly, you
only get so many free Pokeballs a day,
right? So if you want to be any sort of
competitive or or level up quickly or
anything like that, the game is designed
to make you spend money already. Um,
this is just sort of I think what Okay,
I think I've nailed it. I think what the
golden bottle cap thing is for me is
it's it's peeling the mask off of the
payment method faster than we're used
to. Yes, I agree. Every time we peek
behind that label of freeto play and you
kind of see it, but like other things
sort of make it feel more fair. And even
if this is statistically and monetarily
fair, it's you're we're peeling back
that mask a little more than we're used
to. And it doesn't look great. It's not
a good look. Can you find a bottle cap?
I missed this. Can you find a bottle cap
without paying? No. No. So, and do you
when you find it, do you pay or you have
to pay and then hope the end of the
battle pass from what I'm understanding.
This is the end of the battle pass.
Okay. So, um, people So, it it does make
me wonder though because you had pointed
this out before, like who is Pokemon for
Pokemon Go? Is it for adults or is it
for kids? Because it's bright little
characters, but they're the ones that
like people 10, 15, 20 years ago grew up
with. How many kids are getting that
bottle cap? Like, that sounds like the,
you know, they don't have time. They
have to go to school. So, it's like it's
those hardcore, you know, the whales.
It's those hardcore folks who are maybe
that's who that that market is for. Um,
but you know, you get those kids who
that might not be a very healthy thing
for them to who get really obsessed with
it. I I think that's one of my issues
with
Pokemon Go.
I was about to say Magic, but I think
it's less that because Magic
what Pokemon's age range it would seem,
is incredibly young to later adult. like
it feels like it's kind of all over the
place where Magic I feel like is what
like 13 plus 14 plus roughly. Yeah. And
again that the just because the the
window is smaller doesn't make it
better. But like it I would say the way
you advertise and monetize your game for
a for a IP that is meant for people four
to 40 to play. I'm just making like it
obviously can go higher than that is a
real hard and difficult ask. And when
you do things like this, it muddies that
care. It feels like anyway, it's not
it's not the end of it. It's not
breaking the game or anything like that
right now, but we do know how companies
work, right? if if they see that even
the promise of something that could give
someone an infant decimal edge over the
course of 3 months is crazy profitable
if their battle passes start selling
double triple the numbers they were
doing before. You don't think that
they're not going to come up with the
next version of this? That's just how
this functions. Th this is already the
next version of that. I regret to inform
you. So um uh so two things. Um one,
we've talked about this before. Um it
was the we've talked about um raid
passes. So you get one free raid pass a
day and a raid gives you access to a
co-op event where a bunch of you try and
take down a Pokemon and it might be a
legendary Pokemon and then you get a
chance to catch it at the end, right?
And that legendary might be shiny, might
have good stats, might have terrible
stats, whatever. It's still a legendary.
You can catch it at the end of the raid
if you work with people. You can get
additional shots at that by buying
premium raid passes. And this is also
the same rationale and almost verbatim
method that they used when they rolled
out Master Balls several years ago. Uh
conveniently at the same time that they
rolled out the leg the legendary birds
from Scarlet and no from Sword and
Shield. The ones that wander around and
in the in the overworld and you get like
a shot to catch them. They were like,
"Hey, wouldn't it be great if they
didn't run away? You could get a Master
Ball. What's that?" Oh, it's going to be
five bucks. It's going to be five bucks.
Right. So, like they've already begun
rolling out in that direction. And I
agree with Matt that this isn't like the
most egregious step, right? But it is
definitely like taking the X-Acto knife
and like beginning to peel the veneer
off of the the the like the fairness
aspect, right? Yeah. Um it's Yeah, it
I'll be curious to see how they move
forward. Uh my my uh
I I will never say that I am psychic.
What I am uh I what I will say is
precedent very rarely fails. That's
correct. Yeah. Um so we'll we'll see. Uh
even though it feels like feels like
we've we've seen this before. Correct.
It it it does indeed. Uh real quick
between this story and the next story, I
want to call out Trent here's comment
about the Cyberpunk 2.3 thing. We are
Cyberpunk fans here. Actually, if you go
back on the YouTube channel, there's a
whole thing with James and Mike Ponmith
about their card game that is coming out
uh that we interviewed them on. We'll
talk about uh the patch thing. I think
it it works with another story we are
doing uh in about two stories. So, we'll
touch on that then. I just didn't want
that to get lost. Okay, cool. Um next
up, uh we have news and it's sort of a
changing of the guard moment. So, Nexus
Mods has been one of the great bastions
of you can store all your mods for
Skyrim here. Uh, if you are looking for
mods, there's a lot. There are a lot of
mods for Skyrim. Uh, we've we you know,
um, now she What are you What are you
doing? I I I'm reversed. I'm trying not
to block JJ, but now I know. I lean this
way. Okay. Um the uh
the
um the thousands of mods for uh Skyrim,
the hundreds of mods for Stardew Valley
and Terraria and pretty much everything
that's not Minecraft. Weirdly, Minecraft
has its own mod ecosystem, and I believe
Nexus Mods does have some of it, but
it's not the majority of it. Um have
lived on Nexus Mods for a long time.
We've talked about them in the past.
they've been pretty um involved in some
choices about what people do and don't
get to circulate as mods. For instance,
when a bunch of people made a mod that
took all of the pride flags out of one
of the Spider-Man games, Nexus was like,
"Get the crap out of here. We don't do
that here. Shut up." Um, so and part of
that was uh due to the influence of
their uh founder and I guess CEO
um uh Robin Dark One Scott uh who after
24 years
of running Nexus Mods is stepping away
um to focus on his mental health which
you know great awesome uh good you know
admirable and should be done and thank
thank you Robin for saying that that was
why, right? Like that is an important
thing to model for more people
particularly in our industry. Um because
burnout is so real. It's so real. Um
so I guess like this is sort of like a
turning point moment, right? Because we
can see the way that Nexus is going to
go, right? It's just Nexus is going to
be a place to keep your eyes on. It
might be business as usual. uh the the
new um the new leadership of Nexus Mods
might keep on trucking the same way they
have or they might pivot, but this has
been one of those this is sort of like
not to the same extent, but this is like
Gabin stepping down as the leadership of
Valve except for mods. Um this has been
one person whose will has influenced a
huge part of the modding scene and the
modding community and what is and isn't
relevant. and Robin stepping away
might signal a change in the way that
Nexus Mods does business and does um
moderation and deals with bad faith
mods. So, we will Yeah, we will see.
Well, and the entire way that it
functions and how it how it how it makes
money, how it stays afloat, like all of
those things could change. Um JJ, do you
mod much many games on your side of
things or I don't with our new
computers? I'm like mods are something
that I'm incredibly fascinated with but
also terrified of. That's why I was kind
of interested in this conversation and
like you said this this this group that
kind of helps them out. My son's trying
to get me to mod everything under the
sun that's Minecraft or anything else.
And I'm afraid to put anything on my
computer uh to be honest. And so that's
I I'm really fascinated like JJ
happened. Yeah. sometime when we're
offline, you should hit me up cuz I have
run the modded Minecraft server for our
community in the past. Uh, and I will
totally walk you through all of the ins
and outs of that and we can do tech
support stuff. It'll it'll be great. Oh,
that'd be amazing. And there's something
Nexus Mods too, just on that note, like
if if you don't have a will, um, Nexus
mods, what I really liked about it,
because I don't know what I'm doing, and
I've I mostly modded things for charity
streams, but like I can go through the
mods and and like it's it's basically
like a search engine for mods, and you
can see how many people have downloaded
it, what it's like ranking is, all the
comments on it, etc. So, like for
instance, if you're scared to put
something on your computer, it's you
you'll know it's probably safe if 1.5
million people have downloaded it. It's
overwhelmingly positive as opposed to
here's one that was uploaded two days
ago and no one's done it yet. You know
what I mean? Like it there's it's it's
Oh, what? Hold on. Hold on.
Try now. Oh, now Will's Okay. Try what?
You You went away, but now you're I I
went away and then Interesting.
What happened? I uh you muted for me.
Both of you did. Oh. And nothing
nothing changed in our audio program at
all. You two just muted and then came
back. Anyway, keep going.
Nexus Mods is good because you can look
at how many people downloaded it and see
if it's good for you or not based on
numbers. That's my short version of
that. Um, yeah, we'll see. We'll see
where it goes. Um, does the article, we
got this from IG as well. I read this
last night. I'm trying to remember. Does
it say who's taking over yet or is that
still in process? Believe that that
might still be in process. Yeah,
I mean that's going to be kind of it. I
know that um Robin was saying like they
they I believe the last quote there was
um I want to find where they said it but
basically it was like the they want the
feeling to not change you know like
what's changing now they say is simply
the formality of it making sure that the
right people are in place to guide Nexus
Mods into the next era. So it sounds
like they're doing their their due
diligence is to make sure that like
that's going to be the case and that's
great. Yeah. Do you want them to be able
to survive monetarily, but also uh let's
not have them start implementing mod
downloading battle passes where if you
download a mod a day, you grind your way
if you pay 1999 to get a golden mod coin
that lets you uh add triple the Macho
Man Randy Savages into your Skyrim game.
Why are you giving them ideas, man? Oh,
no.
Yep. Yep. Yep. Uh, now I just want to
remind everyone that there is a mod
where you can make all of the dragons in
Skyrim into Thomas the Tank Engine and
another mod where you can make them
sound like Macho Man Randy Savage. So
you can just have Thomas the Tank Engine
fly out of the sky screaming, "Oh yeah."
Uh, and that's that's really what
modding is all about. That's how we got
Zoe into for the Fallout mod for the uh
Fallout stream that we did for Best
Friend Nexus Mods and Vortex. Yeah,
absolutely. Um, I'm trying to gauge
time. Trying to I'm trying to gauge. I
think we should It is a flat circle. It
Yo, it is. It is. It is in fact flat
round shape. Um, it also keeps on
slipping slipping slipping into the
future. Oh, I thought they were a
changing. Uh, but we do got to go back
in it.
You know, it is on our side though.
Okay. What I'm trying to judge is if we
should do ads now or the next story now.
And I think we're going to have enough
to say about the next story that we
should do our fake ads now so that real
ads don't get JJ. Do you want to do a
fake ad? All right. So, a fake ad. Okay.
So, so the way that this works is we're
about to run uh 3 minutes of fake ads
for things you can't actually spend
money on for all of our subscribers and
friends over on YouTube while the folks
on Twitch get some real ads for things
you can spend money on. And we do that
in order to keep pre-rolls off so that
folks joining the stream can just hop
right in and not get slapped with
several minutes of ads that we don't
control. So, we're going to do a fun
improv bit now, uh, for about 3 minutes
while you all get some some real ads,
uh, over on Twitch. So, we'll see you
all in about 3 minutes. Uh, fake ads may
begin now. Will, do you want to start?
Yes. Okay. Ready? Yes.
Hi there, friends. Will from Extra
Credits here to sell you the concept of
bottled time. That's right. Everyone
knows that the problem with battle
passes isn't actually that they're
taking money from you. That's fine. It's
that they're taking time from you. And
time is infinitely more precious than
money. So consider investing in the
notion of putting time in a bottle.
That's right. Bottle some of the time
from when you hate everything. Like when
it's about to be 110 on the East Coast
for an entire week straight. You don't
need that time. Just go to sleep. put
all that time in a bottle and then spend
it later on a battle pass to get
something like a golden bottle cap or a
shiny master ball or whatever else it is
that's at the end of the battle pass
that you want.
That was good. That was good. Yeah.
Yeah. Yeah. I'll go next. Or JJ, do you
have one or do you want me to go? It's
up to you. Oh, I got I I think I got
one. All right. Ready? You have a minute
on the clock. Here we go. Three, two,
one. Oh, hey folks. Uh, do you like
taking notes? Do you like taking notes
on your phone? No, of course you don't.
No one likes to take notes on their
phone. How about a sticky toe note?
Those are great, right? No, they stick
too much. How about a wrinkled old piece
of paper that matches Will's hair? Now,
that's what you want to write on. This
little note already has notes on it, so
you don't even have to take a note. And
it almost sticks to my shirt. Oh, it'll
hang there for probably about 30
seconds. So, for a limited time only
until this falls off, you can call in
and purchase this sort of wheel colored
hair sticky note. What? I'd like a
hundred. Great. There's only one, Matt.
There's only one. It's that one. That's
why it's so precious. That's why it's so
precious. Uh Will, I'm going to send you
a link and this is what you uh if you
could put it in both chats. Yeah. Yeah.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I can uh Here we go. I
can do that. Uh it's this link. Oh dear.
Uh, that link.
Okay. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes.
Okay. Hey friends, Matt from Extra
Credits here. This is something you
don't have to buy. Uh, it is a playlist
I made on Spotify. It's called Songs to
Slay Night Lords to. That's right. I've
been playing far too much Night Rain,
and I needed a bunch of music to be
playing in the background while I did
it. But here is the kicker. I decided
not just to make a playlist of songs
that sound great while you're playing
Night Rain, but I decided to make 38
tracks. 38 38 3 maybe it's 30 38 tracks
where it goes back and forth between the
topic of the song. So it starts with
Night Train by Guns and Roses. Then here
comes the rain again by Annie Lennox. Uh
then it goes into Night Fever from the
BGs. Then it goes Have you ever seen the
Rain Creed Clear Water Revival?
Basically it's night then rain night
then rain night then rain for 38 tracks.
Never never let it be said that our our
boy Matt doesn't commit to the bit 150%.
Also, I did try to make it. You really
made it. Yeah, it's there links in both
there. Yeah, it's it's in it's in chat.
Um we'll send it to you when we're done.
Um I finished it last night and I was
very proud of it. Okay. How long How
long did it take? How long? Too long. I
started it on the train as a joke and
then it didn't become a joke anymore.
Right. Okay. Great. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
Amazing. All right. Uh, and that was
almost perfectly three minutes of fake
ads. Uh, and everyone should be back now
from real ads. So, enjoy that. Uh, all
right. Next up, let's talk about a good
thing.
Bungie has declared that Marathon will
be delayed indefinitely.
Good. Good. Not indefinitely, but
they're saying till 2026, I think. Yeah.
Till 2026. They don't have a firm launch
date in 2026, I believe. It's just
sometime in 2026. So, um, good. Okay.
Here's why. So, there were there were a
couple of problems with Marathon to
begin with. Um, number one,
they took a lot of art assets from
people they were not paying to put art
assets in the game and they owned that
and they were like that, you know,
that's our bad. Um, I don't know if they
would have owned it if people hadn't
caught it and called them out on it,
which a little worrisome, but they did
own up to it when they were confronted
about the fact that there were
definitely art assets in the game that
they definitely didn't pay for. So,
that's on them. The other one is that
everyone looked at all of the
information that they were given. They
were like, "Bruh, this ain't it." And
Bungie went, "You know what? Fair.
We'll take another shot at it. We'll see
you in 2026." And I will fully admit
that this is a thing that Bungie can do
because they have bungee money, right?
So yes, this is the interesting thing
about this story. It feels like and this
is just this is vibe based only. This is
no there is no factuality in what I'm
about to say. It feels like this is the
last time they'll have bungee money if
Marathon does not hit.
I'm not saying they're going to go
under. I'm not saying any of that stuff.
I'm saying this feels like the last time
they could be like, "Nope, redo." Like
it it there's been too many things like
this. And I again, Destiny 2 is my
absolute favorite game that I cannot
figure out how to get back into and
play. Um I I just feel like there's been
a lot of stuff like that. Like, and I I
want Marathon to do well. I like I like
Bungie as a company. their trajectory of
like where they've been bought and sold
and freed and like whatever like is so
fascinating. Um, and you don't get to
see that often. So, I want them to
survive. I'm glad they delayed this
game. Uh, I hope they take the community
feedback. It's funny in Again, this
story comes from IGN. You can look it in
the show notes. All of their quotes.
Uh,
I got to find it. This is very when when
a community gets loud like Whether
they're correct or not, they always call
the engagement and thanks to your
passion. Yeah. Yep. And I love it
because they it it's Thank you again for
your patience and much more importantly
your passion. Your continued feedback
will help us make Marathon an incredible
gaming. Like passion is the passive
aggressive way of saying you shouted at
us a lot. You hurt our feelings. We're
going to go think about this for a
minute. Um, and I wait, what else are
they going to say? I just I always find
that I I'm I'm very passionate about
when uh corporations put out statements
that have the word your passion in it.
Um, I think it's very funny. Yeah. Uh,
of note on that same RJN article, there
is a poll uh that has received 4,143
votes on are you excited for marathon?
The results are 21.3%
yes. So 78.7%
no.
I It's kind of weird, right? Marathon is
a old IP of Bungie. It's an IP that
predates Halo. Mhm. Right. And so I
understand wanting to bring it back, but
also
feels like you missed feels like you
missed a lot. Like not a little bit.
This isn't like you took you took a shot
and missed. This is like you took a shot
and we're facing the wrong way like 180
degrees from where you were. And I I
haven't I have not played the alpha. I
did not or whatever it was that the play
test. I It's funny. I researched into it
like I think a month and a half ago or
something when we talked about it for a
longer period of time on this show. And
here's what I'll say and I I think this
is a little damning. I don't remember
it.
Like I I what I remember now is the AI
the the stolen art assets which is a
small portion but still important. But
like I don't even remember what the
gameplay loop is. And if we did like a
deep dive on it and I that information
is already out of my brain and look
maybe it's because I'm making night rain
playlists but I I think it that doesn't
speak well to like the longevity of what
your core loop is, right? Uh, and again,
this comes from a place I want I want
Marathon to do well. I like Bungie. And
again, and this comes up every time.
This is the right call,
right? If Okay, let's assume that they
want Marathon to come out and they're
not willing to cancel it after negative
reviews and bad feedback, right? And
they're not willing to just throw the
whole towel in, which they're probably
not because they've put there's a lot of
sunk cost there, right? and they've made
commitments to people like Sony that
they're going to come out with this
marathon game.
If they want the game to ever be good,
this is their only remaining course of
action, right? After the degree of
negative feedback that they got, they
needed to delay it, right? And so
they're taking the right call instead of
doing the thing which would have
absolutely sunk it even more certainly
than this, which is releasing it anyway
and being like, "Hey, we'll fix it in
post-launch patches." No, you are not.
No, cuz like again it's really important
that people not look at buggy messes of
bad player review um early like versions
and be like, "Oh, we'll fix it in post.
No Man's Sky and Cyberpunk did it. Why
can't we? It's cuz you're not No Man's
Sky or Cyberpunk." Like the the
survivorship bias, I think, uh is not
kicking in here, which I think is really
good that they're saying we're going to
delay it until it's more ready. The last
thing I'll say too is I think uh for uh
like extraction looters, multiplayer
shooter kind of things, I think the
window for you because it's a saturated
market. I think the window for you to
fix it is way smaller. Like Cyberpunk is
a single player RPG. They should have
released it in a better state, but it
now took years and now it is a one of my
the best games I've ever played. Uh No
Man's Sky was a small team. Again, it it
had multiplayer elements and of course
it is a multiplayer thing, but it it's
not terribly PvP. You you you can, but
it's not like that's not the focus and
therefore it had time to cook. Stuff
like this, if you aren't hooking people
to jump in and play these matches all
day, every day for the first month of
this game's thing, like you're not going
to break the noise. Like, it's just not
there. Um, and I think they realize
that. JJ, what what about you? Did you
What was that? I was excited for the
idea of the Marathon IP coming back.
Yeah. I because I loved like old school
Halo Bungee Halo like and I and and I
played Marathon like way way back. I
don't even really remember it, but I was
like, "Oh, cool." And
the art style was interesting. I It was
the extraction shooter thing that I I'm
not a big fan of. Like Destiny I always
followed, but I never played because I
just didn't have time in my life to
commit to Destiny. Um, so I was just
interested in the lore and and curious
like could I jump into this game, but I
I can't do an extraction shooter. And I
wonder I know that was part of part of
the complaint was that that extraction
shooter is a very niche community. And
I'm curious if if they would change that
at all, like change the actual loop of
the game to make it something that's a
little
broader. Yeah. Yeah. because there are
there are currently
two main extraction games, Tarov and
Dark and Darker. And it didn't make the
the show this week cuz we we we don't
have time to talk about it in the depth
that we might need to to like get all
the relevant details. Dark and Darker is
having a bad time. It's a very bad time.
Like got pulled off the Epic Store and
everyone got issued refunds. Bad time.
Like they're having a capital B, capital
T bad. So, the genre is pretty dense and
also fraught with a lot of problems. So,
I agree that I think maybe extraction
looter shooter wasn't the right game
here, wasn't the right idea here,
especially because as Chad is saying,
this bears very little resemblance to
the actual idea of Marathon. It it sort
of feels like they took Marathon's skin
and draped it over Tarov and went,
"Good, job's done." Y and that's not
really I think what a lot of people are
looking for, right? Um so I think that
there's uh
there there is definitely room to
improve and I do hope that when it comes
when we hear about it again in 2026.
Okay, let me be also be clear. I don't
want to hear anything about it. Bungie,
shut up. Stop saying words. Come back to
come back to us in 2026. Don't do
teasers. Don't and then and then please
please Bungie, I know you're watching
this show religiously. Please check all
your art before you release any more
press for this game. Please check all of
the art. Please make sure you've paid
all of the artists. In fact, you know
what you should do? You should just
throw extra money at sci-fi artists on
the off chance that someone might have
accidentally scooped some of their art.
just take money and throw it at random
artists just in case. Okay, please,
please double check all of this stuff. I
really don't want this to be the story
of Marathon, which is that after a year
of delays, it came back and immediately
they found more stolen art. Please don't
do that. That would be the worst thing.
Uh, and also, side note, uh, this was
where I was going to talk about the
Cyberpunk thing uh, Trevor brought up.
Breaking news, uh, there was supposed to
be a Cyberpunk update. 2.3 was supposed
to drop on the 26th, I think. Uh they're
moving it. They need more time. Uh so
they're going to aim for a scope similar
to the update of 2.2. So they also are
pushing back their specific patch and
thing to make it better. Uh good, good.
Great. Thank you. Delay more games.
Also, it's not like 2025 isn't already
jam-packed to the gills. Oh, 2027. Yeah.
Right. Um, like, uh, it's not like we're
short on things to play this year,
right? Uh, the DK game comes out next
month for the Switch 2 and all of the
Switch One games are new again, which
we'll talk about in a second. And and
and and that that Pauline lore we're
getting on Donkey Kong now. Yeah, that
deep deep Pauline lore. Um, yeah. By the
way, speaking of uh Switch 2.
Yes, Matt. Oh, I was just gonna say, uh,
oopsie asked why they didn't get, uh,
called in the feed when we started. It's
because it was a thing with YouTube. It
was messing up. It didn't belong to the
time. It's blame blame the tubes of you.
I have not, but they're glad they didn't
miss it. Glad you're here. Um, okay.
So, speaking of the Switch 2, speaking
of the Switch 2 and also ruining things.
So, there was a lot of discussion when
the Switch 2 and the ULA for the update
that the Switch One got to enable Switch
2 compatibility dropped. And a lot of
people were also looking at sort of the
terms of service for the Switch 2 in
broad terms. And a lot of people were
lipping out over um the ability for
Nintendo to remotely brick your console,
which spoilers, every internet connected
console ever has had that clause. That's
not new. That's a thing.
However, will point out Nintendo is one
of in in a rare case is exercising it.
They are actively bricking some Switch
twos. uh from and it they might just be
hardware banned from online play, but
they're they're not as functional as
they were above before when you you you
lose access to your account and
therefore you if you bought games on
that account, you can't do it. I think
you can still like plug a cart in and
play. But also, I'm not sure how a non-
Nintendo accounted Switch 2 even works.
Correct. The first thing you have to do
is log in. Yeah. So, um Okay. So, and in
this case, it's it's actually a very
interesting sort of um sort of
occurrence, which is there's a kind of
cartridge
uh I'm looking it up, called a MIG
switch, MIG switch. Um, and it is a uh
cartridge of a kind that's not
dissimilar for some of us old folks to a
game shark in that it is a device which
allows you to interface with the Switch
and load up additional programs. Um, and
it was a thing that was used pretty
heavily on the Switch One and the
Nintendo said that the uh Switch 2 was
going to have stronger measures against
it except it also emulates Switch One
games. It does some amount of emulation
for Switch One games. So, ROM makers
just released a firmware update for the
big switch that let you uh turn it into
a uh bypass for the emulation of a
Switch One game. And Nintendo said,
"Hey, don't do that." And the Mig Switch
people were like, "Hey, we're going to
do that." And Nintendo was like, "Okay."
And now people are reporting that if you
plug a MIG Switch cartridge into your
Switch 2, it can and will just get
obliterated. Um, it is just getting
banned uh
pretty extremely even for plugging it at
once, even for not loading any other
data. If you plug the device into the
Switch 2 and it calls home in some
fashion that people aren't aware of yet,
it will brick the console.
Thoughts, gentlemen? Now, uh, do we know
I the brick term is obviously the one
that gets thrown around. Is this
something that Nintendo can turn on and
off? It doesn't actually affect the
hardware per se. This is a software
bricking of the system, right? like it
it it doesn't like destroy the BIOS. It
like it basically doesn't let it phone
home. It is permanently and to the best
of everyone's knowledge irreversibly
hardware banned from connecting to
Nintendo Switch services and therefore
is well so so but this is my question
from a from a that's what do we have
confirmation on that like is like
Nintendo obviously hasn't reversed any
yet but do they have the ability to Oh
that's a great question if it can't
phone home can it be reversed?
See, this is my my thought is it's not
actually and again I don't know the
technicality of this. It's not actually
bricking the system especially because
if it is if the thing is you cannot
access your Nintendo online account.
I bet you there is still a way for
Nintendo through the serial number or
through something else or the ban list
or something to get you off that list.
It feels like if you're going to
implement this and use it,
it's not doing something that is
irreparable to the actual system itself.
This isn't Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It's not
changing anything about the system. The
system is trying to call home and the
systems hardware ID is on a list that
Nintendo says, "No, you've been bad. No
services for you." Yes. Because even
even to Oopsie's point, like here uh
people are going to accidentally buy
fake cards and lose everything. Like
it's funny.
being a kid growing up uh and getting
video games for Christmas and getting
the knockoff version of whatever it is
like you could totally see this
happening in various different ways. But
um I don't know. I
will your point about the like it's it's
awful that this is happening. There's no
question. It also is and this is going
to be my one swear word for the day. the
inshitification of every piece of
entertainment that we have. Everything
we do and engage with for the most part
is a service like this that can be shut
off and have access our access to it cut
off at any given time. Even stuff that
we buy uh I mean case in point uh
actually I don't know this will you
might know this more. A Steam Deck I go
out and buy a Steam Deck all of the
sudden my Steam I do something and I get
my Steam account logged off and I can't
go online with Steam anymore. That
limits what that can do. Granted, you
can hack it and make you can make it
into a Windows machine, that sort of
thing. I guess it's your value prop of
what you are buying the hardware for and
the ecosystem you are buying into. So,
I'm going to point out something that
has been bugging me about the way the
story has been reported. Um, which is
this is not new. This is like Xbox 360
era old as an issue, right, for like um
banning consoles from online services
for
um for violating terms of service in
some way, right? Uh I'm I'm curious
because I'm looking it up. You cannot
run a Switch 2 apparently without a
Nintendo account. I'm wondering in these
bricked system I I don't even want to
call it bricked anymore because I don't
think that's technically what it is. in
these ones that are account locked, can
you clear the entire Switch and make a
new Nintendo account? Granted, you would
lose access to anything you bought on
the previous Nintendo account, but as
far as like making the hardware work,
that's my question. Unknown on whether
there's a way to reset it. uh people are
already working on pulling apart the
Switch 2's operating system and there
may be a workaround to reset it to
something or to spoof the hardware ID
such that it gets access again. Um, but
unknown on that. No. And I know like I'm
sure modders and everybody will come up
with a way to do something, right? But
I'm talking about like
is there a consumerf facing solution
that is still a punishment for what
happened whether you should have been
punished or not that lets you still use
your $450 piece of hardware even if that
means you lose access to an account you
once had. Do you know what I mean? Oh
yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I I like your
account's forever gone, but you can
still use the Switch with your little
brother's account. Yeah. Yeah, that's
that's my question. I'm gonna dig into
that a little bit more. Not again, it
doesn't make it much better, but it it
changes the argument people have because
again, Will, to your point, this has
been forever. And I think Nintendo's not
doing a lot of great stuff right now. Uh
that's putting it sort of lightly. But
at the same time, I think because of
that, when things like this happen, it
becomes like a lightning rod for them.
But this has been going, this is not
new. Um, so yeah. Yeah. Uh, we'll see.
Yeah. And and and it is also worth
noting that there is um part of the part
of the confusion in the way that a lot
of people are talking about this is um
completely rendering the device
permanently unusable is also an option
that is in Nintendo's ULA and is also
similarly in the ULA for pretty much
every console ever. Just so we're all on
the same page, just because they this
isn't bricking fully doesn't mean that
it's not on the table. They they there
is some way that they can render the
console unbootable. Is is the law then
now we just own the silicon and plastic
but not the functionality of the device.
Is that kind of what it is? That
expensive decoration. So that that's an
interesting question and that touches on
one of my favorite issues on the
internet which is a little topic called
the right to repair. Right. So um the
answer is according to the ULA you don't
but the ULA is not the law. Sure. So,
there is some amount of back and forth
that's gone on, particularly in the US,
and I don't know about the EU, so I'm
not going to talk about that. Imagine
not talking about a thing I don't know
about on the internet. Um, in the US,
it's gone back the primary uh people who
have been upholding the uh corporate
rights to deny people the ability to
repair physical devices that they own
because of software or proprietary tools
or whatever are twofold. They are Apple
Computers and John Deere. John John
Deere is the other big opponent of right
to repair because they make an absolute
fortune from farmers in the United
States needing to pay John Deere to
repair their farm equipment because John
Deere is one of the leading
manufacturers of farming equipment and
they have a big anti-right to repair
thing to hold. So Nintendo would
probably weigh in on that side. However,
there has been movement that suggests
that despite what is in the ULA,
consumers do have some extended rights
beyond what it seems like they have in
the ULA in the United States. Now,
here's the really weird thing.
I don't know that that actually applies
to this specific case because what's
happening is you are being banned from
participating in online services as a
result of violating terms of service
and then that means that the
functionality of the device isn't like
the equivalent would be using your
iPhone to um crank call people or to
spam call people to turn your iPhone
into a robocall machine. Um, that would
violate the terms of service and result
in your iPhone being banned from being
used as an iPhone. You still own the
physical device. It could do something
else with it, but it won't function as
an iPhone because of the thing that you
did. Case in point, I could break my uh
terms of service on an iPhone and I
can't basically use Apple or any of its
stuff. However, if I'm if I am on it, if
it's old enough and I didn't need to log
in, I could still use it as my Fallout
controller for Fallout 4 from my pit boy
if I had that installed. Like it, you
know, it's not doing any it's using
Bluetooth and going to my PC. It's not
contacting anything outside of my
network. Um, yeah. So, like I guess that
was that was my main question, right? is
like
I I'm curious what the letter of the law
is about buying a piece of tech if
that's even anywhere truly because the
theoretically
I could take my switch to if if I had
the I mean this is a this is a a long
shot. If someone had the technical
knowhow and access to all of the parts
and infrastructure they would need, they
could for not profit
uh connect to like change the way the
Switch 2 worked uh connect to it their
own network and do whatever they wanted
so long as they could all kind of do it
by themselves and not talk with Nintendo
about it, right? Like it and that that
doesn't work for full piracy because you
have to connect to the internet, you
have to share. I'm talking like
technically if I owned a piece of
technology and I kept it on my own thing
that talked to no one and I did all of
the things myself. I believe
and maybe it's wrong. It feels like that
would still be legal. It right. So So
there's there's three there's three
levels here, right? There's Sorry, we're
going deep, J. No, I've Well, I've got a
switch two question that with this, but
I want to hear what has to say. Uh um so
so there's three levels to this, right?
One is does that violate the ULA? Two,
does that violate some kind of consumer
protection law? And then third, and it's
the big overarching shadow of an idiotic
law written by people who did not
understand the subject matter, does it
mess with the DMCA? Because anytime we
start talking about intellectual
property and the way that it's being
altered by the consumer, the DMCA pops
its head up and goes, "Is there someone
you forgot to ask?" No, I know. But what
I'm saying this is the weird thing and
again this is a this is a hyper it's an
impossible task I'm positing but I'm
pausing it on like I'm I'm trying to
find where the line is. If it's just the
hardware that I am using and I have
coded my own software correct
then it should be legal. If it's not, no
one has to talk to me or play with me.
It would be under the first two points
probably. Well, it would be against the
ULA, but they wouldn't be able to tell
if it never called home. It would
probably be legal under consumer
protection laws because you're not
interfering with anything else revealing
trade secrets. The problem is that
there's a clause of the DMCA about
breaking encryption on devices, and
that's where you could run a foul.
Again, I don't know how they discover
it, but there is a clause of the DMCA
that does apply to exactly the thing
that you're talking about, which says
you actually can't do that thing. Now,
people violate that clause of the DMCA
literally all the time, and it's fine,
but technically speaking, it is against
that provision of the DMCA because there
is some amount of encryption on the file
um on the software that runs on the
Switch, too. And again, we're getting
super technical in the It's so fun to
think about, though, JJ. Yeah. What was
your question? Well, so one thing I'm
wondering about is
what about like if you have controller
drift and you want to fix your own
controller cuz that was a huge issue
with the switch ones. We went through so
many controllers with with controller
drift and I I didn't do it personally.
We would just get new ones, but I know
other folks with my in my role at other
hospitals who didn't have the same
resources like they would crack it open
and fix it themselves. And now if we are
having the same issues with these, is is
that going toffect it as well? I would
imagine that it would be okay largely
because that's a purely physical fix
that doesn't interact with the software
at all. The the Joy-Con drift in um in
the way that Switch uh JoyCons are
assembled is a physical problem far more
than it is any kind of software problem.
It's not like there's a there's a
rounding error that occurs in the
controller, right? Uh, as far as
placement goes, it's a physical problem
with the joystick, which is why a Hall
effect joystick would fix it. The Hall
effects not possible because they're
using magnets to connect it to the
console and blah blah blah. So, I think,
again, not a lawyer, not an expert. I
think fixing joysticks, JoyCons will
still be okay. However, comma, but we'll
have to wait and see. It's fascinating.
Uh, I I don't know. We can I know we got
to keep moving on. We got a lot of stuff
to go through still. However, uh this is
just I don't know. It's Yeah, this is
this is this is the big question, right?
This has been a question for a while. Um
and Nec um Hall effect isn't perfect
either, but it's um it is better,
significantly better. Um it there's no
perfect way to avoid physical wear and
tear on things, but this is close. Also,
nice corn serpent. Uh, all right. Next
up, um, we're going to keep talking
about the Switch 2 real quick.
This is great, y'all. There's a new
number one game of 2025,
and it's Breath of the Wild.
This is why my daughter wanted me to get
a Switch, too. She She didn't care about
any of the games that are coming out.
She just wanted to play Breath of the
Wild again for the 15th time. So, well,
all right. So, I'm going to defend your
daughter here real quick. It looks
sweet. It looks real good. But it plays
real nice. So tears is the one I got.
You guys talking about it a couple weeks
ago and I I was like, "Oh, maybe I have
to." I have not booted it up for more
than 5 minutes because I know I will
just get sucked in. Like I need like a
chunk of time. Yeah. Okay. So, but the
frame rate's gorgeous. It looks great.
All right. Great. Excellent. We have We
have achieved our goal, which is that R2
is confused. Great. I'm so glad you're
confused. Let us explain. So on
Metacritic, games are tracked by release
year
and uh and and um so there's a list of
all the games that released in 2025 by
rating
and technically speaking the upgraded
version of Breath of the Wild released
in 2025. So the that means that the
Metacritic scores for Breath of the Wild
the concept aka the original and the
re-release have been bumped up into the
2025 releases for Metacritic. This is
sort of like okay this is not to say
anything bad about this re-release or
this port. The port is great. The fact
that they're giving it away to people
who buy their premium expansion pass
thing is also a really smart move. These
are all really good ideas from Nintendo.
Uh they should have given it away for
free to everyone, but this is like a
decent half measure, especially because
they gave away a year of the premium
service to anyone who bought a Switch 2.
Um
the question is
how long are we going to put up with
this? Like we keep like the release
year. So now is it like Breath of the
Wild 2017 and Breath of the Wild 2025?
Like how are we what are we is it the
Switch one version, the Switch 2
version? This is kind of an interesting
problem. In a year that's already
stacked with games, we're having old
games come out again on the Switch 2
because there's not enough launch titles
for people to pay attention to on the
Switch 2. So, we're saying that the old
launch titles are the new launch titles.
And what's that about? I don't think I
think I think
we could take it this seriously or we
couldn't, right? Like, this is an
outlier that is silly and fun. This is
great. Yes, this is great. Breath of the
Wild Taylor's version. Correct. No
notes. Proceed.
I don't know if I don't know if I have
anything better to say about this than
that.
Yeah. Also, hey Matt. Yeah. I regret to
inform you.
Your Discord ping through again. God,
I'm I'm just going to take I'm going to
silently take down the the the one off
of the number of It's closed on the core
system level. I cannot access Discord
right now. number of number of shows
since Matt's Discord ping interrupted us
reset to zero. I am sorry everybody.
Hey, let me talk to you real quick. I'm
so sorry everybody. I have to do this.
Hey. Hey, come here. I'm so sorry that
the Discord pings. I don't want it to
happen. I've changed my sound settings.
Not Come here. Just come a little
closer. I've changed my sound settings
so many times and I don't want it to
happen. I don't want you to look over
and be confused. Does this confuse you?
giant headmat with two people with
regularsized heads. I'll back up. I'll
back up. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. Message
for you. Yeah. Um I I think but but to
go on this, by the way, I I do think
that uh Joseph has a great point. Um
which is charging for for updates to
newer games at least makes some sense,
but Breath of the Wild should have
absolutely been the Costco hot dog. Yes.
Yep. 100%. So should have that tour
thing. Well, okay. Actually, I've
learned a little more about the tour
thing. I've learned a little more about
the tour thing. I've learned nothing
more. And I disagree.
Great. Awesome. Um, the tour thing is
not actually a tutorial on how to use
it. It is not. Well, a lot of us were
comparing it to Astro's Playroom. That's
not correct. Um, it is closer to a
documentary series on the technical
inner workings of the Switch 2. It is
not uh designed for the average
consumer. It's not designed to teach you
how the Switch 2 works. It's designed to
be essentially like a tearown tour by
Nintendo of the technology that's in the
Switch 2. So, it's not quite analogous.
I agree that it could have been a cool
fluff piece to include in everything,
but it's less consumers and much more
like these are the magnets that we used
and this is how we overcame this problem
and like all of that kind of thing. I
have a problem. Yes. I mean, I have many
problems, but I have specifically with
this one. Uh, it's called Nintendo
Switch 2 Welcome Tour. Agreed. Agreed.
Your marketing Nintendo is flawed. If
that's the case, fully stipulated, fully
granted. And so if you're marketing it
as a welcome tour, something that should
be given to some if if you want people
to be welcomed, you don't charge when
you show up at uh uh at least right now
like a national park or something or or
or a or a museum. oftent times the tours
uh especially if it's a welcome tour
will not cost you extra money.
I don't know. Yeah. Anyway, sorry I'm
mad about good old days where a console
came with a game and two controllers,
right? Oh my god, two controllers.
Controllers. I know. Technically, the
Switch 2 does come with two controllers.
Yeah. Yeah. If you have tiny hands. I've
used them. It's not It's not the worst.
The new ones I I tried it just to see.
Like it's not bad. Yeah. I used it when
I was uh playing Mario Kart with my
parents. Yep. Um okay. So uh anyway,
this is just kind of an interesting
aberration when we're looking at top
games of the year or when we're talking
about stuff. We're probably going to
exclude a lot of these re-releases, but
we're going to have to do it manually
because on Metacritic and other sites,
they're showing up as new releases. So
just be aware, right? Don't be like
looking at it and be like, "Wow, there's
nothing good that came out this year."
No. a bunch of spots are just getting
knocked off by really highly polished
re-releases of already existing first
party Nintendo games, and that's just a
thing we're going to have to deal with.
Yeah. Um, okay. I've also gotten green
light uh before I killed the Discord
ping, by the way. I was doing it for
everyone here. Uh, I asked if I could
have more time before the meeting, and I
could have more time before the meeting,
so we're all set. All right. Okay. Um,
let's talk about uh a a topic that is
near and dear to all of our hearts. um
which I I think that this is actually
one of the most important pieces of uh
updates to gaming in 2025 and I think
it's going to fly under the radar
heavily and I'm really glad that JJ is
here to talk about this. Let's talk
about Steam and accessibility.
[Music]
So
Steam is doing two things and they're
both great but they're very different.
One of them is that Steam is now letting
people search for games by accessibility
feature. Right. Oh, so right. So,
right there we go.
JJ Brain cell activated.
You had his interest, but now you have
his attention. Correct. And then the
second part of it, and I think this is
also very interesting, is that Steam is
adding accessibility features to Steam
itself. Currently, they are in the beta
and limited to big picture mode. Um, but
they are doing things like adding screen
reader compatibility to Steam in big
picture mode already. Like that's that's
what's happening. So, let's talk about
this cuz I think this is huge. I think
this is a really big deal that is not
going to get a lot of press because
quite frankly, it's not flashy, but it
is so incredibly important under the
hood.
Yeah. So JJ, can you can you tell us a
little bit? So you earlier you were
talking about the the motto at MOP being
that everybody plays, right? Can you
tell us a little bit about like the
links that you have to go to to make
some games work for kids?
Yeah, I mean sometimes it's it's
something as simple as um duct taping a
controller to someone's hand so that
they don't have to like hold it. Um,
uh, other times, you know, it's it's us
telling the person what is on the screen
because they can't see it or at least
see the colors that they're looking for.
Um, sometimes, actually, usually the
biggest hurdle for most of our patients
is just navigating the menu. the getting
through any menu on anything, especially
a PC game, is is so hard for a lot of
not for me, but or just for me, but also
just for anybody who has any type of
different type of ability, um whether
it's physical or cognitive. Um so being
able to make those tweaks and and I I am
really curious to see like how easy is
it to make that like do you have to deep
dive into five different menus to do it?
Um once you set it up, does it stay that
way? um does it does it stay depending
on what like if you're using a Steam
Deck versus your PC versus you know like
how how nuanced can it be? Um but having
having those tools even thought of by
developers is incredible because for the
longest time it was just all right let's
see what we can do with what we got.
Yeah. It seems it seems like
you know it's funny because you
obviously at M go above and beyond to
like games that might not be fully have
full the needed accessibility things.
You find ways sort of around it to make
it happen. This will hopefully be
something that's good for you guys and
for everybody else that can essentially
let you know exactly how much extra work
where you'll have to do like to to make
the game sort of function or like if
you're for instance when you're looking
to fill uh your Steam libraries for
those PCs and everything like you could
also sort of already have like it'll do
a lot of the filtering for like color
blindness or uh a specialty controller
or like things like that like you'll be
able to sort hopefully through that. So
when you have a kid come through that
needs X, Y, and Z, you can be like X, Y,
and Z. And then like the your Steam
library will hopefully Yeah. uh adjust
that accordingly. So they'll have a list
that they know that they can access. And
and there there is a lot of that stuff.
We don't even we didn't even realize
that we wanted it until some some smart
developer put it in. Whether they
intended to do that for people um with
different abilities or if they just
thought, hey, this will make it easier
to game with your kids. Like Mario Kart
is a great example of like the auto
drive or the auto excel. Um that was a
game changer for us. It made it so much
easier for families to play together,
for people with different abilities to
play together and it's like one simple
thing and or even co-pilot on the Xbox.
Like I I had that thing for a year
before I realized it was there and and
it made it so much easier to teach my
kid who doesn't have any um disabilities
how to play a third person or a first
person game. Can you can you explain
Co-Pilot just real quick for people who
may not be familiar? Oh, yeah. Copilot
it's if you guys don't know about it,
you should check it out. Especially if
you do have kids, um it is a g it allows
you to use two controllers as one
controller. So, um if I'm playing a game
with my son and he's really struggling
like with my when he first started
playing Minecraft and I actually use
this with patients all the time when
they're trying to learn how to play a
game. Um you know, controlling the
camera is really difficult for young
ones. Um, so what you do is you let them
play and what I can do is any it's
basically having one controller in two.
So as like his my A controls his A, my B
controls his B, uh, my left joystick
controls his left joystick. If I'm not
touching it and he's moving it, it'll do
whatever, but then the minute I start
pushing a button, it takes over for that
controller without inhibiting what he's
doing. So, he's able to um what I do
with a lot of kids, if they if they're
missing an arm or if they're having a
procedure done where their arm is being
used, um they can still play a game and
even if they're getting like an IV or
something put into that that right arm,
I'll just play the right side of the
controller with another controller in my
hand. And it's it's just changed the
whole game of how we teach kids how to
play games, but also how we um approach
uh accessibility in gaming. Yeah. So, it
is it is and um Grass also points out
that you can do a similar thing with the
the split controllers, right? Because
you can have the the the JoyCons. They
don't actually have to be close
together, right? There was one for your
left hand and one for your right hand,
but they don't have to be the same
person's hands, right? You can just
split them up uh and do it that way. And
that that's totally um the same kind of
concept, although not executed the same
way. that like as an example, if um as
Microsoft continues to bring more of
their games to PC at and Game Pass at
like the same time, if you could do a
search on Steam for games that support
co-pilot,
that's a game changer right there. Well,
that's we do that a lot. So, with a lot
of our adaptive equipment, like the our
patients usually want to use the P the
who play PC games want to be able to
like use the keyboard as much as
possible. Um, I am atrocious playing any
game with a mouse and keyboard. So, I've
actually been experimenting myself with
like how like using co-pilot to use the
controller to control my movement and my
shooting, but then using the mouse to
like learn how to aim. Um, and I've been
trying to experiment with that with
different uh stuff with patients who
have different types of abilities so
that they can still use the keyboard as
much as possible while using another
piece of equipment, but we just use
co-pilot. So, it's one person using two
controllers as one. And so, that that's
super helpful in that that type of
circumstance as well. And to have that
on Steam, if it like could integrate or
work just as well, that would be
amazing. Yeah. So, some of the things
that they're talking about for right now
um are in in big picture mode. They're
talking about a high contrast mode, the
ability to reduce motion uh in Steam
menus uh or like to to turn off
autoplaying um trailers. They've got a
UI scale option. They've got a built-in
screen reader. Builtin screen reader.
Wow. Builtin.
Oh my god. It's one of the things that
makes Minecraft so incredibly good for
accessibility. I accidentally turn it on
all the time when I'm playing modded
Minecraft so I remember always that it's
there. But like there's a built-in
screen narrator for Minecraft like and
that's huge, right? And so having that
kind of thing built into Steam, right?
Because like if you
we're kind of talking about it, right?
if you don't have to help someone get
into the game, right? That's another
level of independence for them and more
time that you can be spending uh do
helping with other more complicated
problems, right? But if like if you can
set up a library of Steam games and say,
"All right, you can, you know, here's
the screen reader here. It's nice and
big. You can read this. You can make a
choice about the game you want to play."
That feels like a big win for you
getting to like put some control back in
the kids' hands and also like to just
make it easier for them to actually be
driving. I mean, it's perfect timing. It
makes me so excited because like I said,
we've just got these four PCs and we
love Steam. We use Steam, but it's
really hard to use Steam in a hospital
because of all of the different
firewalls and things that are set up to
make it so that you you can't use your
big fancy PC for, you know, uh, HIPPO
reasons, which is like to protect people
from giving away their their hospital
information. All of our accounts, we
don't let kids put their own accounts on
these computers. It's all accounts that
we take care of, but we do help kids set
up their own computers. So, to be able
to even let them know, hey, did you know
this thing exists? we can help you get
your computer the way you want it, your
games the way you want them, that that
would be huge. And then if we're doing
stuff like with all the fun stuff
everyone's going to think about for
design club, um, if we're having like we
used to do something called Mario
Mondays where every Monday Connor would
go around and just look at what door was
open and invite people to come play
Mario Kart. And I could see something
doing something similar with games on
Steam, which would be great because then
we could start exposing our patients to
like all the really cool indie games
that are on Steam or some of the
higherend games that like we wouldn't do
on Nintendo Switch, but have the systems
ready to go for them when they come
down. Like, you know, if somebody is
color blind, knowing this kid's coming
down, we'll have it all ready for them
so right when they start, they don't
have to we don't have to spend 30
minutes trying to set it up for them.
Yeah, that's really cool. Also, uh I
don't know if it made this, but I did
see a push um that some disability
advocates are doing, which is, you know,
how there are the little icons for like
what games this uh what controllers this
game is compatible with? There is a push
to have the Xbox um adaptable controller
added to that list so that you just see
the button squid, right? And if you've
never seen an Xbox adaptable controller,
it is one of the coolest pieces of
technology. It is like, did you ever
want to make your home console into a
Chuck-e-Cheese style arcade game you
play with your whole body? Yes. Cool.
Great. Like, it's got giant joystick
pads and it's got big like big friendly
buttons that you can hit with like a
foot or an elbow or whatever to play a
video game. The thing is dope. The thing
is just like I don't I don't need one
and I want one. No, I love I love that
it looks like a giant NES controller,
like old school NES controller. And my
favorite thing when I was playing around
with it was that was back when I was
really big into Titanfall 2. And I made
the the two bottom buttons my like like
basically foot pedals for myself so I
could jump and and slide. And it like it
made traversal so much more fun because
I was doing it with my own feet. And
that wasn't to adapt to anything. That
was just like, hey, how can I have fun
with this game and and get faster and
better at it. Yeah. Uh so it sounds like
this is this is a thing that you as
someone who uses accessibility options
on the daily in your work are really
jazzed about and that cuz I I like
thought that this was pretty cool and
now I'm even more convinced that this is
really really cool. All right, we've got
uh one more story and then we have a a
special treat for JJ. So uh our one more
story is Twitch chat. Did you know well
YouTube chat too, but Twitch chat for
sure. We haven't tested with YouTube
chat. We might have to do that at some
point. Did you know that you're smarter
than Google's AI? So this this was a bit
of um this is a bit of a freebie dunk uh
that I'm pretty happy with. So, um,
Google, in an attempt to prove that
their AI was cool, hooked their AI up to
Pokemon and went, "Watch, look how fast
our AI beats Pokemon knowing nothing."
And then they released those numbers.
And they were like, "We're very proud of
it."
And then people figured out that Twitch
plays Pokemon beat Pokemon faster with
people playing Twitch plays Pokemon who
actively were trying to sabotage the
run. Yeah, this comes from some PC
Gamer. Um I think this is great. I'm I'm
Matt. Thoughts, feelings? I mean, it's
funny. I mean, look, it's it uh the
first time it ran through it took over
800 hours to beat the Elite 4. Um,
they shaved off a couple um, a 100 hours
here and there, but I believe What is
the What's the Twitch plays Pokemon
time? I'm trying to remember. It's like
days, but not many.
Yeah, I think they're they shaved it
down to 406.5 hours on Google AI. Um,
Pokemon Blue takes 26 hours to beat
according to how long to beat. I don't
remember what uh chat will chat will
yeah it's like a week but that yeah 16
daysish which is way less than 46 hours
because a week is 170 so like
still doing great Twitch chat um yeah I
I think this is is that because they
didn't pick up healings probably most
likely probably um anyway very silly
haha
Listen, I get my jollies from dunking on
things sometimes. It's fine. All right.
Now, we have we have uh a tradition to
uphold, which is that nobody's allowed
to come on our show without being forced
to play a silly game. So yours JJ is
called a difficult dilemma or it could
be a difficulty dilemma
because what we're going to do is
basically Will and I pulled we scoured
the internet um and we pulled
essentially a bunch of different
difficulty settings names from a bunch
of different games. And your job as we
name the difficulty setting, you're
going to tell us if it's from a real
game or a game or a thing that Will and
I just made up. You basically have to
tell us if if the difficulty setting is
a real difficulty setting in in a video
game. Mhm. Or if Will and I are just
BSing you. I will. And don't worry, by
the way, most of these are older games.
These are not the new fangled games.
These these are games. Some are some
some some are, but like most of the
games like for for example, right? Uh
the difficulty hurt me plenty
is from the original Doom, right? Yeah.
The medium setting on Doom was called
Hard Me Plenty, right? So, uh Matt,
would you like to take the first of
these? Uh and Matt will be Matt will be
keeping score for posterity only. Uh the
points are in fact made up and do not
matter. I'm going to Yeah, the points
don't matter at all. I'm going to So you
you're going to be able to score I think
I didn't even I didn't even game out
this to know what even matters. You're
going to get two points. You have an
opportunity for two points if a game is
real, right? So for instance, if you if
we were doing hurt me plenty for Doom,
if you if we said, "Okay, hurt me
plenty." And you're like, "That's a real
game." That's one point. And then you
name the game, that's a secondary point,
you get two points. However, I'm going
to I'm going to double it back now. I'm
making up a bunch of stuff on the fly.
If it is a fake game, if it's not real,
and you name what you thought it was,
you'll lose two points. Does that make
sense? Okay. So, if I get it wrong, what
if I make up a fake game and it's
awesome. It's still wrong. It's still
fake game. Well, okay. What if I say
it's a fake game and I say what fake
game it's for? Oh, if you invent That's
not how it works. That's not how it
works. All right. Inventing stuff. Why
did JJ invent stuff? All right. Okay.
Uh, the first difficulty setting in a
difficult dilemma.
It's called Damn, I'm good.
Is that a real video game difficulty
setting or a fake video game difficulty
setting? That's fake. That is fake. All
right. Uh, sadly, JJ, that is incorrect.
That is uh the very difficult setting on
Duke Nukem from 1996.
That does sound like a Duke Nukem. The
other difficulties on that game are
piece of cake, let's rock and come get
some. Yeah. With Damn, I'm good. So, now
you know. Now you know the vibe of what
this could be. Okay. All right. All
right. Yep. Yep. Uh, all right. Will,
you take you take this. Next up, the
difficulty level in question is a walk
in the park. Is it a real difficulty
setting or did we make it up? That's
real. And do you want to guess what game
or do you want to just It's basically
you're hedging your bets, right? Because
if you're So if I if I guess and I'm
wrong, then I lose the point. No, no,
no. If If you guess a video game, so
Okay, this is how it goes. Sorry, I
didn't explain this terribly well cuz I
made it up on the spot. If this is a
real difficulty setting, you've already
gotten the one point because you've said
it's real. If you you can only get an
extra point, you'll get two points if
you guess the game. If it's not real and
you and you guess a game,
I'm not gonna deduct. Oh, no. You would.
This is why we do. No, if if the game is
real, you can't lose points. You can
only gain them. Does that make sense?
But if the game is fake, you could lose
two points. Got it. Okay. Yep. Um, it is
real.
But you don't have to guess a title. You
could not hedge it if you're not. I feel
like I know what it is. Is it real? Can
you tell it? No. No. That's not how this
works. But you have to decide if you're
going to double. I'm just gonna say it's
real. I'm just gonna say it's real. Just
gonna say it's real. Okay. Yeah. Uh,
that was smart because it is not real. A
walk in the park is what llo and I my
dog love to do. There's got to be a game
that has that title that if you find it,
I will give you the point back. If
someone on in chat finds the thing,
chat, you are on JJ's side here. I'm I'm
going to say that that's the rule that I
made up. If you can help JJ by finding a
real game with a real difficulty called
the walk in the park, he'll get the
point back. Also, Damon, I'll take that
loss of two points for the poor
explanation first. Okay. Next up is a
difficulty setting extra crispy.
That is That's a real one. Okay. Would
you care to guess again? If it is one,
you won't lose for not getting it right.
I want to say it's a Diablo game.
Interesting. Interesting. Interesting.
Interesting. No. No. Can I take it back?
I want to say it's Cooking Mama.
Interesting. Interesting. Great guess.
Sadly, well, not sadly, it is a real
game, so you get one point, but the game
is from the 1997 uh uh boomer shooter
Blood. All of their difficulty settings
were based on ways you could cook meat.
All right. So, they're still kicking
pink on the inside, lightly broiled,
well done, and then extra crispy. So,
you're now adding a point. Are those all
first person shooters? No, there's a lot
of first-person shooters, but they're
not all first person shooters. I also
have an update from Twitch chat. Twitch
chat has discovered a game called Green
Hell,
which has the difficulty a walk in the
park. JJ, with that with that extra
point, you are now dead even at zero
points for
you are now clean slate. Let's see if we
can go. I love that we didn't we didn't
double check the list of fake ones to
give Twitch chat something to do. Good
job, Um, all right. Uh, next up, I can
do this all day.
Oh, that's that's a Captain America
saying. Final answer.
Yes, it's real. Well, it's it's Is it
real or is it a fake difficulty setting
based on Captain America? It's real. And
I'm going to say it's in
an Avengers game.
Interesting. The Avengers. Interesting.
Okay, so we made it up. Uh, it is
Captain America's saying,
but Twitch chat bail JJ can find Come
on. That's got to be in there. If
Twitchcat can find a game, I like I like
I like Survivors. Uh, it's real to me.
It's real to me. That's the most
important part. It's true. All right.
Next up, marshmallow fluff. Yes, that's
true. That's definitely one. Do you care
to guess what game or do you just want
to go with it's real? I'm gonna say
Ghostbusters.
You know, these are really good games
that could actually happen. Figure it
out. This was also a fake one. That is
Will's favorite sandwich. Yeah, it's not
a real one, but it definitely could be.
Uh, and Twitch, so Twitch chat, you're
currently working on I can do this all
day. I can do this all day. Help me out,
Twitch. or marshmallow fluff as
difficulty settings in a video game.
Thousands of games on stream with one of
them's got to have marshmallow fluff in
it. Maybe. All right. Uh, next up,
Secret Agent.
Yes. Okay. Would you care to guess the
game?
I want to say Golden Eye. Both are
points. Two points. Secret Agent is uh
the medium difficulty. The other
difficulties are agent agent and the
secret difficulty 007.
All right. Good. Good. Next up, bring
them on with an exclamation point.
That's That's real. Okay. Do you care to
guess the game? Bring them on.
Again, you can't lose a point if it's
real. You can lose a point if it's fake.
Oh, I'm going to go super retro, even
though it's probably wrong. I want to
say Smash TV. Interesting. Interesting.
It is a correct uh game. It was
Wolfenstein 3D. The Oh, I almost said
that.
A point. You only gain a point. The the
OG game. The The other ones the other
ones from Wolfenstein 3D are Can I play
Daddy, don't hurt me, and I am Death
Incarnate. The The range on Wolfenstein
3D pretty big actually from
from uh was it BJ Honeyut with a
pacifier to I am Death Incarnate, which
is, you know, great. I was going to say
most of what you're saying I was like
that could have been Wolfenstein that oh
my gosh that game was so scary that and
Doom. Yeah. 1980s or no 90 something.
Sitting in the dark. All right next one.
Next difficulty setting. Tanto.
Tanto. T A N T O. Tanto.
I want to say yes because I feel like
you guys wouldn't make that up. That's a
valid choice that you're playing
against. Yeah, you're allowed to play
the game against us. That's okay.
Yeah, I'm the guy that gets good scores
on multiple choice cuz I just, you know,
you can see the matrix. Okay, so you
think it's a real game. Do you care to
guess what game it is? You can't lose a
point if it is a real game, remember?
So, it depends on how confident you are.
Uh, Lone Ranger. All right. Well, it is
a real game. We actually guessed that
that was going to be the other direction
you could go with this. Uh, but the game
is a 1989 PC game called Sword of the
Samurai where all of the difficulty
levels are different kinds of swords.
There's the Wagasashi, uh, the Katana,
the Nodachi. Okay. And Tanto is the
easiest. It's by the length of the
sword. That's right. Yeah. Okay. All
right. Next up, the difficulty in
question is plus ultra.
Plus ultra. Yes, that's that's one.
Okay. For would you like to guess the
game?
That's something I would have said for
Doom, but I don't think that's it. Is it
uh
Oh, I don't know. It's some crazy first
person shooter. Um
You don't have to guess a game. You
don't have to guess a game. Yeah, you
could just say you could just say Okay,
I'm going to leave it. I can't remember
the name of the game I'm thinking of. It
if it were a game, it would be for My
Hero Academia, but it's not a real
difficulty level. And Twitch chat's
about to tell me that there's some
obscure My Hero Academia fan. I was
going to say there's got to be a fighter
out there that My Hero Academia. Yeah.
Uh Dan is selling you out saying that
you're not a not a weeb. Um,
I'm a I'm a comic book nerd. Uh, but no,
I'm not a wee. All right. Sorry, guys. I
tried. Uh, the next one is uh Why God?
Yes, that's got to be one. Okay.
I want to say God of War. I It also
sounds like it could be a Doom one, but
that'd be very fun. I'm going to say God
of War. Uh, it is a real game. However,
it is not God of War. This we went real
obscure. Uh and actually I'm going to
shout out something after this real
quick at the end of where we pulled a
lot of these from. Uh this is a
Newgrounds game uh by Ivory Drive in
2008. Uh it is like an old school flash
game. Oh. So this was a this was like a
hard a hard one. All right, we got three
four more. Four more then we're done. Uh
you can never go home again, but
apparently you can shop there. Is that a
difficulty level or did we make it up?
I'm gonna say you made it up just
because I haven't said that yet. That is
also true. Uh yes, we we did make it up
and technically we we didn't make it up.
That is a quote from the film Gross
Point Blank. Ah, okay. Wonderful comedy.
You guys are getting me because you're
getting quotes that I know. I'm I'm a
movie nerd and a comic book nerd. So
that There we go. Yeah. All right. I
will. Uh, all right. Uh, final three.
Next up, hell or hell.
The difficulty level in question is hell
or hell. Is it real or do we make it up?
I'm going to say that's real. That's
Diablo. Okay, it is real. It is not
Diablo. You still get a point. It's the
penultimate secret difficulty on Devil
May Cry 5. The difficulties on Devil May
Cry 5 are Human, Devil Hunter, Son of
Sparta, Dante Must Die, Heaven or Hell,
Hell or Hell, and Legendary Dark Knight.
Because DMC 5 has too many difficulty
settings for a video game. It has too
many. JJ, I will say this. I'm going to
give you half a point because it the
Diablo and and uh the they're both very
demon focused. I feel like I'm going to
give you the half point for that one.
You actually You guys cut me I was going
to say Diablo May Cry. I was Of course.
Of course. Yeah. The seminal classic
Diablo May Cry. Yeah. Right. Okay. Uh
that's what DMC stands for. Okay. Um
Mezoforte.
Mezoforte.
Yes. I don't know what game.
No. Do you know what game? It is a I
have no clue. It is a uh rhythm game
from 2012 on PC. The hard mode for a
game called Symphony. You get another
point.
And I believe we're on the last one
here. Uh the last difficulty level in
question is let me see if I can do this
right. I'm walking here.
Is that a difficulty setting or did we
just make it up? Um I want it to be a
difficulty setting for Max Pain 2.
But are you saying that it is? I'm going
to. Yeah, just for fun. Uh, well, it it
is not. Uh, it is uh what I heard on the
sidewalk the other day. That's what I
figured. So, it should be though. Hey,
can Chad, help me out. Is that a real
one? Yeah. Yeah.
After correction,
that's like a Grant. That's auto ripoff.
After after a grueling 14 of these uh
going up and down with rules I made up
on the fly, JJ, I'm gonna say I'm gonna
say you win because you are in the
positives. It fluctuated to negative
positive negative positive. Um you have
1.5 points and that says to me that you
have beaten a difficult dile. Where did
the half a point come from? I gave it to
him for the Devil May Cry devil tie to
Diablo may cry. Sorry, I was busy
answering questions in Twitch chat about
the rules of this game that you changed
after we spent an entire meeting making
it up on Friday. Don't worry about it. I
like lurkers thing. If we make video
games with these settings, can we
retroactively boost JJ's score? Yes.
Yes, you can. Okay. All right.
Excellent. Next time I play, I'm
bringing the Game Genie so I can adjust
scores. Oh, Game Genie. That is exactly
it. Well, that is all of the time that
we have for breakfast today. Hey JJ,
thank you so much for joining us. Thank
you JJ. Side note, I do want to call out
there uh we have a YouTube video uh by a
YouTuber named Cammy Player which we
pulled a lot of these from. Uh we'll put
that link in the show notes as well. I
want to make we we did that was like 70%
of our our our research on here. It was
just a very solid like we're going to go
over all these obscure games and their
difficulty setting names. So it's a
check that out if you're interested. Um
so JJ, thank you so much for joining us
for for pitching this challenge. Again,
that challenge is to help you come up
with games that uh would be suitable for
kids from of all ages uh to play on
Steam or on PC or on Switch that might
help in this therapeutic environment,
right? And we're going to be talking
about that with you and uh maybe someone
else from M on Thursday. Again, that's
Thursday, 2 p.m. Eastern, 11:00 a.m.
Pacific. be here for that with me and
Jeff and uh the M crew and that will be
uh an excellent time. Then I believe one
other thing uh Miky uh in the chat asked
if we had talked about the marathon
thing. We did. It is backwards. If
you're watching the VA of this uh by
tomorrow they'll be broken down
chapters, so you'll be able to just
click and go to that little spot. Yep.
Um JJ, where can folks find you and Mott
and all of the good things that you do?
So, you can just look us up at CSM
Children's Hospital. Uh you'll find all
of our information um on the on the
internet or at Facebook. Um uh you can
also look up Stream Vermont. Uh we do
fundraisers if anyone's a streamer and
wants to help support us or just donate
directly to our our program. Um we you
can do all of that through our website
uh at CSM Children's Hospital. Cool. And
we'll put those in the show notes as
well in the description, etc. All that
jazz. Awesome. Um, I guess the only
thing left to do is our patented sign
off, which JJ, you should know because
we do it. It's the same every time.
Yeah. Um, as as a viewer of the show,
right? Yeah. As a viewer of the show,
JJ, are you familiar with the with the
end of it or do you pop in and out?
Like, how how I I pop in and out. I
might need a quick reminder. Okay. Okay.
Well, actually, I usually get pulled
away before the end. So, here's here's
the best part, JJ. Okay. It's the same
every time and it's and what it is is it
it's it's to build community and to make
sure that everybody can leave the show
on the same page. I think through sheer
osmosis of you being at our rless
breakfast nook that you're going to be
able to know exactly what that ending
is. So I'm going to toss to you for one
final sentence of a goodbye. And I
guarantee you it is the same outro we do
every single time. Are you ready, JJ?
I'm ready. All right. I hope I don't
screw it up. Here we go. JJ, take us
home.
Goodbye.
Thank you.
[Applause]
[Music]
Oh, I hope that got in before the cut.
Oh my god, I hope that got in. I made it
so much better. It's so fun. Uh JJ, just
so you know, we are still live and
everything. Now we're in the post show.
Uh, okay. The the the the ending we do
every time, the the thing that is
similar
is that it is always different in a way
and that I always cut it off in the
middle random. Like Matt always does the
bit and I always get to cut it off. So
you're the first one. I think you're the
first other person to do it. Yeah. Okay.
Oh, that's great. Well, cuz I was like I
have seen the end. I don't know. But it
is though. No, that's that that is the
bit. Um, cool. That's awesome. Yeah, and
I love this shot. How did he know it?
Right. Uh, exactly. So, uh, that is
going to do it for our stream this
morning. We have to get JJ back to work
and Matt back to meetings and all of
that jazz. So, I will let our
compatriots go. Uh, friends on YouTube,
this is where we say goodbye. Please
join us Thursday for uh, an excellent
design club. Jeff and I will be there.
And again, we're going to be talking
about the um uh the
uh things that we can suggest to JJ and
the crew M for the uh new um computers
to put on them so that kids can play.
So, be thinking of that and we'll work
on that uh together on Thursday. So,
please join us for that. Everybody say
bye YouTube. I