Long ago, we did an episode on power creep.
We covered what it is and the damage that it can do to a game in a long term.
We wrapped it up with a nice bow and Bam! Work complete.
Or so we thought.
Then the new Hearthstone expansion came out.
And that's we were reading through the board, we saw a lot of people complaining about power creep,
but a surprising number of them were pointing to the wrong examples.
The cards that weren't actually causing power creep.
And it occurred to us that in the whole first episode on power creep,
we never really explained how power creep happens from a design perspective.
This seems like a fantastic time to fix that oversight.
Now, of course, sometimes power creep is conscious.
Sometimes it's an attempt by the developers to sell whatever expansion they just released,
by making the gear or the cards in it so much better than what they released previously,
that anybody who wants to stay competitive 
has to buy it.
But this sort of intentional power inflation is usually pretty obvious to everybody.
And the self-destructive long term cycle there 
is pretty clear.
So that's not what I wanna talk about today.
Instead, I wanna talk about the more interesting type of power creep.
The accidental kind of power creep that inevitably happens
as designers work on increasingly complex sets of interlocking pieces.
like cards in a collectible card game,
or equipment in an MMO.
We are gonna use Hearthstone as an example here,
but you won't have to know the rules of Hearthstone
to follow this episode.
Although, if you do want do a quick brush-up on the rules before watching,
it won't take you very long.
If you do like collectible card design, you'll probably dig this.
The only piece of terminology we all have to be clear on before moving forward,
is power curve.
The power curve of a card game refers to the curve created by
plotting the power and cost of each card on a graph.
While there will be some variation,
all of the game's card should basically fall along that curve.
If a card spikes too high over that curve,
it risks breaking your game.
If it spikes too low,
it risks being too weak to be worth any player's time.
Make sense?
Okay, here we go.
In the recent expansion to Hearthstone,
Blizzard released two particular cards that
have frequently been cited as an example of 
blatant power creep.
Evil Heckler, and Ice Rager.
This is because, the Evil Heckler is a strictly better version of a previously existing card called
Booty Bay Bodyguard.
Notice how Evil Heckler has the same stat as 
Booty Bay Bodygard
but costs one less mana to play.
It is objectively better card in any scenario.
And look at Ice Rager. It is a strictly better version
of an existing card called Magma Rager.
See how it has one additional hit point?
There's no reason to  ever choose Magma Rager over 
Ice Rager when building a deck.
Now it is easy to see why one might look at this and,
at first glance, mistake it for a textbook-case 
of power creep.
But it's actually not, at all.
Why not?
Because Magma Rager and Booty Bay Bodyguard were actually themselves
so far below the power curve that they were already completely unplayable.
All the designers did here was
take cards that are unplayable in any format, 
and make new versions of those cards that
might, in some scenario, at some time, 
possibly have a chance of seeing play.
So while these new cards are indeed more powerful than the existing ones
both of the new cards still fall below the game's overall power curve.
It's only power creep when card or a piece of gear
spikes over the game's power curve.
And, because for most decks,
there are already better cards in the 3 to 4 mana range,
these new cards don't actually 
push the power level of the set
or force players to buy and stay competitive.
They are not competitive right now,
and nothing about them suggests that 
any cards made in the future are gonna synergize with them
in a way that makes them substantially stronger than other cards that already exist.
So, yes, they are clearly better than certain other card that already existed,
but in no way impact the overall power level of the game.
So, these sorts of correction cards aren't what we are looking for when we are hunting for power creep.
Instead, we're looking things that are so far above the curve,
that all future cards of that mana cost must be compared against that card.
One such card in the previous set,
was Piloted Shredder. Ever since it's released,
players looking to put any 4-cost minion in their deck have had to ask themselves:
"Is this card somehow better for my deck than Piloted Shredder?"
to justify putting it in.
This means that any future 4-cost minion worth playing
are gonna have to be better than Shredder to see play.
And Piloted Shredder was itself already better than all the previous 4-cost minions.
This is the definition of power creep.
Now, of course, there are cases where some specific combination of the cards makes another 4-cost minion
better for its specific deck than Piloted Shredder.
But even in those cases, that question is always how the players make that call.
They simply ask themselves:
"Would I rather have a Piloted Shredder in here?"
And you can see the immediate impact that had on the next Hearthstone expansion, too.
Notice how there are a lot more 3-strength, 5-health minions in the next set,
specifically because those minions can kill the shredder without dying to it,
allowing them staying on the board, and have a chance at also destroying the minion the Shredder will spawn when it dies,
which shows you just how much that accidental power creep impacted the entire set,
and how that folks at Blizzard had tried to use the tool they had available
to hold the Shredder's power back into line with this new expansion.
And here's where the mechanics of power creep come into play.
If Blizzard can't hold the power of that card back down
by releasing a bunch of cards specifically designed to counter it,
then, in the future, their only option is to release cards on par with or better than Shredder
in that 4-mana slot.
At least if they want those cards to ever have a chance of seeing play.
But because the power of the Piloted Shredder is already so high,
if they release cards superior to it for the 4-mana slot,
those cards will likely be as powerful as existing cards in the 5-mana slot,
which means that Blizzard are gonna have to make more powerful 5-mana cards
to give players a reason to bother with 5-mana minions at all.
And, if they release more powerful 5-mana minions,
well, then this effect just cascades.
And they have to release more powerful 6-mana minions
and on, and on,
until they eventually release more powerful minions in every slot.
Once they do, the power curve will finally look right again,
exactly like it did before any of these happen
except now it has a new baseline.
And that is how power creep works.
So, if you're a designer, and you're looking to avoid power creep,
you don't have to worry about correcting past mistakes
or making more playable version of existing underpowered cards.
No, what you've got to worry about,
is letting cards accidentally slip by
that form the new baseline for how players judge cards at a given point of your power curve.
Because once you let those throught
they basically deleted all the design space below them.
All those decent-to-mediocre cards that might have been playable in certain interesting edge cases,
will no longer be worth bothering with, because they've simply been outclassed.
And that's a dangerous thing if you want your game to last 10 years,
which actually leads us nicely into a new topic:
How do you avoid this kind of long-term damage?
Is it possible to future-proof your design?
We will talk more about that next week.
See you then!