[Music]
[Music]
This week, we've decided to start a
short series on Telltale's rather
excellent The Walking Dead adventure
game. Don't worry if you haven't played
it. I don't think it'll impact your
enjoyment of the discussion, and I don't
expect we'll be spoiling anything. It's
really just that The Walking Dead series
is such an oddity in modern AAA gaming
that it serves to point out a lot of
interesting things about the medium as a
whole. It's probably worth mentioning
before we start. I personally think The
Walking Dead game is very good, great
even, and I have no problem recommending
it. But that said, it's far from
perfect. We're mostly going to be using
it as an example for the things it gets
right, which means we'll be talking
about it in a very positive light, and I
got no problem with that. But like Spec
Ops before it, I don't want to give
anyone the idea that this is the
apotheiois of game. It's just a very,
very good game that did some brave
things that deserve to be talked about.
The first question that has to be
answered about The Walking Dead is why
anyone played it. After all,
conventional wisdom in the industry says
adventure games are dead. And Walking
Dead is an adventure game as pure as
they come. Not an action adventure game,
not a platforming or shooting adventure
game, but a straight up capital A,
capital G adventure game. So, if this is
a dead genre, why did millions of people
play this game? Sure, it has a strong
license to work with, but we've seen
other adventure games with strong
licenses die on the Vine, even ones made
by Telltale Games. So, what made Walking
Dead special? What made it stand out?
What allowed them to revive a genre that
everyone else thought was dead? Well, in
order to figure that out, the real
question to ask is, why were adventure
games popular in the first place? Think
back to the tech available at the heyday
of the adventure games. Say late 80s to
early '90s, the years of 486s and Super
Nintendos. At that time, because their
gameplay wasn't very processor or RAM
intensive, adventure games allowed a lot
of flexibility for engineers to deliver
on high-end graphics and more
importantly allowed resources to be used
on created a fleshed out narrative,
holistic characters in a fully realized
world. As that ability was appropriated
first by RPGs and then by games in
general, adventure games as a genre
began to turn more towards gimmicky
puzzles and gameplay that mostly
involved clicking on everything in the
game with every object in your
inventory. And while this has always
been a staple of the genre, it wasn't
the reason people played the genre. The
Walking Dead game knows this all too
well. There's very little of the
traditional inventory juggling or even
puzzle solving in The Walking Dead, and
where these elements creep in, they tend
to be the weakest sections of the game,
actually. The fact that there isn't even
an inventory screen and that the game
assues almost all permanent UI shows us
how clearly the developers understood
that their core engagement wouldn't come
from the types of puzzles we
traditionally associate with adventure
games. And by getting out of that box,
The Walking Dead succeeds in showing us
the format for the 21st century
adventure game. The type of adventure
game that is relevant and resonant even
today. They went back to storytelling.
They went back to delivering a world
that seemed real and characters who
seemed like human beings. And they did
this by trimming the fat. They showed us
that an adventure game doesn't need the
tired mechanics that had gotten it
labeled a dead genre. People will still
be glued to their screens for a solid
tale in a strange world that they get to
live through. But Telltale also realized
one other thing about the best adventure
games of Yore, that they offered
something different. In the '90s, when
games were firmly considered a pastime
for children, adventure games from Mist
to Grim Fandango didn't talk down to
their audience. They didn't assume a
short attention span or inability to
process anything but the most purile
humor. They treated their audience as
equals. And this is exactly what The
Walking Dead does. It does not pull its
punches. It uses action for the purpose
of creating emotional tension rather
than assuming that without a shot of
adrenaline, our attention is going to
wander. It's okay to assume that we're
willing to think, that we're willing to
ponder the consequences of our actions.
That we as players will add to our
immersion because we're willing to care.
So, to everybody who ever claimed that
the adventure game genre is dead,
Tailtales Walking Dead shows how it's
done. Saying a genre is dead is kind of
a strange thing to claim anyway. Saying
that we've lost touch with what mattered
in that genre or saying that what we're
doing with it today doesn't appeal to
our audience, that's pretty valid. But
to say a genre is dead, to me, that
seems foolish. There was something
there, something at its core that
appealed to us as humans. We got to get
past the idea that a genre is simply an
elomeration of mechanics we recognize
and instead look at what really appealed
to us about the games we lumped together
in a genre. Otherwise, we end up where
adventure games ended up recently,
confined by mechanics that were outdated
and perhaps unappealing, rapidly losing
relevance with our audience, rather than
delivering on the promise inherent in
them. If you want to see how to
resurrect the genre of adventure games
simply by doing what they were best at
doing all along, look no further than
The Walking Dead. We're going to talk
more about it next week. We'll see you
[Music]
then.
[Music]
[Applause]
Yeah. Heat.
[Applause]
[Music]