How do you go about making a game, if all of the members of your team live in different parts of the world?
Also we've got our good pal, Nick to help us with guest art again.
Say hello! [Hello Nick!]
We've received many questions on the topic of making games
with distributed and remote teams, like how
exactly can a team function let alone
function well when all of its members
are scattered all over the country or
even around the globe!
How does communication work? What about
oversight and iteration?
Are there tools to help manage this? Are
there drawbacks to this approach?
But the truth is we've never really had to run a
remote team.
I mean we make extra credits with the
distributed team and James has worked
many gigs as a remote specialist but
none of us have had to actually
organize or run that kind of dev team.
So we're calling in an expert.
This is Kayd  Hendrix he's the senior
designer on Ark: Survival Evolved and he
has had way more experience with this
than we have.
Thank you Kayd  for helping us to make
this so let's start by asking why!
Why even hire a remote employee?
Surely you could find somebody willing
to move or somebody local who could get
the job done just as well right?
Surprisingly the answer to that isn't
always yes
and even if the answer is yes it might
not always fit your timeline or your
budget.
You could spend months looking for just
the right person to work on site when
the animator or concept artist or
programmer or modeler of your dreams is
waiting in Colombia or France ready to
pour themselves completely into your
project.
This talent pool should not be
underestimated. Recent years have seen a
large uptick in game companies using
outsourced help in order to capture
talent, meet deadlines,
fill difficult positions or just save
some money on an overdrawn budget.
With modern technology for long-distance
coordination with applications like
Slack, Skype and Discord
it's actually very easy to communicate,
share files, exchange ideas, talk, do video
conferences and more and then there are
people who simply work better on the
non-standard schedule, when they can keep
their own hours in the comfort of their
own homes or offices. And allowing that
type of person to work remotely can
result in far greater performance from
them!
So that's the why but now let's talk
about the far more interesting question
of how???
The first thing you're going to have to
do is let your remote worker know what's
expected of them. If you want them
working nine to five with the rest of
the team,
that's fine. If you just want to give
them tasks and have those tasks be done
by some deadlines,
that's fine too but it's important to be
clear and specific about those
expectations.
It's easy to fall out of the normal flow
of an office when you work remotely
especially with no direct oversight or
the atmosphere of a company workspace.
Once goals and expectations are clear
you've got to set up a clear chain of
reporting. Make sure that your new hire
knows exactly who they should report to
and that you integrate them as much as
possible into the pipeline for their
work.
This is standard practice for getting
any new employee up to speed but it's
even more important with a remote worker.
It keeps them engaged and it ensures that
they're getting the feedback they need
in order to feel like they're
contributing to the overall project and
it helps them to know who to go to if
there's something they are struggling with.
Establishing dependencies is a core part
of this.
It's essential to make sure that your
employee is aware of who they're going
to be depending on and who is dependent
on them.
If two programmers are working on
different elements of a linked feature
or if a designer and programmer are both
working on implementing some new asset
or gameplay mechanic
they need to be working together, they've
got to be communicating and asking for
minor changes back and forth without any
obstacles if they're going to be able to
iterate quickly. Inside the chain of
communication
make sure that the pipeline for asset
submission is not only clear but easy.
If you're using SVN, Perforce or Git make
sure that the new employee has access to
those from the start and that they are
familiar with how to use them.
If they're not familiar, then give them the
resources they need to become familiar
and don't be surprised if they've got to
ask a few questions or if they make a
few mistakes early on..
Make sure that any company specific
check in practices you have are made
clear so that nobody gets confused.
Once the new employee's work has been
checked in have them tell somebody who
can double-check it for them as soon as
possible.
This feedback loop is valuable and it
helps both employee and employer to see
the actual tangible results of the work
being done.
The more frequently this happens the
more comfortable both parties will be.
Deadlines are even more important with a
distributed team.
Now we all know that game development is
a world in which deadlines are
frequently broken... Projects or features
getting pushed back in the middle of
development is practically the norm.
This makes deadlines
all the more important for an indie team
and even more so for a team that employs
remote workers. Because it's extremely
easy to look at a task and underestimate
the amount of time it's going to take or
to look at a loosely set deadlines and
decide... ahhhh I can sneak in a few more
games of Overwatch!
I mean the boss isn't here watching me.
So long as you don't push them too hard,
you can be a little bit more stringent
with your remote workers on deadlines.
I mean make sure you are setting
realistic deadlines obviously don't give
them impossible goals you hope they'll
magically achieve somehow. But give
reasonably strict deadlines and make
sure to check in often and get status
updates because sometimes having
somebody help you stay on track isn't a
bad thing.
The temptations of a home office are
many. Finally let's talk about morale.
This is essential for any workplace but
it's probably the most important thing
on a team that's new to game development
or made up of entirely distributed
workers. Schedule weekly meetings that
bring in all the members of the team to
talk about upcoming deadlines, talk about
the exciting new features that have made
it into the game,
the work that's been done or maybe just
to chat about life. If you have a
playable version of the game, use those
opportunities to sit as a group and play
test, discuss deadlines,
find out anything that might be blocking
people on their tasks and get status
updates. Just having a time each week
where you feel like you're working
together rather than each in your own
little silos across the world is hugely
important and blocking out time for
communication between everybody is
equally so. In addition to this make sure
that there's a space where your remote
employees can be socially active with
the rest of the employees.
Make a channel or a room in a messaging program without
strict rules, where people can share
funny stories, pictures of cats, silly
videos from the internet that kind of
thing.
This may sound trivial but making sure
your remote workers are engaged with the
rest of the employees will foster a
sense of community and camaraderie that
will make for a much better workplace in
general.
I've seen places where every remote
worker is in a skype chat or a google
hangout which is displayed up on a big
screen TV in the main office and anybody
can pop in or out as needed.
They can chat, ask questions, show off
what they're working on and get
immediate feedback on their tasks from
anybody in the office.
It was actually really clever, also don't
be afraid to pitch in and buy your
remote workers the things that they need
to succeed.
It benefits both of you for them to have
a decent work pc or a dev kit
heck maybe even cover their internet &
phone bills. This makes sure not only
that they have fewer obstacles between
them and their work but it also extends
an olive branch as an employer that
shows that you value them.
Nine times out of ten, they will make up
that investment by going the extra mile
with their work, just because they care
about what they're doing and because the
company has shown them a little love.
Hopefully this gave you guys some ideas
for how to better manage your remote
workers or some insight into some good
practices for getting the most out of a
distributed team.
This is a really big topic that merits a
lot more exploration especially as it
becomes easier and easier to do and do
right and without it so many great
project would never come to light.
Thank you for joining us and see you
next week