[Music]
Hey guys, guess who's back. I'm happy to
once again welcome Aaron Seagull, who's
been kind enough to lend us her pretty
pictures making talents again this week,
giving Allison a well-deserved break.
Today's topic, introducing people to
gaming. At some point, we've all had
someone in our lives who we wanted to
share our passion for gaming with.
Sometimes it's a parent, sometimes a
friend, sometimes it's a boyfriend or a
girlfriend, and sometimes they express
an interest in sharing this part of our
lives with us. But sharing this medium
with newcomers is actually a pretty
daunting task. It's not like music where
an introduction can be served up in five
spare minutes, or even film where the
viewer can have a complete experience in
only a few hours. Our medium can often
require 40 hours of commitment to
scratch the surface, and even then, it's
tangled in complexities and
self-reerence that we, as veteran
players, tend to not even notice
anymore. It can all be incredibly
intimidating. So, how can we make it
easy for someone who doesn't play games
to enjoy this medium and see why we
enjoy it so much? Well, here's what
we've learned from a few dozen attempts
of our own, some of which were more
successful than others. Number one,
choosing the right game. There are a lot
of great games out there. You may want
to show all of them at once, or you may
simply not know what to choose. You may
be tempted to let them choose. Don't. It
is a trap. They have no information to
base their choice off of. And if you go
showing them just a few minutes from a
bunch of different games, you're only
going to make the medium seem even more
daunting. The key here is to know your
audience. know what type of game might
appeal to them and pick the title that
you think is most appropriate. As much
as James loves giving people choices,
everyone will end up having more fun in
the end. Number two, show them games
that are close to a genre they already
understand. While there are many
fantastic things that are unique to the
medium of games, you don't want to
overwhelm a prospective player with too
much newness right out of the gate.
Instead, start with something they can
understand through the filter of a
medium they already love. This might be
a highly cinematic game, or maybe a
music game, or perhaps just a good old
narrative heavy title. Personally, I
recommend something with impressive
visuals, a reasonable story, and a
strong central character. Games like
Mass Effect, Assassin's Creed, and even
GTA 4 fit this category. Don't worry,
there will be plenty of time later to
show them all the other exciting game
experiences out there. Now is the time
for first impressions. Choosing a title
of this nature gives them elements of
the game they can discuss with you in a
language they already understand. It
smooths their entry into the medium and
gives them other things to be interested
in as they warm up to caring about the
gameplay itself. Number three, choose
something from this generation. As game
afficionados, it's always a huge
temptation to go back and start new
players off with the best game that's
ever been, or maybe the game that got us
into gaming years ago. Fight that
temptation, at least at first. As much
as I love The Seventh Seal, it's not how
I'd introduce somebody to film.
Likewise, I wouldn't show a newcomer
XCOM or even Plscape Tournament to
start. Baby steps. Let them enjoy the
digital wizardry of the modern age. Look
for the great games that can offer a bit
of spectacle as well. There are lots to
choose from. Again, there will be plenty
of time to go back and show them the
classics later. Number four, choose
something with a good opener. Any
entertainer can tell you the first 5
minutes are crucial. There are a lot of
games out there that aren't truly great,
but start off a little slow. Don't go
for one of those first. Choose something
that opens big, or even better,
something with a great mystery that
sucks them in. Number five, don't force
them to play. Now, this goes against
everything in my being, but don't make
them play, at least not at first. Let
them get comfortable with the medium
before throwing them into an experience
of potential failure and frustration.
Once they seem comfortable, periodically
ask them if they want to play. If they
say no, don't push the issue. I'd say
you don't even need to ask them more
than once a session. Sooner or later,
they'll ask you, or you'll simply come
home one day to find them in front of
the screen halfway through one of your
favorites. Number six, when they do
play, be encouraging. I know this one's
pretty obvious, but it can be incredibly
difficult when you're in the moment.
Watching the prospective player take 20
times as long as you would to do
something simple like walk down a hall
or having to sit there while they spend
an hour with the camera pointed at their
feet can be maddening. Still, don't
chide them and try not to tell them how
to do something unless they ask. If they
do ask, be super encouraging with how
you answer. And most of all, never take
the controller away. No matter how many
times they fail at a straightforward
task. This is their learning phase, and
it can be intimidating enough without a
friend or a family member critiquing
their play or backseat driving.
Patience, deep breaths. The painfully
awkward stage won't last too long.
Number seven, start with single player.
While most of us know enough not to
throw a newcomer into a competitive
multiplayer experience, it may seem like
a great idea at the time to play a co-op
game together with them. In my
experience, it's not. It's harder to
concentrate on what they're doing so you
can offer encouragement or advice at the
right times when you're trying to dodge
bullets or fight off goblins yourself.
It can also be taxing because, as we all
know, playing co-op games with someone
who isn't very good at them isn't
actually that much fun for the better
player. Lastly, even in cooperative
modes, there's a competition factor.
Even though you have no intention of
being competitive, your counterpart may
not be able to help it. Playing co-op
games often puts in perspective just how
bad the newcomer is at playing. Your
scores are juxtaposed at the end of
every round. And the entire time you
play, they're seeing your character
breeze through challenges that they're
still struggling with. It's easy for
your new player to start feeling like
learning to play is hopeless and it's
just something they'll never be any good
at. Not the experience you were going
for. However, some of the better MMOs
out there can be a little more helpful
for this because so much of the early
game is spent both directly and subtly
telling the player how awesome they are.
It might mitigate this hurdle somewhat,
but still tread carefully. Number eight,
communicate. Gaming should now be
something that you share. So, feel free
to talk about the gaming experience
you're having. At first, you'll want to
keep it limited to the areas they can
easily converse in, such as story, art
style, music, mood, philosophy. Who
knows, they may know more about some of
these things than you do. And if it's
something they're already excited to
talk about, it's going to go a long way
toward warming them to games. Don't talk
about it over much. Don't fanboy out.
And don't talk about other parts of the
series or games they haven't played. The
most important thing is simply that you
listen. Spend more time listening to
what they thought was awesome than
talking about what you love. Not only
will you get to know someone you care
about a little better and probably even
improve your experience with a game,
it'll also help them work through what
they like about gaming and why they
might want to carry on. And finally,
number nine, have fun. Because if you
aren't having fun, they probably aren't
hiring. Hopefully something in there
will be useful for you guys at some
point, even if it doesn't apply to you
right now. Either way, thanks for
watching and happy gaming. See you next
week.
[Music]
[Music]
Heat
up here.
[Music]
Heat. Heat.
[Music]