An interesting debate popped up recently 
between the Extra Credits crew,
about the merits or necessity of playing older games.
So, we thought we'd bring that discussion here
to talk about the importance of understanding our heritage,
how we got here, and 
the difficulty of not losing our past.
Anybody who wants to be part of 
the video game industry should play classic games.
Now maybe this isn't a big deal to the average player,
although you may be missing out on 
some great older gems.
But anybody who wants to be a game designer or 
really any discipline in the industry
should have some understanding 
of our medium's history.
Now you don't have to necessarily 
LIKE all those older games,
but they are important to understanding 
the evolution of our field.
But why is this important?
Well, because games are a hit-driven industry,
which means a lot of games get made 
in response to the success of other games.
Right now for instance, we're seeing 
a bunch of battle royale titles.
A decade ago it was modern military shooters,
and before that, it was MMOs. 
You get the idea.
But for every PUBG, CoD, WoW or LoL,
there was some initial starting point, 
some inceptive game that caused each of these trends.
So it's definitely worth checking out said game
and seeing what it did that captured the game-buying public's attention. And when you do that,
it usually goes even deeper, because there wouldn't be a WoW without EverQuest, or a PUBG without DayZ.
So if these newer games are so heavily influenced by the older games, why not just study the new ones?
I mean, close enough, right?
Well those progenitors are usually simpler 
and more focused on their core concept,
making it easier to examine what makes them tick.
For example, newer games in the Pokémon series 
have gotten more and more complex,
necessitating more tutorials, cutscenes, and mechanics,
and sometimes it can take quite a while before the game actually lets you battle and catch Pokémon.
If you look back to Pokémon Red and Pokémon Blue, you'll find you fight your first battle within five minutes.
And in about 15 minutes, 
you can start catching new Pokémon,
so it's much easier to examine what makes 
that core experience compelling.
Also, examining older titles can shed light 
on what didn't work,
especially if you look for things 
they cut later in the series,
which in turn will help you avoid 
those mistakes yourself.
Now admittedly, sometimes it can be difficult 
to go back to those older games.
Aging graphics, poor accessibility, and bad translations can sometimes make it hard to see
what made those foundational games so influential.
But it's important to examine these games, 
in the context of their time,
to understand how they laid the groundwork 
for later games to expand on.
And of course, accusations of nostalgia 
do get thrown around a lot.
And let's be honest, the industry does love 
to exploit nostalgic imagery.
But as often as not, older games are beloved because they were good back then and often still hold up today.
I mean, that's what a classic is, isn't it? 
A work that stands the test of time.
For example, one game that popped up in our initial discussion about this topic was The Binding of Isaac
because there's no question that that game 
was heavily influenced by the original Legend of Zelda.
And if the Legend of Zelda was completely obsolete and had no appreciable influence on the medium,
then we wouldn't see titles drawing from it 
a quarter century later.
And of course, The Binding of Isaac added 
roguelike systems and shooter mechanics,
but it all works because it's based on the 
solid gameplay of that first Zelda game.
Also, looking back is a way to inspire 
long-term innovation,
because I think our hit-driven industry 
often comes across major roadblocks
when new games simply copy the template of
successful games, rather than really examining 
what it is people liked about them.
For instance, PUBG became really popular,
so tons of games popped up, 
taking its surface level elements--
the single large maps, the scattered resources, 
the enclosing energy wall--
but what those games should be doing, 
rather than the copy-paste,
is examining the experiences those mechanics deliver.
The feeling of being alone, in a large hostile area.
Where the only places for cover and supplies are also the places that other people converge.
The shrinking playable area heightens the tension,
by forcing players into conflict and 
limiting avenues of escape.
Many of the PUBG clones that failed, failed because 
they cloned the surface mechanics,
but missed all those small elements 
that created the psychological, emotional,
and gameplay impact that players were looking for.
And studying the original, rather than the derivatives, 
let us easier find these elements.
And of course, this isn't just unique to games.
How many thousands of books or 
movies follow the Tolkien trope
that elves live in trees and Dwarfs live in mines?
Where is it written, you know, other than in those books, that those are the universal rules of fantasy races?
Why not dwarves that live in trees?
Well, Tolkien based Middle-Earth off 
of real-world mythologies.
So what inspired creators should do, is go to the mythological sources that he looked at
in order to understand why he came up with 
these distinctions in the first place.
Dwarves did a lot of forging in Norse mythology, 
so Tolkien's Dwarves were miners.
But perhaps going through those stories yourself
will lead to all sorts of new ideas to branch off from
rather than just always going with 
the convenient codified Tolkien presets.
Another example is that everyone knows 
that dragons breathe fire, right?
But did you know that the dragon in Beowulf, which inspired Smaug, also had venomous fangs?
We see fire-breathing dragons everywhere, but venomous dragons? Well let's just say, they're rarer.
Evolution is a slow process, where gradual changes happen over a long period of time.
The further back you go, 
the divergences get more drastic
and we can understand this process only by 
purposely starting as far back as possible
and watching a particular game idea branch off 
in entirely new ways.
There's nothing wrong with taking modern games 
and adding your own spin to them,
but simply working at the end of a 
chain of ideas like this,
usually means tiny refinements 
rather than new ideas that really stand out.
So, if we examine games from a more primordial time,
it's possible we'll more easily find 
opportunities to experiment
and see drastic divergences in mechanics and themes.
We have classic studies in literature, 
film, music, and every other art.
And nobody would think to question what Beethoven did to change music, or what Mary Shelley did for sci-fi.
So following that train of thought 
to its natural conclusion,
clearly there are also classic games 
that have helped our medium evolve as well.
And we should acknowledge and study those classics,
because examining the past, 
teaches us how we got to our present.
After all, without that knowledge, it's much harder 
to know where to go in the future.