Now, and now Janet's here, too. Hi,
Janet. Hello. Welcome. Good morning.
Good morning to to all of you. Uh,
hello. Hi. Greetings. Salutations.
Um, Matt said something about more
coffee and then left and said I I should
I should do this. So, hello everyone.
Hi. How was your weekend? I hope I hope
all of you have had a lovely weekend.
Um,
did I miss it? Did we go back to the
future?
Yes, we're back in the future. We're
back in the future now. It is 2025.
Oh, good. Okay. Oh. Oh, so you guys
don't even know. You don't even know.
That's great. That's great. Um Yeah.
Okay, cool. I don't want to ruin it. I
don't want to uh you know. Yeah. I Okay,
minor minor spoiler minor spoiler for
the future, right? Um
I hope you don't like this stuff. I had
to come back here for it. It's Wow.
Okay, that's great. Not it's not going
great. I thought it was going to be
minor spoiler for the future. Tomorrow
comes. Tomorrow does come. Uh, hi
everyone. And that hits different depend
on whether or not you've played
Expedition 33. Anyways, um, good
morning.
Cop comp with the real questions
[Laughter]
because then I just have to go through
2025 again, you know? Yep. Uh, how's
everybody doing? I'm doing pretty well.
I'm doing pretty well. Uh, and I hope
all of you at home are doing well, too.
Uh,
we we'll probably talk about it a bit
during the pre-show while while folks
trickle in. Um, and we're going to try
and keep the pre-show nice and short
today because we have a busy day ahead
of us. It's a busy day. It's a busy day.
So, a brief overview of today's
nonsense. First, we have this for like
two hours. Then, I am going to be
playing some FF6 over on the channel. I
have gotten all of the optional
characters who are not dead.
There's some jokes about that. Uh I have
feelings about the acquisition method
for some optional characters who are now
dead. Um
so uh that's a thing. And then um we're
going to do that for a couple of hours
and then later on tonight 8:00 p.m.
Eastern,
5:00 p.m. Pacific. Please join us here
and that's on YouTube and Twitch for a
very special event. We're going to be
talking more about that, but do mark
your calendars 8:00 p.m. Eastern, 5:00
p.m. Pacific. We're going to be doing
stuff tonight. Um there's also no design
club this week. That's the other big
thing for Janet. There's no design club.
Jeff is traveling. Uh, so we'll have
some extra stuff here on Twitch instead.
Um, also I have no idea what I'm doing
on Friday. No clue. I have I have
thoughts and feelings, but like I've got
like four different options. I'll
probably let the Discord vote again.
Reminder, if you're a member over on
YouTube, a subscriber over on Twitch, or
a Patreon uh patron, you can join the
Discord and vote on all those things
when I'm like, "Hey, what the heck do I
play today?" If you're like, "Well, I
want you to play,
I don't know, some kind of I was going
to say Hello Kitty Island Adventure."
Yeah. Hello Kitty Island Adventure
Romance of the Three Kingdoms Edition.
Then like sure, I could I that's a thing
you could put on the list. Um but yeah,
we've got we got lots of Yeah, we are
not in fact got getting Hatsune Miku on
EC. I've told you this repeatedly. I
told you all day Friday. The interview
tonight is not is not with Hatsune Miku.
But Will, I am from the future, right?
Uhuh. Uhhuh. I do know definitively
whether or not it's with Hat Miku,
right? Like I got That's true. They
wanted to know if it's with Hatsune
Miku's persona, Ratsune Squeiku, but
you know that there
YouTube chat asking the real question or
her fake alter identity um
Mitsu Mitsunaku or like you know there's
a there's a bunch of there's a bunch of
stuff. Um well either way that's not
happening. Also good morning everyone.
And we're seeing a lot of uh new folks
in here. Hi. Hello. Welcome to uh us. A
nice breakfast chat about this week's
gaming and tech news uh which will be
coming to you very shortly. This being
the pre-show that we are wrapping up
pretty dang soon. I I would say in about
40 seconds we're going to start the
show. Wow. Yeah, that's when that's when
ads over on Twitch end. Perfect.
Perfect. No notes.
Yes, that's correct. Or her poke soda.
Hatsu Nikkun Mikunikun. Yes, that's
correct.
None of these are the person that we're
interviewing. I promise. I mean, only I
again from the future could be sure. I
like I like or her habasher persona.
Hats on Sunn.
Listen, that one's pretty good. I'll
give you that one. That one's pretty
good. Dashers don't play. Uh they they
do. Um,
Sony, my Sony causing problems. No,
never. Ever. Impossible. They actually
fixed a problem. They But they did it.
They did it in in the most corporate way
you possibly can. We'll talk about it.
We'll talk about They fixed a problem
that they themselves created and then
expect us to congratulate them for
fixing the problem that they No, that's
the thing. I Well, we'll talk about it.
They're not expecting that. They're not
expecting that for a very specific
reason. Oh, cuz if they expected that
anyone would notice, they wouldn't have
done it. No, we we'll get into it. We'll
get it. We'll get it. Um,
uh, yeah.
Why? These are all getting like deeper
and deeper cut. Y'all, some of these are
hilarious and no one will get them
because they're too deep cut. Uh, that
and if if there's one thing I've learned
about being on the internet is there's
no cut too deep.
I'm going to go also the first cut not
usually the deepest. That's also true.
All right. Uh ads are done over on
Twitch. Uh we would wait for the hype
train to finish, but we we are on crunch
time today. So, we're gonna move on
along. Uh Matt, are you ready to begin
the show? I believe I am. Excellent.
Then, uh to black we will go chat and we
will return momentarily with the
beginning of the show.
You've heard of it, I guess.
[Applause]
[Music]
Good morning, Matt. No, good morning,
Will. And good morning to all of you.
Welcome to Games for Breakfast, the only
internet talk show we talk about this
week's gaming and tech news. But that
also
I I just feel like we should there's
there's an elephant in the room, Will.
Yeah, huge one.
uh that is that um look I know spaceime
is weird and we're not going to get too
into it as we know video games are not
political and therefore we cannot be
however
however however
um I just want to PSA and say that you
know we're working on perceptually
making sure that 25,000 people does look
like 250,000 people. I'm we're the
scientists are working hard and we're
really going to get there. new
advancements in crowd generation
technology for for big video game
levels. It turns out that um doing the
Q-tip method they used in episode one is
not always viable.
Well, how was your weekend, buddy? It
was excellent. I actually got to uh have
a very gaming Father's Day. My my dad uh
who helped me acquire my um my Switch 2
had one request and it was that I bring
the Switch 2 home. So, I got to play
Mario Kart with my family, and it is, if
you're a gamer or someone who really
likes the games, I encourage you to
examine
gaming with fresh eyes by playing it
with someone who does not play video
games. Sure. It was fascinating, right?
cuz like my dad and my mom are both
intelligent people who have done a lot
of things uh you know over over the
years. They they were gamers before I
was born. Um they played on like an old
Apple and watching them play Mario Kart
was fascinating. Uh like what were they
were they were they having trouble? Were
they enamored? Did they not like it?
Like what was the what was the vibe? the
the uh the time to like get on target
and like begin to understand like you
could watch them rise through the
rankings as like we did different tracks
and then like it took like one race for
dad to realize he'd chosen the wrong
cart and racer setup. He chose Toad with
the little boom box cart. Very, very
accelerating, no speed. He was like,
"This is too slow." But I unlocked
Charge and Chuck cuz I got turned into
Chuck on one of the races. And so the
next time he played as Chuck and liked
it a lot more and like I was asking him
like how he was improving and he's like,
"Oh, my strategy is very simple. I don't
care what place I'm in. I just try real
hard not to crash." And he got like
third right behind me and my brother.
Which is very interesting, right? that
like a lot of the assumptions that we
make about like drifting or the ways
that we need to learn games or like
things that are important are are often
things that we've like given to
ourselves rather than things that are
really true. And like examining it
through the lens of this person doesn't
play video games. What do they do when
you just hand them a controller and you
say, "Here's Mario Kart is really cool.
It's really cool." Nice. Yeah. Very
nice. Yeah. Uh I think the last video
game I played with my dad was probably
on the Wii and I think it was a fishing
game.
um like Sega SE whatever the whatever
that mainline Sega fishing game BassPro
maybe it's BassPro I do remember there
was a store but there's like well
there's Bass Pro Shop right and there's
Bass Pro fishing which is a video game I
think which might you might be able to
play in a Bass Pro shop. Oh I'm sure I'm
sure it's very meta. Only way you could
get more meta is if you dressed up as an
iconic piece of animatronic wall art
from the mid9s. Billy the Bass, right?
If you if you played Bass Pro fishing in
a Bass Pro shop just as Big Mouth Billy
Bass,
you would achieve peak internet.
Yeah, I don't think I I think the
internet would just go home at that
point. I think they'd pack up their bags
and things, their their internet bag and
uh go back to something analog. Yeah,
absolutely. They'd go back to laser
disc.
Old laser disc. Rest in peace forever in
our hearts. Uh Matt, we've got a busy
week upcoming and a busy day upcoming.
It's a busy day. This is not uh this is
not the only time you will be seeing
Will and I's faces today. Correct. Uh,
pray you do not see it more than twice
more. Um,
yeah, it works out. Sure. Yeah. Right.
Right. Will will tell tell Brad and
Janet aka uh Twitch and YouTube what we
have going on this evening. Uh, so this
evening at 8:00 p.m. Eastern, 5:00 p.
p.m. Pacific, mark your calendars. The
uh the Discord has the time stamp thing.
Um, and it'll be going up as an event on
both Twitch and YouTube sometime this
afternoon so that I can get the timing
right and get our thumbnail up.
Matt and I are going to interview a
person that many of you may recognize
and a person whose work many of you may
recognize, but whose face you may not.
Uh, so Matt and I are going to have the
privilege, nay, the pleasure of
interviewing the one, the only, the
incredible uh, James Port now and the
legendary Mike Ponsmith of Cyberpunk
fame about a new game that James has
designed. We are super hype. Uh, it's
going to be a great time. I've put like
cool scenes together. We're going to get
to show you some of the artwork. We're
going to talk about the world of
Cyberpunk. We're going to talk about the
design of the game. It's going to be
about two hours, we think, tonight, 8:00
PM Eastern, 5:00 p p.m. Pacific. Be
there. It's going to be great. It's
going to be awesome. Uh I'm super pumped
to talk with talk with both uh James and
Mike. I have a ton of questions for Mike
about like basically if you're not
familiar, Mike Ponmith is the creator of
Cyberpunk, uh the the role playing game.
And it is uh going to be so fun to pick
his brain. I've uh will I know you got
it on a play test for Cyberpunk Legends,
which is the game that James has
designed. Um I've been play testing it,
I think, for
I I want to say almost a year at this
point. Um and it is dope as hell. I
don't want to really say much more about
it uh before we before we talk to them
this evening. But if you are around and
you do love uh cyberpunk and innovative
card games and I to be very specific,
not like a TCG. Yeah, this is not a This
is something And now for something
completely different, right? Um, no
shade to TCGs. Just Right. You'll see.
You'll see. Yeah. Uh, it it uh is it
Cyberpunk adjacent? No, it is Cyberpunk
fullon. It is not like it it is the game
is called Cyberpunk Legends. It is
full-on cyberpunk. Uh, and there's a
reason that we're getting Mike Ponmith
uh to talk to. It's not It's going to be
great. uh is a new um creation in the
world of Cyberpunk. Uh which I again
really cool and kind of honored to like
get to talk to these guys about this as
like one of the first people to because
I don't think they've given any
interviews since the game's been
announced. We kind of get to do the
first one. So, we get to ask like we'll
talk about we'll definitely uh ask
questions about like where people like
after after our talk tonight where
people can learn more because I think
they're going to try to do the
convention circuit. I don't want to put
any words in their mouths, but um yeah,
it's I I'm very excited. It's going to
be very fun. Yep. Uh and then uh we're
going to we're going to address the
controversy in the room. No, no one is
coming dressed as Hatsune Miku. We don't
know that. Only I from the future can
know that. That's totally it. Yeah,
completely. Um wasn't it Hatsune Miku?
No, we told you repeatedly it's not
Hatsune Miku and you all didn't believe
us and thought it was Hatsune Miku. And
that's not our fault. That's not our
Wouldn't it be crazy though if like at
the end of the day after all this pump
and or circumstance uh it was in fact
Miku? I wonder if I can express ship to
Hatsune Miku wigs to James and Mike and
convince them to wear him for this.
I don't think that's possible. Fine.
I'll do it. I'll do it. I would look
great in a Hatsune Miku wig.
No, no argument. I'm just saying it
would be difficult to get everyone else
to do. So anyway, please come back 8:00
p.m. Eastern Standard, uh, 5:00 p.m.
Pacific for a discussion about Cyberpunk
Legends with literally a legend of
Cyberpunk. Yeah, it's it's going to be
awesome. Yeah. Now, Matt, you also have
a a request, a piece of information, a
thing to tell people about. Um, so I'm
going to get you a soap box real quick
and then I'm going to show So before you
before you transition it, let me just
I'm going to I want to reveal this. So,
for those of you who are not familiar, I
was on a Nebula original series called
Abolish Everything, where where comedian
abolitionists get up in front of a live
studio audience in a New York City
comedy club and uh try to abolish
something from society that they don't
want to deal with anymore. You could
think about like um uh ROOC calls or
billionaires or whatever, right? Like
you could you could the things that you
just don't want to deal with. Uh, and in
their way is the political
establishment, which is four other
improv comics that are hellbent on
maintaining the status quo that argue
with you for five minutes and the
audience decides what gets abolished
forever. I was on this show. I know I've
talked about it before. The season
finale of season 1 aired this Sunday
over on Nebula. If you haven't checked
it out, please go see it. Uh, it is
eight phenomenal comics. It was one of
the funniest things I've ever seen. Um,
however, sadly, in my episode, episode
6, I was unable to achieve victory. I
was unable to achieve uh my lifelong
dream of abolishing the lectturn. And if
you'd like to see my argument about why
lect turns should be abolished, please
go check that out over on Nebula.
However,
the wonderful producers and director um
uh Chandler and Amy are basically uh for
season 2, which has been green lit over
on Nebula, they are giving uh previous
um abolisher
uh attempies, I don't know how to
actually put it, um a second shot. So,
uh Will, if you could put up that
graphic right now. I need all of your
help. Uh basically you can go to there's
a command line. You could type it in
Twitch uh maybe in YouTube as well.
Extra exclamation mark abolish over here
on Twitch and I will put the link over
in chat on YouTube. Thank you. Or you
can scan that QR code and they are
basically polling people. You can rank
four people. I think you actually have
to pick four people. Uh and there's a
bunch of other Nebula creators on there
like Maggie Mayfish, Dan Tumi, foreign
man in a foreign land. A couple other
folks also Ben and Adam and Amy from Jet
Lag are all there. Basically, there's a
reasonable chance that if you saw them
at Matt's birthday, they're probably
going to abolish everything. That's also
true. I want to come back and I want to
uh uh just crush the competition. Uh
there's no nice way of saying it. So, if
you would like uh and if you could do me
the favor of uh going to that link,
scanning that QR code, etc., and putting
uh my name down as someone you would
like to see back. I would very much
appreciate it because um I still got
some fight left in me, chat. And uh I
would like to go back to the abolish
everything stage and um really give the
establishment a piece of my mind.
Excellent. Um yeah, I don't know. I'm
very much it the show is great. Uh and
uh heck, even if you don't want me back,
but you love the show, please check it
out. The season finale is is so good.
It's so freaking good. Excellent.
Excellent. All right. And now on to the
news.
I don't know. I felt like I had some
like good like news deskes Dan like uh
like you know official news deskes
transition there and I just I just lost
it somewhere. It's okay. Uh first up,
Claire Obscure.
No spoilers. Zero spoilers
will be contained.
Is a great game that suff spoilers will
spoilers that suffers a bit. It is a
game that is not highly accessible to
people who lack um fast twitch reflexes.
Uh which is a bit of a shame because
it's part of a g a genre that's
ostensibly incredibly accessible to
people who are good at non twitchbased
reflex games because that's what
turn-based games are. because of the
Perry system. Um it's a little uh it's a
little hard for some folks. So um they
the folks uh have heard those those
complaints, those concerns and have been
working on it. So the the upshot is that
they have now made story mode more
accessible. So you can play through the
gorgeous, beautiful, immaculate,
breathtaking story with its amazing,
gorgeous, beautiful, breathtaking
soundtrack. um a little e it's a little
easier. The parry windows are bigger and
it's less punishing. Um and if you are
uh I believe the the technical term is a
sicko like me. Yeah. You can make the
game even harder because they were like
yeah we wanted to take it both
directions. So we made the game easier
at the base level if you want that
experience. You just want to play
through the story but it also
you can cap your own damage. You can
inflate boss HP and now uh I guess this
is like the most m there is there is a
super boss whose identity will remain
unknown but if you know you know you can
now refight said super boss um so uh
it's a um
it's a good thing I I really think it's
a good thing and they've also talked
about how they are not done this is this
is a first step in this the amount
obscure is already in my opinion
probably a contender for game of the
year
and they're making it better and they're
making it better and they don't need to.
The game's done and complete and
playable and like all that. It's a
single player experience and they're
like, "Yeah, but what if we made it
better?" Yeah, I really I'm really
enjoying again I have not played Clare
Obscure um yet. However, I'm really
enjoying this um
how do I put it? this sort of like
double a game is finished and complete
and you can go buy it and it's wonderful
but they're not done kind of vibe that's
been going on a lot. I think I think
companies are really starting to when
they can afford to really notice that
like continually tweaking and making
your game either more accessible for
everybody or giving up people various
options to sort of breathe more life
into it uh really does keep your game in
the news cycle more. Um, and I I feel
like up till
I don't know like I don't a year or two
ago or maybe I mean this could have been
brought back to sort of like the
highprofile uh flop slise to glory
stories of like um Cyberpunk 2077 or No
Man's Sky um which is again that's much
older um but like now so those was like
oh we'll patch it we'll make it better
we'll make it better but now we're
seeing the the game's already great but
we're going to make it better and we're
going to make it better and I think
doing that in small increment like
having a little plan on how you want to
deal with that with your game is really
really smart because then you get people
talking about it again and again like
for instance clear obscure is and will
correct me when I am wrong just a a
single player narrative experience right
so like it's truly like when you
finished it most people will probably be
done with it but with a patch like this
you're kind of hitting two groups of
folks one maybe people that picked it up
it did not vibe with them because the
timing thing was too difficult for
whatever reason. Now they can go back
and experience the game that they
bought. That's great. Or maybe they
returned it on uh Steam uh and then now
they'll go get it, right? Excuse me. Or
you have the people that like
like Will, I guess, who really want this
like insane kind of challenge in the
packaging of that narrative story. Uh
the story the where we we're pulling
this tale from right now is PC Gamer and
um Harvey Randall over there did a
phenomenal uh sort of like deep dive
stat breakdown of the math that what you
can do with said super boss and how long
it will take. check out the show notes
and go read that article because it's
kind of insane the level of minutiae
that this patch does and the the level
of pure uh difficulty heartbreak you
could actually inflict on yourself if
you are so inclined. It's just it's
really great to see again um not a giant
studio uh doing stuff with their games
and continuing to update it even though
as Will said it's it's feature complete.
It it is it is a wonderful experience as
is. I I think the highest praise I can
give Claire obscure is I am not a person
who replays games. My brain thrives on
novelty and on uh looking for the next
great story.
And I really want to replay Clare
Obscure. Yeah, I really do. Like the
story is gorgeous. And uh Mobile Brother
was like I'm playing Clare Obscure and
this is where I'm at. And I'm like oh
you're there. Oh, you're there. And he
was like yeah don't tell me anything. I
was like, I wouldn't dream of it, but
tell me when you get to the next part
and uh we'll talk, right? And like it
was Yeah, it was it was really good. Um
so yeah, you won't even replay a
FromSoft game.
So our next story, uh I do though. Yeah,
I I am not a huge From Software fan. I
personally think that the best game
they've put out for me is Night Rain and
it's not close. Um, because it condenses
a lot of things down and because it
really leans on rogueish elements kind
of. It's really a rog like not a rog
light. Um, despite some of the light
elements that can come in. So, um,
anyway, I may or may not have made an
entire Spotify playlist based on Night
Rain over the weekend. Yeah, I think I
named it uh Songs to Slay Night Lords to
think it's good. It's good. All right.
Uh next up, we have some news that will
surprise no one, but the degree that
this is news is true is kind of
shocking. The Switch 2 released uh
a week from last th a week ago. Last
Thursday. Yes. So, it's been out for uh
I can do math like 10 days.
In the first four of those days,
according to Kotaku and to several other
places that I've seen this statistic
quoted, but we'll we'll say it's from
Kotaku. Um they sold 3.5
million Switch Twos. That's 3.5 million
units in 4 days. Now, that does include
all of the pre-sales, but that's fine
because every other console counts its
pre-sales as day one sales.
That makes it the fastest selling video
game console in history.
Not bad. Not bad. So, uh my I we Jeff
and I talked about it on Thursday. You
can uh if you missed it, uh because it
was only over on YouTube, Twitch was
having a day on Thursday. We'll get to
that in a bit. Um uh Jeff and I talked a
bit about it. I'm not super hype on the
Switch 2. It is a very good system that
most people probably don't have a
compelling reason to purchase yet,
right? There will be compelling reasons
to purchase it for a variety of people.
I'm uh Matt, you know how Matt's like
about Mario Kart?
I will be insufferable
if Kirby Airride comes out and they
bring back City Trial. If they bring
back City Trial and Kirby Airide, I will
be insufferable,
right, for like a week. It's gonna be
great. Um, and so yeah, I but I think a
lot of people were very hype about it.
Um, I think the the early um the
experience of going to launches, the
experience of like midnight releases,
the whole package of ideas that's
presented as the Switch 2 um caught a
lot of people's attention and they sold,
you know, a gajillion units and that's
pretty cool. Yeah. Uh I I think the
story event again comes to us uh from
good old Kotaku and they broke it down
for context. The original Switch took
over a month to sell 2.5 or 2.75 million
units. Um, look, it's a it's a good
system, but Nintendo also is uh
Nintendo. Um, there was a lot of calls
to sort of uh make this launch smaller
due to complaints about uh pricing
structure or um the the various
implementations of the good, bad, and
ugly of the key card system or actually
putting games on cartridges, etc. that
didn't seem to move anything here, which
uh is not particularly great for many of
those uh for people that wanted changes
to those to those um to those issues.
Yeah. Um
I do think that there are,
how do I put it? Like it sold so many
units, like no question. But also, Will,
to your point,
Is it becoming the conversation in in
the gaming space anymore? Like like like
this the the conversation is look how
many units the Switch 2 sold. Not oh man
Mario Kart World is the greatest thing
ever. And I love Mario Kart World. I
think Mario Kart World is a phenomenal
Mario Kart game. But like it's not
breaking that part of it. It's not
breaking containment if that makes
sense. Yeah. I well I think it's because
ubiquity in systems and market
penetration in video game systems is
equality
right like the quantity is equality in
this case right that like if we if it is
known that this the console is that hot
we're more likely to get good titles
that you might be interested in right so
like it is a unique quality right there
are plenty of good games but there's
only one bestselling video game system
ever does that make sense it feels like
where it's at um Yeah. Yeah. So, I I
mean I think that that's where I don't
know. I think Mario Kart World is great.
However, comma but
give us Grand Prix online, you cowards.
Sure. Sure. Sure. Sure. Listen, I have a
list of things I would like improvements
on or changes and hopefully there's
patches. Maybe they'll take a page out
of the double A book and maybe try to do
some some nice things to a another
feature complete game, but that is that
is missing some things that I would
particularly like to see. Um, Polygon,
man, my voice so sorry. Polygon did a
really great article um maybe we could
link it in the show notes as well.
basically about um
about how Mario Kart World is phenomenal
uh but it will not win game of the year
and it has a bunch of different reasons
sort of why um it is a phenomenal Mario
Kart game but the ceiling on a Mario
Kart game is relatively low.
So
this is where okay this is where it gets
super interesting. Sure. We talk about
and engage with the the the the art form
and the product and the finances and the
story of video games for a living and we
are kind of deep into into that. I think
one of the reasons why
from a gaming perspect from like talking
about the games perspective that the the
Switch 2 could sell so many units and
not really be a part of the conversation
outside of look how good this console
sold is because the majority of people
buying and playing and engaging with the
the Switch 2 for the different games or
Mario Kart World etc are not people that
talk about it online. They're the people
that play the games. I think there are a
lot of um younger people andor families.
Like to your point in the in the I uh
the pre-show or no, it wasn't even the
pre-show, it was in the in the show
show. You were talking about playing
Mario Kart with your family. Yeah. And
like Mario Kart's one of those games
that you can put down in front of almost
anybody and even if they don't play
video games, they'll have fun with it
for a half hour, an hour, and probably
walk away with a positive thought andor
experience. But they're not going on
Blue Sky and being like, "Man, uh Dry
Bones is the best." like like you can't
like it's just not where the
conversation is. So I think there's an
interesting sidestepper by the way
sidstepper is the best crab. Pardon I I
want to crab. Okay crab. Thank you.
Anyway, go. I mean the future will will
tell about crab. Um but my point is it's
very interesting to see um this this
almost feels like a ground news nonsense
thing. Like it's like the not political
bias in any means but like like
franchisement bias franchisement bias.
uh uh topic bias of where the news comes
from versus something like like the
Switch selling so many. And I feel like
the Switch fills that family void uh a
lot more than a PlayStation or an Xbox
or a PC does. I agree. I think it's
Yeah, it's
I think I would say it's not flashy,
right? Like a lot of the things that
they did like there isn't a killer app,
there isn't a killer new feature. It
doesn't do fundamentally terribly many
things different than the Switch One did
other than Game Chat, which is like not
that great in my opinion. Well, have you
done it? I'm not saying it's it's not
revolutionary. I actually did do it. Uh
uh I was um
uh Dave uh uh of Nebula basically uh
sent me a a text showing my like gamer
profile was on the Switch. I was like,
"Oh, this is a perfect opportunity." So,
I just did the chat thing for the first
time. I We didn't talk about this when
we were talking about the Switch 2. Um,
you hit the chat and you have to link it
to a actual cell phone number. You're
not calling through the cell phone, but
you're you're I think it's either both
parental andor like a spamming or a
spoofing kind of thing. Like, you
basically link a phone number to your
account, which could be good or bad. I I
haven't really uh thought that deep into
it quite yet, but it took me five
seconds and then all of a sudden while
he was having the Switch on his TV far
away from him sitting, he was using a
Pro Controller and me just on my thing,
no cameras or anything like that. I was
shocked how like
just it was the chat was totally clear.
It was very very strange. Like again,
Nintendo doesn't innovate in that
regard. I'm and oftentimes I'll
perfectly say maybe only like 20 20% of
the time when they do implement
something new new new to them like a
onboard chat feature it's going to be
bad. This wasn't that bad. It was pretty
solid. No, and I think that's that's
very fair. I just don't see like a use
case for that. Like I'm not saying that
the feature is implemented poorly. I'm
saying that I don't see a use case for
the feature in my life. Oh, totally. No.
No. Yeah. I But again, when whenever
Nintendo says something like, "Oh, now
we added chat." I'm like, "Okay." Right.
Yeah. No, I'm sure they did a great job
with it, but like that's that's counter.
Like the things I want to do with my
Switch are play Mario Kart when I can't
sleep and uh now I really want to replay
Breath of the Wild from the beginning
because it's going to look gorgeous at
60 fps. But I also think we're talking
past each other. I'm saying when I heard
they were doing this, I did not expect
it to be good. Oh, that's fair. Yeah.
Yeah, that's fair. Because uh if I was a
betting man, and I am, I would have said
no, it would not be good. It was pretty
good. So, yay. I don't know. Anyway,
it's just interesting that for the most
popular or the one of the most um
successful console launches of all time
that uh at least right now, it's not
like the hype was the thing that was
driving the news cycles. And now that
it's out in the wild,
I mean, I guess the hype served its
purpose, right? Like, no one's no one's
still really going deep or talking
about. I think that might actually come
from truly I is there really only one
brand new game? Yes. Yeah. And uh Donkey
Kong comes out I thought Donkey Kong was
coming out at launch. It's not. It's
coming out next month and then after
that we're getting Prime
Air Ride. I think we know about Prime
and Air Ride and I think we might know
about one more but like
they're also competing with other stuff
deeper and deeper and deeper and deeper
and deeper. Yeah. Have you considered
using MC allow YouTube to see Twitch
chat? We have played with things. We are
we are working on that. Uh and by we I
mean will in the background. So far my
understanding is there is not a perfect
solution as of yet. So So uh the the the
real the real answer is we could put
chat on stream. It would be distracting
for everyone. It doesn't actually help
that much. Um and anything that's
relevant we generally pull up like that
on stream to to let people know. But um
for for a chat stream like this where
Matt and I have like prepared notes if
we're talking about stuff and we're
picking on individual comments to
respond to uh it's kind it's kind of
nice to let each chat develop their own
petri dish of memes rather than
cross-pollinating everything. But it it
is a good idea. Um anyway, sorry to
derail the that conversation, but I
wanted I wanted I wanted King to get his
answer. Yeah, that's a good one. Okay.
Um so Matt, we we talked about it
earlier. Video games
Super apolitical. Right. Right. Of
course. Definitely no politics. No
politics in video games. I think I first
realized that there would never ever be
politics in video games when it's either
when I beat Metal Gear Solid or or um
H. Yeah. No, it's probably that. It was
probably that. Okay. Yeah. Um so
which brings us to our next story.
Okay. So, let's talk about the game
first, then we'll talk about what
happened and then why it's doubly
ironic. So, Reluded is a game uh that is
by a collection of devs from Africa.
There are devs from Lassotho, Zambia,
Zimbabwe, Ghana, Nigeria, Ethiopia, and
Tanzania. Okay. And South Africa, I
believe. Uh and South Africa. That is
correct.
Was that mine again? I've turned it off.
I've tried muting the I'm sorry,
everybody. It was you. Uh, you know
what? Here's what I'm going to do. I'm
gonna close Discord. I don't need this.
I worked at it this morning. Goodbye,
Discord. No one can reach me now. Okay.
Uh, so, okay. Okay, so Relooted is a
game about uh people from Africa
repatriating African artifacts from
museums around the world and bringing
them home. This belongs in a museum in
its country of origin. Belongs in a
museum in its country of origin.
Fascinating. Great concept. No notes. I
love this concept. I will be playing
Relooted when it comes out because I
think this game is going to deserve
spotlight and I love the concept so
much. Okay, great. Awesome. So,
that group of people again from African
nations wanted to come to Summer Games
Fest here in the US to show off their
really cool game, right?
Great. Would love that, right? more more
people from more places that are not
traditionally associated with game
development should come and show off
their games because more games is good.
Period. I think that's pretty
straightforward, right? More games by
more people that tell more stories is
good. Great. Yes.
But this game about folks from uh folks
from Africa repatriating artifacts from
Africa
was shown at Summer Games Fest by their
one
South African dev
who's white
because nobody could get visas to come
to the US to show off their game at
Summer Games Fest.
or or it was uh dangerous and or
difficult like some got denied some
didn't go do like there's there's a lot
of different reasons why but yes that is
the correct so it parts I just want I
wanted to bring this up because we we
joke a lot about how games are totally
apolitical um a reminder a reminder uh
all joking aside all video games are art
all art is inherently political
therefore all video games are inherently
political
It is uh important that right now when
it is difficult to get a visa, when it
is difficult to travel to the United
States safely, that we as Americans are
looking at other places to get games,
places that we might like interviews
that we might not be able to get. Folks
like the Rooted devs who can't talk
about their game at Summer Games Fest
because they can't make it here, right?
I think it's really important that we're
keeping our eye out for games like this
that aren't getting the coverage that
they need because travel restrictions
are difficult, right? Um, also I just
wanted to highlight this because I think
the concept 11 out of 10 11 out of 10
concept, right? It's literally the
opening to Black Panther, right, with
Killilmonger taking the um the the
hammer back from the museum in the
aftermath.
That we were getting this from, they
even say in this Killilmonger approved
premise. Yeah. Right. Great. Right.
Fantastic. Uh what a great premise. Uh
and the gameplay just looks sick. Like
it's it almost looks like if you haven't
seen it, check out the trailer. Um it
almost looks like what if Fallout
Shelter, but it was a fast-paced heist
mechanic where you ran through like the
the almost like a a series of rooms or
whatever in in the museums like trying
to get past security systems and guards
and things and it it just looks really
cool. Yeah, this game is again called
Relooted. R E L O O T E D. Um, also the
art style, phenomenal. I love um
this style of art. Hold on, something
beeped. Yeah. Uh, right now I believe
it's going to be on Steam and Xbox, I
believe. Uh, someone just asked in the
chat. Yeah. Uh, okay, cool. Um, so that
is the first, but yeah, check that out.
Like again, it's it's super just to wrap
it up, it's it's super disheartening and
especially, you know, again, we're not
going to go too much into it, but like
uh with the no kings protest, I went to
the New York one um on Saturday and like
there's like,
how do I put this? I am very heartened
for the first time in a while after this
Saturday um
seeing uh a ton of voices come together
for specific goals. Uh, and it's funny
to tie that into uh game devs not being
able to come into the United St. But
like it is all connected. And I'm
when I read the story, I was kind of
heartbroken for these people because you
put all this time and effort in and it's
supposed to be like a celebration of you
because this was at Summer Games Fest
Day of the Devs, right? That's where
they were supposed to be. Yeah. And I
just hope that like I don't know. I I'm
again I being from the future I could
see uh what what will be happening and
uh I don't know I
this is a sad story but also one that uh
I witnessed a lot of people fighting
back uh against the concepts behind why
it happened this weekend and that made
me feel really good. So, um, yeah, uh,
hopefully we hear more about this game
and hopefully we get more interviews
with these folks and we get to have a
faking cool premise that actually ties
so well into a large thread in Western
civilization's history. Not to tag into
the other, you know, channel, but like
it's it's that's that's the legacy. Um,
and it's cool that people from these uh
from these uh cultures and communities
are being like, "No, no, no. Now we're
going to do a game about taking it all
back." Right. Also, very interesting.
Um, if you're if you're new here to to
the channel, um
Brad, our our Twitch chat is very big on
the concept of a h
can't say the word or they'll, you know,
they'll do that thing where they go
absolutely feral. Um, but this is a game
about that concept
done for good reasons in an interesting
way. So, I have a feeling that we'll be
playing a lot of this when it comes out.
Yeah. Oh, great. Awesome. They heard me.
Anyway, um, next up on things that are
totally apolitical uh, and relate to
video games heavily.
I'm not feeling so good, Mr. Mr. Newell.
It don't feel so good, Mr. Newell.
Actually, it probably does. This is a
good problem for him to have in a weird
way. I agree. So, the Steam Deck, the uh
the the the muchbeloved portable PC, um
definitely one of the better ways to
play Steam games, uh is currently having
problems with stocking. So, according uh
to Windows Central,
the Steam Deck OLED,
the uh the better, more improved,
updated version is uh out of stock right
now. And the reason is very simple. The
supply chain is all screwed up. So,
getting parts and components and Steam
Decks uh in is uh becoming more and more
difficult. And this is sort of one of
the things that we had talked about as a
potential side effect of tariffs and
disruptions to the supply chain is it
will become harder to get the stuff you
want right um and it's not that it will
be more expensive it is that it will not
be available and this is sort of a big
symptom of that um the Valve wants to
sell more Steam Decks. Steam Deck. I
don't think they're selling it at a loss
and is a phenomenal device that
encourages people to play at more Steam
games and spend more money on Steam.
Valve wants to sell all the Steam Decks,
right? They really do. It's a phenomenal
thing for them. This is probably the
best piece of hardware Valve has ever
put out. They've had a bunch of
stinkers. Um well, they've had some that
weren't great, some that were
discontinued, and then the Steam Deck.
Um, and it really stinks that this is
going uh away in this fashion because
they can't get the parts. Um, uh,
someone just wrote, oh, uh, Doride did,
uh, is it due to Microsoft and the
Switch 2 noming up all the parts? Not
not directly because obviously they're
machined different, but the the
facilities that do the machining are all
affected by the tariffs and therefore
they're probably not getting as many or
like the the whole the whole thing is
connected. Yep. Um the Switch 2 in
partic like it's funny because I think I
think the Switch 2's release sort of got
and the tariffs looming got people
really like okay what am I doing? what
is my portable game system? And I think
many people also chose chose the the uh
Steam Deck OLED. And I think that's why
it is gone now. And granted, they're
saying Valve's saying right now uh
they're not planning on increasing the
price. Uh you know, it's not so so far.
You never know. Yep. Um but it's it's a
good problem for them to have, but it's
a bad problem for the industry to have,
if that sort of makes sense. you want
them to be able to manufacture as many
of these as they can sell because that
just makes more people have jobs. Um,
but yeah, it it'll be interesting to see
how this plays. I'm curious now, Will,
how with the OLED gone, I'm wondering if
the others will slowly follow suit
before the OLED is back in stock. Um, or
if people are willing to compromise on
which Steam Deck they get. Yeah. Well,
so the the 256 gig LCD model is still in
stock. The only the 512. Yeah. The only
the only two that are out are the 512
and the 1 TB. Um and according to Valve
himself, those are due to supply chain
constraints. Um so we'll see. The LCD is
significantly less good. I will say the
um the battery is like it's not just the
screen or the size. It's also the
battery and the refresh rate. Yeah. Both
of which are significantly better on the
OLED for a nominal increase in price. I
mean, it's not nominal. It's, you know,
uh $150 more. Yeah. I wonder too what
the what the overall plan for the Steam
Deck is. Like I I I was The OLED is the
only time they've really changed the
hardware so far, right? Or was there
another other than like increased
capacity or they have they done it a few
times? I believe that's it. They they
one of the things that they have done
though is they um unlike with many
consoles, Valve also just released the
schematics. Yeah. And like the tearown
guide and they were like, "Yeah, if you
want to replace stuff or upgrade it,
here's how you do it. Go have fun. You
bought it. We might as well give you all
the instructions on how to do it. Also,
if you want to fix it, here's the stuff
you need to fix it. You can send it to
us or we can sell you parts and you can
fix it yourself and it'll take less time
because you only have to ship stuff one
way." What's great about that?
Um, I don't know that the handheld
market I I I don't know. I really enjoy
even I was sitting down playing Mario
Kart World. Um, and Jamie looked over
and was and was like, "Oh, it just looks
like it's more fun when you're holding
it." I was like, "Kind of." So, I with
that sort of in mind, uh, I'm glad to
see the proliferation, the popularity
obviously of the Steam Deck, um, the
Switch Switch 2, and now I hope that the
the ROG ally for Xbox does well. like it
seems like a good move to have this sort
of be a thing especially in households
that have one TV like it it it's really
helpful for people who want to engage in
different activities um to multiple
people at different times. So I don't
know I think it's absolutely great and I
hope that the supply chain issues for
all of these portable devices uh is not
long for the world. I know that, you
know, whether or not it actually will be
long for this world, of course, but I
cannot say due to the um I I signed
Well, I signed a temporal NDA. I was
going to say, you mean the temporal
prime directive? No, I see. I can't talk
about it. See, that's the thing. Pretty
sure if I say temporal prime directive
one more time, Aaron's gonna like poke
her head in and like Yeah, just through
the window. It's going to be like Mr.
Rogers Neighborhood just popping in.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Uh okay, cool. Next
up, again,
all totally apolitical stuff that has to
deal with video games. Hey, sack after
strike. Um, so
there have been a lot of words said by a
lot of people about the nature of the
strike and the nature of the reasons
behind suspending it, right? We're not
going to mess around with that too much
because that's all like hearsay and
leaked Discord messages and all not not
our purpose. What is important is that
we are letting you all know that the
video game strike that um Saga began has
been suspended. That is that is the
major piece of news is not is not the
why or the how, merely that it has been
uh suspended. Um, and this is from their
own Blue Sky account and their um and
their uh website. Um, all saga members
are instructed to return to work on
productions under the IMA, including
work promoting or publicizing projects
under the IMA. Um, they'll um they met
on the 12th to consider benefits. And
I'm going to double check to make sure
that we're on the most current. Yeah,
that's what I was going to say because I
I was looking for more news on this and
it was hard to find. Um if anyone in
either of the chats has actually found
anything more about this that is updated
beyond the 12th. The the the last thing
that I've got is the 12th um was the
meeting. There was a meeting and they
recommended uh that the membership vote
yes on the agreement, but we have not
officially gotten a vote from the
membership of Zaga on that agreement
yet. the Games for Breakfast Curse might
come true as well. And the second that
we're done with this show is when that
news actually hits. Uh so if you are uh
invested in this and if you care about
video games, uh you absolutely should be
keep an eye out for that because this
will obviously affect uh many different
elements of the things we love to engage
with and the people that make them. Oh
yeah. Uh Chad's asking what is IMA? IMA
is the interactive media agreement.
Yeah. It's the contract essentially that
they're voting on. Um, this has been a
thing that's sort of been a background
current for a while and this just feels
like a good little update that the
strike is suspended and there is an
agreement and they're voting on it. Of
course, the agreement isn't final till
it gets voted on. That's really
important. We're not saying it's over.
We're not saying all of it's done
because the membership could reject this
agreement. That's a thing that could
happen, right? Um, and again, we don't
want to engage in the well, it's
probably or he said, she said, they
said, or whatever, right? The news is
strike is suspended. They voted and
recommended to that the membership
approve this uh agreement and we'll see
if they do. Yeah. Yeah.
Um,
I think we got But now I think we need
to move away from politics, Will. I
think we need to move towards a towards
an IP that has no political lean or or
or multiple ideologies
good oldfashioned. You turn off your
brain, Will. Just turn it off and engage
with the video game that is our next
story. Oh, wait. Hold on. I got these in
the wrong order. But this But it also
works. It also works. These are all
good. We could do this story now. I
think we should do this story now
because it's funny. Um and then I'm
going to do the same intro for the next
That's correct. Okay, so Runescape
um has been pretty big on Pride for a
while. Um I didn't actually know this
till this article came out. Um this um
Runescape is is pretty big on Pride. Old
school runscape has a pride event
and
this year
are scaling it back.
And a lot of people are saying that
this is politically motivated by the
higherups at Runescape
um to sort of scale this back because
the political climate around Pride right
now is not the most favorable from
people in charge of things.
put it that way. It's a good way to put
it. Um and so uh the
the report from employees who wish
remain anonymous because of course they
do is that it is uh politically
motivated that they're going to be
pulling back this year which is really
sad to see. Um,
I am
trying to put my thoughts into coherent
words rather than just screaming. Uh, I
really like when games do stuff for
Pride. I feel like Pride is one of those
times of year that while it is a
celebration of all things queer, is also
just a good time in video games, right?
like it is. There are rainbows flying
everywhere and we generally get some
like hella gay cosmetics or you know uh
emotes or whatever and it's it feels
like it's a good opportunity to do
something big and colorful
and
it
is being lost because people are scared
to make pride noises in the current
political climate in the US. which
sucks. That just sucks.
That's that's sort of my my my best
synthetic take that doesn't devolve into
me just screaming in and and and this is
just something that's so interesting to
me just from a functionality level like
let's even stepping back from the
emotional element and the and what is
morally correct and in my opinion um
we're seeing consistently
whether it be pride uh for LGBTQ uh plus
folks or um
or or other marginalized groups etc.
When when businesses, particularly large
businesses,
are
making sort of mistakenly cowtowing to
nonsense.
They are being financially hurt. Like
you can see it. It's not helping. and
and and I know that in the current, you
know, there's multiple governmental
oversightes and committees and things
that can damage a uh a company a lot as
well. So, there is always that like when
you're getting to the level of say a
Target or something like that. Um, but
then again, uh, and again, I feel like
it's weird. I think two weeks ago we
said something nice about Walmart. Um,
and there's another thing the the
Walmart Aerys was did like a paid for a
no kings advertisement and that got a
bunch of people upsetti spaghetti and
that just seems so strange to that to
that I say let them fight. Um, but I
guess my point is so Runescape and old
school Runescape are big, right? They're
but they're and they're they're
communities. What was that? They're the
third largest MMO generally speaking.
third most relevant behind WoW and Final
Fantasy 14. If you add a third, it's
always old school Runescape. But like I
just I don't like so from a fear-based
perspective of your business, there is a
methodology. While I do not agree with
it on a moral level, and I would not
choose it to protect your business, you
want to cowtow to whatever garbage is
going on when you're like the size of a
Target or something like you know,
whatever. Sure. again, blah,
but this is not a retail chain in middle
America. This is an MMO, right? And if
you if you look at
the people that are playing video games
and MMOs in general, I I would say like
you're going to make way more people
more angry by not doing this than like
the government who is not looking at you
at all or not like the government
doesn't understand software. Look at
look at all of the look at the DMCA to
point out that people just don't
understand software or like digital
spaces at all. Right. Yeah. Um and and
the CEO of um was it Jagex? Jagex. Yep.
Um
uh John Bellamy said a couple different
things uh when asked about it. Uh he
apologized for the initial communication
uh but did not relent, noting it's
getting stranger, more troubling, less
moral. Uh what did he say? Uh, game
studios are being cancelled because
content is perceived to be woke or
representative. The pendulum is swinging
back in a way we didn't expect. Um,
it said they said quote uh Belly argued
that the his role was to quote ensure
the business is protected against those
who would wish to harm us and that Pride
content was quote now controversial in a
way it didn't used to be and that
controversy now brings more risk than it
did previously. Risk that I'm personally
responsible to protect against. Um,
like look man, like in a bubble where
it's not about people at all, like sure,
maybe whatever, but that's not what any
of this ever is. And to think about it
that way will bring about your downfall
far quicker than uh doing what is right
and moral. So I it it seems so
backwards and and just a real just
tonedeaf take on how any of these spaces
work. This is not
Target. This is not Chick-fil-A. This is
an MMO. Like I I just And uh Tur's
completely correct. The uh the players
are unhappy. The players are very
unhappy. um including such things as no
gay no pay. That's the thing. You're
you're actively angering the people that
pay you. How is that not the most
dangerous thing for the longevity of
your product? like rather than an
outside boogeyman that might come one
day that you're hiding from
also
god just the the sort of fervor of the
uh go woke go broke which I don't think
has actually ever happened it has not in
fact uh people who have unwoked who
sleep um uh have have lost out big time
for instance Target's p pride collection
sucks and I no one who has bought any of
it, they're going to take a loss on
Pride on the Pride collection this year
because it sucks, right? Same idea.
Anyway, just a just a another thing to
talk about uh that's not the the most
fun. But you know what, Will, if you're
if you're finished with this story, I'd
like to move us to a completely
non-political story. Uh that has nothing
to do with the IP of it having to do
with any politics or or various uh you
know, groups within the story having any
sort of political lean or bent or
commentary on actual real world events
at any uh time in the history of our
planet.
So Dune Awakening came out. We're going
to talk about Dune Awakening after this
commercial break. Oh no. Uh okay. A
reminder that um
uh we are doing fake ads which you over
on YouTube can enjoy while uh the folks
on Twitch watch some real ads to keep
pre-rolls off so that folks can just
roll in and hang out so you won't miss
any of the show while we do some fake
ads. Uh Matt, would you would you care
to go first while we just keep this
image of Dune Awakening so that chat can
meme on how apolitical it is? Sure.
Sure. for sure.
Hi everyone, Matt from Extra Credits
here. Do you ever have uh the problem
like me when you're time traveling and
you can't actually talk about anything
from the past or future? Well, let me
introduce you to the best possible
excuse ever. It's called a temporal NDA.
Cuz the best part about a temporal NDA
is if someone like Will asks you a
question like, "Uh, what's going to
happen tomorrow?" Uh, Will, I'm so
sorry. I can't talk about it. I I signed
a temporal NDA. Side note, this also
works when you're not time traveling
just for the future. If you have a gap
in your actual resume for a year and a
half, maybe the economy tanked and you
didn't work for a while. Just say you
were working on a project that required
an NDA and they can't do anything about
it.
It's true. That is that is actually a
really great Yeah. I wanted to sneak in
a real thing. Yeah. the the the the I'm
under I I've signed an NDA thing uh is a
really great way to it's legitimate.
Like it's legitimate. Like I'm I'm sorry
now I'm I'm going into career advice,
but if you are if you have a gap in your
resume
and someone you don't you don't like
write it on the resume, but if someone's
like, "Oh, what were you doing, you
know, between 2017 and 2019?" You're
like, you know, the pandemic, but like
you could be like, "Oh, I was working on
this thing. I'm sorry. I signed an NDA.
It's not it's not quite up yet, so I
can't really uh whatever." And there's
no like there's no follow. They're not
going to call you out for being a liar
because they can't. And that also shows
that like you also honor if this thing
if you did sign an NDA, you're honoring
your previous company and that's also a
good look. Just a thing. I don't know.
Yep. Very good thing. Uh okay. Um
yeah, I've got one.
Ready? Yeah.
Hey Chad, do you desire to peer beyond
the veil of space and time? Do you want
to see the future as if it were the now?
Do you want to live temporary uh in
contemporaneously with with all of the
memories of all the people who came
before you and also with what will
happen in the future? Try spice. That's
right. Totally apolitical substance that
isn't a standin for any realworld
roughly analogous sources of power or
resources. That's right. Spice. It's
that thing that opens your mind and
makes you precient maybe. Unless it
kills you. Who knows? Uh, it's totally
not an allegory or a representation of
anything in the real world. No, no, no.
It's just a fun It's a fun thing in
sci-fi.
There you go. Yeah. Despice it must
flow. Also, Allan depends on the NDA.
Yeah, true. Yes, that is also true. Oh
god, don't
you actually have to read all those.
Some of them are wild. Some Some of the
ones I've signed are wild and I can't
talk about them because I've signed
them, but let me tell you, they're wild.
Okay, great. Um Uh, you mean you're not
supposed to put it in your food? I mean,
well, it depends on the on what kind of
spice. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Okay. Old
spice. Yeah, old spice. Old spice. All
right, ads are over. Let us begin uh
once again talking about totally
apolitical topic Dune Awakening. Um so
the game itself
came out in full release. Uh it had been
sort of in a rolling early access you
can pay for some early time thing which
uh while it does stink for players who
don't pay for it to be behind the power
curve a bit. It also does stagger
people's entry into the game so you
don't onboard your entire player base at
once, which is generally one of the
worst times to be a server
administrator. Uh onboarding all of your
players all at once is a nightmare. So
getting people to self- select and
stagger to come in is kind of a good
idea. Um so um it came out and it's
doing pretty well. Uh, it's doing um
the previous number I have courtesy of
IGN is 142,000 concurrent players, which
is pretty good. Um,
this is a game that I've I've put as my
mustplay of the year if I had time for
an MMO.
Yeah, that's kind of the problem, right?
It it also uh is the other problem is of
course that it's got heavy PvP and like
um extraction looter elements and that's
you have to pay attention at a lot of
point like you can lose a lot of things
and uh it hit a new all-time high this
weekend of 189,333
players and there are currently 122,000
in-game on a Monday. So it's doing
really well. Um good. It is it is a
fascinating
Dune has sort of come back into
resurgence and again we meme on it a
lot. An awful lot of people haven't read
Dune with an eye to media literacy and
the things that Dune is really talking
about. So it's kind of fascinating to me
to see the set dressing of it taken
without some of the more like deeply
political commentary that is inherent to
the novels. Well, so what's interesting,
I think, at least from my and I haven't
watched the TV show. Did that come out
yet? The HBO series. I believe it did,
but it's on HBO. So, the films Dude
Awakening, the the HBO series. Um,
it seems like they aren't shying away
from those things. It seems like they,
you know, they still exist in the
spaces, which is nice. And it'd be hard
to divorce Dune from any of those
things. It is interesting to Will's
point to see people come in to it just
like um and not that other sci-fi
projects aren't political by any means,
but like uh it's it's interesting to see
people sort of come in from the opposite
direction of reading the books. Um
I don't know. I I love that Dune is
getting more of a spotlight because it's
been one of my favorite novels for
forever. And uh I don't know. I I'm very
glad to see Dune Awakening doing well.
Um, I hope to one day have time to play
it. Yeah. Um, it it might it might go on
my list of what chat wants me to play
next. Uh, yeah. After I finish up Final
Fantasy 6, hopefully this Wednesday,
we're we're spending today prepping to
fight Kefka. And Wednesday, we're going
to take on what I believe to be the
final dungeon and what I believe to be
the final fight with CFKA. So, that'll
be fun. Um, I have a lot of grinding to
do. A lot of grinding. Yeah.
Uh, also a little side note to the story
that I found also on IGN uh that you you
you can't ride sandworms in Dune
Awakening in in principle in in design
asterisk. Of course people have figured
out how to ride sandworms in Dune
Awakening. Um, like what do you take us
for? A bunch of off-worlders? Of course
we're going to learn how to ride. Yeah.
A Redditor by the name of Sergeant
Dolphin figured out how to like walk
without rhythm.
uh or walk with rhythm I should say to
attract the worm and manage to uh
basically use their Menntat not Menntat
abilities use I forget which ability
they had to sort of float one of their
pieces of tech and land on the worm and
ride it. You sometimes do clip through
the worm. There's a really fun Reddit
post where they intercut the action of
the player doing it with um with the
film when they all see Paul ride the
worm for the first. It's very, very,
very funny. So, of course, people are
going to be doing this even though you
can't. And what is an MMO if not uh just
a tool for, you know, gamebreaking
shenanigans? That's basically what I'm
here to see. Yeah, absolutely. 100%. Uh,
great. Well, moving on from Shy Halude,
uh, let's talk about
Sony
chat.
Oh yeah, we can dive again. Uh, and by
we, I mean all the people who were in
the who were in many but not all of the
regions that were restricted originally
from purchasing PlayStation or from
purchasing Sony games on Steam.
Um, the four games in question are uh
God of War Ragnarok, Last of Us Part Two
Remastered, Spider-Man 2, and Hell
Divers 2. And those have all been had
their regional restrictions uh removed.
Um which and they didn't announce it
anywhere by the way. So this is what we
were alluding to before. So Sony sort of
I and and some people are saying oh this
is also Stellar Blade came out and it is
the highest selling uh PlayStation game
on uh on PC.
I'll let you and your Nexus Mods account
figure out why that is. But the um the
the people are like, "Oh, like they're
seeing that like if you don't have this
thing, it sells well." I think this was
put into play a little bit like before
that. Or maybe they were maybe they
wanted
that game, which they knew would do
well, to sort of outshadow them sort of
slowly walking back the need for a
PlayStation account. I was thinking
about this the other day, like what they
should have done was give you like
in-game cosmetics and things if you did
link to a PlayStation account and let
everyone else do it if you couldn't or
didn't want to. Yeah, they they they did
that for Horizon, Forbidden West. They
they did they tried that in a couple of
places and they were woefully
inconsistent about it, right? Which was
kind of weird and silly in my opinion.
um they felt like they were taking wild
swings with like different parts of the
catalog and then were like, "Well, it
didn't work over here, so we'll try
something different over here." And I'm
like, "You have confounding variables,
Brendos. You need to control your
variables when you're doing testing on
that scale." And you're not because
those are not the same game,
friendos.
Okay. All right. Yeah. I also I think
that the
not making a big deal out of it, not
doing an announcement is both smart and
not smart. Um, you could essentially
make a big deal be like, "We listened,"
but then there's a sort of negative side
to that too because then people will
uh probably push for other things that
they might be able to not do or not do
for other various, you know, whatever.
whereas if they just sort of quietly do
it tail between their legs, they don't
get a nice little media push, but also
they don't have to save face in any way.
Um, I don't know. This is just good
news. Uh, it's I'm glad that places that
could not play these games before are
now allowed to. Um, and if if Sony is
serious about
making sure that their games do come to
other platforms, and to be clear, I
actually really like Sony's business
model. have it be exclusive for your
console for like a year or so and then
go make a bunch of money off it again on
PC. Like I I think that is totally fine.
There's enough games There's enough
games coming out where I feel like
if if you are so deeply committed to
something that is a PlayStation
exclusive for a year, you probably
already own a PlayStation.
You know what I mean? Yeah. And if
you're not, you'll play the myriad of
countless other phenomenal titles that
you can play on PC until the games get
released on PC, right? Like, I don't
know. I think it's a a really good a
really good system right now. Yeah, I
think the I think that's very true,
right? Like delaying PC release is never
really a risk because
on console you're not competing with
WoW. or Final Fantasy 14 or League,
right? You're not competing with uh a
whole bunch of other lifestyle games you
are competing with on PC, right? And so
like the competition is harder on PC and
there are more games in general that
come out on PC because it's
mindboggling. Yeah. Like the there the
number of demos that came out last week
during Nexfest.
absolutely mind-bogglingly wild, right?
And some of them were incredibly good
and some of them were incredibly bad and
we talked about a lot of them last week.
It was great. But the um
the opportunity cost of releasing later
on on PC feels much lower, right?
Because like people will wait and
they've got other things to play and
they're not going to be super impatient
and if they really want it, they'll buy
a PS5.
There's just I It's funny 20 years ago
or whatever. I'm ancient. Um when when
there wasn't as many amazing games being
released at the same time, I feel like I
was would be much more salty about X Y
and Z. Like even going back to Dune,
right? Dude's a PC game or being
released on PC, so it's not the same
sort of can of worms, but like you see
uh but I I don't know. Like it's one of
those things where it's like I will play
this when I get to it. I don't I want to
play it now, but I have so many other
games to play and a limited amount of
time. Sure. The urgency for a lot of
things has gone down, right? like you
really have to be hitting like at the
top of your weight class to like really
demand play on release right at this
point. Like it's expedition 33. But also
I will remind people that like streamers
knew like we knew we knew when they
pitched us the game like years ago that
Expedition 33 was going to be huge,
right? Or like last year at at a
minimum, right? like we knew and and
there like Soong and there are a couple
of others, but the amount of like
mustplay on release demand is much lower
with the size of um the the pool of
games growing. Well, yeah. And actually,
let's let's sort of use that to
transition to our sort of second part of
the of the Sony story, which is
basically uh you Sony Interactive
Entertainment CEO Hideki uh Nishino, I
believe. I might be uh butchering that
name. Apologies. uh just did a um call
with investors um or it might have been
board members, I don't quite remember,
but uh you can read the article on
screen rant. Um
but basically
um
it was talking about sort of like the
future and commitments of things for
Sony Entertainment and and the video
game division, etc. And so some
interesting sort of tidbits in there and
you you can only read so much into this
because it is very corporate speak. It's
it's not meant for us. it's meant for
people involved in the business of of
Sony and selling PlayStations. And
basically um they were talking about how
um the PS5 while it did well did sort of
suffer from uh essentially trying to
move a lot of the first party uh you
know juggernauts that Sony has to make
single player super crazy good narrative
experiences to more live service games
like conquered and like a couple other
things and how that obviously didn't
work out. Um and so he's noting a couple
different things in this call. This is a
little bit more of um this is talking
about like cloud streaming versus
running things on consoles. He says um
basically quote while cloud streaming uh
is progressing well from a technical
standpoint uh the majority of players
continue to want to experience gaming
through local execution without
dependency on network conditions. I
would agree with that. I think that is
overall very true. That might not even
be based on want. That might be based on
actual physical availability. Not
everyone has the ability to stream games
to wherever they are. a reminder that
Matt and I are both on fiber because we
live in reasonably large metropolitan
centers, one larger than the other by
definition. But like there are plenty of
places in the US where you can't get
that connection speed or you can't get a
reliable connection, right? Or like
there's a reason that stuff like exit
lag exists, right? And they were saying
uh uh Nishino says references the m uh
the majority of method majority of
people prefer the traditional console
model. So basically in other words uh
they are believing or their CEO believes
that people want to buy a console and
play the game if you're going to be
playing games on console. Like that's
kind of what Well, wait Matt, back up.
Back up. Back up. What? I know. They
want to purchase a thing and software
for the thing and then use it and that's
it. Now people are extrapolating a
little too much from this call. I I
don't fully agree with everything in the
screen rant article, but basically they
were saying that like cuz he quote says
without dependency on network
connections could also lean towards
meaning like less like more single
player experiences on rather than
multiplayer. Of course, PlayStation
Network is still a thing. are not going
to stop doing that. Um, but it's the
live service side for Sony has been a
problem. pulled it's pulled a lot of
developers
away from making those exper because we
really on on PlayStation 5
we got
I'm trying to think of like it was um
God of War Ragnarok Ragnarok
Forbidden West
Spider-Man Spider-Man
and the console's what six years old
five 2020 like November 2020 cuz we
talked about this last week. The the
Series X and the PS5 came out the same
week in 2020 in November, but Sony's now
canceled a lot of live service games
from from Bluepoint games. They canceled
the God of War one. Uh Naughty Dog was
doing a Last of Us Online that is
canceled. Like in my opinion, while it
sucks that uh you know, when you're a
dev on these things, it's got to be
heartbreaking to be working on these
things for a year and then just be like,
"Nope." Um, from a player perspective,
I'm like, "Yeah, I want these teams that
are excellent at doing as long as
they're happy doing what they're doing,
making these narrative experiences,
these single player experiences. That's
kind of where I that's kind of what I
want my PlayStation 4, uh, my
PlayStation, well, I guess they're
talking about PlayStation 6. What I'd
want a PlayStation console for, not the
number. You get where I'm going." Uh
anyway, this is a really sort of um it's
nice to even though it is corpo speak,
it's nice to hear a CEO sort of talking
in ways that I particularly want to
engage with my games. Um and uh they
also said basically the the at the end
of the day they were saying how like the
PS is very much on their mind and and
from what he's talking about it will be
a console like other cons like it it
will still follow this throughine
because they believe that is what people
want. So that was really heartening to
hear, I thought. Yeah, I agree. Uh I
think that that's Philip Pop. It's nice
to see a CEO pretending to be human.
Yes. Yeah. Correct. Correct.
Uh, okay. Let's talk about last week
because something happened last week and
I think we don't talk about it enough.
How much it deeply impacts our media
consumption and gaming habits,
which is Cloudflare had a bad day
Thursday,
which means everyone had a bad day
Thursday. Um, so for those unaware,
Cloudfire is I will simplify this. One
of the major parts of the internet that
keeps it working the way that it should.
Yeah, go more deep into the tech, but
that's not important. They had an outage
on Thursday which proceeded to have
Twitch have a weird outage and a large
number of other sites all just have like
incredibly bad days and games were down
and stuff was down and everything was
weird bad and just bad.
And it it got me thinking that we don't
like
there's it's sort of an interesting test
case, right? because we were just
talking about physical media and
acquiring physical media and playing
games on physical media.
And I thought this was a really
interesting moment because
it felt like even in what was a pseudo
worstcase scenario,
it was fine.
But maybe that's just my viewpoint on
it. Like chat, sound off if like how bad
was it for you last Thursday when
Cloudfire went down? Did you notice were
were you like trying to play a game or
do something and it just absolutely
ground to a halt? Like what
how was your experience with it? Right.
This will be both interesting and you
know highly anecdotal. Um mine
personally uh I noticed a lot of um
a lot of uh emails weren't going through
on Google's side of things. I noticed um
a general slowdown of the internet. I
noticed Twitch was obviously having a
bad time. Um,
let's see. What do we got from people
here?
Most people didn't notice be on Twitch.
Yeah.
Boom, boom, boom. Yeah.
Works online. Didn't even notice.
So, it's interesting because
the the the infrastructure of how we run
our digital lives is incredibly fragile.
It feels like um and we kind of just
keep it going on a hope and a prayer. It
also feels kind of resilient, right,
that like
some stuff still works, right? I like
this. I was at work. I couldn't look at
Reddit on my phone. Yeah. Yeah. It's
reasonable, right? like it feels like it
it is a big
it is fragile, but it's also resilient
in the same way that like you can get it
feels like a lot like Pokemon Red and
Blue. Pokemon Red and Blue you can make
do some weird funky stuff, but getting
it to crash completely is kind of hard.
It feels a little bit like that. Like
yes, it's fragile and things go wrong,
but they go wrong in like weird ways
that like almost function or maybe don't
function and then we give up and then
they come back and it's fine. I don't
know. It felt like it if it didn't feel
that bad to me and maybe I'm just coming
at it from like an IT perspective where
like nothing was on fire. Great. Like
Yeah. But like at the same time, uh the
things that like was was getting me and
it's one of the reasons why I don't like
really move into the um
uh
the u sort of like smart home. Oh god.
Yeah. I know. like when when the ability
to turn on your lights or lock your
doors or or those things are affected by
a network outage. Uh that's when it it
starts feeling real. I don't do that. I
do know a lot of people that do and I do
I talked to one friend who like couldn't
get their lights working like because
this is this is sort of a prime example
of the technology enthusiast versus IT
professional thing. technology
enthusiast. I will connect everything in
my home to smartome IT professional. No,
absolutely not under any circumstances.
Thank you. That's the difference, right?
Yeah. So, but again, like let's let's
think about it this way like uh because
that's the part of the story that really
got me was the sort of smart home
element of it. And these things are
marketed as a thing to make your life
easier. in in many ways they can, but
like I think because to your point,
Will, outages that we some people
experienced on Thursday are so rare, you
don't often think about them even being
connected to these things that run your
day-to-day life. Yeah. Um
it it'll be really weird if something
like truly network bad happens. Uh
anything from you know a superdetailed
damaging hack to a solar flare like like
solar flare is a good one. If it goes if
it hits hard then your entire life not
beyond your entertainment and your news
is tied to the ability to talk to an
external network. And I think that
that's that's one of my takehomes from
this too is that lots of people are very
worried about like well what if I can't
play games during a network outage
right? Yeah. What if you um what if you
have a uh you know um what if all of
this stuff goes away? And then I I point
at people with smart homes or with
digitally connected insulin pumps or any
number of other things and you go,
"Yeah, then I have bigger problems."
Right? Like gaming is now so deeply
integrated that like it's and
entertainment, right? Twitch um is now
so deeply integrated that I feel like
it's all like it's a we go together or
not at all at this point. Maybe that's
just me. I don't know. Yeah.
Um Dart, you're right. Most smart home
devices let you manually control your
devices. It also depends on which one.
I've seen some I mean they they do how
deep that is in the system and whether
or not the people and again this is I'm
not trying to excuse anyone who doesn't
understand the thing they installed in
their home. Uh but
the way these these services and these
products are served up is it's easy.
It's one button. It's so simple. You can
do whatever control everything from your
phone. And most people I think or not
even most people that don't do this to
their detriment can get locked into that
like are sold a product that if they're
not interested in learning about the
thing and again that's on them but it's
also it's the messaging behind the
product as well. Does that make sense?
Like, yeah. Hey, Matt, you're you want
to do you want to do a breaking news
story? Oh, yeah. What do we got? You
want to do a live react? Um, I'm gonna
I'm gonna find this, but the comment
from chat is that Jeremy Crawford and
Chris Perkins just joined Darington
Press. Um, I'm gonna I'm gonna get
confirmation. Uh, no. So, um,
for those unaware, Jeremy live reaction.
I smile a lot. Jeremy Crawford and Chris
Perkins are two of the most um
they're the ones that that made D&D 5e D
and D 5e correct and so um they are uh
Perkins recently announced his
retirement from Wizards U and I believe
Jeremy did too. And the fact that both
of them are have now joined Critical
Role and Darington Press to write
Daggerheart is Yeah. 26 minutes ago on
Twitter. Hold up. Darington Press. Our
adventuring party grows.
Yeah. Wow. Chris Per and Jeremy Crawford
have joined us at Darington Press. These
two powerhouses will be dreaming up new
game concepts and expanding our existing
games. Give Chris and Jeremy a warm
welcome. So that is, by the way, that is
um
with love and respect to the D&D team at
Wizards,
uh someone in charge is asking for brown
pants right now. That that's a lot of
star power. Like people who are deeply
invested in Dn D know Perkins and
Crawford and
Dagger Hart is already backed by I don't
know how Dagger Hart is Darington
Press's uh new the Critical Role folks.
their uh role playing system. They've
done two so far, I believe. Uh Candela
Obscura and and um Dagger because they
started working on their own systems
when the OGL thing started happening for
um DND because they're a company now
that wants to control their own IP and
not worry about creating things in the
D&D world and needing to worry about the
lensure or the intellectual property of
like parts of that, right? Because like
in Critical Role, if they reference
Palor, god of the sun from Dn D, then
they have a problem because they can't
there's a yes and no based on the the
the different there there was there was
a thought that when the OGL thing
happened that it would be difficult. So
yeah. Um also will do you care to
explain your Deadpool joke? No. Okay,
cool. Just checking. Um this is
okay. This is this sets up something
very interesting.
What is stronger?
An IP
or the people who created it moving to a
smaller but beloved IP?
I like
so like D and D YouTube is going to be
exploding for the rest of the day.
There's going to be a hundred different
things about all this stuff. But let's
not let truly it will take a lot of a
lot more missteps to sync
D&D in Wizard of the Coast like
completely. This is a an insane
announcement.
I I
I think that there the group of Okay, so
here here's my thought.
There is a group of people who wants to
play D and D the way Critical Role plays
D and D, right? which is very role-play
heavy, which makes sense because they're
actors, right? That is not a thing that
is inherent in the rules of D and D,
right? That extemporaneous um role
playing that like governs a lot of the
way that their story progresses is not
there aren't rules that govern that,
right? And Dagger Heart, to my
understanding, is a way that they are
attempting to like add structure and
rules to that to like help games be more
narratively focused rather than just
like I down the door and I kill the
stuff and I still loot, right? Um I
think that there is a there is enough
room in the ecosystem for two things,
right? A crunchy war game, Dungeons and
Dragons, right? And another new branch
of the narrative tabletop role playing
space that is Dagger Heart. But also,
here's the interesting thing. We already
have a, in my opinion, if you want
crunch, if you want numbers, if you want
stats and num nom nom, eat them up. I
got to click I got to click Arvd Doll's
thing, you got Pathfinder. That's your
thing. If you And so people have used 5e
as sort of a catch-all for everything
else. But if Daggerheart is taking the
other side of that pendulum and the
creative forces that allowed Dn D to
become the thing that could be used it
maybe not for the best but ubiquitously
across a lot of different play styles.
What what is left for Dn D outside of
the IP that's been going for years? Like
I I think it's the um it it is the so DN
D so has the same thing as magic has the
same thing as Warhammer has the same
thing as McDonald's
which is it's not the best but it is
everywhere right and that ubiquity right
takes a very long time it's Kleenex it's
bandaid right it's Band-Aid it's Kleenex
it takes a very long time to undo that
ubiquity
right and to make it not the most
popular thing right Yeah. Um
uh well, I don't know if you can do the
Oh, I'm not going to. If you look, you
could grab their picture if we were
still talking about this for a bit. It's
on their tweet. Um it's they look so
psyched.
Okay, I want to describe this picture as
Will grabs it. Um
everyone's smiling really nice. Like I
think Travis is freaking out.
Um, everyone has big big smiles and
Mercer
Mercer's just kind of like smirking
and I love it. I love it so much. Um,
it's weird to be talking about this over
um over a picture of Cartman. I mean,
whatever it it it's breaking news,
right? We're not going to We weren't
prepped for this. We couldn't have been
prepped for this because uh you know,
it's um it's not Yeah. And Mr. Mr.
Question marks, I I do agree with this.
Like that's that's the thing. They're
losing trust at a rate that like Okay,
IPs can survive beyond beyond um beyond
their creators. Of course, however,
how do I put this?
like
uh uh Coca-Cola, unless you are super
into the corporate structure of
Coca-Cola. But we, none of us probably
know the CEO of Coca-Cola or the people
in charge of Coca-Cola's particular
branding campaign between the years of
blank and blank
because something as and I'll even use
the word intimate as a role playinging
game system,
you come to learn if if you get deep
enough in it and you're not just a c a
casual player, which there's far more
of, of course, you do get to know the
people that are behind your games like
this more. I would I would argue role
playing systems like tabletop role
playing systems more than even video
games. I I don't know why I feel that
way and maybe that's misguided but
that's like my lizard brain gut
reaction. Um,
this like
with Pathfinder
killing it for the for the tech the tech
people that want it and with Daggerheart
being something that is incredibly uh
for the for the the juggernaut that is
Critical Role and the way that people
want that many people who were not
traditionalists want to now play role
playing games with Daggerheart
unless Wizards of the Coast post for D
and D 6 or whatever they want to call
it. Get some really really um engaging
and and exciting talent behind what they
want to do. If it's just another CEO of
Coca-Cola we do not know or care about.
And unless somehow that system is the
best system ever, I I see it just
shipping away. It's also become
it's the meme now, right? like kicking D
and D for messing up is kind of it's
been the internet's personality when it
comes to that game for the last three
years
and and no amount of in my opinion
incredibly wonderful updated 5e source
books is changing that overall
conversation. You have positive reviews
of the books, but that's not changing
the conversation.
Yeah.
Anyway, anyway, I I thought I I I saw
that and I was like, "Oh, that's that's
that's got to be a right now. That's
that's that's got to be a right now
conversation." Like, right, we we know
exactly as much as you do. Uh we didn't
prep this ahead of time. So, thank you
for indulging our breaking news segment,
but this is something that like I had to
get Matt's take on and feel like you all
would appreciate those. All right. Yeah.
Our last prep story for today is is a
bit of an interesting one. So, we talk
about uh game design, game balance here
a lot, and we've also talked a lot about
like um how important balance is to
online games and how competitive games
in particular need to be tightly
balanced or to try new things in terms
of balance. And this might be the first
time, I don't it's probably not actually
the first time, but it's the first time
I've heard of it that a company is
adjusting a character's size
as a way to balance their gameplay.
So, you might be familiar with our boy
Bastion. Our boy Bastion is a character
in Overwatch who's a big tank. He's a
He's a robot. He runs around. He can
turn into a tank. He turns into a hat
now. Yeah, he has a I look I if I played
Overwatch, I would refuse to use
anything except the Bastion pre-order
skin from Overwatch one where he looks
like a robot from Spirited Away or from
Castle in the Sky, excuse me. Um, I
would refuse to use anything except the
the Lapia bot skin because that's the
best skin for Bastion. You can fight me
if you want and you're wrong. Um, right.
So, uh, they have reduced his size
by 10% in the next season as a way to
balance his gameplay because he was
getting shot too much.
And this is
fascinating to me like that this is a
way that that people are are balancing
stuff because it feels like that we talk
about all kinds of numerical tweaks,
right? HP, bullet resistance, uh damage
per bullet outgoing, healing factor, you
know, healing debuff factor from DPS.
We've talked about all kinds of things.
Just make the character a little
smaller. Sort of like I read this and I
was like, that's a really cool idea. And
apparently the team was playing with it
a lot. They tried 15%. They thought it
was too much. They tried five. It was
too little. And they they landed on on
10. Um, my favorite thing from this PC
Gamer article, though, is a Reddit user
named TB pitched an even better way to
handle it. And this is what they said.
TB said, quote, "Instead of shrinking
Bastion 10% at once, you should have
shrunk him 1% every week and denied it
anytime anyone asked."
Yes. No notes. perfection would have
been would have been the opportunity for
the funniest thing ever. I think that uh
would be so so fun. Yeah. Um uh that's
correct. So uh Grass points out that
they've done they've uh done no not that
this um Apex has done a similar thing in
reverse. There used to be a debuff
called small frame which caused smaller
characters to take more damage when they
got hit. And bigger characters tended to
have um or didn't have that debuff and
tended to have additional defensive
buffs like um Jibralter had the bubble
and the arm shield and all that. Um and
uh but it's very interesting to just
see. We made him smaller. We just we
just made him smaller. There's so many
fun ways you can adjust balance in in
games as sort of complex as a hero
shooter like like Overwatch. So yeah, I
don't know. That's a fun story, Will.
Thanks. I try I try and bring one of
those every week for dessert. Nom nom
nom. What a pastry.
Friends, that that does bring us to the
end of our stories for this week. I did
want to remind everyone And the end of
my coffee. And the end of your coffee.
Wow. Well timed, Matt. I did want to
remind everyone as we as we uh before we
throw it to Matt to do our our patented
sign out that we always do together, um
that tonight
8:00 p.m. Eastern, uh 5:00 p. p.m.
Pacific,
you should all be here wherever you are,
whether it's on YouTube or or on Twitch,
um for our interview with James Port now
and Mike Ponmith about Cyberpunk
Legends. I cannot stress enough how hype
I am to do this uh interview with Matt,
to talk to these guys about this game,
to hang out with all of you. We've got a
whole bunch of questions we want to ask.
We've got some questions that uh some of
their um some of their fans wanted to
ask. Uh we've got a couple of hours on
the clock. We're really excited about
this. Please join us for this. Um it's a
real it's going to be a real great time.
Uh yeah, follow no
interview with Hatsu Neiku.
Okay. Um
Temporal NDA. Yeah. No, please come
check that out. It's going to be super
fun. Uh I'm very very excited. But we
for now, at least the two of us shall
let you all go. Will is sticking around
on Twitch. Will, what are you playing
again? I am working on Final Fantasy 6.
I have uh some stuff I got to grind. So,
we're going to be grinding and talking
and it's gonna be great.
Excellent. But until then, I would like
to bid uh for me personally, farewell to
both uh Janet and Brad, YouTube and
Twitch. Uh and of course Rocky over on
Nebula. Thank you for watching over
there. If you have anything uh any
thoughts on these stories, Rocky, I know
we've been talking to Brad and Janet a
bunch in chat. You can blue sky us uh
over you can basically talk to us over
there. Let us know your questions or
thoughts you have on any of these
stories. If you made it this far in the
Nebula video, chances are you might want
to say hi and let us know you're
watching over there and maybe we can
talk about these stories more next week.
But until then, I'm going to leave you
with the same outro that we do every
time. Again, it's to build community.
It's to make us sure that we all know
what is going on. And I think what I
love about this outro is it not only is
the same every time, but it also
temporally loops with the beginning of
the show. So without with without
further ado, thank you for watching
Games for Breakfast. We'll see you next
time.
[Applause]
[Music]
Will, we've got to go back to the
future.
I should have left that in the record,
but the the move to the I should have
left that in the record, but the move to
the stinger auto pauses. No, no, no.
It's fine. Fine. It was a good bit. Uh,
okay. Cool. Cool. Yeah, we're hanging
out here for a while on Twitch. So,
Janet, um, if you, uh, want to come over
and hang out, please do so. Otherwise,
we will see all of you tonight, 8:00m,
uh, for the interview. A reminder, there
is no design club this week. So, the
next stream after tonight's stream over
on YouTube will be next breakfast.
Right. Right. Um, no, not yet. Not yet.
Someone should do it. Okay. Um, this is
the part where we say bye to Janet. So
Janet, we will see you all when next
tonight or next week or whenever we see
you. And of course, if we don't see you
live tonight, the VOD will stay up in
the same way that breakfast does so that
over on YouTube, y'all can watch at your
leisure and leave comments uh there. So,
uh, everybody say bye, Janet. Bye.