[Music]
Often in terms of game design, we talk
about power creep, which is what happens
to the general power level of content in
a game, like weapons, monsters, and
spells, as the game ages and new
expansions or downloadable content is
added on. But we very rarely talk about
spectacle creep. Spectacle creep is this
idea that as time goes on, all your
content has to be bigger, flashier, and
more adrenaline-packed or immediately
riveting than before. And it's by no
means limited to our medium. In film, we
see this all the time. We see this
everinccreasing need for bigness, for
spectacle, for ratcheting up the scale
of a story. The transition from Pitch
Black to Chronicles of Riddic is one of
the examples that immediately springs to
mind. In order to keep the audience's
attention, the filmmakers decided that
they had to up the stakes. The story
could no longer be about the plight of a
single ship of starf farers, but had to
be about the fate of the galaxy.
Anything less would seem unimportant.
And we see this on a broad scale with
our summer blockbusters. Not only have
we increased the size and frequency of
our explosions and fight scenes, but
perhaps most telling is the fact that
we've come to a point where most of our
summer blockbusters can't be about
anything less than saving the world.
There's a fantastic quote by Damon
Lindelof, the writer for things like
Prometheus and the film version of World
War Z that typifies this. He said, "Once
you spend more than a hund00 million on
a movie, you have to save the world."
And when you start there and basically
say, "I have to construct a mcguffin
based on if they shut off this or if
they close this portal or they
deactivate this bomb or they come up
with this cure, it'll save the world."
You're very limited in terms of how you
execute that. And in many ways, you can
become a slave to it. And again, I make
no excuses. I'm just saying you kind of
have to start there. In the old days, it
was just as satisfying that all Superman
has to do was basically save Lois from
this earthquake in California. The
stakes in that movie are that the San
Andreas fault line opens up and half of
California is going to fall into the
ocean. That felt big enough, but there
is a sense of bigger, better, faster.
Seen it before, done that. And now we're
there with games. The Call of Duty games
may be the best example. General plot
spoilers ahead, just so you know. In the
first Modern Warfare, we have a series
of reasonably plausible scenes with the
big punch to the gut moment being when a
nuclear bomb explodes and your character
slowly crawls from their downed
helicopter until they're overcome by
their wounds. In Modern Warfare 2, we
start to ramp up the ridiculousness,
forcing the absurd just to top what was
delivered in the first one. Russia
invades the US eastern seabboard, which
by the way, that makes no sense
whatsoever. Even if you accept the
semi-ludicrous notion of Russia invading
the United States, why they would ever
go west through or past Europe and over
the Atlantic rather than just crossing
the Pacific. Anyway, Russia invades the
eastern seabboard just so that we can
show Washington DC being occupied and up
the stakes. And now the punch to the gut
involves the player being forced to
participate in a terrorist attack on an
airport, pandering to the fears and hot
button issues of an American audience at
the time. In game three, we enter what
almost seems like full parody mode,
forced by the spectacle creep of the
series. We blow up most of New York.
Americans flippantly knock over the
Eiffel Tower. There's a zeroravity
gunfight in a crashing plane as the
sections are separating. And I can
almost imagine the meeting that resulted
in the punch to the gut moment. All
right, guys. We're stuck. How do we want
up making the player be a terrorist? I
got nothing. Yeah, me either. That seems
pretty big. I got it. Wait. All right.
We have the player be a father who
accidentally videotapes his daughter
getting gassed to death while on
vacation. And and then we gas him to
death, too. That's it. High five. Now,
none of this is meant to diminish the
Call of Duty folks achievements. Even in
the later borderline parody iterations,
they managed to pack enough ridiculous
action in that sometimes it's hard to
even take in how ludicrous everything
might be while it's happening. They are
masters at this sort of thing. And they
make feel awesome what other people
would be laughed out of the room for.
But it still serves as a good example of
the dangers of having to continually one
up your last product, especially now
that many games are on a yearly
production cycle. Which leads us to
reboots. One of the reason that we see
so many game series diving into reboots
these days is that a reboot is an easy
way to level out your spectacle creep
and bring things back down to a
manageable level where you can still
tell a story or have a coherent plot.
Even efforts like Call of Duty Ghosts,
where they branch the series and make a
strong lateral shift away from the
central story line, is an attempt to
find a new starting point for the
inevitable creep upward in spectacle.
After you've saved the world, there's
just not that much farther you can go.
Unfortunately, as this industry
continues to depend more and more on
franchises, and the investment in game
creation becomes so enormous that we
have to produce these franchises on an
annual basis just to keep revenue up,
spectacle creep becomes an even greater
issue. The fresher a game is in the
minds of a player, the greater the need
to top the last iteration in an
immediately visible surface level way.
And it's this very spectacle creep, this
ever growing need to become bigger and
faster and more intense that breaks so
many franchises, forcing them away from
what originally made them great and
instead leaving us with mere parodies of
what we once loved about the series. See
you next week.
[Music]
Heat. Heat.
[Music]