We then after going live like a few
seconds before on Twitch, we went live
on YouTube. I think that's a really good
plan.
That is indeed the plan that I have
executed. That's correct. Is it already
executed? Yeah, that's correct. Well,
good morning for a second time, Janet.
Yeah. How's it going? Welcome
to this
Oh, boy. I'm still I'm making I'm making
links. I'm doing things. This is the
pre-show goodness you come here for.
Let's see here.
Uh, Pavara, thank you so much for
gifting a channel membership to Annie.
Annie, welcome on into the channel
membership family. We don't have alerts
for that yet. We're working on that.
There's a minor technical hiccup that we
have to overcome first. Uh, that we're
working on there. Actually, Matt, we
could work on that later this week. I
think I think I figured out a way to do
it. Question. Are you seeing YouTube
chat in your chat right now? I am not
looking at that chat.
I want to make sure. I see a lot of
Twitch love because it is the first of
the month. Thank you so much everybody
over on Brad. Uh, no I'm not, but let me
see if I can fix that.
Um, I'm just fixing a thing over here.
I forgot to hit activate selected, but I
think it's
good. Uh, membership does also give you
Discord access. That's correct. Channel
membership over on YouTube does give
Discord access. Also, wait, what
happened? I turned away and now there's
so much hype. It's a level three hype
train. And how is it already level
three? Well, it's working on level
three. It is
level deceptive marketing on the part of
Twitch. It won't actually God. I wish I
you know what I
wish I wish they would let us like they
would give us the mechanism and then let
us customize it more cuz right now we
have no ability to customize it. I want
to customize it with like different
names, different emotes, diff all that.
I want to all the things and the highest
level of hype train should be plaid
obviously, right? But like
I don't know. I don't know. Who knows?
Yeah, I'm still not seeing anything on
the YouTube side of things. I don't know
if I have to reactivate something. Yeah,
I uh I don't know
either.
Um already added someone on Janet type
something so we know what's going on and
then we'll move from There we go. There
we go. Thank you, Tam. I appreciate you.
Yeah. All right. Great. Now it's
working. So, you're being loud. She will
not be Is it now not working for Brad?
No, now it is. It is working for Brad.
All right. Great. Awesome. Excellent.
Love it when a technology works
together. Man, I'm like halfway to
references this morning. I'm not awake.
Uh Chad, we're both on the East Coast
and all of a sudden the East Coast
decided that instead of spring, it
wanted to be like
fall in Boston like for no reason like
for the entire East Coast. Thanks,
climate change. We love that. Um, but I
woke up this morning and it was like I
went to sleep with the window open
because it was nice out and I woke up
this morning and I was cold and I was
like, "Why is it cold?" I looked at my
phone and it was like it's 45. It feels
like 37 and I'm like that is not a
number of degrees that I wanted to be in
freedom units. Thank
you. So, yeah.
All right. I'm back. All socials posted.
Good morning, pre-show, folks. Hell hath
indeed frozen over. I I I'm willing to
bet that some people wish that um the
market would freeze. Hey, that's the
first of many jokes about the stock
market that will probably be happening
today. What are you talking about? I
haven't I haven't read the news since a
week and a half ago. What's going on?
Oh, you know, we continue to live in
times that are most unfortunately
unprecedented. That's fair. Well, we do
have uh a really good show today. We're
going to be talking a lot about uh the
Switch to I do we're going to break it
up into a couple different sections, I
think, because there's a lot to go over.
I'm very glad that we waited
uh that the Nintendo Direct was two days
I guess after the last breakfast because
I it's good to let this stuff sit
because I found my opinion has sort of
changed across a lot of different
things. Um and yes, we will be talking
about prices and tariffs and nonsense
and stuff like that, but uh there's a
lot to sort of unpack around that that's
sort of like we need to get through the
base of it first. And we have a bunch of
other fun stories that Will has found uh
to start us off throughout this this
wonderful week because listen, as
darkest of timelines go, uh there is
always something else going on and we
want to make sure that we're actually
like talking about other things as well.
Um yeah,
Zoe agrees. I don't know if you can hear
her due to the noise gate, but she is
agreeing loudly and um prolifically. Oh,
these are good words. Yeah, I need to I
need to bribe Whisper into like coming
in here more often, but he is largely
immune to bribes. Um, and is generally
grumpy and also sassy, but I love him
because he is grumpy and also sassy. So,
yeah. Well, I'm feeling both fat and
sassy, so I think uh no
reference. Is your spoon too
big? Never mind. Will Zoe, come here.
You understand me. I I was digging for
one of those that was like vaguely
PG-13. And the first reference that
comes after my spoon is too big is not
an appropriate reference for this
channel.
Cat. It's got old man energy. Exactly.
Immune to bribes. Put that man in
office. Unfortunately, that man is a
cat. Oh, that's right. I am a banana.
My spoon is too big. It was an
adventure. I can't hear anyone yet. Hi,
bud. Good
morning. Yeah, I got to put my
headphones on so I can hear what Will's
saying. He could be saying anything
right now. Literally anything. Nope.
Well, he said nope right there.
Okay. Okay, pal. As you should be, Ice.
It's It's a work day, so she has to put
her collar back on. All right. I am
happy to report that I am a banana.
There we go. Good. See, yo, Matt, you
you know what the reference was going to
be after my spoon is too big. And I was
like, that's not the right reference.
Can't use that one. So, that's fine.
Zoe's platform is more for all. That is
correct. Yes. Oh, hi, buddy. Okay, we
got the tail. We got the thing. We got
your collar. We've got lights. We've got
cameras. Pitching
technology.
Yeah. Okay. Hey, is the hype train over?
Will,
for everyone who doesn't know, the the
pre-show goes until the hype train on
Twitch is over. They have 45 generosity
to get to level five, but I don't think
they're going to do it. So, it's
probably over. We'll see. We'll see.
We'll see. We'll see. I'm gonna put I'm
gonna say that they're not going to do
it. So, we can start wrapping up and
I'll start thanking people and because I
can't have my coffee until until I trade
is over. That's That's
correct. Um, yeah, there are new emotes
available, by the way, if you want to
throw your prime sub in or whatever and
do all of those things and stuff. Zoe,
you've been you've been called by the
people.
We'll sign the executive order that the
hype is over. That's not how executive
orders or hype work. Yeah. Sadly, well,
it's funny. At first, I was like, "Oh,
no. Zoe has too many scandals going on
to be mayor of New York City." But then
I was like, it doesn't matter.
All those treats. Uh, we got Oh, I got a
I got a new we got a new emote. That's
very nice. Thank you. Thank you. Shoot.
All right. Uh, I'm going to start
thanking people. Bob, thank you so much
for 57 months at tier or sorry, 71
months at tier 2. Hippie, thank you so
much for 55 months at tier three.
Midlife cranky for 15 months. Mindless
indulgence for 36 months. That's like
three years. Thunder for 60 months at
tier 2. carrying for biddy's copper chef
for 18 months. That's like a year and a
half. That's a really long time. Rayan
for 24 months. That's two years. Why do
we all have all these anniversaries?
Gladius for 61 months. Book Dragon for
59 months. Hippie for gifting us up to
Nocape. Ras for 56 months. Ice Beer for
47 months with Prime that's almost four
years. Thank you for remembering to hit
the Prime button and give us Jeff
Bezos's money. Uh Hippie for gifting a
sub to Phil Sean for 41 months. Teamwork
for 32 months. Hippie for gifting a sub
to the chatbot. Thank you. Uh, now it
can use emotes again. It was kind of
awkward. I didn't want to ask, but it
couldn't use the emotes. Um, Alcar for
18 months, CIF for 50 months, THC for
57. How have you been here 57 months? I
remember when THC joined, and I was
like, is that actually that's actually
their use. All right. You know what's
cool. Um, a mentor for 49 months, Nova
for the giant Zoey emote, Sal for 65
months at tier 2. And that's a hype
train. Thank you so much. Boom. Nailed
it. We have a great question from
YouTube. Uh, there are custom emotes for
channel members. Those are gated by the
total number of members we have. And
since by and large, most Extra Credits
fans are members over on the history
side. The credits channel only has slots
for the current number of emotes. We
want to put more in. We have all of the
emotes from Twitch that I can port in as
soon as we have enough members that
YouTube will give us access to those
slots. Um so that's that is a thing that
is very much in the works but we need to
meet thresholds uh first so uh that's
that's the plan. Um,
is there are there any other uh matters
of business or state that we must handle
uh before we jump into the show proper
or any other questions from Brad or
Janet at this time that we can answer
before we begin in today's games for
breakfast?
I forget did the original EC channel
transform extra history? Yes. Yes. So,
so we rebranded the OG channel because
the split on the OG channel was that
most people were there for history and
so we spun up the gaming channel and
this is the the lives are actually an
experiment. We couldn't have done this
because um when when it was all one
channel because then we would get no
gaming news done because we would spend
the entire time answering questions
about history. We might do lives on the
history channel um at some point. I've
thought of a bunch of use cases where we
could use this to go live on the History
Channel, but that's not a thing that
we're
there's no plans for that currently. Uh
the the one exception may be if and and
spoiler alert for anything that could be
coming down the pipeline. Um if a thing
we did last year we decide to do again,
uh that might be one of the only use
cases currently for that. But
yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
Um,
uh, hey, you know, I I I hope I I hope
that is true.
Oh, boy. Uh-huh. Oh, boy. Like it. I
didn't have to say anything. We're
keeping it as light today until we're
not. Uh um we're keeping it as light as
possible so that we can float above the
conflict until we just hammer drop right
through it. Just
um yeah. Uh
okay. Cool cool cool cool cool cool cool
cool cool. Uh this is a great question.
Um much like all stocks it's imaginary.
True. Uh so I'm imagining right now
uh
listen if if if current if current
trends are anything to go by so the you
have definitely go by the gameplay of
flexel sticks right it it unlike
traditional stocks flex sticks um
offerings tend to be priced out around
different methodologies that the player
base is actually uh you know using. Um,
so right now they're in uh blue indigo.
Yeah. Don't Yeah. Yeah. You got to write
out that. But here's the thing. The
thing with a flex stick is when it when
one side of this this is not a flex
stick. This is a pencil. But the thing
about a flex stick is if one end dips,
what happens to the other end? Will it
goes up? It goes up. Unless it's doing
that really weird optical illusion thing
where you wave the pencil really fast
and it it turns Yeah. See, it bends. And
then who knows? There's still there's
still a there's still an up and down,
right? So like my point is much like the
point of this pencil that is not a
flexible stick. If one end of flexel
stick go down, other end go up, boom, to
the moon. Uh I think I just solved
finance.
Yes. I don't even look I don't need I
don't even need to look for a man in
finance with 65 blue eyes with trust
funds. Uh I now we just put all of that
those hopes and dreams into uh the
Flixelsticks account. For those of you
who don't know, Flixelsticks I was going
to say a lot of Janet's confused right
now. By the way, you know
what? I don't I don't I don't know what
tier of reality I should explain flex
on. Flexel sticks is one of the longest
running stupid bit jokes that keeps
coming back and we have to explain it
every time because it's inconveniently
long between the times it comes back.
Flexible Sticks is a is
a a game in our minds. Yeah, that is
also apparently a Fortune 500 company.
Anyway, we probably should start the
show. Cool. Does that mean that they can
um witness us? Witness. Yeah. Yay.
All right. Uh I need to go get silver
spray paint while we're in the blackout.
All right. A reminder. We're going to go
to black for a quick second and then
we're going to come back and then we're
going to do a show. Please do not panic
as we go to black. That is so that we
can begin a clean recording for uh the
folks over in uh Nebula. So uh please
look forward to it. Um you are allowed
to panic if you would like as a treat.
Yay.
[Applause]
[Music]
Good morning, Matt. Matt. Oh, good
morning, Will. And good morning to all
of you. Welcome to Games for Breakfast,
the only internet talk show we talk
about this week's gaming and tech news,
but that also sadly due to uh stock
prices. I've had to maneuver some things
around. Uh I had to basically do the Teu
version of my hat now. Um it's
everything's go we're fine. We're going
to ride it out, but right now uh this
this is this is this is where we got to
be. Uh but you know, I I hear that, you
know, temporary pain for some sort of
solution or something would be cool if
someone had one. I don't know. I black
out every time I watch the news. Um this
is dear audience, right after Matt in
the pre-show said we were going to keep
it really light before we got really
heavy, but I see that we're just sinking
to the bottom of the very honest trench
right at the beginning. I want to be
very clear. This hat is very very flimsy
and light. Like like it the materials
this hat is made. No, this is this is a
I could breathe on this wrong if I like
like I'm surprised the brim doesn't go
flying up and just break backwards.
Yeah. So
I don't like the reality that we're
living in right now. I'm gonna What are
you talking about? Listen, we we all
have to make terrible terrible Yeah. My
eyeballs are apparently making making
the sacrifices. Um Oh, okay. Yeah, yep,
yep, yep, yep, yep.
[Music]
Um, welcome to Games for Breakfast,
everybody. We've got a a very fun, I
promise so much fun show for you until
it stops being fun. We have to talk
about the cold, dark reality of the
world. But before then, listen. Yeah.
Uh, we're going to be talking about the
Switch 2. Uh, that's going to be sort of
our main story. Also, what's going on
with the prices and stuff like that. Uh
we're going to keep the the the the
polytox uh basically put straight into
the video game space uh because that's
where we live today. That's right. Um
we're keeping it very restrained to that
space. How this affects gaming and not
only just video games. I think there's a
lot to be said about the tabletop stuff.
That's going to be later on in the
episode. Will has actually prepared a uh
a a a wonderful smorgish board of other
uh wonderful gaming topics to talk about
before we dive into all of that. Uh but
as I was saying in the pre-show, I was
very happy that we did we had a week
between last show and the Switch 2
announcement and everything because uh
my opinions have changed and it will be
really fun to sort of dive in with all
of you. So please when we hit something
that you are interested in start
chatting in in whatever if you're on
Twitch, if you're on YouTube uh or if
you're on uh Nebula, there is a place
you can talk to us and that is on Blue
Sky. If there if you basically have
anything in the show that you wanted to
comment on or question or say you're
wrong and silly or you're awesome and
still silly, then that is also where you
can do that there.
Um yeah. Yeah.
Uh, real quick before we begin, I have a
correction um that I I thought we could
we could talk about ever so briefly. So,
last week we were talking about Ubisoft
and Assassin's Creed, right? Oh, yeah.
And we were talking about how um there
was a story that went around for a
really long time that uh Assassin's
Creed, the Assassin's Creed team at
Ubisoft contributed information of some
kind to the restoration of Notredam.
That part's not true. They didn't give a
bunch of money, not information. kind of
interesting. We don't actually know
where that came up. Um I found it really
Polygon has a good
video in the show notes. Yeah. And big
big um thanks to Siegebug for passing
that video along and setting us on the
right path. Um yeah.
Okay. I hope this is on the right screen
when I take this thing away. It might
be. You never know. We're going to talk
about our favorite April Fool's jokes
cuz today's April 7th and we didn't get
to talk about April Fool's Day cuz it
was on a Tuesday. It was so silly. The
last
breakfast was
um at the end of the month and so it
feels odd that this is the 7th today.
Correct. And it's the first breakfast of
April. That's correct. Um so Oh no, not
that. Oh, I'm in the wrong spot in my in
my slideshow. Matt Matt saved me. Matt
saved me. Oh boy. You just you went I
was I looked away for one second to pour
my coffee. It it reset. So, I'm just
going to do this. There we go. There we
go. All right. Great. We're going to
talk about that other thing later, but
everyone's already seen that because
it's a thumbnail on YouTube. Um, all
right. First up, uh, some some some
fantastic uh, April Fool's Day jokes. My
two favorites were both games that you
can play. That is my favorite kind of
April Fool's Day joke is things that are
real um, and not just like fake product
announcements. The fake product
announcements are funny and good, right?
Don't get me wrong, I'm not saying like
you shouldn't have those, but I love I
love me a good hey, we made a thing and
here it is. It's for you. Um, so my two
favorite were Discord's The Last Meadow,
which will be playing after stream today
before it goes away because it goes away
today at noon Eastern or Can you explain
what that is? No, I don't know. I just
know that the community on Discord told
me I needed to play it and then I needed
to know nothing about it. So, I've done
as much as is necessary to set up the
capture and I have no idea what it is.
That's great. So, it is a game type
experience. Yes. That uh Discord has put
together for April Fool's Day, but you
have no idea what that game type
experience is. That is correct. All
right. Uh and the other one um is
uh that Minecraft continues to just
point at the fence, point at the fence,
and then knock it out of the park. On
April Fool's Day, um they have
introduced a new uh April Fool's Day
snapshot called Craft Mine where they
turn the entire Minecraft experience
into a rogike. So, we're playing that
tomorrow on the Rogue Review because
they
combined Minecraft and rogue likes and
they made them. Okay, great. Awesome.
That's everything I wanted. So, yeah. Uh
the thing the only thing I learned about
the Discord one, honestly, uh was what
Grass says here. The bad thing about
Discord is the one that looked exactly
like an ad, which means I clicked ignore
as fast as I could. Same. I saw it pop
up. Even though it did, I think pop up
on the other side of the Discord window.
I instantly was like,
"Yeah, and I made it go away." Yeah, I
think a lot of people did that, too. Um,
uh, are Minecraft snapshots permanent?
It is permanently available. Yes, it
will be available for as long as
snapshots are available under craft
mine. Um, which is cool cuz people have
done really weird things with the old
snapshots. There was one
where, excuse me, um, if you wrote a
word on a book and then through that
book into a portal, the portal would
lead you to a new randomized dimension
kind of like Mist. Um, Sure. like with
linking books and um, you would do that
uh, and that's still around and people
still play that because it's it's a wild
experience.
Yeah. Um,
yeah. Uh, nice. Yeah, there was I didn't
I didn't get a chance to check out
Chocolate Dropa. Uh, that wasn't on the
list, but when uh I had heard about it,
uh, true. Uh, which,
uh, at some point at some point I will I
will dive in. Um, what was I going to
say? Oh, my favorites were uh this thing
that we're seeing right here, which is
the uh which is a fake product. It's the
thing that Will doesn't like. Uh, I
don't like it as much. I like it just
fine. I just prefer real products. Uh, I
love this so much. This is the ste uh
the stream desk. Uh, so most streamers,
as you probably know, have little things
like this that control various buttons
and and things we need to do. Uh, this
would be a whole desk of them because
everyone just needs more buttons. My
favorite thing is on the Elgato website
there's I I think they're real streamers
that they just asked to write some fake
things, but like there's the scroll of
like like product reviews and they're
all equally as unhinged. Like there's
like, oh man, now I'm really looking for
the the the Stream Desk XL cuz I still
need more buttons. It's like just things
like that are very fun when it goes two
or three levels deep. Y um but my my
absolute true favorite was
um was this which uh can anyone tell me
well actually I guess it says it on the
thing. Um this is a pillow that you can
actually buy I think until tomorrow from
the Konami website. It's too expensive.
I won't be doing it. That has this line
from Silent Hill 2 in glow-in-the-dark
ink on the
case. So, it is this is my favorite kind
of April Fool's thing because unlike the
steam the sorry I keep saying Steam the
stream desk this is a product you could
actually buy in a limited number were
you so inclined. Mhm.
Uh yeah I I I really really loved that
this was uh a reality a terrifying
waking dream reality. Yep. Yeah. I uh I
I I I I worry about sleeping with my
head that close to anything directly
related to Silent Hill. I feel like
that's my fear. I feel like if I do that
No, I I don't I I do not wish to have
those dreams. Thank you.
I mean, or what if that's the most
immersive Silent Hill experience you
could have? No. No. I'm good. I'm good.
I already have enough trouble sleeping.
You can tell from the bags under my eyes
perpetually.
Whoa. I made this coffee strong as hell
this morning. I feel like it's it's a
it's
a a precursor of things to come. Okay.
All right. Uh well then were there any
real quick? Were there any uh in in Brad
or Janet? Were there any April Fools uh
game related stuff that you really
really dug that we sort of missed on
here? We'll leave a list u of a bunch of
them in the show notes.
I know Hell Divers made their guns
really big. Yeah. There's always like
some number of silly things um that that
happen in like in small amounts. Um
yeah, I will say here's something else.
Larky. True. Same. I actually had to
hunt them. Yeah, I did. Um and it feels
like uh this year, this particular time
and whatever was not a place where
people were looking for a lot of levity.
people were looking for maybe some some
assurances or or or um you know
something a little more solid and it
feels like a lot of the April Fool's
stories did get sort of undercut and
didn't really have much time at all in
any and any news cycle, you know. Uh oh,
that's right. Um Marvel Rivals had a
Venom twerk emote, right? Um at the same
time, however, is my least favorite
April Fool's Day joke. Not because
anything about the Venom twerk emote is
bad, but because they also broke rivals
for a non-trivial number of people with
the one of the updates that put the
Venom twerk emote in so hard that I
literally when I tried to launch rivals,
it force rebooted my computer so hard I
had to go into BIOS and restore
defaults.
Like is bad right now. Thanks, Nies.
Love that. So, waiting for a fix on
that.
Um, yeah. Uh,
anyway, I do really I actually very much
like April Fools. This year did feel a
little different and harder to parse and
or find things, but that's to be
expected, I think. Yep.
Um, oh, I love this Star Trek Online
April Fool's thing where for the day you
can replace all the sound effects with
the devs making the sounds. Zoom. That's
fun. That's good. I like that. Those
those kinds of things are great.
Um, okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Cool. Cool.
Cool.
Um, let's move on
to some stuff that happened this week.
Some of which is is good, I think. Some
of which is good. So, chat chat, in
these trying times, and boy are they
trying, uh, many people turn to their
comfort games. And I know of two games
uh that are particularly comforting to a
large number of people in our audience.
One of them is Stardew Valley and the
other one is Balders's Gate 3. And in
both of them, you're trying to kiss
people who probably need to go to
therapy. Um and
so one daring visionary asked and
answered the
question, why not both?
So, there's a mod for Stardew Valley
called Balders's Village that adds a
village for all the people from
Balders's
Gate. So, you can marry and start you
can marry Asterion and Stardew. Like,
it's just that's how it is. Um, and it
had kind of a tumultuous launch. Um,
because uh Sven, the CEO of Larian, saw
it and was like, "Yo, this is dope.
Great job." Uh, and the Larian team all
loved it and it got released and then
Wizards was like, "Hey, you can't do
that." And the Larian team was like,
"That really the attack you want to take
with this buddy?" And then Wizards
backed down and retracted their
copyright complaint and Balders's
Village is once again up for download
and you can add it to Stardew Valley if
you want to. So this is this is uh you
can get it on Nexus Mods but it was by
user BV and uh the story comes to us
from Kotaku as well and basically
uh it's kind of you never know because I
I have yet to find a statement from
Wizards about this um they are I think
through Hasbro's uh
puppeteering um so overly latigious and
like will slap things down so quickly.
Like they definitely have out I'm sure
have outside companies looking for
copyright infringement and just like be
like no like just to sort of keep things
clamped. Mhm.
Um it's great that they realize that
this was a mistake for whatever reason,
but I don't the reasons of why they
consider this a mistake
is is not clear, right? Like is it
because they're like, "Oh, wait, no,
that's cool. Crap. Ah, and then they fix
it because they're they're overly
latgious on that. Or is it a you know,
oh we we got caught, people are mad, the
creators of Baldersgate say this is
cool. We're going to look like dummies.
Okay, never mind. Right. There there is
some there is a balance between So like
we should also be clear. They totally
have the legal grounds to be like don't
do this. Oh, because it contains
characters and likenesses that they own
the copyrights for for a whole bunch of
reasons. Like, so we're not saying they
don't have legal ground. We're just
saying like you could, maybe don't.
There is there is I'll even I'll even go
a little further on the benefit of the
doubt. I'm feeling generous in this very
light hat.
Um, copyright is a hard and interesting
and dangerous thing to maintain. And
every time you let something like this
go through um without comment or or or
something or or engaging with it in some
way, you could essentially in various
courts be weakening your copyright
claim. So they have to do something. But
I think even Sven over at um Larian uh
mentioned that there was basically like
ways around this like
you this all comes back to a corporate
beast being too big to react quickly to
something small and wonderful like this
if that makes sense. I truly don't if if
I was to give my hypothetical what I
think happened I don't think the people
at Wizards saw this and were like
absolutely not slap. I bet you one of
the firms that they hire to to take care
of these things did a nice quick like
nope whatever. Turned out this was not
only a beloved thing but crafted with a
lot of care and no one's making any
money off it. Like there's a lot of
different things but still to help
wizards with their copyrights etc. like
it's this whole process has to like play
this dumb game and then all the things
pick it up being like Wizards hates this
thing and well maybe they do I don't
know but it seems pretty silly like this
is this is and I I think I think people
would realize that. Um anyway that's a
long way of saying I'm very happy this
exists. I'm very happy it's back up. I
have yet to uh play it yet because I
haven't Stardew tends to just suck away
my brain and so I don't play it much.
Um, but I was interested in trying this
out and just seeing just seeing how uh
how well the crossover went. Yep. Uh,
absolutely. Uh, okay. Speaking of things
that are in sort of a legal limbo, uh,
we're not going to talk too much about
it now. We're just going to let all of
you know that it's
happening. So, a reminder that Tik Tok
is still very much in legal limbo. Uh,
this came up again this week as the
original deadline imposed by the US
administration on Tik Tok getting sold
to a company or to an entity that wasn't
the Chinese
government got
extended again. We don't know if it's
ever actually going to hit the deadline
or not, but it is a good reminder that
Tik Tok might just stop working in the
US in the next little bit. um whatever
your feelings on Tik Tok are that it is
a source of um job for a lot of uh
creators and it is a place that a lot of
creators have turned to um particularly
um in the past couple of years. So it is
going to be an interesting phenomena if
and when it goes away or when it gets
sold. Um it's sort of a a thing that I
forget about cuz I don't Tik Tok. Um
Right. And and then it comes up across
the news feed as like, "Oh yeah, that's
right. They need to sell themselves to
So Okay, great." Yeah.
Yeah.
Uh what an interesting moment for um
social media companies in general. Yeah.
Um, again, not to get uh into things
that a this show isn't about and b uh I
am undereducated on,
but this seems as though there is a
social media platform, Tik Tok, that is
was basically
um for for better or ill. uh many part
bipartisan groups in the in the US
government thought that there was a
problem. Uh but then when it seemed like
Tik Tok might actually help the side
coming into power, it was then saved for
a little bit and now the can has been
kicked again.
Um this just feels
like That's right, Zoe. It feels like
just sort of
um a tactic to keep stringing the story
along. Yeah. Um also, I don't believe
Bite Dance is at all interested in
selling any of it. That's the big
one. I I I I don't this is and given the
the state
of the global economy, which we'll dip
ever so briefly our toe into in a little
bit, um
getting it sold now might be even
harder, right? So, like there there's a
bunch of problems with this. Uh, suffice
it to say, uh, our our regular reminder
every time this story comes up, the
reason I bring this up is not because I
particularly have a dog in the race of
whether or not Tik Tok goes away.
Um, it is to remind you that if there
are creators whose work you enjoy who
you only follow on Tik
Tok, it is a good time to find them
elsewhere.
Because remember the last time the
deadline expired, they just sort of
turned off the app entirely ahead of
time and people couldn't find creators
that they wanted until they made deals
to get it back online. Right? So like
the the regardless of the um quality,
efficacy, legality of any of this, the
inevitability is that if Tik Tok goes
away, people will lose access to
creators whose work they enjoy. And
those creators will be desperately in
need of finding their fans again on
other platforms if they're going to keep
being content creators as a primary like
um uh job. So do that. Find find all
your favorite content creators in other
places.
Just do that as like a matter of habit,
right? Yeah. I uh I I popped up X
Dragon's thing again. I'll pop it one
more time just real quick if it'll
actually uh play or not. Maybe it won't
actually allow me. There we go. Uh yeah,
when Vine went under uh they did migrate
to another platform, but there were
growing pains. Lots of people couldn't
find the other people. And this is sort
of in in what Will is saying now is you
have another 75 days to like look if
there's people that you and creators
that you really really have
basically made a part of your internet
life at this point on
TikTok. Take the 10 minutes, go through
your feed, see who you see every day.
maybe make sure you're following them
other places because if this does go
away, they will just be gone to you,
right? And yeah, like you can I'm of
course Google their name and find those
things too, but the less time you're
away from their content on whatever
other platform that they're trying to
make a living on, the easier it will be
for them to stay afloat amidst this sort
of nightmare of their main ship sinking.
Correct. You know. Exactly. So, um Yep.
Yeah. Also, side note, I am seeing a lot
of um I love this comment honestly from
Male. Um the the very ironic thing when
D and D is the most modded game ever.
Um yeah, and I will say I'm seeing a lot
of the D and D stuff from the from the
previous um uh story. We have people
were bringing up like they want to
become TSR again and I was like we have
a great breakdown um written by a friend
of the show Eddie Webb uh animated
thing. It's like 20 something minutes
long called Dungeons and Disasters and
it talks about the different uh it's on
this channel. You could go watch it
right after this. Um where basically uh
we go over all editions of Dungeons and
Dragons as it's happened. And for some
reason how
the even number editions are very, no
pun intended, draconian and locked down
and the odd number editions are like
proliferated and can be modded freely
and things like that. and the successes
uh uh and financial gains how that
tracks along those things. So um coffee
says with regards to Tik Tok maybe you
shouldn't put all your eggs in one
basket. I don't think most creators
aren't. The creators aren't. The the
problem is that Tik Tok some do, but
but the the the thing to keep in mind is
that Tik Tok's algorithm
is hyper effective at delivering content
to people in a way that other algorithms
and formats are not. Shorts aren't as
good, but they're pretty good. And
Insta, from what I understand, not being
a person who uses Insta at all, um, is
kind of in the same boat, right? And
it's not that anyone's putting their
eggs all in one basket. It's
that creators aren't in everyone's
basket or people can't find creators new
baskets to put themselves into, right?
That's the problem. It's it's making the
baskets talk. Social media, I will only
speak to my individual use case, but it
feels like this is also true. It feels
like often
times you only engage with a creator on
one platform that you found them on. I
that's what I do. Uh not not on purpose,
just because I'm like, "Oh, well,
there's the people that I follow on
Instagram and these are real funny cuz I
get my Tik Toks a day and a half later."
Um and so that's fun. And then on
YouTube, it's more to be honest, the
majority of my YouTube watching now has
moved over to Nebula because all the
creators I would watch on YouTube, a lot
of them are on Nebula already. So, I
just watch over there. But that's for
like longer form stuff and then I'll use
Blue Sky to engage with them uh if I
wanted to chat or bring up something
like that. Like it's it's interesting
that at least I find whatever platform
I'm on that I found that person on, I
tend to stick around on that platform to
engage with them. It's not because I
don't want to, but it's just now if like
if I found out that say uh Instagram, we
could only be so lucky goes away. Um I
would then have to do the same thing
that we're asking for Tik Tok people to
do, just find people in other places.
Yep.
But okay, speaking
of interesting things that happened this
weekend, not my best. Oh, actually, uh,
sorry, one last thing. This is an
interesting This is exactly sort of what
I'm saying from Oopsy.
Obsy, sorry. When y'all cancelled Janet
last time, tried to follow me on Twitch,
but fell off after two weeks. So, glad
you're back. Well, thank you very much.
Thank you for coming back. And uh, yeah,
and it's that's that's sort of the
thing,
too. as people who make stuff on the
internet. I would like to just say like
no one can be blamed like no like it's
never ill will or anything like that if
if there's something that moves to
another platform and people fall off
like that's expected. That's just that's
the that's how humans engage with these
things. Um and it's really nice that
uh it's really nice that uh we can come
back here and that uh you're back here
even though you fell off of Twitch.
That's just I don't know. I think it's
cool and it kind of speaks to what I was
saying. Yep. Uh okay.
Um uh Oh, what? Yeah, you're right. It's
true. Everyone watch the same things for
every Thanks. What up, buddy? That's
right. Oh. All right. Uh let's go on to
something that's relevant, I guess, to
both of us and also maybe to all of you.
This thing. This. So, I haven't seen it
yet. I'm going tonight to see the
Minecraft movie. Uh, also Will will be a
guest on the podcast on the only podcast
about movies which will be out next
Saturday on Nebula next Sunday um
everywhere else on wherever fine
podcasts are not sold because they don't
make money. Um, or mine doesn't mine
doesn't make money. But um I am very
excited to see this. I'm also seeing
this tonight. This is not going to be
about the quality of the movie or or
whether or not people enjoyed it or not.
This is more a thing I wanted to throw
in because all I've been seeing in the
headlines of stories about the Minecraft
movie is every major news outlet seems
like their minds have been blown that
the Minecraft movie had the strongest
opening weekend of a film this year. It
already made back Sonic 1's like full US
budget like or like uh it beat it beat
it in its weekend. It ran its whole
theatrical run. Quick reminder, quick
reminder. Minecraft has sold over
because the last time we checked it was
this number,
300 million
copies. This is my point. The a lot of
business places like the one
um the one we pulled from I think here
was CNN Business like says the Minecraft
movie uh smashes box office expectations
with 157 million. I think they were
planning it for to be 60 million. And
when I saw that number, I was like,
what what type of block are you smoking?
Like it makes no
like if you are if you either are in the
gaming space or have a
child, it feels like you would know how
large, no matter if this movie is great
or not, this movie was going to make
bank regardless. Uh early reviews seem
to be pretty positive. That's great. But
I just couldn't believe how many like
actual news organizations like I can't
wow I can't believe this and it's it
feels very odd and out of touch.
Um I don't know is everyone else's
experiences with sort of what they've
been seeing sort of similar to that like
it just the tone of headline is really
what I'm getting at and how weird it is.
Yeah. I uh I actually haven't heard
anything, but I also don't have as much
like movie business news in my feeds as
you do. Um but I could have told you
that it didn't it it could have been
terrible. It could have had no one who
was a known actor at all, let alone
Jason Mamoa and Jack Black in the same
movie.
Um, and it would have done great cuz it
had the word Minecraft on it like but
also like you take you take that right
and then you make it truly a four
quadrant film. I think it's rated PG,
right? I believe it is rated PG. So
PG-rated film, well-known actors that
parents will like to see. Well-known
game franchise that that children will
want to see.
Uh, also a bunch of money dumped into
it. Like I feel like if those are your
four quadrants, then you've hit every
one of them. Yeah. Uh, I'm I'm gonna be
very interested to talk about the how
well they dodge the or lean into the
uncanny valley thing that they've got
going on. It's very strange. They made
hyper realistic villagers.
It's the one that's like
Yeah. But yeah. Oh, no. Yep.
Hey, Luis. Hello. Welcome. Um, oh, and
then also, uh, Red Lightning says
something interesting here, too. To be
honest, I think, uh, well, actually,
movie entry to be popular, Alex Pika. Oh
my god, that is very true as well. Chat
was moving too fast. Um, I don't think
most news realize how big Minecraft is.
It's It's funny because they maybe it's
just like the the degrees of separation
because like they know how
big Microsoft is and they know that they
bought Minecraft for a large sum of
money. Like I I it's it's so strange how
it's like how they never uh understand
how big Fortnite is.
Also, AMP worked on it.
Hey, hell yeah. uh AGori. Well, congrats
on the good opening weekend. Yeah,
right. Is a is a visual effects artist
and uh has worked on many of the fine
things that we have enjoyed over the
years. Uh so that's cool. Well, I'm very
much looking forward to seeing it. Will,
I'm looking forward to you seeing it in
our conversation. We're recording it
midweek and then that'll be available. I
I I got to ask I was wondering um is the
reason that you all want me on because I
know stuff about Minecraft?
We like to have people on the show that
know about the subject matter, but that
also can talk articulately about the
subject matter. I have Will I have
plenty of friends that know a lot about
Minecraft. That's fair. Um I I I would
say that you are my friend that could
talk the most articulately about all of
those things known about Minecraft.
That's fair. That's valid. to be honest,
Minecraft quickly gets into like the and
then Herobrine territory very quickly.
And and what's fun is I know you and I
talk about movies on here on occasion,
but you and I have never actually gotten
to do I' I've been trying to find like
the right one to bring you in on, and
this felt Oh, yeah. This felt like one
that you would already be making the
trek over to the theater to see and that
you would be a perfect fit for. I I am
indeed very excited. I uh I'm I'm
looking forward to it. My roommates and
I are going tonight after the stream.
Nice. So, um, let's keep moving. Okay.
All right. This now comes
the time where I need to tell
everybody, brace yourselves. If if you
just wanted like the light gaming news
and like the the fun April Fool's Day
stuff,
that's that's that bit. We're gonna talk
about tariffs in general here for a
second and then we're going to talk
about the Switch 2. But we wanted to
talk about tariffs in general first
because they are impacting a lot more
than just the Switch 2, though that is
the headline piece of news that's really
grabbing people's attention. Um because
and also Oh, sorry. Uh there's our boy.
There's our boy points if you're old
enough to understand this reference.
Um, real talk, we will be talking about
this situation that is a real beyond
gaming issue that is happening in the
United States and and also therefore the
world. Um, I do think even if it is not
a fun topic, a we'll try to keep it as
fun and silly as we possibly can, but B,
um, it's something
that
because in my lifetime, let me back up.
In my lifetime, I have had the
um how do I put it? The the distinct
privilege of unless I was interested in
a global economic thing,
uh my privilege allowed me to sort of
just sort of coast by and ignore if I
wanted to.
Um, and I think because things were so
stable for a lot of people and places
for so long, that kind of became a norm
for a lot of folks. And now with
everything sort of changing as fast as
it is, it really wasn't an option
before. And now you can start seeing how
much it really isn't. So I guess my
whole point behind that is even if this
doesn't sound like a fun topic, it's
not. Um, but it's important. is worth
engaging with and talking about because
the the more the can gets kicked uh the
worse it can probably get if that makes
sense. Yeah. Yeah. So, with all that
super fun preamble on this lovely happy
morning talk show, this is Ben Stein.
This is Ben Stein from um uh Ferris
Buer. Ferris Buer's day off giving a
speech about tariffs. Uh and
yeah. Um okay. So uh the brief the brief
recap which I will try to keep as
factual and screamless as possible. Last
week on April uh 2nd we had the Nintendo
Direct for the April uh for the Switch
2. And after that, that evening, the uh
president of the United States, one
Donald Trump, signed uh an executive
order mandating a raft of
tariffs unprecedented in American
history. Um, which is currently causing
the global financial panic. That's
probably the most factual and succinct
way I can put that. These tariffs uh are
by country, not by good or service
imported. there don't appear to be wide
swats of exceptions. The reason that
this is particularly relevant to our our
show and to the topic that we're the
topics that we're going to be discussing
is that many of the countries in Asia
which produce many of the goods which
are relevant to the gaming industry,
China, Vietnam um several others uh but
those two in particular um are being hit
with north of 50% worth of tariffs um
which is uh an existential crisis for
the gaming industry in some cases um
companies are not able to absorb that.
So uh we'll do a we'll do a very we'll
do a very brief and succinct uh what's a
tariff because that Google search
continues to trend. Um a tariff in this
case is a additional tax placed at the
port of entry on a good from another
country into in this case the United
States. So um based on the on the value
of the good on the declared um like MSRP
of the good. This cost is in every case
where it matters passed directly or
almost directly on to the consumer which
leads to a um a cost of goods increase
roughly equivalent to that of the tariff
placed on the good. These are not ways
to actually make money. there ways to
sculpt um uh consumer behavior towards
in theory domestically produced goods.
The problem is of course that that's not
how that works anymore because those
things don't can't be produced
domestically um for a whole bunch of
reasons. That's sort of my my short like
what happened? What are tariffs? Did I
miss anything there? It's no I think I
think you're actually a really solid
solid description. Here's something I
will say. I was while Will was sort of
giving that uh the the 101 entry into
what's sort of going on. I was just
looking through a couple different sites
and a couple chats I'm in and a couple
things where uh I was trying to see like
what the up totheminute stock thing was
right now. I don't normally follow
stocks this closely or the stock market.
So, uh I don't know exactly where to
look. Um it is there are some things
that are dipping up at this very moment
and other things that are dipping down.
It is what what would be coined as
incredibly volatile. There are rumors at
this moment, even though the White House
says the rumors are not true, that there
will be a 90-day pause on these tariffs.
There's like it's
it's I I have no this this is the
problem. The the the the markets, from
what I understand, like stability and
and this sort of whiplash will cause uh
irreparable damage. Now, going back to
what Will was saying, oh, sorry. I was
just the the reason I bring up that is
by the time you even watch this on
AvaD the this information obviously will
be very different but but like I think
what I wanted to talk about in in the
generalities of this for first and
foremost is tariffs will in no way as
Will sort of said help the average
consumer anywhere. it will just be an
additional tax and sometimes in in small
doses and things and again I'm not a
economist so I don't know this spec
specifically tariffs have been issued
across countries for a long time based
on various different things but the way
that this was implemented seems
incredibly hefisted and possibly
generated by Chad GPT um the equation is
very rudimentary uh and I believe Chad
GPT spat out like and said hey if you
wanted to figure out a global type of
thing how would you do this and it spat
out some the equation that is
essentially what the White House used.
I'm not saying they used it. I'm saying
whatever they used was the simplest and
most ineffective and incorrect version
of what could possibly be used.
Um there is a world and and before we
get into this whole switch too of it all
like just talking about manufacturing
because the line that seems to be
happening and I'm going to tie this back
to games. The line that seems to be
happening is like, oh, this is being
done to bring manufacturing jobs back to
the United
States.
Um, and it doesn't work like that. Like,
look, I I won't even say that is a good
thing or a bad thing.
Um, but you need years of leadup to get
even remotely the possibility.
Yeah, that's a great point as well.
um to get capacity up where you could
sustain a tariff like this and you could
actually push people to manufacture and
you you can push people and tell people
to manufacture in the US all you want if
there aren't facilities that can do it.
I saw then then you are just killing
businesses.
Now the the thing that um I believe
we'll be putting into the um this is
from PC Gamer even though it is about
board games. They have an article called
board game publishers lament the
devastating impacts the new tariffs on
the industry. Um the headline continues
there's no silver lining. It's just a
lose-lose lose for everyone
involved. Smaller to mid-tier companies
are going to be the ones that can't
weather this. This is going to be
um oh god I'm going to butcher history
here. Oh my god I have so much of it in
my brain. But there was something and
I'm trying to remember this back in the
day in our history of beer series. There
was something about the beer barons and
was it during a financial collapse?
Maybe someone in Brad or Janet can
correct me when I'm wrong, but like a
lot of small brewers got destroyed
during specific hard times financially
and that's why the larger corp the
larger ones were able to stay because
they were able to weather the sto Oh,
I'm sorry. No, no, no. It was it was
prohibition. Yeah. Wow. Me. Um, so pro
prohibition caused there to be a
consolidation of power in those
industries and that happened. Sorry,
took my brain. It's the hat. If I was
wearing my regular hat, I would have
gotten that correct. The hat is actually
an external locus of Matt's memory.
Yeah. So, um, it's it's it's my it's the
equivalent of my N64 RAM booster pack um
that I have to unplug right now. Um, so,
so with that in mind, like small to
mid-tier tabletop people with physical
physical, let's just talk about like
physical gaming products, that's a lot
of paper products, that's a lot of
plastic, that's a lot of wood and laser
cut wood and stuff like that. Um,
they're going to be the ones that can't
handle this volatility and the short
term. And that means that the board game
and and tabletop game boom that we've
kind of experienced over the last 10 to
15
years does really feel like it it is
coming to an end. Yes.
Um and you you add on to that that
people will now have less disposable
income to throw at those hobbies and now
in order for those hobbies to even
remotely try to turn a profit, they will
have to raise their prices.
Um it's it's the death of a lot of sort
of small industries with no with with
two main problems. One, there's no
solution to do the thing that the US
government is pushing for, i.e.
manufacture in the United States.
Nothing is being offered there. And two,
let's even say
this somehow did help like the American
people. Like no one that I have seen has
been able to tell me, okay, great. We're
bringing in all this money uh from
tariffs. How is that money going to be
spent and distributed to make the United
States better?
It's going to make what better? It's not
my point. Let's say this is this is the
whole thing cuz they're the current
administration is positing that it will
make America a bunch of money. Let's
pretend that that's true. It's not.
Let's pretend that that's true. What are
we doing with the money? Whose money is
that? What's h we doing a big old
infrastructure push? Like what's the
plan, bro? Like that's that's what also
gets me too. So, um yeah, it's a it's a
sad time especially for hobbies and
things that I absolutely love. Um so I I
here's what I'll say before we move on
to the Switch too because there are Oh,
sorry. I I wanted to give a concrete
example by the way. So of a thing that
you were talking about because I think
this is really salient. Okay. So, um,
when we're talking about tariff
increases, right, one of the problems
is, um, is that, uh, if you increase the
price at the point of sale to compensate
for the tariffs, because tariffs don't
take that into account, it's actually
more complicated than just multiply the
base price of the product by the tariff
percentage. You have to take into
account the tariff also has to pay for
the tariff on
itself, right? So, it's slightly higher
actually than the tariff rate. Um, but
as an example of a kind of thing that's
not going to be happening, I looked it
up. Frost Haven, the sequel to Gloom
Haven, award-winning, muchbeloved big
box game that many people legacy game.
Many people enjoy it. Is that game kept
me sane during the pandemic with my
little pod? Yeah. Uh, Frost, the
original. Yeah. Yeah. Frost Haven is
about $190
right now, give or take, which is
already expensive. And if you take if I
assume it's manufactured in China
because most board games are
manufactured in China. And if I'm wrong,
that's okay. We're going to use this as
an example. Let's pretend for the moment
that it
is. Uh China's getting the it's about
1.64. It's about for the cost conversion
if consumers ate 100% of it. Would you
pay $310 for Frost Haven? No. Can you
afford $310 to pay for Frost Haven with
the with the amount of money with
groceries going up, everything like that
is the my grocery bill is a little
higher because I have siliac and I have
I have to shop around very carefully and
there are some whole like places I can't
eat and I don't have access to a lot of
cheap food staples because of that.
Okay.
Um and that's more than a month of
groceries for
me. That is Yeah, right. I could eat for
a month or I could buy Frost Haven.
Yeah, Diaby brings it up. Uh it was a
long one. Uh basically hobbies are one
thing but there's a lot more at stake
here. There's enough things we produce
high examples of. Coffee for example is
going to be much higher. Manufacturing
one thing but then goods and services is
another. And then we also have to look
at sorry I've been waiting all week to
kind of rant about this. So thank you
for for for sticking with um let's say
that there are places to manufacture.
All of a sudden these facilities are are
here and now like Apple can make iPhones
in the United States.
Um, all of the materials and things that
we need for tech things are also kind of
not from
here. So, we have to import them anyway.
So, that will be tariffed, right?
Correct.
Um,
yeah. Anyway, um, so in general, there
is there is no upside to these tariffs
for the for the gaming industry in the
US. Not for the electronic side,
definitely not for the board game side,
not for the TTRPG side, right?
Especially because most printers get
stuff printed elsewhere, right? Mo like
most um books, right?
So, a lot of indie um TGRPGs are going
to be experiencing problems, right? Uh
it's it's not there's no good upside on
this for the gaming industry, I would
say. I think this is just bad across the
board. Oh, interesting. Uh, Kool-Aid,
the tariff income will help make up the
potential trillions lost in income tax
due to the Doge cuts according to the
IRS. So,
they're are they then saying that
because they fired a lot of people to
collect taxes, this is how they're going
to try to make up for all the money the
government didn't get. Okay, I'm gonna
I'm gonna Ber real quick. Real quick.
Real quick. For a while, we were doing a
show called Action Politics every week
that I hosted with a bunch of friendos
of mine. We took some time. We're taking
some time off because the mental strain
of doing that during this particular
administration is higher than we were
willing to upfront, especially with two
of my co-hosts working in the board game
industry and needing to deal with this
and one of them working in politics and
me doing all of this. Um, but I I would
love to ping their brains on this
because that thing that you just said, I
Kool-Aid, I believe is an accurate
representation of a statement that was
made and it's wrong. That's not how this
works. Tariffs don't make up income,
right? Because the net purchasing power
of the
consumer goes down, right? So if things
cost more, you will buy fewer things and
and therefore less money will come in
and you're hoping to even it out, not
make more money, but you still probably
won't do that anyway. I have been so
tempted so many times to just scream the
most
horrendous, profane things about this
because it's so much of it is wrong.
That's not the way the economy works.
That's not the way tariffs work. That's
not the way consumer purchasing works.
None of this works that way. And it's
and this is this is something and and
and I I'll sort of say this last thing
and we'll move on to the switch to it
all cuz I want to I want to swing into
something happy for a moment before we
bring it down again.
Um I am an animated loud cartoon man on
the internet. I try to uh be as educated
about things as I possibly can, but uh
running the helping to run the studio
and making all the shows and doing all
of these things I and just my general
level of education. I don't have a
doctorate in anything. I have a BA in
communications. Uh, I tend to stay out
of conversations when it comes to
economic policy because I feel I don't
know enough to act actively bring
anything of value to the conversation.
That has been a general feeling that
I've had cuz I don't want to cloud
people that know what they're talking
about with any misinformation that I
might not understand.
But we're here now. And when I, an
undereducated person in this space, can
look at this and very clearly see that
what is being done makes no financial
sense. That is when I throw my very
cheap hat into the ring to basically
scream from the rooftops, what the hell
is happening here? Because if I can
understand that this doesn't work, how
can people
in control of it, not
understand that these things don't work
like that.
It's a really great question, Matt.
Anyway, uh hearts do go out to everyone
in the board game industry and god,
every industry. Um because and and truly
if you know if there is a team or a
group um that you really love their work
and you can still afford to get in on
that last Kickstarter or do something
like that. Uh now would be a really good
time to show that support.
God, I needed that. Thanks. Oh my god.
I'll be I'll be uh uh chief of the
cabinet of the interior of What Up, fam.
Um Yeah. No, I
could Oh, man. All right. Uh Okay. Okay.
Celebrating mediocrity. Uh hold on, hold
on, hold on. All right. Uh we're
actually gonna I'm gonna I'm gonna push
them forward three minutes. We've got
ads coming up, so we're going to
schedule the ad break now. Um, so Janet,
we're gonna do fake ads for things you
can't buy while um Twitch gets real ads
for things that they can buy so we can
keep pre-rolls off over on Twitch. So,
we're going to do that real quick. We're
going to take about three minutes to do
that and then we'll start talking about
the Switch, too. Okay, cool. Great.
Awesome. Brad, go enjoy your enjoy your
ads. Uh, that that Bob post is lying.
Ads will start now. Also,
Janet Janet and subscribers of Brad,
we're alone now. We can sell you any
fake thing we want. Will, would you like
to sell a fake thing?
I'm struggling to come up with something
that isn't just like a Why don't I do
something? Why don't I do something?
Because right now, I want to sell people
eggs.
I mean, they are delicious, but I'm
going to sell them something a little
bit different. Hey, friends. Matt from
Extra Credits here. You love buying
stuff, right? Well, have you tried not?
That's right. Well, it's going to be, I
have to tell you, so much more easy to
now not buy things than it has ever been
before. Did you enjoy having disposable
income or even a little bit of it
outside of your normal needs uh for for
sustainability in your life? Well, boy
oh boy. If things are going the way
you're going right now, then you're
going to hit not buying things as hard
as I'm about to. Because when you don't
buy things, you
basically Ooh, am I just am I just doing
an advertisement for
like certain religions? I just got lost
in like the esoteric thought of like,
Matt, how many Scoville am I allowed to
go? How many Scoville can I go?
Oh.
Um, do number seven. Never go full the
bomb.
Okay. The the bomb. We're talking about
hot ones. Skullville is the heat rating
on on the hot sauces. Uh, the bomb is an
interesting hot sauce because it's
always at number eight. And I've done
the hot ones challenge before. And
basically, it burns out your tongue so
much that you don't really experience
nine and 10. And I think that's for for
a hot sauce for your ability to taste
and and whatever. I think that's almost
like a a kindness, but for this will, I
feel like we should go with a seven out
of 10 on that rating so that the message
doesn't get lost. Does that make sense?
That seems correct to me. I I have one.
Here we go.
Hey kids, Will from Extra Credits here.
Here to sell you the concept
of collaborative action. That's right.
If you want to do things with your
friends, maybe do them without spending
a whole bunch of money on new fingle
products. Do things like play board
games that you purchase from an
independent developer. Do things do
things together, right? Just things
together. Maybe maybe take trips with a
bunch of your friends. Maybe, you know,
art projects, make creative signs with a
bunch of your friends that express the
way that you're feeling in a way that's
healthy and communal, like 2% of
Americans did. I don't know. If you're
if you're feeling some kind of way,
maybe talk with your friends about it.
That is very true, Will. is a better
thing to to sell to people uh than the
concept of buying nothing is the concept
of doing something. Hey friends, Matt
from Extra Credits here. Piggybacking on
what Will said, did you know that the
hands-off protests across the country
were a insane success? And if I could
sell you a moment of your time, going
and supporting those type of things over
the course of the next couple months are
going to be crucial in trying to claw
back any of the things that we've
actually enjoyed over the majority of
our lifetimes. Collective action is a
thing that you can do. And there's many
places that you can go to find out more
and join up with groups that believe in
the things that you do and peacefully
let people know exactly what you feel
about their dumb nonsense that they're
trying to do to the United States
government. A lot of people marched all
over the country this two days ago and
you can too. There we go. Did we do it?
Did we fix it?
Believe it or not, Matt, that was still
one level down from the level I was
originally aiming at before I asked.
Yeah, I know. I've got to pull the bomb.
This hat would melt. Yeah, exactly. Um,
okay, cool. Apparently, people are now
getting ads for silver supplements.
What? Right. Thank we supplement for
what? It's silver that you eat, Matt.
What?
Why?
[Music]
Why? Why?
[Music]
Why you ingest the powerful minerals to
obtain their power at you could obtain
the power of wealth by eating minerals?
Obviously,
they also make you blue. If you consume
too much colloidal silver, you turn
blue.
Oh, we got a great short coming out
about um
uh that green dye in Victorian times. I
think it might have even dropped this
week. Yep. On the XP side of things.
Anyway, okay, great. Take a deep breath,
everybody. So, we're going to take a
detour away from tariffs. We're going to
talk about So, we're going to do this
chronologically, okay? We're going to
talk about the Switch 2 as it um
released and then we're gonna uh and
then we're going to go from there. Okay.
Um, well, kind of. Um, so here's we're
Did we Oh, is that the wrong one? No,
that's the right one. That's You said
that that was the main image for the
Switch story, and we'll move off of it
when we're into the sub stories, but you
made this, so now you have to deal with
it. All right, great. Awesome.
Um, so,
uh, all right, so last Tuesday, we
finally got our first peek at all the
information about Switch 2. Um there's a
whole bunch of it. Um it's uh the next
generation of the Switch. Uh it is in
fact named the Switch 2. Those things
were not actually
in question. Well, we weren't 100%. We
were reasonably confident on all of them
and then we were became more confident
before the press release. The world is
too cruel to have it be called the Super
Nintendo Switch. Right. Yeah. Uh, and
Jeff actually had some really good
thoughts on that, which is that because
the Switch 2 is backwards compatible and
the Super Nintendo wasn't, they didn't
want to link the idea of the Super
Nintendo to the Nintendo Entertainment
System with the Switch to the Switch 2.
Um, and if you want a
more in-depth breakdown of how they
announced this information, Jeff and I
actually did a like a look through of
the Direct last week on Design Club. The
VODs on YouTube. You can go check it
out. Excuse me. Okay. So, um uh the
first thing is the console itself. It's
more powerful. Um it's significantly
more powerful actually. It will do 120
frames per second at 1080p for some
games when it's docked. No, no, it'll do
4K uh 60 too as well. It'll do 4K 60 or
it'll do 120 1080. And again, games will
vary here. I I always find it
interesting when like the spec of a
system like the PlayStation tech five
can technically send out 8K. Not that
you're going to do it, but like it's
it's the same thing as like television
manufacturers and screens. Like they put
the absolute top tier thing that could
possibly be done but would never be
done. This is not a dig. This is more of
a marketing dig than a hardware dig.
Yeah. Um Yeah. Uh so that's kind of
cool. It's It's the same thickness.
They're very big on that that it's the
same thickness, but it's bigger
dimensionally. It's heavier. It's
heavier. Um the battery life is worse
uh ever so slightly, but for the most
part, I don't think that's going to be a
huge deal. uh LED screen, but apparently
it's a newer version of an LED and
therefore like people put it next to the
OLED and it looks just as bright if not
brighter than the OLED, which is
interesting because I know a lot of
people like myself who to be perfectly
honest have fallen back on fallen behind
on screen technology. Yep. Innovations.
Um I was like, "Oh man, it's really
disappointing that it's not an OLED."
Then I was like, "Wait, that could also
just be a real buzzword depending on
what's going on." Um the
uh the screen also supports HDR which is
cool. Um and uh that's uh someone in
chat mentioned correctly that Larky made
uh yeah I said LED it is LCD correct.
See uh the hat will I blame every
mistake I make on this hat. That's
right. Um it's uh Nvidia has confirmed
that it has ray tracing and tensor um
cores in it as well. Uh we knew that it
was being powered by Nvidia because
that's all Nintendo told us. We don't
know uh exact speed or RAM or any of
that. We do know storage is bigger. It's
got about four times the storage of the
original Switch, but that makes sense
because games are getting bigger. That's
interesting. It also supports a new form
factor for uh SD cards, Micro SD
Express. Uh, so your old SD card won't
work, which is stupid. Um, I think
that's like most of my thoughts in
general on the console itself, on the
hardware. Um, uh, the the JoyCons seem
like a lot of good uh, innovation there
as well. Obviously, the mouse controls
are neat, though. People are saying it
does uh lend to hand cramps based on the
shape of what the the mouse is, but also
it's not a Yeah, the fact that the I'm
really curious about the magnets because
something on my OLED switch uh the the
slide down um JoyCons always feel like
they're shift up a little bit like when
you pick it up. And the fact that this
is like coming in from the side and
locked in with magnets, I'm very excited
to have sort of have that feel. Um yep.
Uh, in handheld mode it does copper say
it does lower processing power.
Um, also yeah, lurker magnets. How do
they work? Um, I'm very excited about
that. I also really
like Okay, this might be a Matt thing. I
love
Nintendo busted out hardware innovations
that everyone has used for a long time,
but doing the This isn't even a dig. I I
I'm actually a fan of this. Doing the
cheaper and lower res version of the
thing that we've all been doing for 5
years. And by that I mean they have the
microphone on the Switch that you can
apparently with all the noise cancelling
can hear you from across the room. Uh,
it's like putting people's faces in
games based on a camera. Um, side note,
can we go to the camera shot or is that
two
away? Yeah. Okay. So, let's let's talk
about this for a second. So, a hardware
thing. There's actually two USBC ports
on it, which is great. Means you can
charge it from the top and the bottom,
do all
things. This is the Nintendo Switch 2
camera. I want to say something right
out the gate. The Switch 2 looks like a
like a beautiful, elegant machine that I
I feel like I would love to have in my
living room and hold in my hand.
Okay. Why is
this like like nothing looks good when
you have a like the plug bent up like
plugged into the top? Like you're you're
telling me that you couldn't have added
a continuation port on the dock or
something for when the C like not to say
you couldn't do this if you were in like
if you were in regular standing mode,
but the fact that this is like Yeah, you
just bend the cord and then it just
sticks up and like it so much care feels
like it's been given to the shape and
the ergonomics and we didn't make it any
thicker. And like then you get this
image for literally a 2000's webcam
sticking out. Like it's so crazy. And it
shows you, I think, how much
Nintendo doesn't care about this
particular element of it cuz everything
else feels so planned and and pristine.
There are ways, by the way, that you can
make a USBC cable that like plugs in and
then goes 90°, right? So it could like
have the plug and then like like the
plug's down here and then it just bends
at 90 degrees. Why wouldn't you if
you're making the proprietary camera,
why wouldn't you do that? But here,
okay, but okay, I'm going to back up.
I'm going to back up a little bit of the
sauce here. I also have heard that other
webcams will just work with it. Correct.
You don't need the Nintendo webcam.
Good, good, Nintendo. Thank you. USBC
webcam. Yeah.
Um anyway, I think that covers most of
the hardware stuff. Um um we get into
games now. Will is that you want to sort
of talk about I was also just going to
bring up was there anything about the OS
like at the same time the virtual game
cards make a lot more sense now? Um and
we'll talk a little bit because we
talked about that last week some uh
we've got a couple of comments from
YouTube uh comments that we wanted to
talk to about that. Um, but uh overall I
think the operating system is it does
the same
thing. It does the same it does the same
thing only faster. Only faster. If if we
can make the the store run faster than a
sales pace that would be lovely. Um
uh Okay, cool. Um so now let's talk
about uh launch titles real quick. Um
I don't know if we have a specific
picture for that. We can just stay on
this if we need to. No, we can. Oh, not
me resetting everything by looking at
them. It's good. Great. Awesome. Love
that. Okay, let's talk about this. Um,
so, uh, there are gajillion launch
titles. I want to give credit to Kotaku
for this image. This, this was so good.
And the shadow on the box is perfect and
I love it so much. Uh, uh, so um, there
are a bunch of games coming out at
launch. Um
though though only if I'm correct really
like two or three original games.
Correct. Which for a Nintendo console to
be perfectly honest is
pretty are for the course at this point.
Well, and that's if you don't include
the Gamecube Classics launch. I
don't. They're not. They're That's great
that they're they're coming out. I love
that. I love that those games are going
to exist. Wind Waker, F-Zero, GX, and
Soulcalibur 2. Three phenomenal GameCube
games, but you also have to pay for the
online service with expansion pass. And
again, my hat doesn't have the port for
that. Um, it's just I'm not going to do
that. Yep. Um, the the the I'm very much
looking forward to Mario Kart World. In
theory, in practice, I'll probably play
it for 10 minutes and then never again.
Oh, come No, we're gonna we're gonna go
hard, Will. We got to we got to we got
to I'll play with you. Get you up. I
I've been talking about this. We we
talked about this a bunch last Thursday.
I am slowly coming to the realization
that I'm probably only going to play the
Switch 2 when I play with people or play
on stream. It's not my preferred method
of gaming. I'll have I mean, you are you
are I would say a proud uh mainline PC
gamer. Correct. And you get consoles for
exclusives. To be perfectly honest,
you're you're you're
not you're not uh by design on the go
enough where like a Steam Deck or a
Switch or Switch 2 makes the most sense
for your console. Correct. Use it. Yeah.
Um, so, uh, the other big one is the
new Donkey Kong game, which isn't out on
launch, which won't be out on launch,
but does look very good. Um, and then
here's a game that is out on launch. Uh,
the, uh, the Welcome Tour, which
actually Larky just says three hours ago
they confirmed would be
$10. Cool boy. Okay, so I am not the
first to say this, but the little tour
that they give that basically like talks
about the system, like what makes the
system special in like a gamified way is
a real opportunity for a home run. And
it's funny that Sony showed us how this
was done with the PS5 and Astrobots um
Playroom or whatever it was called uh
before the full game because that was a
full-fledged platformer that wasn't
terribly deep, but made with incredible
love that showed all of the different
things that the console could do in fun
and innovative ways and it came with the
system for free.
The fact that
Nintendo is selling this thing for even
$10 is in my opinion out of all of the
things we'll talk about the most
insulting thing about this launch beyond
price, beyond everything. It this
because this comes down to
principle. And I get that they're trying
to make up costs for other things that
we may have mentioned before, but this
is a piece of software that's supposed
to sell people on your system. and make
them feel good about their
purchase and you're selling it to
them. This should be either
pre-installed or free download day one
and I will actually be shocked if by the
time it drops it is not. Yeah,
I agree. Uh I cannot believe they're
trying to sell that. It could be the
most fun thing. That's not the point of
the software.
Mhm. I'm all about also selling smaller
mini games from Nintendo, maybe for $10.
That seems like a really good thing in
the price hike world we're living in,
but not the one that is marketed purely
to sell your systems like capacities and
and qualities, right? Um, oh yeah,
Nintendo Crimson says this too. Did it
for Wii Sports. Wii Sports arguably one
of the most successful things that sold
the Switch to millions or not the
Switch, the Wii to millions of people. Y
Anyway, um what this image is referring
to, however, is sort of even though the
Switch and the Switch 2 now, uh is a the
reason I was excited for it was physical
media still having cartridges. Um
they're doing uh they've done their
virtual cartridge or what was it? there.
I I'm having trouble keeping track of
the naming conventions. So, there are
there are physical cards. Yep. Virtual
cartridges, which is how they're going
to be handling digital
games. And then there's this other third
thing which is called a game key
cartridge.
Yeah. Yeah. So, yeah. Same. Right. So, a
game key cartridge is their new
innovation.
It's a It's a cartridge same size as any
other cartridge. Comes in a box that you
buy at a
store and it's just an authorization to
download the game. It's essentially a f
a version of physical DRM in a way.
Correct.
Um and that seems okay. Let's let's talk
about a minor positive before all the
negatives about that. In a world where
sadly everything is going digital in my
opinion people can there are benefits to
digital. Of course I do think
preservation and having a physical thing
is really important in the day and age
especially with a company with a track
record like Nintendo of just shutting
down services.
Um there is a a cool thing here though I
don't know how the market will sustain
this for uh resales. So in theory, you
can buy this card with say Elden Ring on
it. That is the DRM equivalent of
allowing you to download it and then you
can download it and then when you're
done with it, you can sell that card to
someone else who can then download it
with a with a digital game full digital
digital like the with the virtual cards
you download from the Nintendo store.
You can't do that, right? So this is
a small olive branch to those to that
ability to resell a software's license.
However, it is not the same as a
physical game because as stated
uh it's not on the card. So therefore,
if the system ever goes down and let's
be very clear
in 10 to 15
years minimum or I don't max of
something I don't know like the Switch 2
store will go away like it that's just
time marching on. I'm going to I'm going
to take the counterpoint not necessarily
because I fully believe this but because
there is a counterpoint to this to that
line of thinking which is Jordan No,
please. We passed that thermal client a
really long time ago when games started
shipping with mandatory day one updates.
We're already at the point where games
simply don't function without patches on
day one. Right? When we stopped shipping
games with gold masters that were
designed to work out of the box without
any major game-breaking bugs wi without
a day one patch, we sort of passed that
point because even physical copies of
games, which I agree is a good thing,
right? require those day one updates,
right? And that's been true for
generations of consoles now and every PC
game ever since they, you know, they
came out on Steam, but like that's a
whole different thing. But I do think
that this is
not really that substantially different
because of the presence of day one
updates. So I think you are uh uh 100%
correct. Um I will yes and off of that.
I think also in the world of games that
either are multiplayer or have
multiplayer elements that need to be
have servers up to play anyway, buying a
physical copy of that game doesn't make
a whole lot of sense. Like it just
doesn't because there's another key
latch point of that experience that
could go away anyway. But the things
that got me are there's there's two
different things here. So Elden Ring is
coming later this year onto the Switch
2. Mhm. And Cyberpunk is, I think,
launching. That sounds right to me.
Cyberpunk, at least at this point,
correct me when I am wrong, has gone on
record saying that the whole game is on
the cartridge.
It is going to be a 64 gigabyte
cartridge. Impressive. And the whole
game, including Phantom Liberty, will be
on the cartridge.
You're right about patches and things
like that, but chances
are it Cyberpunk as a game will still
function on that. Like if it if it's
broken, that's a whole another thing.
And give me my money back, right? Like
that's fine.
Um, but there's an interesting that
specific
thing is a real interesting itch for me
to scratch from a philosophical
perspective. I agree. Um, like if if you
if companies do that, we should reward
them, right? That is a cool good thing
to do. I am going to scrimp up a bit and
even though I do own Cyberpunk on PC and
I don't even know if I'll
actively play it on the Switch
too, I will want to own one of those
cartridges. And again, it is not I if
that proves to be true, whereas I will
not even if I wanted to and probably
would play Elder Ring more on the go be
picking up the license key version
because the as a secondary system to
play a game on for my use case, it also
loses part of the the specialtity of why
I would even remotely engage with it on
that system.
Like I don't know there there's I hope
that is true and I would like to
whenever I financially can reward larger
companies for putting their whole game
on a cartridge. Yeah. Um but again that
it's a personal thing and there's a
million reasons why digital is great
too. Um
yeah I I think your your line of
thinking makes perfect sense to me. I am
just already so far past the point of
like
If I lose access to my digital game
collection, it means that there is a
bigger problem than me losing access to
my digital game collection. A thousand%.
Right. So like, so that's sort of my
personal philosophy on it and why it
probably doesn't bother me quite as
much. And I also don't have a problem.
This is a weird thing and this is all uh
this is all how things are sold to us
and how we've engaged with them
throughout the our course of our lives
while we game. I have no problem with
the fact that I don't buy CDROMs anymore
to install games with. Yeah. Oh god.
Awful. But because like Steam has taken
like it's funny and oh actually you know
why I think it is even though Will again
I want to say you are correct. Day one
patches and all that jazz tend to have
to happen, right? But there is a
mentality even if it is incorrect where
a PC game when you bought it, no matter
what it came on, you had to install it.
That is and then it was installed and
that is that is on your computer now.
Whereas consoles with me coming up
because I am a h a thousand years old.
You put the thing in the thing and it
plays even even though there are day one
updates and whatever and and we've been
I've been old man yelling at cloud about
when you pop in a game into the
PlayStation 5 and it's like updating and
I was like are you kidding me? Like
there's there's something about a
console that's supposed to, at least in
in my uh institutional memory, feel like
you just play the game you put into it.
Even if that's not true, that is an
experience that I am wanting to buy.
Yeah.
Yeah. Um Yep. Uh and I think I think
lots of people are going to be divided.
I think some people will will care and I
think a lot of people won't. reminder
that while you all right Brad, Janet,
Rocky, uh the there is probably a larger
percentage of you that care about this
than the general public. Yeah, the
general
public probably won't care. The general
public will probably go, "Oh, sweet. I
can play Elden Ring on my Switch. Great.
I'mma play it again with a different
build. Let's go." Right. So, I think
that
um I think the the the angle that we're
taking with this of it being a largely
philosophical one is probably the best
angle for us because I think um this is
not a thing that they're going to back
down from. Oh, no, no, no, no. Here's
like so truly they're not dropping this
price and we'll talk about the prices in
a second. And they're not changing this
plan. This is the plan. Uh, the thing
that I will go back and I I I will try
to hang my very cheap hat on is I think
that they will inevitably start giving
away if not before launch quickly after
launch that tech demo thing. I agree.
Um, or they might, you know what's
funny? And I don't know if they just
announced the price of $10 a couple days
ago. This feels like any other company
would just be like, "Oh, yeah. Who
cares? Yep. Yep. This is bad press.
Yeah, this is free now." Like, but
Nintendo is Nintendo, so who knows? But
let's should we get into cost now? Uh
well, I wanted to do one more real
quick. One of the big things about uh
Nintendo Switch 2 that everyone has been
very interested in and happy about is
that it's largely backwards compatible.
Um there are currently working on a
list. There are some games that will
never be compatible and those are
generally ones that rely on Switch One
hardware. Unfortunately, Wee Fit is on
that list or um Ringfitit is on that
list because of the IR sensor which was
removed from the um uh Wii remote
because not Wii remote. God Joy Con. I'm
on the Wii right now. Um uh on the
Joy-Con because it did was underutilized
and was an additional part that was
costing them money that they didn't need
to put in. Um there are other titles
that are currently we're currently
working on. There is a complete list on
um the the media on the on the Nintendo
um website. We'll have those links in
the description uh or the show notes um
so that you can check it out for
yourself. But I do want to give Nintendo
and Adabo for putting forward backwards
compatibility as a thing that you can
do, right? Because this does feel like
it's an upgrade rather than a
replacement, right, for the vast
majority of games. And I do like that
and I do want to call that out as a good
thing, right? When we start upgrading
instead of replacing games. So, uh, also
side note, I want to bring up something
that, uh, Neo just said. I like this I
like this comment a lot. I listen to
many Matt rants about physical media,
but I have a hard time caring. I know
it's uh, it's just the me uh, me thing,
but I tend not to rewatch or replay most
shows, games, etc. I think there's a lot
of people like you, and there's nothing
there's zero wrong with that. We all
engage with media in different ways. And
like
um it's funny because like there's
thousands of movies not maybe not
thousands but maybe thousands I have no
idea. I've seen a lot of films uh that I
have enjoyed watching and I never want
to watch again. Right. I there are many
games I have played that I have played
and never want to play again. But then
there's some that like um it's it's it's
it comes down to I think for me
personally the ability for me to
continually engage with a piece of art
that I have purchased. Yeah. That I that
that I specifically know that I will
want to engage with again. And I
understand that that use case is
different for everybody. Um I think it's
the it's the it's the loss of that
option that gets me ranty. But I a
thousand% Neo agree that there are
probably more people like you than there
are me that like enjoy the thing.
They're happy to pay for the thing.
Let's move on to another thing. And
there's nothing wrong with that. Yeah.
Um Yeah. Uh okay. So, let's talk let's
talk price. Um
so, uh the treehouse went well. Okay. A
reminder, this is being filmed at
noonish Eastern time, April
7th. This is relevant because all of
this information may be wrong in the
future. You're going off the latest
information because I'm actually going
to skip the last one and then come back
because I think that makes sense. Um,
Nintendo originally announced that
pre-orders would open April 9th, that's
Wednesday, and then said, "Just kidding,
we have to evaluate those tariffs that
are coming in on all of our products
into the US. The US will not be able to
pre-order on April 9th." So, that
there's two there's two things real
quick about this with the Switch, too.
one is the initial price everyone lost
their mind about for many different good
and bad reasons about both the conso's
price and the the games prices
themselves. Um and then there's the
tariff stuff and removing the pre-order
day from the United States. Um if we're
jumping onto that second thing first, I
think kudos to Nintendo for calling out
the tariffs as why this is happening.
Don't don't beat around the bush. If
companies have to make hard decisions
because uh the US government is making
it difficult to conduct business, call
out that the US government is making it
difficult to conduct business. Like, and
it's interesting
because with something like the Switch
2, it it's a this is so weird how our
society values news and information, but
the Switch 2 hits a lot of those
quadrants that you need to hit to have
it bust out and be the story. Nintendo
is a huge name. Everyone knows what the
Switch is beyond like I would argue that
the Switch and the Wii in this sort of
generational time are the things that
Nintendo is just like it's ubiquitous.
So when the new Switch comes out, that's
a big story. Oh, they just announced it.
Oh, wait. Now you can't pre-order it in
the United States. Why? tariffs and and
and uh you know
volatility that amount of of news like
I've seen more news and maybe this is
just my circles everyone in Brad Janet
Rocky please let us know
like I've seen more news about people
being mad at Trump for these switch two
than all of the other far more damaging
things like on major news cycles. Mhm.
And it's interesting that this is the
story that's breaking through because
it it's playing to something that like
look, I love video games. Video games
are an art form that I hope I never have
to live
without. If push came to shove and I had
to, as we all could, we could live
without video games. There's a lot of
things that are happening right now that
are affecting things that people need to
live. And it feels like those aren't
even getting the same amount of breath
in the news cycle as the Switch 2 being
interrupted. And I find that interesting
and kind of scary. Yep. Um,
so yeah, all all that to say, the prices
that we're talking about right now are
the pre- reannouncement prices in the US
only. We're not going to talk about the
global prices for the most part because
that would take too long and we're a US
focused show, so we're going to focus on
the US prices. Okay, cool. Great.
Awesome. Um, the console itself is going
for
$450. It is available in a bundle with
Mario Kart World as a digital
download. There's not a cartridge in
that box. It's a digital download code
to the best of my knowledge for
$500. Um, and those seem to
be people seem generally to be fine with
that. I think they priced that the way
that it is and all of the prices truly
to make up for impending doom of tariff
type things. And here's the here's the
other thing about Oh, you you disagree?
I I disagree. I think that I think that
um they may have priced in some amount
of tariff into it because it was known
Oh, yeah. Not the amount not the amount.
Right. Right. Right. Right. So, like
there's no way anyone could have
predicted these. Absolutely.
We're trying like the fourth time to do
this without swearing. Level seven.
These unprecedented, ill- advised,
economically
unound,
grocken, AI hallucination looking
excuses for an economic policy. Um
because no one dreamed that anyone could
be this stupid and still be able to
walk, talk, and sign a piece of paper.
And yet somehow I am proven wrong.
Um so uh
the so th those prices are are
reasonable, I think, as long as they
stay roughly around there. I can see it
going up 50 and people still being like,
"Okay, that's the tariff tax." All
right. The problem is that that doesn't
even begin to close to cover the tariff,
right? Because a reminder coming out of
uh China and I think these are actually
coming out of Vietnam, which is where
the Switch 2 is theoretically being
made. I don't I'm not exactly sure. The
number that I've seen bandied about is
north of $600 for the console after
tariffs are taken into account. Yeah,
that'll be a deal breakaker, right?
That'll be a deal breaker. Um people
won't buy that. Uh, so Nintendo's gonna
have to take some amount of It'll be
very interesting to see what
they land on for that adjusted price.
Yeah, I Yeah, who who who knows on that
sort of front.
Um, jumping back a little bit to sort of
the price of the individual games. Yeah,
I was gonna do that next. Yeah. Yeah.
Yeah.
Um,
so it is a complicated topic.
Um, at the end of the
day, so what is it? Is it now? And I'm
trying to remember because the news
about this was so flaked around before
the tariff stuff even hit. Yes, it was
going to be
$80 for a new Nintendo Switch 2 game
roughly. It is somewhere, depending on
which game and how you buy it, between
$60 and $80. $80 is a physical copy of
some, but not all Nintendo titles. Mario
Kart World will be $80 when sold
separately, right? DK Bonanza
is $70 when sold separately and there is
uh pretty credible going around that
there will be a $10 discount in some but
not all cases for buying a digital
version rather than buying a physical
version. Which would be interesting
because there has been digital physical
price parody for a very long time and
breaking that would be a big shakeup in
my opinion. just doesn't matter by how
much. Breaking that parody and
acknowledging that it's cheaper for the
producer to get a digital game to a
consumer and that therefore that
consumer need not pay as much for that
game is a big deal. No, agreed.
Um, it's interesting
like we've done a bunch of stuff on on
game prices on this channel over the
course of years
and
the I think where I stand personally
is I would love it and and on the on the
PC side of things, this has already
become very normalized. I would love it
if game prices were not static like or
if we weren't expecting like, oh, it's
the $50 game, it's the $60 game, it's
the $70 game, it's the $80 game. Like
that that that I think that way sort of
leads to a bit of ruin in the current
way we engage with purchasing video
games. Um, it feels like archaic in a
way.
Um, and sure Nintendo as a company has
track record of
uh sticking by their guns on what on on
the value proposition that they believe
their games hold. Yep. Sometimes I agree
with those and sometimes I do not. Um,
but that that is what they do. And if
we're going to engage with
them, if we're going to engage with them
in their ecosystem, by this point, we
know what type of company we are dealing
with.
Um, for better or worse. I think there's
there's pro and con to what they're
doing. I think one of the bigger cons is
less people will play their games. Like
that's just what's going to happen. If
you look at the entirety of the current
economic status of the world uh in that
direction like everything else, please
see our fake things you could have
bought before for not buying things. Um
that's going to be affected here. Like
that's what's going to happen.
I and and and luckily at the very least
and I'm not saying this is a solution by
any means but like there are other
avenues to get games cheaper than
Nintendo
that doesn't mean you need different
hardware infrastructure that that sort
of thing obviously internet connections
etc.
Um but like I could I could not blame a
soul for being like seeing these prices
and being like nah. Yeah. like yeah what
what I do think is hilarious to me is is
our is our image for this topic which is
um the petulence of
gamers true I think um so if you I
attempted to as research for this and
for our design club last week watch the
tree houses um for the new launch titles
or for the new games that are coming to
Switch 2. Metroid 4, DK Bonanza, Mario
Kart World were the big ones. um and uh
watching um watching them the chat
completely unusable because chat was
spamming drop the price in all
caps. That's not how this
works, right? So if you believe that
you're going to influence Nintendo to
drop the
price, don't buy the game. But don't
like I I understand people wanting to
like go in and express their
displeasure, but like that it doesn't do
anything and is just annoying, right?
Like Well, I think we've also kind of
seen
online I won't even call like on live
online action like spamming drop the
price in a Nintendo chat
is essentially trolling. Mhm. You can
you can do it and let them know you
displeasure or whatever, but like it's
also not going to do anything. And I
think we've seen this. Look, we've seen
this since horse
armor. People say one thing, right? And
then go and and mass do the opposite.
Correct. And then people at these
companies are like, "Oh,
well, there's a vocal group of people
that say they absolutely hate this, but
profits have never been higher." Right.
Yeah. I I would be willing to bet that
more than half of the people who were
spamming drop the price in chat will be
buying uh Switch twos at pre-order at
whatever price Nintendo sets and buying
games to go with it. Right. Yeah. Um
that's sort of my uh Yeah, that's sort
of that's sort of my take on it. Um and
then so this last thing that we'll get
back to is the delay. The console is
still expected to release June 9th. June
9th, June 2nd, early June worldwide.
Yeah,
I'm going to go out on a limb and I'm
going to put my prediction down now that
it won't launch in the US on that day.
That's my bet. My bet is that things
will be so volatile and the pricing
structure will be so unstable that it
will not launch the same day in the US
that it launches worldwide.
I have a conference that I have a theory
on that.
I think if nothing changes between now
and then or whatever, absolutely. But if
there's one thing that this
administration has proven is
um is
This is a
loud thing that many people across the
board are angry at that
has a very simple solution that can make
them look like they're winning. Mhm.
They could very easily because chaos say
the switch to nah no tariffs on that.
Like that's what we're going to start
seeing here I think is individual deals
on loud things that would look like an
economic win in three weeks time because
we have myself included the attention
span of a goldfish that that looks like
a big win for this administration like
oh look we saved it you get your video
games at a normal price look we saved it
we made it the price again when in fact
they caused the problem to then sell you
the idea of the solution right Um,
that's what I think is going to happen.
There's already talks of individual uh
the individual countries coming and like
trying to work things out through it.
There's no way that Japan and Nintendo
is not in on that, right? Uh, but Will,
I do agree with you that if everything
stayed as is, they wouldn't launch it
here. And it would be a really sad yet
interesting global economic experiment
for a large piece of hardware that used
to be global to not launch at the same
time in the United States.
Yeah. Yep. I I agree. Also, also, um I I
wanted to give uh just a second to this
this very good comment by that guy
Jimmy. Um I'm going to read it rather
than post it because it's a giant
comment. Um, I'm trying to be brief, but
there's a lot of nuance here and more so
with the tariffs. I think Nintendo gets
away with some scummy stuff because they
do exclusivity so well. But video games
have been around $60 since 2006ish. It's
surprising to me that some people seem
unwilling for prices to raise after all
this time when you consider inflation
and wanting devs to be paid and treated
well. However, a wealth inequality
problem has only gotten worse and
people's disposable income has not
grown. Yes, that's a great summation of
it. Right. There there it is a complex
multifaceted problem, right? And I
understand people not wanting to pay
more because they don't have more money
to spend, right? But at the same time, I
do think it's really important that we
acknowledge
that the real price of video games has
gone down and down and down because of
inflation. The problem is not the price
of video games. The problem is our lack
of disposable income and that wages have
not kept pace. Right? There is a there's
also and there's and there's also
compounded onto that where the money
made from video games goes. Correct. Uh
yeah, it does not often times go to the
developer unless we're talking about
some real indie stuff like it's Yeah.
Correct. And so the big problem the
really big problem is that this applies
to lots of luxury goods, not just games.
games you're just anchored to because
they're a individual physical item which
is disposable in that you purchase many
games, right? Um that has had a very
anchored price that many of you have
been anchored to since childhood. I'll
even go back to what I was saying before
about the anchoring around consoles and
having a game that just works outside
the box. That is a feeling that is
anchored in me because that's how I grew
up. game prices are a and it's funny.
You know why I don't So, I think I just
put it up there. Um, someone mentioned
the SNES prices. Daft mentioned the SNES
game prices. You know why I don't
remember those is because I my parents
got me one or two of those. I didn't buy
them, but I have the anchored price of
$50 to really in my brain of what a
video game costs because that's when I
as a consumer started engaging in the
hobby. Yeah. And so there's there's a
real and
and it's so complex and and honestly an
interesting conversation because you
talk about, you know, how much
disposable income people have for luxury
goods versus how much those goods should
cost based on inflation versus where the
money that is actually going for to
support the people that make those
things. Then who is actually making
them? The dev is making the game, but
the publishers getting it out there. And
who's keeping that end of the money and
why aren't devs being taken care of? And
there's a lot of like interconnectivity
around all of this stuff that is hard to
summize easily and quickly, which makes
a solution hard to find. Yes, this is
one of the most complicated topics in
the gaming space because of all of the
internal to the gaming industry and
external to the gaming industry factors
that go into this, right? And again,
people spamming Drop the Price isn't
going to do it, but I would welcome um
we're running a little short on time
today. I would welcome No, no, I already
pushed my meetings. I can go longer
because I knew this would be going
right. Yeah. Um I would also welcome
wellconsidered responses in in in the
comments on blue sky, right? Please do
and
like I want to sort of um the comments
have been really good about this and I
want to sort of put forward this idea.
Say more. I know it's weird in in a
YouTube space to like to like have a
longer comment. take your time and say
more because one of the things that
we've been fostering here on Twitch is
taking the time to say more when it's
worth to say more, right? We're a little
antish that way. Um in uh and I perhaps
the tariffs should not be implemented in
the way that they currently are being at
their you literally hit the bottom end
of the call and dropped out. um uh the
um but I do think that this is a complex
multifaceted issue, right? I'm not happy
about them going up, but I also
understand that that's an economic
inevitability and the the way that
people feel about it is going to be
different depending on their level of
disposable income, their relationship to
their disposable income, right? What
their priorities are, whether or not
they have a family to take care of, how
much their job will be impacted by
tariffs, right? If you work in the
tabletop RPG industry, you're probably
not buying a Switch 2. You're probably
not buying a Switch 2. You're probably
saving all of your money because you
have no idea what's going to happen when
the bottom drops out from your industry
momentarily. Yeah. Right. So, there's
there's a lot of there's a ton of stuff
going on here and I think that um I'm
really glad that we're having this
bigger larger conversation. I want to
thank Brad and Janet for having more
time
for saying more. Right. takes time to
write the text wall because it is
important that we have the multi like I
see so little nuance about this because
everyone's limited to 300 characters on
on blue sky, right? Or whatever, right?
But um and if you're a member or a
patron uh or a subscriber here on
Twitch, drop in the Discord, right?
There is a space to have a longer
conversation there. I may set up a like
what should games cost thread in the
industry news channel. we can have a
bigger conversation there because I
think that would actually be really
interesting to have it be because like
again what we want to foster here is
like a space that is comfortable to
have complex difficult conversations in
the gaming space because that doesn't
seem like there's a lot of places for
that. Yeah. Um also I think I found my
end
filter. Anything worth saying is worth
saying slow.
There we go. It's pretty good. Yeah. Um,
okay. Is there anything else on the
Switch 2 that we wanted to tackle? Uh,
la. Um, there's lists of the games that
might not work at launch. We have them
in the show notes. Check those out if
you're going to be affected. If you are
still interested after all of this stuff
or think you can get your hands on a
Switch 2. Um, let's close out the Switch
2 stuff on what I consider Oh, what do
you got? I'm I'm gonna interject this
one. This This This is a big one. For
those of you who missed Kirby
Airide Songs and I have already agreed
that we're going to have a 1v one Kirby
Airide uh City Trial because I swear to
God if the new Kirby Air Ride does
include City Trial, it's not worth
buying. Let's Let's Let's do this. We We
just talked a lot of of of of dark dark
stuff, right? Yeah. I want to talk about
the games that I am legit sort of
excited for. Please. Um, obviously the
new Mario Kart is right up my alley. I
think that it is this will be a game
that I'll be able to play with friends
for a very long time. And I think I the
value prop for that for me is so huge. I
love the idea of an open world Mario
Kart. I I I trust Nintendo to make an
open world, especially after the last
two that they made that feels both lived
in and and interesting enough to move
around. Um, I think that that opens up a
lot of interesting sort of like one of
the things that I miss in Mario Kart 8
and that that game has so much content.
I miss sort of the experimentations and
things of the battle modes and whatnot.
Like there's some battle modes, there's
a lot of them, but it never felt like
actually like it nailed something. What
an open world Mario Kart at least
allows, it seems like, is you can kind
of invent your own games with your
friends. What I'm hoping will, and who
knows if this could be pulled off, this
is not a feature that is announced, but
there's something that there's a very
little used feature, at least in my
friend group, um, with I I want to say
it's in GTA online where you can
basically using your waypoint on the
map, make an impromptu race. Yeah. So,
you set your waypoint wherever you want
and you say, I'm inviting whoever wants
to race to do this race. It would be
awesome if in that Mario Kart in Mario
Kart World, you could do things that
simply and cool. Like you could do it
without a a feature like, oh, we're
going to race to the top of the the ski
slope or whatever, right? But like it it
makes it seem like there's a lot of um
option there. So, I'm excited about
that. Donkey Kong Donkey Kong Bonanza
looks like it's the first Donkey Kong
game that I've been really excited about
in in a while to be perfectly honest. It
it has a level of chaos and joy to it
that I I really like. And I like that it
feels like there's some new mechanics
for Donkey Kong, specifically the the
earth the earth melding or ripping or
throwing or breaking or punching
mechanic. Um and Will, I can't believe
we've gone two hours and you have not
mentioned that uh Silk Song confirmed.
Yep. Silkong confirmed for 2025 has 8
seconds of footage. By the way, those
are eight new seconds of footage. I will
not bore you with the frame by frame.
Suffice it to say, Soong. Now, by the
way, I won't be playing it on the Switch
2. I'll be playing it on PC. Sure,
because achievements, but like uh very
excited about that. Also, Enter the
Dungeon 2. I don't know how much of the
charm of the original is going to
maintain in 3D. Spoilers, the original
Dungeon was also 3D. It was just
billboarded. Um, and and also spoilers,
I think Will and I's friendship uh was
formulated around Enter the Dungeon. Uh,
we were both super deep into that game.
It e is easily in my top five games of
all time list. And I I think there's a
much like I I uh you probably feel this
way about Gungeon as well, but I maybe
my Silk my Hollow Knight is Gungeon if
that makes sense. So with a sequel, even
if it's exquisite, it's going to be very
hard to beat the emotional resonance and
and importance and just like drive the
first experience. That's just how it
goes. Absolutely. Um I don't mind if
it's going to be 3D. I I couldn't quite
tell how the camera was like I want to
make I I want it still to be like that
locked like asymmetric locked kind of
thing. I do think the Pixel
Maybe pixel art is a I don't know. I
have no idea. There's some There's some
level of like ephemeral joy to the
ridiculousness that pixel art brings me
that I have yet to see in the style of
3D that seems to be used. I've also seen
what 8 seconds of it. So like who knows?
Yeah. Um yeah. Um,
oh, and the the elephant in the room,
uh, is the Dusk Bloods trailer. Yeah,
definitely legally for reasons of
copyright and deals with Sony, not
Bloodborne 2. Yeah. Yeah. Look, no, it's
not Bloodborne 2. It absolutely isn't.
It are there gothic buildings? Yep. like
it's it's also a PVPVE game which I was
very worried about until uh Miyazaki did
an interview recently uh since the
launch and he's like hey look this is an
experiment we wanted to try uh I think
Vidya does a great sort of breakdown of
like why he's psyched and trepidacious
about it but basically um this is the
kind of game that Fromoft can only try
as a console
exclusive that Nintendo is helping to
back or that that a game hardware
publisher is helping to back. Um it's
and I like personally that it is not a
story focused thing specifically because
of that. Yeah. Because if it was
Bloodborne 2 essentially Yeah. with the
with the name serial number filed off
because it's exclusive to Switch 2. It
would be like Bloodborne one on the PS4
and less people would be able to play
it. Yeah, I agree. This this is an
experiment that hopefully goes well. I I
I I'm very curious about it as
development happens.
Um it it
feels Yeah. And um and uh Akuma in the
chat says, "Yeah, two multiplayer
focused FromSoft's games and lined up is
kind of worrying for fans of the
original formula." And that's why
Miyazaki basically went on and was like,
"Hey, this isn't the studio's direction.
This is what we're wanting to try now.
We are still very committed to doing
storydriven uh singleplayer mainly
experiences." Yep. Um which is a great
thing to say. I I want FromSoft and
other companies that I love or creators,
developers that I love to be able to
experiment and not be
lambasted right away for doing that. And
and you could without that message from
him very much be like, "What the hell?"
But the fact that they he came on, he's
like, "These are just fun things we
wanted to try. This feels like the right
time in space."
Cool. I that was enough for me, at least
for now. That obviously can change.
Yeah. Uh, and my last one I think is uh
Metroid Prime 4. Mhm. Congratulations
Nintendo. You have done something for
the first time in the FPS market. You
have introduced a console FPS with
native mouse support.
Yeah, I will I will buy it and play it.
I will try it. I'm very interested.
Right. To be fair, this isn't the first
time they've done unique control
schemes. Uh, Resident Evil 4 on the Wii
has manual Wii remote aiming. Yep. Um,
so there's they've done unique control
schemes for shooters before. I'm very
interested to see what this is. I'm also
very interested to see what the hand
cramp issues are with the using a
Joy-Con as a mouse for a prolonged
period of time. Sure. Um, but we'll see.
I'm I'm I'm very excited to to check it
out. Yeah. I think I think the overall
even though many of these things are not
on release, they did a really great job
of h like I felt before reality smacked
me in the face and this is a good tell I
think of video game announcements in
general. I was over the moon like with
with the with the announcement as a
whole. I felt great uh and I I was
excited. I was more excited about this
console release than than any in
previous memory. Um, and when you sort
of step back from it and look at all of
the specifics and all of the myriad of
topics that we've talked about for the
last hour about these things, yes, that
that excitement has been chipped away,
but there is an ephemeral joy to what
Nintendo tends to do that I thought they
actually really brought to this. And for
a brief beautiful hour and a half or
whatever it was, I was I was feeling
pretty good.
Yep. Uh let's end us off with our
dessert story. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
Um Oh, that was the that was the tariffs
uh one that we had. Oh, whatever. Now we
talked about it. All right. So, uh a
story from GDC that has come out that I
think is probably my favorite GDC story.
Um so, Local Thunk went to GDC and that
was cool and he got to see people
playing in the wild.
and no one knows what local funk looks
like. So he went up and played Bellatro
at the Bellatro
booth and no one knew it was him. Yeah.
And he was playing really well and
someone went, "Hey, you're really good
at this game. How'd you get so good?"
And the other the other very interesting
thing is he's finally getting to
appreciate the game himself because he
didn't play the game. He was building
the game. I think a lot of people assume
that developers are always good at their
own games. That's not always true,
right? Uh, in fact, I'm pretty sure the
crew at Meggrit isn't nearly as good at
Slay the Spire as a lot of the Spire
pros are as an example. Um, and so, uh,
he got to experience that and and get
got to play through and be recognized as
someone who's good at Bellatro, not just
someone who made Bellatro. And I I just
love this story as like a heartwarming
little
like look from someone who's managed to
maintain anonymity and not let it all go
to his head as an aur in this space that
there are like these cool fun moments
with a game that is better than anyone
could have possibly expected it to be
and brought more joy at a lower price
point and an easier install than any
other game of the year. Um, and and I
just love I love the cultural phenomena
around Bolatro probably more than I love
Bilatro. And I think that's great. Yeah.
Yeah. It's very fun. Uh, I like that
that happened. And I like uh I don't
know. I I it's it's a because of the way
that the industry is, you don't get a
lot of these devs in these stories and
things and it's nice when they when they
come across. So, all right. Real quick,
we did have a couple of comments from
the tubes of you that we wanted Oh,
yeah. to uh to address from last week's
show. From last week's show, right? And
if you're still here after watching, you
know, a bit of this week's show. Thanks.
Um uh RMS Grey said, "When it came to
the virtual game cards, my media thought
is that it removes one of the major
roadblocks to Switch to adoption. Now
people know for sure that they can bring
their virtual library across to the new
console or as much as they want to
transfer without having to research the
question." Yes, we talked about this.
Um, and I picked this question in part
to throw to last week's design club.
Jeff and I actually talked about this as
a marketing move to announce virtual
game cards before the console because
lots of people when they announced
virtual game cards were like, "Oh, I
don't have a use case for this. How why
why do I care about this?" And they
didn't realize that they're about to own
two Switch consoles, right? A Switch and
a Switch 2. And that that will be the
use case that applies to them. So I
think that if you don't transfer your
entire account to your Switch too.
Correct. If you still intend to use both
or intend to have both in the household,
right? Yeah. So I think um that's
exactly right and I I think that that's
um a very good move on their part. Um
yeah. No, agreed. Uh next one comes from
uh Roi 13 and says that they're excited
about virtual game cartridges. Uh my mom
and I live in different countries and
love to play Just Dance, especially when
we're together. And it seems like uh the
video game cartridges will allow us to
play games separately without needing
two copies of the game. Uh yeah, I mean
that is essentially what they're trying
to do. Um and it is interesting to think
about. I kind of like this. It's
interesting to think about once you're
on the same like family account or
whatever.
Like again back cuz I'm a thousand years
old, you'd go to someone's house and
give them a cartridge to borrow. Yeah.
here. If even if you live far away, you
can just let them borrow your game and
that's pretty neat. Yeah, I'm a big fan.
And the last one is aimed directly at
you, Matt. It's from Aie Cycler or AIE
Siler, excuse me. Rifts was the first
system I underestimated as a DM. I
started with TMNT and other stranges. I
was not prepared for what Rifts was
doing. For those who don't know, Matt
has a deep and abiding love of tabletop
games. Um, he loves Lancer, he loves Dn
D, but God, if you start talking about
rifts, Matt will go to a happy place of
nostalgia and then you've lost several
hours of Matt trying to pitch you a Rift
campaign. Oh, I'm sorry. This is the
original edition. Would you like the
Ultimate Gold edition instead? Uh it's
it's I listen again, beautiful,
wonderful world, absolutely terrible
system that I uh that I cannot get
enough of and love and have rewritten a
bunch of different times. Um
yeah, uh thank you. Thank you for that
uh Cycler. Uh I too was not prepared for
what Rifts was doing. And literally,
it's funny. I don't actively have a
Rifts campaign going. My last one was I
think four years ago. Um I have all of
the world books like cuz the expansions
for riffs came in world books. So you
had rifts um Africa, riff South America,
riffs this and they broke off
eventually. But like so you basically
because it takes place on Earth, you
have all the different locations uh as
your expansion books and uh I still have
them on my shelf because I just like
looking at the spines.
That's fair.
Uh uh yeah and and Mort more if you are
interested in riffs look it up. There's
there's some bad. It's a lot of good.
The system again
is broken. Uh but the world is very
interesting and it it's it's one of the
few versions of like throw everything
and the kitchen sink into your RPG that
has actually worked with me on a
narrative conceit basis. Um it is great.
Anyway, yeah.
Friends, thank you so much for joining
us today. Uh if you have thoughts,
comments, concerns, responses, please
take time to say more in the comments
below or message us on Blue Sky if that
is the case. Especially for folks
watching on Nebula. Thank you for doing
that by the way. You can you can hit us
up. Um seriously, let us know what you
are liking about the show, what you'd
like to see more of.
Um constructive criticism is always
welcome. I know that's a daring thing to
say on the internet. Um, but if there's
stuff you wish we'd cover more of or you
think perhaps our um our pre-shows are
too pre, I don't know, uh, let us know
and we'll we always love hearing from
y'all and and seeing what you like and
how we can how we can make this little
breakfast adventure a little bit better.
Yep. Uh, I think then all that remains
to us for today is for Matt to do the
same sign off we always do uh as sort of
a community, you know, reentering
exercise as we as as we say goodbye
today. That's right. Um, I think and and
we do it the same every time to ensure
that we can all come together as one
breakfast family, whether you're a Brad,
Janet, or Rocky. Um, and so I think I'd
like you all to join
me in the following very
somber and and um I guess um ritualistic
I might even say thing that we do every
time. So hold on just one second. If I
could
just also with
[Applause]
[Music]
[Laughter]
you. It's a good one. I like it. I like
it. Uh yeah, I know we ran long,
friends. Um that was a topic that
demanded running long. Like I could we
could have cut some of the pre stories,
but god if that main story wasn't going
to hit like a freight train loaded with
hammers if we didn't do leadup to it
like no no no we have to we have to we
have to do that thing. So um Matt's got
meetings to get to. I'm uh we're going
to say goodbye to Janet here. Janet,
thank you so much for joining us
YouTube. Um we will be back on Thursday
uh on YouTube. Jeff and I are doing a
design club on the Unity store and why
um why a dev might use it. We're going
to talk about that because there's um a
bunch of conversation about the
difference between asset flips and using
a store and what that's all about. And
Jeff wants to go deep diving in Unity
source. We're going to do that on
Thursday. Um so please join us for that
then. Uh, everybody say bye Janet.