Okay. And now we should be live over on
YouTube. I figured it out, Jeff. I
figured it out. We're actually live
live. We're live live over on YouTube.
Hello.
Hello, Janet. Sorry, that took longer
than expected. So, here's what's up.
Here's here here's what's up. Um Twitch
is having a bad day. Twitch's basement
flooded. Uh and they're it's not going
well. Um, and by basement flooded, I
mean some API calls are down and
whatever. Um, so we're gonna do a design
club for you over on over over here with
uh with Janet um
solo and only Janet. Yeah, you you all
get exclusive content today. Uh, so
that's cool. Uh, let me just tell folks
over in the Discord where where we can
be found. Uh, let me copy this link
because I've had to do that. Okay, so I
figured out Jeff how to do it and I know
what the problem was. So in the future
we won't have this problem. Hooray. Uh,
because for anybody watching, we have
never just streamed to YouTube. It's
always been Twitch with a rebroadcast to
YouTube, which means all of the settings
were Twitch dependent. And so when
Twitch basement flood, we're like, oh.
And Will's been sitting there like a
little mad scientist plugging in cables
behind the scenes. Yep. Reconnecting all
the connects. Yep, that is that is
correct. And Pival's been very
impressed. Yeah. Uh
on YouTube for a special design club
while Twitch
sorts out their issues.
Speaking of which, I should open up the
chat. I guess I don't need the mol Oh, I
do need the mulch chat if I want to be
able to throw chat on screen. That is
correct. Um, so, uh, Janet, while we
while we give everybody like a hot
second to get in here, I have a question
for you that's very important. Uh, which
is, how many of you have Switch Twos?
Because that's actually a really
interesting question that I thought we
could ask our audience as we were
getting started. Right. So, if you got a
Switch 2 in the in in all of the
pre-orders and the launches and the
everything else,
did you get one? Did you wait in line?
Did you buy it off a scalper? Did you
spend extra time on it? How did that
work? Right. Like, or did you do the new
thing, which we're going to be talking
about, and you went to Costco? Correct.
Did you get it day of at Costco like
Matt and I did? Right. That's uh very
interesting to me because um we'll talk
about 100%. Costco is not usually the
place you go to to get a day one
console, right? Yeah. We're we're going
to we're going to talk about that. We're
going to talk about um
and I think I think male has like a
great a great point here, right? That um
doesn't want to get it for a while.
Waiting for Kirby Riders in Prime 4.
That's a big point that we're going to
talk about here in a bit, right? uh when
we get into the episode proper, we're
gonna give it like a couple minutes to
like just chat about the Switch 2 and
then we'll get into a proper design club
episode. There is a danger with that
will which I'll talk about which is I
did that with the Switch and I still
don't have one. Yeah. Right. Yeah. Well,
is that a danger?
Right. It might you might I was every
other console I've gotten but Twitch was
like ah portable. Do I need it? I have
my iPad. I have you know my gaming
laptop. I have this big Steam catalog.
Okay, I'll wait and something will come
out that I'll need to get. Yeah. And
suddenly the Switch 2 is out. Well,
that's another really interesting
phrasing, right? For us, I needed I
needed to be on the lookout for a Switch
2 because there are opportunities that
we will only have if I have a Switch 2,
right? There are content making
opportunities. Like for instance, Matt
and I have talked about this on stream
before over on Breakfast. We really want
to get 24 Nebula creators in a Mario
Kart race together. That would be so
cool. Like just 24 Nebula creators in a
call, right? All just I would buy a
Switch for that. That right. Yeah. Like
when we went out to PAX into design
club, I think two of the design clubs
we've done, Matt brought his Switch two
out and plugged it in and that's what we
were, you know, to the audience of
hundreds of people sitting there, you
know, at the conference, that's what we
were playing on, right? And so that
there have been compelling reasons to
get one before, but I I I actually am
going to um in a first, I think, well,
not in a first. I I'm a little less up
on the Switch 2. And we're going to do a
bunch of We're going to do a bunch of
talking about the news. We're going to
do a bunch of talking about the console.
I'm going to give you my thoughts uh
because I have one and then we're going
to we're just going to talk about a
little bit of the why. Um but Jeff, have
you seen the news before we start? I
wanted to make sure that you saw the the
news link. That is an You can't just say
see the news anymore, Will. There's so
much news happening everywhere. That's
That's my bad. That's my bad. Did you
see the news link regarding the Switch 2
launch that I put in our notes?
Um,
there's three links. Uh, I have not. No,
let's see what the Stapler incident. No,
we're going to talk about the Stapler
incident. We're going to talk about
Walmart. And there's a third one, which
is, uh, fun fact, the Switch 2 is now
the fastest selling console in the
history of consoles. Wow. It sold 3.5
million units in 4 days. Costco, baby.
Costco. It's all Costco, man. Straight
to the moon. Um, so yeah, we should be
we should be waiting for the Well, no,
I'm I'm I am setting the stage, Jeff. I
am I setting our stage. I'm setting
everything up. So, um, chat, now that
everybody's here, we're going to do the
thing that we always do. We're going to
go to black. We're going to record this
for our friends over on Nebula, but you
all, your comments will still be of
great value to us. And we're I'm
actually really excited to get to not
split my focus and just pay attention to
Janet today cuz like normally you're
here with Brad, right? And like our
focus is unfortunately always a little
divided, but today you get all the
focus. This is the first time I've ever
watching live on YouTube. Yeah.
Actually, can we like it's just it's a
different layout. I'm looking to see.
Yeah, it's it's a very different user
experience and some people prefer that
user experience, right? Um, the other
thing you might want to do is there's a
thing called uh top chat,
which is which is silly. Top chat is the
algorithmically selected best parts of
chat. You can turn that off with all of
our chats. The best parts. Thank you for
that. I have now switched it to live
chat. Correct. Um, which I'm actually
really happy about. Right. I can I can
see the purpose of top chat, right? Like
if if chat is not about conversation,
but it's instead about spamming emotes,
then I understand that purpose, but
that's not why we're here, right? And
that's not why you're here. So, I really
appreciate that there is the opportunity
to like just get all of it cuz I don't
want to risk like even if it's just an
emote. I know some of you are like
sarcastic and pathy enough to make an
entire point in one emote and I don't
want to miss it, right? Cuz like that's
happened before. Uh so I'm really glad
for that. Okay. Yeah, it's kind of fun.
Like I'm looking at the different UI
thing like the fact that you can turn
off and on time stamps and a couple of
other things. Yeah, correct. Uh oh yeah,
top chat no relation to top cat. That is
correct. That is that is absolutely uh
correct. Um okay, so we're going to go
to black. We're going to come back.
We're going to play an intro. We're
going to do a very brief uh
uh we're going to do a very brief intro
and then we're going to get into our
discussion of the Switch 2. Are you all
ready?
I I suppose I should ask, are you ready,
kids? And now all of you are having
flashbacks while we go to black. All
right, be right back.
[Music]
Good time zone, internet. Hello and
welcome to Design Club, the only design
show on the internet that's live just on
YouTube today because Twitch is having
problems. Uh I don't know the nature of
their problems, but they're having them.
So we're glad to be here for you on
Nebula and everyone here on YouTube. Uh
I am joined as always by my uh constant
design companion, Jeff. Say hi to the
people, Jeff. Hi to the people, Jeff.
Wait, you usually say hello to the
people. So I say hello to the people,
but today it is hi to the people. And
yes, we're just we're just changing
everything up, right? Dogs and cats,
Switch 2, you know, raining up, Twitch
is down. It's chaos, Jeff. We don't I'm
actually excited. Like, this is the
first solo YouTube stream we've ever
done. And we would never have done one
if Twitch was not crap on fire. Yeah.
Right. Yeah. So, uh, and it's good
because I learned a whole bunch of stuff
about streaming just to YouTube and how
I have to set that up, uh, and how I
have to pivot it. And now we know. And
now we know. So, uh, Jeff, it's it's the
12th of June. Oh, sorry. Go ahead. It's
the 12th of June, uh, which means the
Switch has been out for a week and what
a tumultuous week the Switch 2 has had.
Um, we're going to So, we're going to
sort of break down the launch of the
Switch 2. There's going to be kind of
two broad halves to this. In the first
one, we're going to talk about the
launch, and in the second one, we're
going to talk about the console. And I
guess there's sort of a third synthetic
part which is how the launch and the
console end up in
whether or not like you should buy a
Switch. Like if you're here wondering if
you should buy a Switch too, right?
We're going to try and do something for
that. Now, we understand fully that
there's a large category of people for
whom that idea at the end there isn't
interesting. I promise the rest of this
will be um because I know that there are
a lot of people who are very firmly in
the I am buying a Switch 2 as soon as I
can afford it. Locate one uh you know uh
I used to be in that camp every console
right and there's a whole other category
of people that are I have zero interest
in the Switch 2 or any games available
on the Switch 2. I'm just going to
continue to throw money at Gabin with
both hands until the sun turns cold and
dark. Um and both of those are fine,
right? To be clear, both of those are
fine and understandable points of view.
Uh but we will be trying to like talk
about the value proposition that like um
that the switch to represents. So um
let's start out with with something kind
of strange. A first I believe. Okay.
Which is Jeff, you don't have a switch
too. No. By the way, if I talk about a
switch, unless I like specify OG Switch,
I mean the Switch 2. Switch two is just
about for this conversation. Yeah. And
actually, I was joking before on stream
like I used to buy every console. And
part of this was because I'm a game
designer and play a lot of games. And
part of this is because at a different
point, I ran a research firm that
researched video games in the game
industry and we I also played
everything. Mhm. But since
moving away from the um research studio
where we literally had to look at
everything, I have more played the games
just that I want to play. Will Yeah. And
I have a laptop. Yeah. I have a PC. I
have a PlayStation. I have an Xbox of
various different generations on that. I
have an iPad. And I was like, "Oh, I'm
going to wait on the Switch, original
Switch, till something comes out that I
just feel I have to play to pick it up
because I have an Xbox, a PlayStation, a
gaming laptop, a gaming PC, and an iPad,
like current generation." Yep. That's
five pieces of hardware, not counting my
phone, that are all set up for games,
and all have games on them. Yeah. And so
I was like, "Cool. I'll wait for
something to come out." and suddenly the
Switch 2 is out, right? Like I say
suddenly, of course it isn't suddenly,
but it's also one of those things that I
have so many games I want to play. Mhm.
That even things like Tears of the
Kingdom was like, "Oh, I should play
that." But it didn't work its way to the
top of my list because, you know, Elden
Ring came out and I jumped on that. I'm
gonna say Fallout for a bit or you know
I got back into League of Legends or
like I'm spending less time on games now
because I'm relearning Unity so that I
can go make another game. Yeah. Like
there's stuff. Yeah. So, uh by the way
for for for anyone who's unfamiliar, I
am a notorious Tears of the Kingdom
hater. Uh if Tears of the Kingdom has
one hater left, it's me. Uh and if there
are no more haters, I have left this
world. I dislike Tears of the Kingdom
intensely and feel like it really missed
the mark. I'm gonna say you didn't miss
anything. I think you should have played
Breath, but you could have played Breath
on the Wii U, but not the same.
Actually, sorry. I meant Breath. Yeah,
Breath is peak. Gears of the Kingdom
missed in my opinion. But that's okay.
So, you didn't get one. I got one but
didn't plan on getting one and reviewers
didn't get one, which is weird, right?
It's It's not unexpected. It's not.
There are plenty of good reasons for it,
but we should start out by saying that
until the Switch 2 came out officially a
week ago, there were no real official
reviews.
And this is, let's just say, a little
bit unusual. Yeah. Because like back in
my day, I I've been designing games
professionally since 97. Sure. And for a
very long time and this so it's
ingrained into me which is
you need to get reviews for your game
just straight up like reviews are what
sell games reviews magazine articles TV
spots all of that stuff
but the reviews being an important part
of it and therefore studios would go out
of their way to come get reviewers to
check out their game and if what
Nintendo like not just for the Nintendo
Switch but what that also means will is
that theoretically
no reviewers were able to go play
Nintendo games correct so like excuse me
any games on the Switch too. So for all
of the studios working on their games
for this they also didn't get it. So
there like there are hardware reviews
cuz people could get hardware and they
could go see it at some things but
that's not the same thing as owning it
because will why couldn't people do
reviews? So two reasons two reasons one
they didn't have consoles and two the
people that did have consoles didn't and
this is a complicated thing so we're
going to pick this apart didn't have
access to the day zero patch. Mhm.
There's a day zero day one patch that
unlocked a lot of the features of the
switch. So the switches the switch 2
shipped with firmware version 19.
The the day one/day zero patch patched
the switch 2 to version 19.1
which is necessary to do a whole bunch
of things.
However, and this is the big however,
there is some weirdness about this.
It turns out, and I did some looking and
uh some a very helpful viewer from
Breakfast when we brought this up on
Breakfast uh let me know that there's a
uh group called Does It Play?
and does it play has done an analysis of
this and has said that they might have
been able to because the cart the launch
cartridges not the downloads the launch
cartridges if you had a cartridge for a
Switch 2 launch title
those all contain version firmware
version 19.1
so when you got your Switch and you put
the game in it physically that would
update your Switch Yes to playable
Yes. So, that's kind of that is a good
way to do it because that is not just
true apparently of launch titles. This
is the way the Switch did it and I was
unaware of this. So, that's that's 100%
on me that the the Switch operating
system has the capability of patching
itself off of a cartridge
if the game on that cartridge requires a
specific firmware version. So the every
game ships with the bare bone like the
the lowest firmware version that's
required to play the game. So there's
this complex interchange of if you were
going to use the Switch as a pure
digital console can't patch until day
one. If you if you had a physical
cartridge and a physical uh Switch 2,
you might have been able to, but then
you still have the review embargo
because you're going to have to say that
you broke embargo. And Nintendo's pretty
lawyer happy. Nintendo sued a lot of
people for a lot of things and I don't
think most uh news groups most most
review sites would want to bring
Nintendo's eye down on them. Uh it does
create well that's a different there's
an embargo but like usually and this may
be a thing that I just missed in the
news. Every manufacturer of both games
and hardware will ship out review copies
early and basically say do not publish
to this date. It's an embargo, but they
still want to give you time to look at
the thing. That's true. So that you can
look at it, assess it, and write your
articles.
Because when you initially talked about
it, I thought this was actually a
breaking embargo
thing. Like there have been cases in the
past where like Microsoft is like, "Do
not sell the Xbox until this date."
Sure. And you know, some guy at Best Buy
is like, "Screw it. I'm selling a week
early." and just starts because you have
to ship all of the hardware out there.
It's not like it magically appears on
the doorstep the day it starts selling.
If you're going to get it to any store,
you have to ship it to that store and
often you want it to get there a couple
days early just in case there's a delay
so that it's sitting there ready to be
sold on the day you want it to be sold,
right?
And um groups hate it when you break
embargo. They're trying to do this big
concerted launch and get a lot of hype
and if people start selling early, other
stores start feeling like, well, maybe I
should sell early and suddenly your
carefully structured launch plan all
falls apart. And that's doubly true of
Nintendo, right? We've seen Nintendo
over the past couple of years pull out
of major uh press events, right? They've
decided instead to go with their own
treehouse style or Nintendo Direct model
where they do it all inhouse and they
have a very carefully curated
message that they are giving about their
product, right? So, it fits that
Nintendo would go to those lengths to
avoid people finding out about things
early now. And the other interesting
thing, and this is another interesting
point to this, um, it should be noted
that there were two versions of the
Switch 2 available for purchase. One of
them is the just the Switch 2, and the
other one, by my understanding, far more
popular, was the Switch 2 with Mario
Kart World bundle. That's the one I got.
That bundle does not come with a
physical cartridge. It comes with the
code for Mario Kart World. So, what did
anything come with a physical cartridge?
Yes, there are games available that do
come with a physical cartridge. I
believe sorry, but they weren't boxed
with the Switch. So, they were separate
purchases. So, so nothing in the Switch
box had the firmware with it. Correct.
Okay. That's what I Yeah. So that so
that even if people got the Switch early
and they were posting pictures of like
the of the console or like whatever,
right? We saw a bunch of pictures leaked
on social media of people displaying the
white please connect to Wi-Fi and update
screen, right? And nothing else because
nobody had a cartridge to put in the
thing to update. This did somewhat work.
There were people who got it earlier
than they were supposed to, right?
Stores did break embargo on that. Okay.
But they were unable to do anything with
it, right? And because of the nature of
the firmware thing, there's a little
less, and I'm not saying there's no,
there is a little less concern about the
idea that this console requires a call
home to update in order to be functional
at all, right? Which is a topic of some
worry, right? That people want when when
Okay, I was talking about this with
Matt, right? We both clocked it. It took
us about half an hour, maybe a little
more depending on download speeds to get
our um to get the Switch set up and to
do system transfer and everything else.
But when we got consoles when we were
kids,
it was like open it up, plug it in, put
the game in, play 5 minutes, 10 minutes
pops. Especially if you're like I think
you're misremembering. I can't remember
a console I've ever bought that didn't
immediately have a uh system patch when
I plugged it in. Every PlayStation,
every Xbox since the 360 has Jeff, I'm
Jeff. Jeff, buddy, buddy. I'm talking
about the N64. I don't You're talking
about pre-in consoles. Right. Right.
Right. Right. I I am just bringing up
that for people who are big things from
further than 20 years ago. Yes. people
who are big believers in physical game
conservation, right? Let's get to that
in a minute because that is a whole
different topic have a concern about
this. Right. Right. Yeah. But yeah,
let's let's benchmark that for a moment.
But I I will say for the past 20 years
because that it is roughly 20 years
since the internet fully internet
enabled consoles came around which is
the 360, the PS3 and the Wii. Yes. I
have not seen from that date on picking
up a piece of hardware which is a
console and not having a day one patch.
I agree. I agree. It is uh this is just
a very interesting snapshot to compare
the way the like to give an honest
comparison of ye olden days with the way
that it works uh in modernity. I feel
like it's almost unfair to compare to
that because modern kids have never had
that. And what we're talking about is
really two different things. A piece of
hardware you could play games on or a
internet connected piece of hardware
that allows you to download games in
addition to putting in physical media to
play a game on.
Like once we got built-in hard drives
and internet connectivity and stores
built into the consoles, they just
became a different beast. I think that's
fair. I And I think there's a larger
conversation that we'll have probably a
later time about the the interplay
between that increase in functionality
and the worries that people have about
inability to preserve games, right? Like
I I think that that's a different topic.
But yeah, I I Do you want to just talk
about the preserving for a minute? Yeah,
just for like a quick second, right?
Like let me talk Let me say this from
Microsoft, Xbox, and Sony. They don't
care.
Just straight up. They are not building
internet game preservation machines.
They are building consumer merchandise
hardware to sell that they you will pay
money for and that you will then buy
games for. Right? conservation
is not a thing that they are that they
care about or and or are building in.
However,
and but other people care about
conservation a lot and have arbitrarily
picked certain pieces of hardware and
says, "Oh, these are good places to
preserve things." But they're doing it
they're playing in somebody else's
garden. Like if you're going to go make
a game for Xbox and Xbox is suddenly
like, "Hey, you now need to do this,
you're playing in their garden." If
you're in the iOS store and they're
like, "Hey, this is how you do
monetization or you don't get to be in
here." You're like, "Oh, yes. This is
how we do monetization or we don't get
to be in here." Right? Like, so when
you're played in somebody else's garden,
they're the ones who set the rules. And
if you pick something to do in it that
they suddenly decide is obsolete. Like I
can't tell you how many YouTube features
have been deprecated or Twitch.
Same. We used to have community
subtitles on YouTube. They deprecated
that feature because like not enough
people use it. We're like, "Hey, we use
it. People subtitle our videos." So if
you're over, you know, in India, you can
watch an extra history or in Brazil or,
you know, all of Not anymore. like
they're deprecating anyway. Yeah, it is
just part of existing in the modern
space. I agree. I think but I I agree
that that is the company position and I
agree that that is an unfortunate fact
of living in that place. However, there
are groups that of uh consumers that
care a lot about this and want to know
to what degree that wall like how high
are the walls on that garden, right? How
many gates are there in those walls? To
what extent do I have control over this
$500 piece of hardware that I own?
Right. You own the hardware. Correct.
So, how do I like what to what extent is
that? If the hardware is nonfunctional
until it calls home, do I really own it?
Right. And those questions, you still
own the hardware. Right. Right. And this
gets into a whole other issue which
we'll probably tackle at a later point
called right to repair which is that's a
whole kettle of worms we're not going to
get into. But it is it is worth noting
that that is one of the big stories
that's been a part of this launch is it
needs to patch to do anything right
either from a cartridge or from a call
home. that has been a a big part from
the from the game preservation side of
the consumer um base, right, about this
console launch, right? That's not
necessarily a bad thing. It's not
necessarily a good thing. It is just an
element of the news that I think the
thing that and it's funny what's really
it reminds me a little bit is um
basically
it's kind of like the MMO or the live
service game thing. Yeah. It's like if
somebody's like, "Do I own It's like I
play League of Legends. Do I own my
game? I was like, no, you you bought a
you well, you didn't pay for League of
Legends. It's free, but you know, you
bought your hundreds of dollars worth of
skins or whatever things. If tomorrow,
right, it's like, hey, we're shutting
League down or they will. Yeah. Did you
hear Blizzard shut down Overwatch one?
Right. Yeah. That's that's a whole
thing, right? like there there's not a
lot you can do like we're getting to the
point where consoles are becoming like
that in some cases and uh Nintendo
consoles are no stranger to that. The
3DS and Wii U eHop went down, right?
which is why um in a in an absolute
incredible attempt to preserve games,
people were downloading all of the games
off of the eShop so that they would have
them on a physical device that would
exist beyond the demise of the eShop,
right? But okay, it's a and that's also
one of the things like I think one of
the reasons Steam has been so popular is
Steam basically says, "Hey, as long as
Windows
possibly Linux, but Windows exists. You
know, you have a place to play your
games
mostly, like depending on how the game
was built, if it can still exist in a
modern environment. But, you know, and
that's kind of the Xbox, Microsoft,
Nintendo store promise now is, you know,
there are games that you bought for the
last PlayStation that work on this
PlayStation because they're digital and
they move along with the architecture.
Yeah, I think that's true. So, like
they're actually building emulators into
modern consoles to emulate their old own
old consoles
so that you can play those games. So,
and Nintendo's following in those
footsteps,
right? Nintendo is following in those
footsteps. They say 99.9%
of Switch One games will play on the
Switch 2. That remaining 0.1% is like a
weird nebulous small group of outliers,
including things like Ringfit because
the new Switch doesn't have the IR
sensor that Ringfit needs. So, you can
connect a Switch One Joy-Con with the IR
sensor to play Ringfit, but by default,
it doesn't work, right? Because that
hardware isn't included anymore. So,
there there is some there there is some
loss there, but it's very small. It is
edge cable. This, by the way, is way
better. Like, if you owned PlayStation 2
games, those didn't play on the
PlayStation 3. And most PlayStation 3
games didn't play on the PlayStation 4.
Like, the compatibility issue is
something that or you know, you didn't
get PlayStation 1 to two or two to
three. Like, they've built that in now.
So, they're you're actually
in the long term, you are better off on
games now than you used to be. I agree.
with digital purchases. I think what
happens is we get pain points. We get
pain points for much beloved for much
beloved games and people go, I can't
play this without the original hardware.
I can't play that. And they point at one
specific thing. And I'm not saying that
they don't have a a point, right? But
they still have an absolute point. You
want to play the game, you have city,
right? But it but it's a small fraction
of overall games, right? Okay. Anyway,
we could talk about that forever. That's
probably a different design club. Let's
keep talking about news around the
Switch 2. So, but anyway, so they didn't
launch with review copies or review
hardware and there something I'd wanted
to say, but we kept bringing up
preservation, so I wanted to address
that. Like, yeah, on the hype, I think
Nintendo just thinks they don't need it.
I agree that that's true. And just
straight up like
the possibility of some negative press
or bad things out like is more dangerous
to them like or excuse me not getting
reviews is less dangerous than possible
bad reviews mucking up this carefully
planned and orchestrated thing that they
have that seems to been going really
well. Yeah, like I think if they'd had a
couple of snafoos and the sentiment
wasn't as strong around this looks cool,
they might have broken down and sent
those out, but I think they looked and
said, "Nope, we don't need to." I also
think that um they got an unexpected
boom
that helped that hype that helped them
keep goodwill and and that is that the
console price didn't change when the
tariffs got announced. They got a lot of
goodwill out of that, right? Because
people were worried that it was going to
go up and they were like, "Nope, console
price is staying the same." I think that
if that had moved, they might have done
review copies or done other things to
generate positive hype. But yeah, it's
hard to know, but that definitely that
helped. Correct. Agreed. Okay, so other
things that happened, we got we got we
got two very interesting stories. Uh one
one positive, one negative. Um, and
they're both not Nintendo's fault, but
they are things that have been very much
in the uh in the ecosystem. So, thing
one,
a singular GameStop took it upon
themselves as a methodology of loss
prevention
to staple receipts to the Switch two
box.
Some products this was would probably
have worked fine with. Correct. On the
Switch 2, it doesn't because the Switch
2 unit is directly below the box with no
additional padding. So, they stapled
directly into the Switch 2 screens.
Now, one GameStop and they replaced all
the switches. I want to be very clear.
GameStop immediately said, "That's 100%
our bad. We will replace all of them.
Just bring it. We'll replace them all."
Mhm. But it is a weird story that like
immediately dominated the news. And then
there's been this whole like sub channel
about like whether or not the Switch 2
is properly packaged and like should
Nintendo be blamed for like companies
putting staples through your box and all
of this in an extenduating circumstance.
By the way, we're learning more about
this. The reason that they use staples
is that the glue that they were using to
hold like tape on wasn't working because
the AC in that GameStop was broken and
so that it was too hot for the tape to
hold. And so like there were all of
these extenduating circumstances that
led to this and people are like Nintendo
should be blamed for having insufficient
packaging on the Switch 2 and that's
been a story. I don't know that that's
actually a story. I think that the story
is GameStop screwed up and immediately
fixed it. Yeah. Through a weird thing
like if there AC's out that's also on
them usually because like poor
maintenance. True. I could also see
employees being like glue isn't working.
We need to do a thing. You know what?
You know what it strikes me as? And if
you've ever worked retail, you know
exactly what kind of decision I'm
talking about. It feels like a district
manager decision. It feels like someone
who is so deeply out of touch. Just do
it. I am your boss's boss. I am your
boss's boss's boss. You need to do this
because loss prevention and like all of
this is policy, right? This is now the
policy. and that person is high enough
up that they can't be told this is a
stupid idea, but they definitely had a
stupid idea. This very much smacks of
like they had a good idea. Loss
prevention. Sure. They had a bad
implementation. Yes, that's fair.
Stapling Well, yes, absolutely. Stapling
things to boxes is bad. Don't Don't
puncture container, kids. Okay. Okay.
Yeah. Just like don't use the glue that
never comes off on stuff. I just We just
got What was it? Pass this to our local
zoo. Actually San Diego has a me not the
zoo balo park will sometime when you
come out and visit me. Yeah 100 years
ago in San Diego it wasn't the world's
fair actually longer like 15 but it was
something like it. Yeah. And that whole
area got turned into a city park and has
remained a city park and has like 20some
museums, two theaters. Like it's the San
Diego Zoo is next to it. And you can buy
if you're a resident a pass that'll get
you into every museum for the entire
year for you and your family for like a
hundred bucks. That's dope. In-N-Out
privileges. Some of the best museums in
Southern California. Yeah. They put this
sticky thing to like attach it to the
paper they mail it out to that doesn't
come off for like half a year. So every
time you stick it in your wallet, it's
like sticking to the side of anyway.
It's gross. Yeah. No. Like Yeah. Some
packet just like staples. Don't use
that. Yeah. Uh someone was asking how
that's loss prevention. Um one of the
ways that you one of the sort of tenants
of loss prevention is coupling physical
items with proof of purchase. Um that's
that's a thing. So you can't like have
it set up so that someone sneaks a
receipt back in and then grabs the
switch to off the wall and then claims
that they already bought it and presents
a receipt that's already been used.
Right. So you need to pair each receipt
with the item that the receipt
represents. That's basically if you
bring the receal in alone without the
switch, they're like, "Well, right, this
was we know this was attached to the
switch, right? And so that therefore we
think you're trying something sneaky."
Correct. So there's, you know, there's a
bunch of Anyway, so that was one of the
stories. The other good story was, and I
gotta be very careful when we do this. I
really dislike Walmart. Okay, I think
that Walmart's consumer practices are
not good. Okay, I am not defending
Walmart, but they had a brilliant Abs I
game recognizes game. They had a
brilliant marketing strategy, which is
that if you ordered your Switch 2
through Walmart, every Switch 2 that was
ordered through Walmart came with a
reusable Walmart tote bag, a bottle of
Coke, and a can a fullsize can of
Pringles. Total cost of the company sub
$3, I would guess. Significantly sub $3
to to add that into every order, right?
And they they make far more profit on
the Switch, too. and your car are on a
branded thing that says Walmart.
Correct. And they've got a huge
huge
uh upswell of like positive press for
Walmart because they rode the coattails
of the Switch 2 and included this thing
that was like that's trivial for them
but feels like a great gesture, right?
Cuz like you know what's funny? If
they'd said it comes with a $5 Walmart
gift certificate,
nobody would have cared, right? Yes, I
agree completely. But because it comes
with like people the the monetary value
is not the point, right? It's a cool
thing. We you run into this all the
time, particularly with gamers,
particularly with trading cards, okay?
Cards that are valuable and cards that
are cool do not necessarily overlap.
Sometimes valuable cards are cool.
Sometimes valuable cards are not very
cool and are just sort of bog standard,
right? Lands come into mind for magic,
right? And so often times, sometimes you
want to conserve value and you want the
valuable thing. And sometimes what you
really want to crack in a pack is
something that's cool, right? You want
like like the cool alt art that's not
worth maybe as much as the really
expensive thing, but is an interesting
story, right? Or that has utility. Yes.
Like if you open if you open the new set
of Magic cards and you're like, "Cool."
Yeah. You know, you find the common that
you're going to know you want four of in
your deck. Yeah.
is not valuable, right? They're commons,
but you're like, you know, I need four
lightning bolts or, you know, whatever
the thing is, you're like, oh, good. I
got one. I'm going to use it, right?
Yes. And just like that, now no one was
expecting to get a drink and a snack,
but they got a drink and a snack and
that was nice and it was a cool
experience, right? Um, so I think it's,
you know, that that's been the other
dominating stories. And and the very
interesting thing about both of these is
that up until like yesterday, today,
that was pretty much the only chatter.
The the pre-orders, uh, while pre-orders
were a problem, post launch, the process
of getting a Switch was relatively
straightforward. Midnight launches
happened across the country. I didn't
hear anything bad about them. I saw lots
of pictures of social media of people
happy, smiling, hanging out with other
gamers getting their Switch twos. That
was it. And I think that that's really I
cannot stress this enough how important
that is that it was just a good launch.
Yeah. Right. That it was just low drama.
Low drama. High like high efficacy. The
fact that people are talking about a
single GameStop that effed up with its
staples tells you how low drama the
launch was. Exactly. And getting to the
big news that was released, I think
yesterday or today,
it worked because the Switch 2 is now
the best the fastest selling, I believe,
is the official metric console ever.
Yeah, cuz you can't say best selling
ever because correct. We don't know how
many they will sell eventually, but we
do know that in the first four days of
its existence, the Switch 2 sold 3.5
million units. Now, that does include
pre-sales. That does include pre-orders.
However, even accounting for that, they
all include pre-orders. Like people
pre-ordered the 360 and the, you know,
PS4 and the XON and huge, right?
Absolutely. God forsakenly massive
launch, right? And a complete success.
So, I know why. Why is that, Jeff? They
sold them at Costco.
Yeah. So, let's had pallets of Switch
Twos, right? Pallets of Switch Twos,
right? And if you're in Costco, Costco
is the place that's just like it's the
low drama. You know you are mainstream
when you're there pallets of your thing
at Costco. Okay, let's back up real
quick. Let's let's do let's do a quick
uh Costco is a company largely operates
in North America. It is a wholesale
club. You pay a membership fee to join.
And Costco offers wholesale prices for
common consumer goods. Um you can buy
like uh you know if you go to your local
store and you buy like a fourack of
energy drinks at Costco, you can buy a
whole pallet or a whole um you know tray
of like 24. Yeah, you'll get your 24.
This is where you buy your 16 pack of um
toilet paper or your case of Coke or
your multi cartons of milk. Correct.
It's equivalently all of the staples.
And one of the big things about Costco
is they are aggressive with their price
negotiation with vendors, but not in the
same way Walmart is. They don't burn
them, but they and they also are very
known for um their diligence on their
products. Yes. Like if they're selling
two white shirts, they will only be
selling two white shirts. There'll been
100 people vendors that came to get in
and Costco will have had its buyers look
for price and quality to find that happy
medium and they'll only carry the two
that have been vetted. Yes. So
everything there is vetted. It's well
priced. They have an amazing return
policy. They treat their workers well.
They pay them well. And it's it's like
it is the model of the business you want
to run. Correct. Um and they also carry
by the pilot load electronics. Y and so
it being in a place that is well
reported to be an excellent place to
shop. Right. If you live in driving
distance of a Costco, chances are you
either have a Costco membership, know
someone who's has a Costco membership
and you've gotten them to get you stuff
or you've thought about getting a Costco
membership, right? Like it is synonymous
with if you have a family that you were
trying to feed, especially with young
children. Yeah. Yeah. You go to Costco.
And as Compsite Jedi said, they
maintained a hot dog and drink meal at
their food court for $1.50 50 for an
exceedingly long time without ever
raising the price. Yeah. For which they
are also beloved. Yes. Correct. So, uh
that's really interesting, right? That
that um we got a lot of uh sales at the
the the big four, right? So, the big
four in this case are Target, Walmart,
um Best Buy, GameStop in the US, right?
And GameStop's only there because it's a
game thing, right? But and Best Buy kind
of only there, but Target and Walmart
are really really big. And then Costco
on the day Costco is not where you think
usually to go out to buy video games.
Correct. And Costco, they have them, but
yes, Costco also didn't do pre-orders.
On the morning of, I got a message from
Matt first thing in the morning. Hey,
you have a Costco membership. They're
selling Switch 2 at Costco.
No pre-orders. And they built in um uh
sort of anti-hoarding measures, right,
which Costco is pretty good at. Um
because it's one it was it's one console
per membership per week.
That's it, right? And because they have
a membership because you have to be a
member of Costco to shop there, they
have a way to control sales. And it also
wasn't a thing they had to set up on the
fly because they have plenty of things
like that that they sell where they'll
have a manufacturer is like you're only
allowed to buy two of these TVs at a
time or Yes. Like they will put things
on discount. You know, we're selling
kitty litter at discount. You're only
allowed to buy eight cases of kitty
litter at a time. And this is also
something they had to put in because
their prices are cheap enough. People
would often go there, buy a lot, and
then go like resell them somewhere. Yes.
And Costco wasn't interested in that.
They were interested in the people who
come in who are members having the stuff
on the shelves, right? So, they just
took that system and they're like,
"Cool, click." Right. And as part of the
deal, this is very interesting. So,
Costco Costco had them morning of. You
needed to have a membership. My dad
ordered his uh ordered mine for me from
his phone. I messaged my I texted my
dad. I was like, "Hey, dad, you have a
Costco membership, right? Can you order
me one?" And he ordered me one from his
phone. Okay. And and then I found out,
and this is fascinating, they offered
free US-wide overnight shipping,
which is not cheap. That is not a cheap
add-on, by the way. There's a reason
that a lot of people pre-ordered to like
go get theirs in person, right? That
that is not a cheap add-on for for
something, right? So that that was in my
opinion I don't think we can understate
the the impact of that on like people's
positive experience with Costco. A no
pre-orders to worry about. B you buy it
you feel like your membership is
increased in value cuz you got a thing
that it is a little hard to get right
now. Mhm. C overnight shipping. D no
hassle. There's no hassle. Unlike a lot
of other places where the websites went
down and there were long lines. None of
that. There was none of that with Costco
of all places, right? So, I I think
Jeeoff that you're right that there is
something about it hitting big and
hitting the mainstream that is really
exemplified by you can just buy it at
Costco. Like, you don't have to go to
the weird place that only gamers go to
that's GameStop. You don't like
literally like I bet there were hundreds
of thousands of people going into Cos
across the US a couple days ago that
went, "Oh, cool. The Switch is out." and
picked one up as they walked by and kept
going. Yep. Yeah. It's uh it's very
interesting. So, I Yeah, I think that
that sort of and that combined with the
sales numbers really shows how
how well this launch went like as a
launch, right? Just and again, we're not
talking about the console yet. We're
just talking about the process of
launching a console and delivering a
product seamlessly to people that want
to purchase. Nintendo's team in charge
of that A+ got all A's. Like they aced
it. Like there have been plenty of other
launches of any number of things that
have not gone well. This one was went so
well. We're talking about the single
GameStop that stapled things to a thing.
Mhm. Like
which is pretty amazing. So good job
team Nintendo on that. Good good team.
Good job team. Manufacturing and supply
and distribution
and marketing and PR and the whole group
getting along to get everything out on
the launch. Yeah, they did it. Yeah. Uh
PS, I've just gotten a fascinating
update. Uh we now have someone to blame.
Uh Cloudflare is the reason that your
internet is being stupid today. Please
look forward to it. We'll talk about it
on Monday. Um what's going on with
Cloudflare? They're having a major
outage, which is why Twitch and a bunch
of other services are having a very bad
day. Um, so, uh, anyway, interesting. I
If Cloudflare is having it, something's
going on. Correct. Because Cloudflare is
pretty stable. Yeah. Yeah. Does. Uh,
yeah. Um, so anyway, funny story. Well,
on Cloudflare. Yeah. Besides the lava
lamps. Sure. Um, I know the founder from
college. Oh, that's really cool. I used
to eat like lunch and dinner with him.
Like he was a associate, not a friend.
But like I knew him on a first-name
basis. We ate dinner together. He used
to he was the one of the main writers of
the student newspaper. Wrote a great
article about our fantasy and science
fiction guild once taking over the
student government of the college.
Like yeah, it just like it's so weird to
see that he's the one that went and
started it.
Smart guy. Anyway,
um okay. So that's why we're not on
Twitch. That That is why we're not on
Twitch. Uh so
let's talk about So all of that being
said, Will, yes. Did you get your
Switch? I did. I have it in front of me.
I have in first impressions. Like, hey,
what do you think? Okay, so I the
complicated, right? Uh if if you've ever
known me to like give an opinion on
something, I'm trying much better to be
more nuanced in these. Overall, I think
the hardware is great. I think it's it's
much bigger. It's it's much bigger. The
screen is much brighter. The uh screen
is clear. How does it feel, by the way,
when you hold it? It's got some heft to
it. Um the uh the the lock on mechanism
for the uh controllers, right, is is
very satisfying. That's right. Those are
magnets. Do they have a cool click when
they go in? Yeah. And um let's see if I
can if I can show it. So if you if you
look on the look on the screen Mhm.
look on the screen when I attach it, it
does a little thing that like shows,
right? It's a lot of nice a lot of
little touches, right? Um
uh the setup was kind of interesting. Uh
it took about half an hour. Some of
that, a reasonable portion of that was
doing the system transfer from my switch
one
that you can only do at setup. You are
never offered the opportunity to do a
system transfer again. If you want to do
a system transfer again, you have to
factory reset your Switch 2. So, if
you're going to do one, do it then. It
makes sense. You can do partial
transfers, but the only way to get the
full wizard to do the full system
transfer is at first boot, which I think
that's true of things like phones and
other stuff as well. I I I give it grief
every time it comes up to be honest. I
think it's a bad decision in general,
but um you know uh so uh that's a whole
thing. Oh, chat really really wants to
know.
I am not licking a Switch 2 game. You
don't want to watch me throw a bunch.
You just put it in your mouth while you
were like No, no, sorry. That's the
That's the controllers. What they're
talking about is that the is that the
physical cartridges for switches um are
are coated in a biterant because they
are so small. So this is this is a
switch cartridge. This is uh Breath of
the Wild. This is not Oh, wait, wait.
Literally something that makes it taste
bad to keep kids from putting it in
their mouth. Correct. Go Nintendo.
That's Yeah, it's very It's embedded in
the plastic. It never goes away. It
tastes awful. Uh and it became a meme to
like still think sticks things in their
mouth. I am 100% on this. Um Yeah. Yeah.
They're incredibly better. So, um so
there's that. Uh I like the I like the
the JoyCons. Um, I do like uh I paired
all of my old Switch One accessories.
Works pretty well. Um, the dock is nice.
Uh, it's got some good heft to it.
Physically, I like this a lot. I think
this is a high quality physical product.
I don't uh there are some concerns about
stick. I've never had a Nintendo product
with stick drift, though I empathize
with the idea that stick drift is a
problem. But from a physical
perspective, I like this console a lot.
I think it feels much better than the
Switch one to play physically, whether
it's using the Joy-Cons, using it in
handheld mode, whatever. Um, okay.
That having been said,
the software experience is fine.
When you say software, do you mean the
games or the operating system? A little
of uh mostly the operating system,
right? There's not a lot of bells and
whistles. It doesn't. Now, I'm not like
a power user of the Switch, but like
it's fine. Like, it didn't it didn't
blow me away. It's snappy. It looks
clean. It's very pretty, but it doesn't
I don't know what I expected, but
there's not a lot of room to like
impress. Okay. Right. Like, there's not
a lot of room to impress on the on the
software aspect. Um, it's just fine,
right? Which is, you know, as to be
expected. Um, and I'm last I was just
kind of curious because like consumer
hardware unboxing and feel like in a way
it didn't used to be the case. I think
now more than ever there really is a lot
around kind of the heft and weight and
balance of your phone or yes other
things that people don't necessarily
think of but as a designer like I pick
up all things all the time and I can
tell kind of the cheaply manufactured
versus medium versus more expensive.
Like who would have thought years ago
that people would like be figuring out
where to put things in the phone to make
it more ergonomical to hold so it wasn't
like more weighted one way or the other.
Yeah. Right. It's just it's interesting
what becomes I agree. Things you then
identify as does it feel good. Yes.
Absolutely. I I definitely agree with
that. Oh, also the kickstand's much
better. Oh, I heard that. Yeah. Yeah.
Yeah. The kickstand's a whole a whole
thing and not just a little flimsy like
one. Mhm. Um so that's nice. The
kickstand is no longer an afterthought.
Correct. The kickstand is and it's
included in the boot up tutorial of like
how you can use your Switch too, right?
Which is like you can use it handheld
mode or you can put it on a table in
desktop mode or you can plug it into the
dock in docked mode, right? Um oh that
that's that's a really great question.
Um the eShop feels fine. It is still the
eShop. I still would prefer to navigate
that with a keyboard, but I am also like
a I have had a Ethernet jack plugged in
between my computer and my skull since I
was about
seven. So like I am I am all over like
keyboard and mouse is like my primary
means of navigating things. Um it does
have a touchcreen if you're in handheld
mode, but if you're in dock mode that
doesn't do much. Um it's it's it's fine.
Um the
uh interesting thing about like sort of
the compatibility as well is that
they've got a lot of like when you log
into the eShop, you don't actually log
into the eShop on the console. You log
into the eShop and it shows you a QR
code and then you scan the QR code on
your phone and then the phone
authenticates for you. So, if you're
logged into your Nintendo account on
your phone, you scan the QR code, it
logs you in, and then it gives you a
code to send back to the um it gives you
like a alpha numeric code to send back
to the Switch to confirm that it's you.
Okay, which is nice. I do like that bit.
Although, I am also given to understand
that later on in the Switch one's life
cycle that was more of a thing um as
well. I don't think the eShop is plenty
snappy, too. I know it was pretty laggy
on the Switch one, but um
yeah, let's talk games real quick,
though. Okay, so so
consoles in general. I am going to I'm
going to go a limb. Consoles are not
sold because they're consoles.
Consoles are sold because they're rare
exceptions. The PlayStation 3. Sure. PS3
grant PS3 exception granted. Sometimes I
really want a Blu-ray player that can
also be part of a Beaolf cluster. Um you
know, you know. Uh, other than that,
other than that, consoles are sold as a
delivery mechanism for a game that you
really want
in some hopefully games. Hopefully
games, right? Right now, it's game. It
is game. There's uh I saw a statistic
and I'm not 100% sure on this, but I saw
that it was roughly 88% market
penetration on Mario Kart World,
which is
Yeah, that's wild, right? I wonder if
the Costco only bundled it with the
Mario only sold the Mario Kart bundle.
You could buy either one, but most
people from my understanding bought the
Mario Kart bundle, right? Um,
so, uh, the,
um, Mario Kart World is definitely the
closest thing to a killer app that the
new console has. I am not saying that
the Donkey Kong game is bad, merely that
the Donkey Kong game was not advertised
terribly well or interestingly, I don't
get it. It doesn't have the charm or
appeal of Mario, right? I'm not saying
Donkey Kong is a bad character, but like
they were talking about destructible
terrain as like the big selling point of
like digging around in destructible
terrain, and that's not a thing that
like really appeals to me unlike their
last Mario title which they were using
to really drive the Switch sales which
was the Odyssey um which was Odyssey
with like the whole like cap capture you
can be different enemies thing that felt
like a better cell than this does.
Donkey Kong is a brand neutral thing.
Like if you look at what does Nintendo
have? Cool. A Mario Kart title, a Donkey
Kong title. Like it doesn't seem weird.
It's like a thing Mario
has. Yeah. Um so I think I think Mario
Kart's the big thing. Um yes, that is
also true. Oopsie is correct. Um it is
not 80. Uh Mario Kart on its own is 80.
Donkey Kong on its own is 70.
So, the price break may make some
difference to some people, but again,
for most people, Mario Kart's 50 because
you bought it with a console.
Um, but that's it.
Unless you count What do you mean by
that's it? For Nintendo first party
titles, there are like three meaningful
first party Nintendo titles. And I'm
going to put air quotes around
meaningful. Okay. Mario Kart World,
Donkey Kong, and the $10 should have
been free on every unit, but isn't for
some reason, I don't understand, Switch
to Tour app thing. I don't understand
which executive thought it was cool to
charge 10 bucks for that, but they were
right. And I hate that they were right.
It's like number three or four on the on
the Steam on the Switch charts. I'm
literally I wonder how many parents
bought that thinking it was a cheap
game. Yep. Uh, as of hold on, let me let
me me look at the bestsellers list.
Bestsellers list, Welcome Tour is number
five.
Some well, some executive made Nintendo
a lot of money.
Yeah, a lot of money. Now, um, plus Oh,
will a year from now they're going to
say comes free with bundle. Yeah. Right.
Or something, right? Yeah. So, maybe
they'll just leave it up there and, you
know, rack up like 50 million in sales
over, you know, sure, five or 10 years
and, right,
anyway. Um, so, uh, so it's Mario Kart,
which is, um, number one.
Oh, wow. I didn't even realize this.
Okay. Donkey Kong is not on the top
selling page at all.
Oh, so this is going to get me to the
point which I want to talk about for a
second. But so one of the things about
consoles is people will often hold off
buying them until there is the killer
app, the mustplay game. You know, the
Halo 3 for the 360.
Oh, wait. Chat's saying that Donkey Kong
isn't available right now. Okay, that
makes sense. I thought it was a launch
title, but it's not. That's very So
there was only one Nintendo one first
party launch title. Great. Awesome. make
makes my point so much easier. Go on,
Jeff. Oh, that a lot of people will hold
off on buying in some cases until
there's the game they want to play, the
killer app, the killer game that and
that's that is historically for game
hardware what has moved it. And Nintendo
might have thought honestly Mario. So
Will, yes, before I get to the other
thing, go with me on this rabbit hole
for a moment. Sure.
Say you're Nintendo. Yep. And you're
looking at your slate of titles that are
going to come out in the first three
years
of the Switch 2 that you're making. Not
the third party stuff. They don't
control the third party stuff in the
same way they do their own stuff. And
they look at this and they say, "Okay,
the average video game family buys two
to three games a year, right?
and they look they're like, "hm, we have
five games that are going to come out,
first party games in the next three
years." I'm picking a random number. I
wonder if they literally looked at that
and said, "Cool, we're going to space
these out so that every six months or,
you know, maybe we'll have another one
come out a month after launch, but you
know, we're going to space these out so
that there will always be for Timmy's
birthday and for Christmas
you know, one or two Nintendo first
party things that the person doesn't yet
own, right? That they literally might
have pulled back on that just because
they have a limited slate of capacity of
what they make. Yeah. I'm not saying
that's true, but that is a possibility
that they have looked at the amount of
sales that their typical purchaser buys
of games and just said, "We don't need
to have more than that." I think that's
fair. And I think that there's a
compelling argument that Donkey Kong
Bonanza is there to make people remember
that they have a Switch 2 a month after
it comes out, right? Cuz like and and my
confusion is deeply rooted in the fact
that when they talked about launch
titles, Donkey Kong Bonanza was always
paired with Mario Kart. And I was like,
"Okay, cool. It's either of those,
right?" Um there is a thing where
sometimes people will give a window of
like two months for considering what a
launch title is. That's fair. Yeah. That
it isn't it isn't day zero launch. is
these were available in the launch
window of the console. That's a very
good point. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
Yeah. Um
and so currently if you are a Nintendo
fanboy fan girl fan person,
there is one game that you can only play
on the Switch 2 sort of
because the number two on the bestseller
list is a $10 game game. The $10 upgrade
to Tears of the Kingdom to the Switch 2
edition and the Breath of the Wild is
number six. Three is Cyberpunk, four is
Delta Rune, by the way. Five is Welcome
Tour, six is Breath of the Wild upgrade.
So, out of the top six, two, actually,
can we just read off the top 10? Yep.
Top 10 right now as of time of recording
are Hold on. Hold on. So, January 12th,
uh, if you're looking at Pacific time,
just after noon, June June. Jeff, wait.
What did I say? You said January. Oh,
it's a J month. June. June 12th. Right.
Okay, cool. Um,
best sellers as of right now. Number
one, Mario Kart World. Number two, Tears
of the Kingdom Switch upgrade pack.
Number three, Cyberpunk 2077. Number
four, Delta Rune. Number five, uh,
Nintendo Switch 2: Welcome Tour. Number
six, Zelda Breath of the Wild, uh,
upgrade pack. Number seven, Fantasy
Life. Number eight, uh might be first
party n uh Bravely Default. Um number,
uh nine is Street Fighter 6. Number 10
is No Man's Sky. And No Man's Sky is
also 60% off. It's uh it's the only
title on that list that's on sale and
it's 60% off. How much is it selling
for? Uh it is currently selling for $24.
It normally retails for 60.
They really want to get people into the
Switch eco. Well, I will also point out
game that has ongoing sales. Correct.
They also did an up they also did made
the Switch 2 uh upgrade for the Switch
one version free I believe. And they
also released an update at the same
time. And
No Man's Sky updates at this point are
just like Sean stop. Stop. Let us give
you money for this please buddy. Like
you're just make Yeah, right. Bravely is
square. Right. That's true. I wasn't
sure if Bravely Default was being
produced in Square and Nintendo are so
often confused because they're so
tightly in synergy that um Yeah.
Interestingly, well, you said Cyber Punk
was three. Cyber Punk is number three.
So, there is a mature rated game with
Nudity that is in the top three, which
isn't all that surprising. We're going
to talk about it. We'll talk about it
eventually. They ported the Switch store
like in its entirety, right? So like all
of the Switch titles are there and then
all the Switch 2 titles which means that
if you scroll down not terribly far you
start getting hentai
on on like the main thing. So the
parental controls are still intact as
well which is good because of that. But
like it is kind of interesting that
Nintendo has this very family-friendly
persona and then their online shop has
mature rated games very highly rated has
uh essentially AO games very highly
rated
um as well and I think that's one of the
interesting things where there are
people
who for their experience with gaming
play on the Switch. Yes. They don't buy
gaming PCs. You know, they have a phone
or an iPad or something, but that isn't
quite the same thing as a Switch 2, but
they're not they are not in the Xbox or
PlayStation ecosystem. They don't have a
gaming PC. And so, for a lot of these
people, you know, we're talking about
what's the killer app. The fact that the
Switch 2 is now powerful enough to play
Cyberpunk or to play Civ 7 or some of
these other games is also like part of
their killer app thing. It they're
exposing a library of, you know, the
past 5 years worth of amazing games.
Yeah. That were not playable on the
Switch One from a hardware perspective
that are suddenly now the entire library
is now available for the Switch 2. So
even though Nintendo only has that one
entry, there's a whole bunch of
fantastic games that if you are entirely
in the Nintendo ecosystem, right, you
never had access to before. Yeah. And so
and the other the other big group of
people that we're talking about is you,
Jeff, right? In what world if you were
if if I said, Jeff, I need you to buy a
Nintendo console for a thing. It's a
work thing. You got to do it. Is there a
world where you would buy a Switch One
anymore?
No.
And I think part of that is the price
difference like and like kind of getting
into the reasons to buy. Like if you
were like, "Jeff, you need to go."
Actually, if you said, "Jeff, you need a
portable console. We're all going to be
going somewhere, right? And we're going
to be playing games for a week
together." Sure. I Okay. Yes. There is
another there's a dark horse in that
race. But yes, we'll we'll we'll go with
your model that it's it's it's a
Nintendo not a Steam Deck. Yeah, it's
not a Steam Deck, right? Yeah. No, I'd
be all in on the Steam Jack train, but
Okay, cool. So, it's a Okay, but yeah,
like if I was going to go look at it,
like actually Will, how much is a Switch
One right now? Switch one is uh $300
uh for a base version for like the
launchish version, right? And $335 if
you want an OLED.
Okay. Which is I'd probably want an OLED
at this point. Yeah. So 335 and a Switch
is 500. Uh Switch is 450, but the com
but the common bundle and we we've
actually got a uh I pulled this up. Oh
yeah, just so if you if you want Mario
Kart, so it's an exact comparison. Mario
Kart World versus Mario Kart 8, it's
$500 for the Switch 2 with Mario Kart
World or 356 for the Switch One with
Mario Kart 8. So $144 different. Yeah, I
would buy a Switch 2. like the fact that
this is the newest hardware and will
last me for, you know, the next 8 to 10
years until Mario or Nintendo puts out
the three, right? Um, like I can't see a
world where I wouldn't spend that
difference to get basically almost a
decade newer hardware, right, with all
of the games that it therefore entails
could play and the full backwards
compatibility where I could then be
like, "Oh, there are Switch One games I
want, right? I can still buy them and
play them, right? It doesn't lock you
out of anything. Right. If if we were in
a case where backwards compatibility was
less robust, there might be a stronger
argument for having a switch one. But
because we don't, there's not as much
because, as you said, it's the 99
something% correct. transfers over.
Yeah.
I can't see a world where if I was going
to be spending that much for a gaming
console that I wouldn't buy the one that
equivalently is going to last the next
decade. I completely agree. I think I
I'll I'll freely admit that if you're
going to buy a Nintendo console right
now, buying a Switch 2 is the sensible
move, assuming you can get one and can
afford the price. Like, I need a console
and it is going to be Nintendo, right?
Switch makes sense.
But, oh, and if you're just somebody who
likes buying the new gaming hardware to
see what it is, correct? But strong
argument, too. Right. We're I'm also
going to stipulate that there's a large
group of people that have already
checked out because they've already got
their Switch 2. By the way, if you're
watching this on a Switch 2, sound off
in the comments cuz I feel like that's
cool and meta. Um the there is a group
of people all of that being said, right?
If you already have a Switch One, and
there's nothing wrong with your Switch
One,
I don't know that Nintendo has yet made
a super compelling case to upgrade.
Unless,
and there's another big carve out,
unless your killer game is out, and
that's going to be different for
everyone, right? For some people, that's
going to be Mario Kart World. For some
people, that's going to be Legends ZA.
For some people, that's going to be
Metroid Prime. For some people, that's
going to be Kirby Air Ride. For some
people, for some people it might be
cyberpunk. For some people it might be
waiting for your portable system to play
Cyberpunk on and you're like, "Cool,
it's now here." Yes. But yeah, if it
isn't, you're right. Will like you could
wait another year or two or three
because there are also plenty of good
games on the Switch One and there isn't
yet the huge tipping point of well, of
course you would buy like it's not it's
not an incredibly it's not a
hard-hitting launch lineup. It's not
Halo, right? It's not the next
generation of stuff, right? Like Mario
Kart World is good. I'm not saying Mario
Kart World isn't good. It's not my cup
of tea for daily gaming. Matt is already
devouring it. We're going to if if
Twitch decides to behave, we'll play
some later uh this evening on Twitch,
but
I'm not really seeing it as like a
compelling
reason, right? the upgrade is not
compelling right now to me. Um, mostly
because that launch lineup is so spread
out temporally and is so very very hey
Nintendo. Here's the latest thing. You
know what it's going to be. Don't you
want it?
Right? And the answer might be yes, but
if the answer is no, then like what are
you doing? Wait. Just wait. Just wait
for it. Right? Like
I I think that that's that's the big
thing. And I'm not saying again again I
want to be very clear. I'm not saying
it's bad. I'm not saying it launch
wasn't spectacular. I'm not saying that
it's not worth $500 if you're trying to
buy a system from scratch. What I am
saying is I don't understand the fervor
to immediately like ditch the Switch one
and get the Switch 2 just because it's
out. I think part of it will is it's
also been a while since we had a console
launch. I think that's also true. Like
there hasn't been a new PlayStation or
Xbox for a while. you know, we're
squarely in the middle of that cycle.
The Steam Deck has been out for a bit.
Like, if you're like, "Cool, new gaming
hardware to get excited about." Like, VR
still isn't enough for most people.
Like, VR is now selling better, but it's
not the thing everybody gets excited
about. So, like if you haven't bought
There are some pe actually I would say
there is pent-up demand, I think, at
this point for it. And this is the
outlet. Is part of it. how well the
launch went is part of it the desired
like I think especially during the
pandemic a lot of us had the fondness
had fond remembrances of midnight
launches right that was a thing that was
a cultural touchstone for a whole
generation of gamers I went to the
midnight launch for reach right for Halo
Reach right not a game that many people
remember really well I think it's
probably the best game where you play as
a Spartan and the second best Halo game
overall uh cuz the best game great voice
cast excellent voice cast the best Halo
game, by the way, is ODST. I will fight.
That's what I was thinking of. I'm
sorry. Instead of Yeah, ODST had the
best voice cast. It's true. ODST was
also just the best Halo game. I will
fight people on this. Um, but like we
haven't had a midline launch of this
magnitude. We haven't had a big cultural
like moment. Keep going, sir. Yeah.
Yeah. In a while, right? Um, I think
that there's there's a ton of um
not demand for this, but demand for the
experience that this offers and I think
that that can't be underestimated in
terms of why people are so about this,
right? They want to be and
again it is right now June 12th, 2025.
If you're watching this later, there are
a lot of people who could use a good
distraction right now, and that is okay.
That is an understandable thing. This
happens to have been positioned quite
correctly to be a fun, light-hearted,
familyfriendly, highquality distraction,
right? Much in the same way that the
original Switch took off heavily during
the pandemic with the release of Animal
Crossing. I can't say that there aren't
other factors which are involved in
helping make this such a success.
They're by no means the primary driver
for that success. But we would be remiss
to not mention that there are lots of
people looking for good distractions
right now. And by Thunder is the switch
to a good distraction. Right. That
actually dubtales nicely into the
thought I'd had. Um
there's another difference between this
launch and every other console launch.
Yes,
the streamer, excuse me, the streamer
and e influencer ecosystem is now
significantly more developed. I agree.
Than any other console launch we've had.
And I will say that even with the Steam
Deck, because I don't think the Steam
Deck is something that most people got
excited about. And it's positioned
poorly because by definition, it doesn't
fit well with the streamer ecosystem
because it doesn't represent new games.
It represents taking your games away
from the thing you use to stream, right?
Versus this which does offer new games,
right? But like when was the actually
the last Xbox and PlayStation were both
five years ago, six? I don't even
remember now. Uh PS5 was mid pandemic.
Xbox was similar.
Was it that recently? Uh
the PS5 was November 12th, 2020. Yep.
Okay. Okay. So that's not mid. Okay.
5 years ago. Yeah. Yeah. Okay. So, five,
if you think of influencers and
streamers, all of that together, what's
happened in the past 5 years, I think
part of their Nintendo's big thing here,
all those, not all, a lot of those
people need a new thing to talk about
all the time. Just straight up. I think
the amount of free press Nintendo got
and free hype from this being a thing to
talk about that all of those people knew
their audiences would be at least mildly
to heavily interested in.
I forgot about that.
What? Uh
the the Xbox Series X released on the
10th and the PlayStation 5 released on
the 12th of November 2020. Oh, they
almost always are neck and neck. forgot
about how close those were to each
other. Yeah. And like it's funny because
I feel like everyone's forgotten that
and people won't forget the Switch
launch.
Well, I mean f I don't know 5 years from
now. We'll have to see. I still Well,
okay. Difference. I still remember when
Pokémon Go came out. Do you remember
Peace in Our Time, chat? You remember
Peace in Our Time? It was the week that
Pokémon Go came out and all of your
friends went out and wandered around the
city and almost ran each other over
chasing a Squirtle, right? Like great.
I still remember like that first 6
months when even like I remember going
through malls and seeing groups of
people doing these long circuits which
was basically you'd walk the circuit
long enough for all the Pokéstops to
refresh. Yep. On what was it? A five
minute refresh. 10 I think. Five or 10
whatever it was. Like Yeah. Like that
was a actually hold on grass vortex you
said it bet. Yeah. Why is this theory?
There you was special. It was that
summer was special, right? And I think
this is this is part of that in addition
to being again we're getting a lot of
flash memory because this is again part
of a um greater cultural and historical
moment for better or worse. Right. Yeah.
But yeah, like again just driving home
the fact that this it's been 5 years
since the console launch and you have a
whole bunch of people. Yes. Whose job it
is now is to be excited about the pop
culture thing and sharing it with all
the people that are interested in
hearing what they have to say. Like I
will be really curious to see the next
PlayStation Xbox launch around this. But
also those aren't mainstream in the same
way that a Switch is. I agree. Like it's
funny. They may in a lot of cases sell
more games and have more people playing
on average per capita than a Switch
does. Like higher penetration of percent
playing. But for percent of people
owning,
my parents didn't care about the
PlayStation or the Xbox. But when I
asked my parents to help me get a
Switch, they immediately said, "Hey,
we're going to try and get one, too. if
we can't, can you bring yours over for
Father's Day so we can play Mario Kart
together? That doesn't happen with all
the consoles, right? It is a it is
accessible enough and deeply embedded
enough that I think it it is a unique
phenomena. It's funny. I think for me,
and this may sound weird,
I think it was the Wii that did it. I
think it was the Wii with the silly
motion controls that ended up being more
successful than anybody ever thought
they were going to be. but got families
running around playing Wii Sports and
swinging with Wii tennis and a couple of
other things, playing together
that helped cement in a lot of parents'
minds who had never considered games
being interesting before. It was
suddenly a thing they could interact
with with their kids in a fun and goofy
way. And it helped cement
it helped cement Nintendo in the middle
of family gaming for digital. Yeah, I I
very much agree. I think that and I
think that Switch 2 is probably going to
continue that. I think that this is
right. You're going to you are going to
have moments where you uh re-engage
sibling rivalries over things like Mario
Kart. That's just going to happen. And
that's like part of the expected
experience, right? I I was uh I was
telling um uh chat on Monday when we
were talking about it that Mario Kart is
still Mario Kart time from launch until
someone was swearing and screaming about
how cheating it was. that so and so got
a blue shell is like 10 minutes. It's
like right there, right? It is still the
experience I think that people are
looking for fondly, even if it does ruin
friendships. Um, actually, and the
important thing which they captured.
Will, can you do a Did you still have
your Switch there?
Let's pretend you and I are in the same
room for a moment. Pick that up. Hey,
Will, I want to play Mario. Yep. Mario
Kart with you. You could hand me a
controller, right? You can split the
controllers on the console immediately
and generate here you go. Like that
right there I think is one of the single
biggest underrated
selling points of why the Switch one and
two and the Wii before that and and the
Wii U were brilliant is that when you go
buy an Xbox, you have to go pick up a
second controller. A lot of people don't
have one.
These come with one. It had the family
games. We were just like, "Oh, here.
Play with me." The thing I was using,
hold on. Click controller. Like, that's
faking brilliant. I I agree. So, yeah.
Overall, Switch launch A+ device.
Hardware, I would give it a solid A.
Launch lineup
B minus. Actually, launch lineup depends
who you are. Yeah. Yeah. I think if I
would say Yeah. Yeah. It depends on who
you are. For me, B minus. For for other
people, it might be higher. For other
people, it might be much lower. If you
don't like Mario Kart, if you're if
you're big into Zelda and not Mario and
you don't think that it's worth it for
the upgrade. Now, by the way, I should I
should clarify. I did try the Breath of
the Wild upgrade. Mhm. It's significant.
Those upgrades are like you get them for
free if you get the Nintendo Switch
Online Plus expansion pass subscription,
which is like 40 bucks a year. Um, and
you get two $10 upgrades with it. So,
it's like 20 bucks for a year. It's not
bad. Um,
it does do justice to those games. It
It's a really significant upgrade. Um, I
went to Cororo Forest and there was no
frame tearing or no anything. Um,
everything was smooth. The whole game
was fluid. It was very nice. So, you
know, that might be it for you. But if
if you're not feeling like there's a
killer app for you, I think it's a wait,
right? There will be one eventually if
you like Nintendo franchises, but I
don't think it's there yet for everyone.
Yeah. But again, it's it's an
interesting cultural thing happening
right now. I also agree with that
highly. I think the cultural moment is
very significant and I think that that's
a thing that uh we'll be looking at for
a while actually. I think people will
continue to participate in the I got to
switch to check this out and everyone
will be happy for them for a good long
while. Um because it's funny. I'm
actually traveling this coming like
Saturday for a little while. Going to
meet up with my sister's family and I
have a niece and nephew there who are
both teen and tween. I'm going to be
curious to see if they show up with a
switch too. Yeah. Like I I know they
have a switch. I'm curious to see if
that like bumped up to the level where
they're like, "Hey, mom and dad, can we
get this?" Yeah.
Because I don't know. Yeah.
YouTube comments, sound off below. Did
you get a Switch 2? Do you feel like it
was worth it? What's your favorite game
so far? Do you feel like it's all been
overblown? Um, let let us know in the
comments below. Uh, there will be no
design club next week. As Jeff just
mentioned, he's traveling, but we will
have one the week after. Also of note, a
small programming note. Uh over on
Twitch on Monday evening at 800 PM,
Matt and I are interviewing people about
a thing. And I'm phrasing it like that
very specifically because we're not
telling you yet. We'll tell you. Is it
going to also be co-road to here? I
don't think so. Oh, I thought it was.
Okay, we'll find out. We'll work that
out. It might be broadcast to YouTube,
but it'll definitely be over on Twitch.
Um, and whatever uh Twitch chat tells
you it's definitely not Hatsune Miku.
Um, that they they seem to believe for
some reason it's Hatsune Miku. I promise
it's not. Uh, so thank you all so very
much for joining us for our discussion
on the Switch 2 launch. I, as always,
have been your humble host, Will. That's
Jeff. Say bye to the people, Jeff. Bye
to the people, Jeff.
[Music]
And we back.
Club.
Cool. I thought that I thought that logo
intro and outro.
Mhm. Yeah. Oh, I think the intro and
outro were great. I think the uh the
episode went really well. Thanks, chat.
I thought you all had um a lot of really
good points on that. I saw a lot of
people talking about the cost of the
games. Um, that's a thing that I didn't
really want to get into here largely
because we don't have a huge sample size
and because we talked about it recently,
I I think
and also the top selling game, it's
impossible to judge what the actual
price point is because for many people
it will be $50 and for some small select
people it'll be $80, but for most people
it's $50, right? So, there's a lot of
confounding factors. I think we'll have
a better idea of where people stand on
prices when we see sales numbers for
more Nintendo games in a couple of
months. Um, but I did want to
acknowledge that I saw those. I just
didn't think it was a great part to like
put that in the um in the conversation.
Yeah, because it's just it's still too
new. It it is still too new. Um, is
there anything else, Jeff? I think Matt
and I Matt and I may go try and do see
if if Twitch is alive again to do a
Mario Kart stream. Um, which you So, if
you want to do a thing for 15 or 20
minutes, I know a thing we could do. We
could also do that when I come back
another time. We should do that another
time cuz a I don't have it set up and b
I need to go see if Twitch is working
enough to do this with Mac. That sounds
quite reasonable for both of those then.
Yeah. Uh Janet, thank you so much for
being so cool and for hanging out and
being here while we uh did a Twitchless
design club uh and for helping me test
all of the stuff. I broke a lot of
things. I'm going to have to fix all of
them when I go to stream over on Twitch
tomorrow. Uh tomorrow begins my Final F
tomorrow continues my Final Fantasy 6
playthrough. I'm in uh the the the
Shattered World and I have uh at least
three dungeons I know of before I go
take on a clown. Um so please join us
for that tomorrow. Uh until then
everybody uh yes uh in case you missed
it um we mentioned it earlier someone
mentioned that uh stuff has has been
down uh today. Um Cloudfire is having a
very bad day which means the internet is
having a very bad day. So if there are
outages it's not you it's not it's the
internet. The internet's having a bad
time today. Um so do do you know keep a
weather eye out for yourselves and um so
yeah. Cool. Great. Thank you all so
much. We'll see you all next time. Uh,
bye everybody. Two weeks from now here,
unless possibly there's a Monday one,
which we'll see. Yeah, maybe. But
there'll be breakfast on Monday anyway.
Breakfast on Monday. Design club, not
next week. It'll be great. Cool. Great.
Bye.