[Music]
Winston Churchill once said, "I'm always
ready to learn, although I do not always
like being taught." I know most of us
don't sit in front of our games every
night to learn things, but games have
more potential as teaching tools than
most people realize, and they don't even
have to be boring games to do it. But
before I dive into the topic head first,
let's start by looking at the state of
educational gaming on the mass market.
There's been a pretty big divide between
games meant to educate and games meant
to entertain. Like larger than in any
other medium kind of big. It seems that
somewhere along the way in game history,
educational games and entertainment
games were made into two completely
separate industries. So now we have the
video game industry and the enterainment
or simulation industry. And they've dug
a nice deep trench between themselves
and we haven't seen each other in years.
The problem is that in digging this
trench, both sides gave up something
valuable. To a degree, enterainment gave
up being fun while the fun games gave up
the opportunity to benefit their
audience. Now, just so we're all on the
same page, let's look at the educational
games for a moment. For starters, what
does it mean to educate? In this case,
it means setting out with a goal of
teaching someone a specific thing. And
that's what educational games do. Games
like Math Blaster, Doer is Dying, Typing
of the Dead, they all take this
approach. They are games. Yeah. But
their primary focus is to teach you
something. But you know those movies
that hold you down and hit you in the
face with the point? A lot of modern
educational games are kind of like that.
Sitting you down with the promise of a
good time before just smacking you with
a lesson plan. And being beaten over the
head just isn't very fun. Not how we
want to spend our leisure time, is it?
Not while locusts are running free. And
that Kadamari isn't going to roll
itself. And really, if we wanted to
spend our free time working to learn
something, it'd be faster and more
effective to just pick up a textbook.
Now, over in the other camp, we have the
fun games. I'm sure I don't need to
introduce you to these. They're great,
aren't they? But after a long Halo
session, when you stand up for the
couch, what have you really gotten from
the experience? Yeah, you've had fun. No
denying that. But it hasn't expanded
your horizons or enriched your life in
any way, has it? So, how can we make
games educational without sucking all
the fun out of them or substantially
adding to development costs? The answer,
to enable learning, to facilitate
learning rather than trying to educate.
Don't worry, I'm going to explain what
that means. Study after study has shown
that people assimilate information
better when they're studying topics
they're interested in rather than things
they're forced to learn for school or
for work. You know what I mean? You
can't remember the names of all 50
states half the time, but you can draw a
map of Azeroth from memory. Don't be
ashamed of it. It's how we are. If we're
interested in something, we're going to
have an easy time learning it. The
problem with the educational approach is
that it tries to jazz up a topic we just
don't care about rather than trying to
get us engaged in the topic and care
about it in a personal way. But video
games have a huge advantage here. We
inherently care about what we're doing
when we play games. The enthusiasm is
already there and the game designer just
has to channel it. This brings us to the
topic of tangential learning. Tangential
learning is not what you learn by being
taught. Rather, it's what you learn by
being exposed to things in a context
which you're already engaged in. For
example, consider say the movie 300.
Clearly not a film intended to educate,
right? Yet just about everyone you know
now knows who Leonitis is. The film
didn't educate, but it got people
interested and it stirred discussion.
People were exposed to something they
didn't know they were interested in,
which is one of the biggest
breakthroughs for learning. Some people
Googled 300 and ended up at the
Wikipedia page for the historical battle
of thermopoly. Others simply thought,
"Hey, Leonitis seems pretty awesome. I'd
like to learn more about him." But you
get the idea. This is what tangential
learning is all about. It's the idea
that some portion of your audience will
self-educate if you can introduce them
to topics in a context they already find
exciting and engaging. For example,
maybe after hours of playing Call of
Duty 2, certain shooter fans might
decide to read about the campaigns of
World War II. Maybe some Dynasty
Warriors fans will take time to learn
more about conflicts in Chinese history.
As for me, thanks to Rockband, I've
discovered whole eras of music I never
realized I liked. And I've spent hours
watching documentaries on rock history
and reading up on the rock gods of old.
And my wife has been very patient with
me. I bet most of you can think of a
time this sort of things happened to you
as well. This is easy for games to do
and it costs nothing to the developer.
And there are a lot of different ways to
do it, too. Some of you may wonder, is
tangential learning possible in games
that aren't historically themed? Yes, it
is. And I'll give you an example. This
is how tangential learning, barely
implemented and taking no extra
development time, can serve to introduce
players to new ideas. Consider how many
RPG fans who have never gone to Temple
know what the Sephro is simply because
the Final Fantasy team decided to name a
character after it. if just.1% of the
Final Fantasy audience discovered what
it is. Square just facilitated the
learning of 10,000 people. So, let's
think of some good ways to put
tangential learning into action without
resorting to history retellings. One way
is to follow the Sephro example, setting
up a little kernel of fact or a
reference into the game story. But when
your game is a giant sea of fantasy
fiction, it's going to be pretty hard
for your audience to figure out which
elements are references and which ones
are just crazy you made up. So, how
do you highlight which elements have
more to them? You could use the
straightforward Zenosaga method and
simply make everything referential. Of
course, that's probably going to take a
lot of effort and pre-planning to pull
off. Alternatively, you could literally
highlight the names of referential
things. Effective, but kind of tacky.
Personally, I recommend a more subtle
approach. For example, I'm fond of games
that give information or quotations
during loading screens. It's dead space
anyway, and it's not like we gamers have
anything better to do while we wait, so
why not throw something up there for us
to read? Another example, if you include
objects in a game that are clearly
referential, you can clue the player in
that other objects in the game might be
references as well. So, like if you
include the Excalibur as a sword in your
game, an obvious reference, then the
player might connect the dots and assume
that perhaps the Masamune in your game
is a reference as well. A really great
example of tangential learning
opportunities in action are those
in-game indexes. You know, like the
Civilipedia, Mass Effects, CEX, the
Metal Gear Database, that kind of thing.
These are all good examples of a game
providing players a space to access
tangential topics in game. But that
concept could go even further. What if
rather than spending time, money, and
storage space developing a civilia type
feature, developers integrated a readily
available source of information?
Wikipedia. Wikipedia links could easily
be implemented into any PC game and
require no development time or disk
space. Plus, Wikipedia would allow users
to follow their interests from topic to
topic in a way that traditional in-game
encyclopedias simply never could. Now,
these sort of features might sound a
little heavy-handed or intrusive, but
they won't be if the player never has to
use them. properly implemented, things
like the codeex or a civilipedia can add
to the depth of a player's experience
without making them feel like you're
holding them down and bludgeoning them
with knowledge. That's the whole point.
Enhancing the player experience without
getting in the way of the fun. Now,
don't think I'm saying that there's
anything wrong with old-fashioned fun
games. A game certainly doesn't have to
be educational to be worth our time. But
many designers are missing out on a
prime opportunity to enrich their
audience's lives. This is a chance for
developers to extend the players
engagement with their product at very
little additional cost. And I hope more
developers start taking advantage of it
in the future. Games can be more than a
mere diversion. When we put down the
controller, we should have the
opportunity to bring something from our
recreation into our lives. By simply
exposing players to new concepts,
designers can lay the groundwork for
learning. And to any of you who are
planning to look up what the Sephro is
after this, you know tangential learning
works. See you next week.
[Music]
Heat. Heat.
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
Heat. Heat.
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]