The beacon the the beacon the beacons
are lit. Um the beacon has been lit. The
beacon that said no one should come and
look at this. Right. That's right. So it
exists. Okay, good. It exists. It is
however the thing we wanted people not
to perceive. Correct. Is now is in
existence right now. It it is
perceivable. Um it is however unlisted.
So I'm going to fix that. Right. You
might have to do that on the fly's
correct. I don't actually know where
that thing. There it is. Visible uh
public.
So now the beacons have been lit. The
second beacon, right? The beacon that
was like the first beacon been lit but
wasn't. Yeah. Okay, cool. And I'm
getting
Well, to everyone uh either coming in or
who is watching this later, like what is
going on? Hello. My name is Matt. I'm
the showrunner narrator of extra credits
pronouns he him. We are doing a test
that due to the title, you really
shouldn't be here, right? Yeah. Uh,
right. Okay. So, yeah. Um, excellent,
excellent, excellent. I see Janet is in
attendance. Hello, YouTube comments. Uh,
and, uh, I got the I got I love this.
They're already in uniform. It's No.
Nuh-uh. Definitely not. Um, love this.
Uh, I I absolutely love Here, I'm gonna
I'm gonna pull some of these up. Let's
see.
Oh. Uh, Matt, in the thingy. Yep. I'm
gonna I'm gonna activate selected select
live source and that way I' be I'll be
able to see the Janet chat. That's
correct. The YouTube chat. There we go.
Yeah. Right. And so, uh, Right. And so I
can say that like this shows up on
screen, right? QB, nobody ignored this.
Nobody ignored this. Correct. So, hi
YouTube. Uh, this is an experiment that
we are doing. That's correct. Again,
expect nothing good right now because
this is Will and I running a stress test
for hopeful good things later. I
introduce myself. Will, who is you? Hi,
I'm Will. Uh, pronouncing him. I am the
the the Hold on. I I dress for the
occasion. Wait, hold on. I'm the Twitch
guy. Huh? Uh, I'm the live streaming
guy. Uh, I do all of our um He's that
guy. He does I'm that guy in the place
with the the face, right? I do all of
our live streaming stuff. If you've
watched any of our let's plays, you
won't see my face, but you will see my
work cuz I'm the one behind the scenes
managing all of that stuff, and I'm
generally the camera. Um, I co-host both
our breakfast podcast and our design
club podcast with Matt and Jeff,
respectfully. Respectively. Um, yeah. Is
this an Easter egg? The these are these
are all very good questions. I Well,
actually, I have another one once that
one's up. This is technically not an
Easter egg. Uh, it's early for Easter.
It's it's more of like a a March
I want to talk about magical crazies
here. This is going to kill your
algorithm. Well, this is a weird little
test. So, okay, let's little bit of
story time. So, back a while ago, we
tried doing uh putting some of the talk
shows we do on Twitch uh put the VODs on
YouTube and back then you darn tootin it
did some some some negative stuff to the
algorithm. No question. Uh the
interesting thing now is why we wanted
to try this now. And again, this isn't a
real show. this is a fake show to test
to see if the real shows work, right? Um
the now YouTube cordons it off like
there is a section for live streams. It
doesn't put all of these things in. So
one of the other tests that we're going
to run today is when this is done in
like 10 or 15 or 20 minutes or whatever
it is, uh we are going to once it's done
and it's treated as a VOD, we're going
to look at our page, see where it places
it, see how it organizes it, etc. Uh
because this is much different content
than what's usually on the channel,
right? Uh and we're totally aware of
that, right? But um this is
would we really be EC if we weren't
failing faster and trying random wacky
stuff like doing this. Um so yeah, this
is a uh this is sort of a all a grand
experiment, right? Because like this is
not Yeah, social psych's got it. Not not
a real show, just a tribute. Like Matt
and I have been doing this show for oh
god, ready to turn to dust.
like five years, right? And like north
of 200 episodes. Um, and so we thought
that the this might be uh with the
changes to the algorithm, this might be
a good way to bring it to more of you.
Uh, and in a way that doesn't suffer
from the same like this isn't an
animated video problem that the ones
before did, right? Because when someone
clicks on a live stream, I don't think
they expect us to be live animated
versions of ourselves. We're working on
it. Yeah, exactly.
Um, yeah. Well, I'm just trying. It's
funny. I'm trying to keep up with
everything here, but there there's a
lot. Yeah. Um, so so far, let's walk
through kind of what we're doing. So,
we're sim we are simal streaming on
Twitch and YouTube right now. That's
part of the test. We're testing out
Will's rig. We're also testing out some
of the tools that Will has uh put into
place here so we can look at both chats
at the same time and pull uh you know
comments from folks about pertinent
stuff we're talking about. Yeah. Like
for
instance uh excuse me, where's VTuber
Matt? I'm looking for him. We'll find
he's he he is currently at large. Yeah,
correct. He's out in the world.
Uh, we don't know his exact location,
but uh, I'll let you know as soon as I
find him. Fun fact, Vtuber Matt is
actually the snail to Matt's in
immortality, right? Like Matt has to
keep moving away from the snail cuz if
they ever touch, they'll mutually
annihilate, right? It's like that. Um,
only unfortunately Vtuber Matt is flat.
So, um, we're going to roll them up and
put them in a poster tube and then just
mail that poster tube to a random fan
and then it won't be a problem anymore.
Uh, we think that's the really the best
solution. It's the it's the path of
least resistance really, correct? Yeah.
Yeah. Yeah. Absolutely. Um,
uh, someone says, uh, can we get a
stream called EC tangents where you guys
just go off on tangents together? That's
this stream.
It's not the title of this stream again.
The title was uh, test stream. Please
ignore. Yeah. Um, but if you want the
subtitle or the the pull quote on the
back of the box of this stream when you
buy it at a brick and mortar store, uh,
it would be something akin to this.
Yeah, absolutely. Um, so, uh, we also
want to open the floor to, uh, yeah,
wait. Someone found this. Someone what?
The RE1 dialogue in the description. I
don't know what you're talking about.
Look, if you can't read the title, why
should we believe that you can read the
description? I listen I am just thankful
someone saw it. Yeah. So, um, uh, okay.
So, so in fairness to to Ben, um, Ben
says it's a clickbait title. Actually,
generally not like, so, so there's sort
of a balance here, right? We knew that
there were going to be people here. We
also actually need to test things,
right? So, like, um, behind the scenes,
there's a bunch of metrics going on,
right? I am currently, uh, for all of
you streaming nerds, I am double
encoding the stream myself. We're not
using a third party, um, thing like
Reream. I have an add-on in my streaming
software, OBS, that is encoding this
twice and sending identical copies to
Twitch and to YouTube. We've never done
that before. So, I genuinely need to
test that, right? And I can test that
even if nobody shows up. Um, we also
wanted to see how um this new Twitch or
this new um chat add-on that we have
works. Um, and so there are a bunch of
things that we're legitimately testing
here. Your presence is lovely though u
not strictly speaking necessary. Uh so
yeah but why would why would we not uh
show up? Great question. Yeah, also
thank you very much a bizarre fantasm.
We appreciate you uh ignoring the
instruction and being here and thank you
very much. That's very kind. Yeah. Um
yeah. So, so the
idea behind this test and I'm actually
quite proud right now, Will, of what
you've done. Like, so right now, case in
point, Will and I can both find uh chat
messages and highlight them separately.
Spoil I want I want to break Will I'm
going to break the fourth wall here for
for a moment.
We're not in the same place. We're not
near each other at all. We're we're
about a 9h hour drive apart. We're
significantly far apart. So, we can't we
can't like, you know, uh high five.
Well, we kind of Yeah. Oh, that almost
worked. So, like um we what we wanted to
make sure was that we both could take
highlighted um messages, you know, for
pertinent topics whenever we're doing
something like this. And we've proven
that we can. We both can work on the
same uh I guess instance of the merged
chat, which is something that up
until an hour and a half ago, we didn't
know if we could do. Correct. We've we
there have been some technical
struggles. I I I'm telling Matt this
that for the first time I legitimately
had nightmares about this last night. I
legitimately like woke up this morning
and realized that something was broken
uh and that I was going to need to fix
it before we could do this. And that's
how my morning started. So, uh to see
all of this going this well um is uh is
is really excellent. Um uh again with
the secrets, why are you spoiling our
secrets? Also, it is cool that it shows
that Thunder's a mod on YouTube. That's
nice. Oh, cool. Yeah. Um, uh, by the
way, if you're in YouTube chat, um, you
may notice that there are already mods
there. Those mods are also our Twitch
mods. Um, that they've been with us for,
oh god, I think Thunder's the most
recent of them, and Thunder joined like
three years ago. It's been a hot bit.
So, um, yeah. Uh, yeah. Uh
um also just some some housekeeping I
guess since people are here in the in
the not come here uh stream. Uh you'll
hear us refer to Brad, Janet, and Rocky.
If you are not familiar with that, uh
those were our names uh when we did the
talk show when we since we've been doing
the talk shows on Twitch. Brad is Twitch
chat, Janet was YouTube comments, now
YouTube chat, and Rocky is Nebula. Uh
because Rocky doesn't talk much. Because
Rocky doesn't
talk.
Um, so if you hear that, that's what
that is. Yeah. Um, so what else do we
need to run through here, Will? Let's
see. Um, well, we kind of we kind of do
need to test this. So,
um,
chat, we're gonna we're gonna real
quick, we're going to test a recording.
Oh, that's right. Okay. So, yeah, again,
peek behind the curtain. what we've
done, especially for like the Nebula
uploads, uh, we we normally do a
pre-show for our Oh, let's back up.
Let's even back up further. The idea
that we want to do here is we're not
moving every stream that we do on Twitch
over to YouTube. That doesn't make
sense. We still want to only move over
things that basically we consider like a
produced show, right? Right now, those
are the two you might have seen before
when we tried this experiment before the
tools and the setup and the page was uh
honestly appropriate for the algorithm
to not do weird things. And that is
games for breakfast where me and Will
sit in an animated kitchenet on Monday
mornings and talk about the week's
gaming and tech news. We've been doing
that show for over five years now. Um
and it's really nice because you know
all of our stuff takes a long time to
make. Um uh the animated stuff. This is
stuff that lets us sort of stay more on
top of what is currently going on in
gaming and the video game space. So,
that's uh one of my favorite things to
start my week with. And then Will and
our studio director Jeff do a show
called Design Club where they sit in our
animated uh coffee shop here and deep
dive for about an hour, hour and a half
into specific game design uh principles,
theories, things that are going on in
sort of that space. Industry industry
stuff. Uh Jeff is a game designer with
20 plus years experience who uh is an
absolute beast in the space and has tons
of just uh where where I bring chaos to
a breakfast kitchenet, right? Uh I will
say that Jeff brings gravitas and
knowledge to design perspective and and
things like that. And Will tries to rein
us both in. Yeah. Um um so just wrapping
that up, those are the two shows that
we're going to try uh co-streaming here.
There is still other stuff on Twitch if
you wanted actual play or not like
actual plays or playthroughs or stuff
like that. Actually, right after this
once we stop the co-stream. Uh we're
going to be doing my Thursday block with
Will and we're just going to be running
some Shadow of the Year intrigue cuz I
need to beat that thing before Night
Rain comes out, right? Uh but those are
the kind of things that will be on
Twitch if you ever wanted them, but
those will not be coming to YouTube.
Only shows that have like an episode
dock and like what we're doing and produ
and produced elements and things like
that will be coming to YouTube. Yeah.
For instance, um we've got a bunch of
stuff to talk about. We got to talk
about the GDC awards on Monday. Um there
were a bunch of awards that got won by a
bunch of really deserving folks. Um and
then on Thursday, we're going to be uh
Jeff and I are going to be diving into a
really crunchy topic for the industry,
which is
are conventions still worth it for the
gaming industry? Like E3 is dead, y'all?
Like it it it is dead and buried. Like
is that concept still worth it? So,
we're going to be diving into that and
I'm going to be interviewing Jeff about
his time at GDC and what he got out of
the experience as someone in the
industry because that's a cool thing we
can do that will never really comp that
just doesn't compress into like an
animated. He's there right now so we're
going to find out. Uh uh Beet uh Tist
here asked a question. Serious question.
Y'all doing alerts for subs and
whatnot? Are you talking about will this
alert subs when it goes live or are you
talking about something that I'm not
following? So, uh, to to answer the
question of will you doing things to
support the stream make weird goofy
stuff appear on stream? Oh, no, that's
the question. That that's that's a sub
alert. Um, there will be some minimal
stuff. Um, for instance, uh, Brad, can I
get a lurk alert from someone just to
like demonstrate? Um, and then, uh, so
there will be like some minimal stuff in
the background to like thank you, but
that's not really the focus of
it. Okay. All right, y'all. Y'all broke
it. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. But that's
happening. So right now, just again as
this is a test, I'm seeing Yeah. I'm
seeing that in Twitch chat, not anywhere
on our correct. That's because it's not
important to that thing. So then what
would be the alert that they would see?
Oh, uh, normally, oh, it's broken on
this scene. Great. Thanks for Twitch
chat. Um, normally there's a little
there's a little guy that like leans in
and out of We found our first bug. First
bug. I'm adding I'm adding in a document
of some kind. Um so uh where did I put
my documents? So um yeah, we're gonna um
uh they will be minimal. They'll be
unobtrusive. We're not going to take
time to call out subs or super chats or
memberships or any of that um during the
show, right? We will thank people like
beforehand. But here's what we will do.
Actually, here's here's a question,
Will. Sorry to interrupt. So, I this is
where I was going before I went to the
tangent about what shows were coming
over here. For both of those shows, and
this will play back into the original
question, for both of those shows, we do
what is essentially a pre-show um where
we just come on kind of shoot the ish
for a second and um kind of warm up
before we start the show. And actually,
we're gonna run a test of one of the
show opens in a second to make sure that
doesn't crash everything because Will
has it set up on his end to have it
start a local record of what we're doing
from the start of of a of a show's intro
graphic and then when the show's outro
graphic, it cuts it and stops. Um, so
one thing where we do what we do on
Twitch is especially for like free subs
and and and I guess here for like
memberships or or whatever YouTube sort
of calls them super chats and super
chats, etc. If we do the pre-show on
YouTube, which I think we should, and
then we just take the trim down one and
save it as the VOD that save it as the
VOD. Um, the all of those things will be
called out in the beginnings of the
shows in the be in the pre-shows
basically. So, like for instance, if
you're coming to hang out and show
support and whatever, uh, all support is
greatly appreciated, but we'll do like
the call outs in that first 10 minute.
Like if it like everything that happens
in that first 10 minutes will be the
thing and we'll talk through people and
thank people and welcome them on in
because um we don't uh we don't want to
d we don't want to have the possibility
of being like on a really serious topic
like unionization in the games industry
because that's a thing that like both of
those shows have talked about, right? or
like layoffs or console or something,
right?
yapping about Monster Hunter Wilds or
Night Rain or whatever and have that get
derailed by feeling like we immediately
need to thank someone because
um as exhibited with the tangent thing
earlier, if you put pennies on Matt and
Mai's train of thought at the same time,
not only do they spectacularly derail,
but they sort of both jump the tracks
and then collide midair and explode,
right? So, we don't really want to have
notifications doing that. Um though we
do support it. Uh we do. Yeah, we do. E
is cheating on Twitch. No, no, no, no.
Yeah. Also, we should we absolutely
should know better. And and yeah, almost
like here we are. We do know better. Or
do we? We might. I don't know. I've met
better. Yeah, they're pretty cool.
Anyway, um so we're going to we're going
to run a um a test uh of the recording.
So, uh, for for those of you who have
never seen it before, this is going to
be I'm not going to go to black because
that's going to confuse everyone. Um,
uh, this is going to be a test of the
recording, uh, for, uh, breakfast. So,
you'll get to see the breakfast intro
for the first time. And hopefully this
doesn't crash everything. If it does, we
will be back right after this to keep
testing. It just might kick out. And
listen, if you're here for it, great. If
not, then the instructions still worked
and everyone wins both ways, right?
Yeah. Uh, thanks. All right. Cool. Cool.
Pressing the button in three, two,
one. Oo. Oh. Oh. Oh, I know what I did
wrong. I know what I did wrong. I know
what I did wrong. This is a test. It
failed successfully. Great. Great.
Great. Great. I have to be in this
thing. I have to be in this thing. No.
No. No. Shut up. It's great.
[Applause]
[Music]
Okay. And then we'd say good morning.
And then Yeah. Good morning, Matt. Good
morning, Will. Good morning to all of
you. Welcome to Games for Breakfast Talk
Show. We talk about this week's gaming
and tech news, but also tell you not to
come to a place and you show up anyway.
That's right. Yeah, that's that's
exactly it. Um, okay. So, is it now
recording on your system? Yes, it is now
successfully recording and I freed up
room. And so far, by the way, yeah,
everything seems to be running somewhat
smoothly. It's really weird cuz I'm
triple encoding now and it's like I'm
only at 37% of GPU power which is really
great because it means I've got lots of
headroom for unexpected things to
happen. Um so that's really unexpected
things to happen.
An unexpected thing. I just I just took
away 16% of Will's bandwidth with that.
Yeah. Right. Um so uh while we're while
we're doing this because we're going to
let the recording run for a bit just to
make sure cuz I'm going to analyze
afterwards.
Um, do you have questions? Right?
Because this is a great time while we're
just doing stuff. If you have if you
have questions, um, we're stress
testing. So, that means we have to chat
for like five or 10 minutes and see how
it goes. Uh, Beet asks, "What's the
rig?" Uh, the rig in this case is how I
refer to the there. I have a two PC
streaming setup. I have a um relatively
new built over the winter break. Uh, you
know, when we go on that winter break
thing, we also go on a Twitch break. So,
I get two weeks where I don't have to
stream. So, I rebuilt an entirely new
computer and put it together in that two
weeks when I was supposed to be
relaxing. I don't have problems. It's
fine. Um, and it is a GTX 4090 Ryzen
9950 uh X sort of behemoth of a thing.
Um, and so it is what's handling all of
the stream stuff. When I do gameplay
streams, I have a separate computer that
I feed into this computer to keep the
stream crispy. Right. So, yeah. Um, so,
uh, let's see what else we have. Uh,
what's Nathan? What's your favorite
Mario game? Uh, canon Mario Super Mario
World? I guess offc cannon. I don't know
if this even matters, but I've been on a
real Dr. Mario like mental bender
lately. Um, and the music has been stuck
in my head a lot. So, those are my two.
Will, do you have any? Um, I will
confess. I have a confession to make.
Not much of a Mario kid. Um, I guess it
would. But if you had to if I had to
fireflower to your head
64 um uh but that's also because if if
you do it right right Nintendo
kids the main menu music for Mario 64 is
now playing in your
head. Congratulations. Your blood
pressure probably just dropped or or
Yeah. Yeah. I thought you were going to
say hi and you went low.
Like that is like such deep nostalgia
childhood feels, right? I think I know
the answer for both of Will and I here.
Do we want to say it at the same time?
Yeah. So, three, two, one. Cowboy Bbop.
Oh, no. See? Yeah. We didn't quite No.
No. Out of these two. Out of these two,
it's funny. Will, I was this close to
saying Babylon 5, but I wanted us to be
different, right? Um, uh, I would
personally go Star Trek. Uh, I I I
think, um, I I'm more on Trek than Wars.
Caveat, Mandalorian is the best thing
they've put out for the Wars since Oh,
Andor is for me. I I'm I'm not super
invested in Andor. I respect it as a
great show. It's not for me. versus like
Mandalorian's sort of like
I have gone on so many rants with Twitch
chat about how the worst part about Star
Wars is Jedi and how if you remove Jedi
from Star Wars uh the world of Star Wars
gets a chance to breathe and do weird
stuff that's not about Jedi. I don't
want them removed. I want them to be
mythical again. Right. No, no, no.
That's that's fine. I mean like if
they're not the focus of the story,
right? So like if it's Mando, right? And
kind of Grou kind of is, right? But like
if it's about man if it's about
Dingjarun's journey with the dark saber
and like the quest to reunite the
Mandalorian that gets a whole lot more
interesting when the Jedi aren't
directly involved solving all the
problems. So yeah. Um oh interesting
will. Yes. Uh so I just we just had a
bit of a bit rate drop on my end. I
don't know if anyone else saw that. I
see uh Ramy
[Music]
mentions minor issue on the side stream.
And closed captioning is not available
here like it is for Brad. So that means
there isn't on YouTube. Is there a way
we can turn that on? I will look into
it. That is my list of things. That's a
great great captions for YouTube. I I
need to see if I can tie in the closed
caption software that I use um or if I
need to use a different solution. Yep.
Okay, cool. Um let's see other
questions. I got another video game one.
uh traditional Zelda more dungeon
oriented versus Breath of the Wild open
world which is better I will put a
caveat at the end of your question uh
Zach 3 and I will say better for us cuz
I don't know if if intrinsically I can
say that one is officially better
um I
re I think dungeonoriented for me not
that I didn't love breath and tears uh
but I think I got most excited did in
Breath and Tears when like I was in the
open world and then I got put into a sp
like I love the um the wow I'm blanking
it's been a minute but the sites where
you get the the stuff to level up all
your things those little like shards in
the ground uh the shrines or whatever.
Um like I don't know I like I like Zelda
design and puzzle solving in that way.
What about you, Will? Uh I think I'm
sort of middle of the road. Um, and I'm
going to say there's a there's a very
specific middle of the road exception
and it's mask. Majora's Mask feels like
it's uh it's got a lot of overworld
stuff and has and it's different it's
different kinds of boxes, right? It's
it's a different kind of box, but the
focus on questing specifically and all
of the side quests to get all the masks
in Majora's Mask feels like um the sort
of predecessor that I want to the to the
Breath of the Wild quest system at least
to me far more than anything like in
Wind Waker did. Um but also where do you
put Wind Waker in that spectrum? Because
like if it's not Mask, it's Wind Waker
for me. Wind Waker is wonderful. They're
all kind of wonderful. This is a hard
question because every time I'm like,
"Oh, this. We'll accept this, this, and
this." Yeah. Yeah. Um,
uh, I'm of the opinion that Wind Waker
is the answer. The open ocean serves to
emphasize the structure of the detailed,
uh, design spaces. Yeah. Absolutely,
Richard. That that Yes, 100%. Um, also,
by the way, small a small thing that I
did just notice now that we're putting
people's, um, like the little profile
pics, Brad, get your profile pics
together. YouTube's got their profile
pick game on. their profile picks
unlock. Let's find comments based on
profile pick. I love Zach's. Um, let's
see if I can findoop
[Music]
what's Beetay was talking to all the
Bobs. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I saw that
earlier. Yeah, that's a cool profile
pick. Yeah, absolutely. Um,
Twitch chats like either yep or I
refuse. Yeah, correct. Absolutely.
Um, so uh let's let's see what what
else. Um the recording is going great.
We haven't had any Is anything spiking
down? Is anything doing poor things? No.
And and and um YouTube uh Janet is
saying that they are uh pretty impressed
with the the connection. I'm I'm
actually really I am genuinely surprised
that it's this stable. I also This is
kind of weird. I I feel like and I I
really want to focus on this uh just for
a quick second. I feel like we we want
to make it clear just because Twitch
chat's been here longer. We're going to
try and treat these as equal. So like if
there are tech problems that are caused
on one side or the other, we're going to
pause and fix them for both, right?
We're not going to be like, "Oh, well
the recording's fine. Uh, and YouTube or
Twitch can't see ye, right? Like we want
to make sure that like everybody is part
of the conversation. Everybody is
getting the show wherever you want to
get it." Because I know that like some
people like the YouTube player better.
Yeah. even if they normally hang out and
talk in Twitch chat, right? Well, like
here here's the thing, and I think Will
and I were in agreement with this when
we were talking about doing this
experiment and trying this out. Like we
wanted to make sure that we only did
this when a few things were met. Again,
the changing of how it organizes these
things and what they are shown on
YouTube, of course, but that also we
could in one easy place see a mixed
chat. So, we'd make sure that we're not
like focusing on Twitch or YouTube. And
so far the solutions that Will has found
is working quite nicely. I don't it's
it's obviously because it's double the
chat. It's going a little faster than
we're used to. But I think uh eventually
you're just going to see us doing that
reflex test that you sometimes see at
carnivals with all of the um all of the
dropping tubes that you have to catch
while standing in the thing. Except it's
comments, right? So you have to like
just stand there and focus and like
catch all the comments real quick. It's
that right. Yeah. Um uh Oh, wait. I was
going to say, can you please pull up
green comment? All right, go ahead. Have
you looked into Lancer TV when my
favorite I got to play it about piloting
mechs. It's so much fun. Oh, wait. Hold
on. It's behind my green screen. All
right, go get it. Go get it. You You've
made Matt's day. Um Oh, god. Matt,
you've ruined the immersion. Also, you
can see the play button for the channel
back there.
Um,
yep.
Yeah, Matt's huge into Lancer game. I'm
actually huge into everything that
Abdon, the creator of Lancer and icon,
has done. I am a unabashed fan of Kill
Six Billion Demons. Caveat, every time I
mention Kill Six Billion Demons, it is
so much higher than the rating on this
channel because the rating on this
channel is like PG, like barely. Kill
six billion demons is like NC7 levels of
like gore and trauma and content
warnings and everything. So, if you have
if you're into TTRPGs, uh please join
Green Rain and myself. Uh this is a
phenomenal phenomenal phenomenal game.
Uh it has a great uh digital component
if you want it called Compcon that's
basically like what if D and D beyond uh
but also had functional combat and was
skinned like you're a mech pilot. Um and
uh the Tyler and Chris uh and Miles over
at Dwarf & Forge introduced me to this
game and I am in absolute awe of it. I
love it so much. Yep. Um okay, we had
another question.
Um, I did see a Zoe mention if she comes
in. She was being so mouthy before we
started. Yeah, there we there it is.
Yeah. Uh, I can try to find her. Um,
what system does Lancer use? Lancer uses
a D20based system, but it's not like D20
modern. No, it's uh there are 20s in
there are 20sided dice, but it's not
D20. And you and you also are getting
I'm trying to remember the the verbiage
of it. blanking on it right now, but
there's a bunch of like you do
modifications with D6s and a couple
other thing like you get advantage and
disadvantage works differently. It's
very fun and um it's broken. The thing I
really like about it is it's broken
between um uh tactical like actual just
like mech combat based on mission
parameters. Like your mission starts and
it could just be like rescue six convoy
ships and then no matter what if you do
that or you don't the that ends and
different things happen. Then you go
into what is considered down and that's
when a lot of your RP happens and you
can and the game switches in a bit of a
way. It feels like it's got a lot of the
same bones as Blades in the Dark in that
way where you've got like two very
distinct outlined phases of the game,
right? There is one where stuff gets
smashed and people die and one where you
deal with the fact that stuff got
smashed and people died. Um yeah and and
those are two like Yeah. Yeah. Um any
any any Thank you for letting me break
that fourth wall. Well, I mean that that
is it's another really great example,
right? That is another thing that we
want this space to do, which
is a lot of the time, and this happens
on Twitch a lot to this day. I've been
on Twitch since
2018 as the Extra Credits channel. Okay.
To this day, I still
have Wait, you have a Twitch channel?
Are you the narrator? Where's Zoe for
me? Right? Because even though I've
shown up in some of the animated stuff
as like a guest at the mythology
campfire or in short two or three
episodes of EC, right? I've written for
EC. Like even though those things are
true, people don't know us, right? We're
sort of almost anonymized behind the
animation. So like this is another
really great way to talk to you all
about stuff, right? During breakfast,
during um design club, right? to to have
these conversations and to you know
what's your favorite RPG what do you
like what are you thinking about this
upcoming thing or like what is the
ceiling another wall that can be broken
you know I'll try like yeah
there anyway uh no it's it's actually
really nice because uh I and it's funny
I am one of the things I'm most excited
about because we've been looking we used
to use something called featured chat on
Twitch which let us do the things like
pull up your comments and show them on
screen. And that has broken to the it
broke or the people stopped supporting
it. And uh every time we go live, Will
can attest to this, I always go to their
website to see if it's back before we
start because I miss the level of
interaction that we're able to do with
this sort of unified tool of merging the
chats. Yeah. Um yeah. So I don't know.
Uh, we should probably address uh a
question that we kind of thought we we
might get um uh which is from Warrior
Dude. Why no extra credits episodes in a
while? Why no extra credits in a while?
So, uh I will answer that question with
a long- winded answer.
Um I don't know how many of you here are
Extra History fans as well. Uh, but we
noticed something across the YouTube
algorithm. And that is that to be
perfectly honest, six to eight minute
long stuff across the
board, it does not catch in the
algorithm as well as it used to. And we
only have so much time to do animation.
We only have so much time to do any show
that we do. And so what we did on the
history side of things was sort of a
twofold approach. Uh,
one, sorry, I got distracted by a dog.
Uh,
one, you never know what they're doing
on the carpet. One was, um, engage in
more shorts. I don't know if you've seen
our shorts content over there because
the algorithm, that's a different
algorithm and can lead people into the
longs. And two, we adjusted our release
cadence over there to make our our
episodes basically 1.5 times longer and
still not like give give people enough
time on our team to actually make those
episodes. Mhm. So, it's the same amount
of content released every other week,
but the episodes themselves are longer.
Also, we've been doing our Extra History
Completes, which are redoss, like sort
of like going back and correcting things
from Rob's Lies episodes and redoing
like a series of five videos that makes
a 50-minute video. And that is because
YouTube has been well and truly really
pushing either shorts or long form and
not a lot in between. And so what we've
been doing in the background while doing
uh I think every other week we do a
short on credits. Um what we've been
doing in the background is sort of
developing. They're all in early stages
but sort of developing what the next EC
show is going to be that we can both
make the shows that we want to make but
also probably to be perfectly honest
make them a bit longer so we can
actually kind of catch that algorithm
again. Um, I had a list, let me pull
that up real quick, of sort of like the
things in the hopper. Yeah. Uh, I'm
gonna keep I'm going to keep checking in
on uh on um on on chat here. Yeah. So,
uh we have a couple two different long
form uh episodes uh coming out, which
we're not not coming out. They're they
will be coming soon. And the goal is to
make something that's closer to
I don't know 30 to 45 minutes that are
sort of a bit more expose or or
like go deeper into a topic. And how we
have to do that is honestly we want
we've been experimenting with and we
found a good balance but nothing we're
quite exactly proud of yet doing a sort
of combination of animation game footage
and IRL. So uh there's two things. one
uh James is working on one um and uh
Eddie Webb uh another one of our writers
is working on another um and those
hopefully we don't know what the release
cadence of those will be because we're
still basically figuring out the
workflow but that's been uh in the in
the hopper for a minute. Um we're also
working on uh with some comedy writer
friends of mine uh that actually I was
introduced to through uh uh Ben Doyle
from Jetlag. Um,
uh, we're trying to do what might be
essentially like a narrative topical
video game, like leaning more on on on a
comedy bent that is also a a
modification of animation and IRL stuff.
Uh, that's going pretty well. There was
one other thing. I'm trying to dig
through where I had my uh Jeff and I uh
have Oh, yes. Yeah. you pitch that one
cuz Jeff and Jeff Jeff and Will have
been working on another I would say like
longer but midform length thing like 30
minute type thing. Yeah. So this one's
going to um this one's animation and
gameplay footage but we're we're
thinking about doing like a a genre
exploration primer um and the sort of as
an example the first one we're pitching
is the idea of MOBAs because MOBAs are
sort of opaque as a genre. So, we want
to like through like a designer lens,
through an enthusiast lens, pull that
apart and talk a little bit about
everything that makes up what we expect
of when we think of a MOA. Um, so
looking at like all of them, right? Not
just League, but like Dota and uh
Deadlock and uh Smite and Heroes of the
Storm and like pulling apart the genre
and looking at all the pieces that make
it tick. Um, yeah. And so, and I'm I'm
excited about that, too, because it
opens up like that's something
we've seen a lot of success in a lot of
places. Like, for instance, uh this goes
back a little bit, but like um I want to
find like the buckets of types of shows
that we're excited to make. So, for
instance, I was really truly down on uh
shorts for a long time a couple years
ago. Um, and uh, shout out to our um,
social media director Cat who knew the
winds were changing and like pushed us
in that direction and it feel felt very
smart to do that. And I didn't they
didn't really start really hitting for
me on the extra history side until we
really started doing like worst dads,
worst moms, best days, best pranks, like
basically finding things that were
buckets like like where you could be
like, "Ah, here's a bunch of things in a
wheelhouse that I'm interested in and
very clearly labeled." Something I'm
excited about will and Jeff's idea for
this sort of like deep dive primmer into
uh genre like getting started with the
genre and looking into its mechanics is
we can do that like over and over and
over again. The first one is on MOBAs
and you go deep. But then even as times
change, as more things are released, we
could do code uh codas to it, move on,
like add to it and we get to do stuff
that we're all excited about, right?
Like I know Jeff is big into Forex's and
Matt really likes fighting games and
I've got a thing for card games and like
we there's a lot of space where we get
to talk about games that we're
passionate and also bring that sort of
um informative and entertaining content,
right? Because if it's not informative
and entertaining, why are we doing it?
Right? So like cutting that line is very
important. Um
correct.
Um so yeah, that's that's the answer to
that question. There is we are cooking
in the background. It's going to take us
a while. Again, we are a a small team
and we just did a history overhaul and
now we're kind of switching back into uh
sort of like what we want to do on the
credit side of things. I brought this up
on breakfast. we are doing on one of the
long form ones. I've already started
getting various props and things that
are actually like historical artifacts
for the topics that we are talking about
uh brought here. So like it's going
there's there's stuff cooking. Uh in the
meantime, we're just releasing shorts to
sort of keep stuff going on the channel.
Um, and and now swinging full circle
back to what we're doing here today,
bringing something that we are already
doing and enjoying and loving and
interacting with over on Twitch on over
here as well, both in the interim and
sort of in preparation of when we come
back uh with with uh Yeah. with with
more shows released on credits. Yeah. Um
uh
sorry.
Yes, B just switched over to Twitch
chat, right? And and we by the way, we
we expect that, right? Um we expect that
people are going to move wherever they
want. Also, there is this other thing
YouTube folks may not be aware of this.
One of the other reasons that we're
doing this now is that Twitch and their
infinite Twitch wisdom just Oh, this is
the other thing. Yes. decided decided
out of nowhere to give us all um two
months notice to get all of our VODs,
all of the backed up highlights for
those five years of shows. Get them all
off the platform. They said, "You get a
100 hours of highlights maximum,
regardless of how long your account has
existed. That's it. More than that, get
them out of here." And we
went, "Okay." So, I spent the next two
weeks pulling three and a half
thousand hours of highlights off of
Twitch, and now we want a place where
people can watch the VODs of these
shows for free, right? They're always
going to be available on Nebula without
ads the day after, but YouTube's a good
place where you can go and watch them
for free. And this way, they'll be up on
YouTube the same time that they're up on
Twitch. Um, and they'll be there
permanently. So, that's a good place for
that as well. That's another added
benefit. Um, and I know Twitch chat's
been asking for that for a while because
having the the if you've never been in
the Twitch VOD system, it's god awful. I
was trying to make it as good as I
could. Um, and it was still not great.
Uh, so the the video viewing experience
has always been better on YouTube and so
we're leveraging that, too. Yeah. Yeah.
Um, also I I just
Yeah. Right. Exactly. Correct. Right.
Can't Can't read. Can't Yeah. Um Cool,
cool, cool. Uh was there anything else?
Yeah. Uh by the way, if you're if you're
rolling into YouTube chat or Twitch
chat, either one. But Twitch chats had
this info for a little bit because we
wanted to let them know that something
weird was going to be happening next
week. Um do you have questions? Is there
anything that you want to know while
we're here testing this? Uh I've got
about 25 minutes of the recording in the
can. So, let's go for an even 30 or 35
and then we can sort of call it here
because I think I'm trying to think if
there's anything else we need to test
while we're doing questions. Yeah. Um,
must not ignore due to title. Yes,
correct 100%.
Understanding the assignment. Yeah. Um,
that's good. Uh, let's see. This is this
is also another uh nope, not that one.
Uh, another nice thing. Jake, uh, Jacob
says, "YouTube can sometimes perform
better on slower connections." True. Oh,
interesting. True. Um because uh YouTube
because it's designed to be a video
viewing site is better at caching stuff
for a longer video versus Twitch where
if you're not current on the Twitch
connection, it sort of just like
flips out and has no idea what to do
with itself. So that is a thing to keep
in mind, too. Here's a good one. Why are
you so green? because this is
technically the design club settings and
Jeff's green screen is different than my
green screen. So, we kind of kit bashed
my green screen key very quickly before
we started. It's my fault. Okay. It's no
one's fault. It's just that I I It's
funny cuz we were talking about like
think people will notice maybe. I don't
know. Yeah. Well, so I I've spent a long
time dialing in green screen settings
for both of them. Uh and but we can't
easily move them over based on the
setups. Yeah. for for OBS nerds. I have
different scene collections and moving
things between scene collections is a
giant pain. Yeah. Uh a great question
from Endoride. Uh how much caffeine is
enough?
I don't know. I I can't uh um
Okay, cool. It's a great vintage. It's a
great chroma key Baja Blast vintage.
Um, you'll find that we do quite a few
chroma key jokes uh here. Um, yeah,
Mountain Void. Exactly. 100%. Just drink
the void. Yeah, Mountain Dew. Consume
the void. Thing about Baja Blast is it's
just it's Yeah, it's invisible. Yeah.
Um, Plasmetic has a really great
question. Any plans to do a kind of
up-to-date gamedev want to get started
enter the industry video on EC? we have
talked about it uh because the last one
truly I think is like 10 or 11 years
old. Um it's so interesting and we talk
about this on breakfast all the time.
Um obviously the industry is going
through a tumultuous time right now. Um,
and
so we we had one sort of started in in
the hopper and then it sort of started
changing and not all like based on
honestly the economics of the game
industry is working. We want to make
sure that we're like not just giving
like moonshot advice that isn't sort of
like correct anymore. So, uh there's
there's there has been talks of that.
Yes, it does keep changing because the
games industry is changing. One of the
things that we're also thinking about
doing is doing more for specific niches.
So, for instance, one of the things that
I'm a big proponent of is I think that
every game in 2025
needs someone doing community management
because so many games have discords and
complex social media presences and they
have um forums and chats and everything.
So neither Jeff nor I is a community
manager and the kind of work that our
community manager here um Cat does is
like comm's director kind of stuff and
that's not game stuff. So we want to
talk to the community manager for a game
and talk to them about getting into it.
So that's a sort of example of where we
can leverage the live format to do more
on that specific topic for like
community manager or game producer or or
or or I also want to like I think there
could be an interesting series even of
the animated show or a mixed medium
version of the show. I'm just kind of
thinking of this now based on what you
said will like there could be the like
getting started in the game industry
like actual like designer there could be
something that and yes obviously what uh
what says here absolutely that's like a
a step zero um but also
like there there could be stuff about
like getting started voice acting
getting started in community management
getting started in producing like there
there's a lot of different ways we could
again I go back to liking buckets. Uh,
and that would be a good a good resource
to to update the original videos from 10
or 11 years ago, which honestly uh are
amazing, but there's stuff that's
happened since then, you know. Um, there
was another thing I just saw in the
chat. Oh, very important question.
Where's the Martinelli's? I'll tell you
where the Martinelli's is. This is a
test stream. No one was supposed to be
here, so I didn't bring the
Martinelli's. Something we might stream
over here as well is anytime we do a
special event and uh those of you on
Twitch chat and Brad know that every
year we do a charity stream for my
birthday for the last six years, seven
years. Uh normally uh it is a crowd
control affair and I have found out by
the
way YouTube does have crowd control
support. So well there we go. Um, we
will be doing uh we will be doing a
crowdcontrol special guestladen stream
uh with the birthdays uh all that jazz.
Uh sometime late April, early May. Uh we
have picked the game. Uh it will be a it
will be I'll here's the hints I'll give.
It is not a game we've done before. It
has crowd control, but it will still be
a janky beautiful mess. Uh, and there
will be a slight mod to it to make it
very easy. Uh, we'll let you know when
that's happening. Uh, next question.
What? What did Zar ask? I'm working on
that actually. Hold on. Uh. Oh, like
change the icon around the people to
show. Yep. I'm I'm trying to do that
right now. Uh, give me one second. Give
me one second. I like it's Super Mario
Maker. No, but we have done that in the
past. We tried designing a campaign. You
can see the Oh, yeah. You can see it.
Wait, put put it back up. So, that was
Twitch. Great. And then let's find
YouTube
crow control. Let's Google. Yes. Yeah.
Great. That's awesome. That's helpful to
see, too. This is a great system, by the
way. Um, so I don't know how many of you
are familiar with the XKCD about like
that one thing that's run by one guy who
lives alone by himself out in the middle
of nowhere in Iowa that the entire
internet depends on for the entire
streaming industry. There's one guy
named Steve. He lives in Canada and he
runs so many open-source projects that
it is baffling. He runs the he he has
created the video call protocol that we
are using to bring this to you. He's
created this chat overlay thing. He's
done even more stuff. It's ridiculous.
Um and I just we have to find we have to
find Steve or Steve's company's uh
Patreon. Patreon. Yeah, absolutely. Like
I want I want to thank him monetarily
for his work. We believe in Steve.
That's right. Um, yeah. Yeah. Uh, can
confirm y'all? Okay, this is this will
never get normal for me. Uh, J6 says,
"We look great on a smart TV. I will
never understand being on people's TVs."
For some reason, the move from like
phones and laptops and PCs to like the
television that's a big part of your
room, that feels weird to me. So, thank
you. That actually means like a lot more
than you might think it does. And also,
your living room does look great. I see
you cleaned it up a bit and it's got
like you've done a lot of good
organizational work. The fune is really
is really nice. I like the furniture and
also the flooring and perhaps the
possible pets and or other human beings
in your vicinity or not. The lack of is
lovely as well, right? That's very true.
I was going to say
um going back to YouTube and analytics
and stuff like that, it is disturbing. I
think it's truly almost up to 50% if not
more history. It might have actually
cracked it watching more on TVs,
especially the longer form stuff. Yeah,
absolutely. Um uh I forget the actual
numbers. Yeah. Uh Bavar, thank you so
much for that uh super chat. Um so great
to see the on YouTube. Looks great.
Thank you so much for letting us know.
We uh we're Oh, and it shows the Yeah,
this stuff is great. What the heck?
Yeah. Where is this tool, Steve? I don't
I I would like to apologize for not
having found this sooner. Anyway, uh
thank you so much for that. That's very
sweet. Um yeah. Wow. Um yeah. So, um
let's see. Was there any other stuff?
Wait, I love Jacobs. At the cost of my
job, I could get you playing on a
twotory tall video wall. That's too
Don't do that. But I appreciate the
mental image you've given me. Uh, that
is very very funny. Oh. Uh, hold on. I
got to try
this. There we go. And the bits work.
The the flipping bits work. It's
platform agnostic. It's great. It's I
love this. This is This is perfect. Um,
you saw there was a test stream. What
chaos may you cause? Uh, you have caused
chaos with your presence. Thank you.
Thank you so much, Cordell. Deeply
appreciate it. I mean I
mean do it. It didn't work. Why did it
not go? Oh, I don't know. There we go.
Oh, I know why it didn't go because I
clicked it before I cleared it. Yeah,
you got to clear it first and then click
it. Um, let's see. Oh. Oh, we should
probably also mention um so, uh, one of
the things that parody, right? We're
we're trying very hard to get to parody
between Twitch and YouTube for these
things. Um, if you are a supporter of
ours on Patreon or Twitch at the uh $5 a
month level, um, you can get access to
our Discord. Yeah, we have a Discord um
where uh our our patrons and subs can
hang out and talk about a little bit of
everything. We've got a games we're
playing section. We've got a section
where we talk about all of the shows and
people ask questions and have like
follow-on discussions about Games for
Breakfast Design Club, all of the
animated stuff, everything. Um, if you
become a member on YouTube, that is also
set up to automatically get you into the
Discord at the 499 level because again,
we're trying to make sure it's parody
because the Twitch sub is roughly five.
The level on Patreon is five. We're
trying to keep we're trying to keep it
all the same because we know that people
have different wants and needs on the
platforms that they want to engage with
content with and we want to make sure
that we're offering uh uh roughly the
same on everything and everything does
have like a slightly different thing
like supporting us on Nebula is
different as well. Like it's just we
want to make sure that or Patreon or
wherever. We want to make sure that
like we are giving everyone what we
consider not what I we want to consider
a good value and also an even value
across all platforms even if the stuff
the individual tiny things are uh
slightly different but uh yeah so on the
YouTube side of things because that is
sort of the new part we're testing right
now at the $4.99 you get access to the
Discord um which is a pretty sweet place
to hang out. Uh Io said asks, "Could you
tell us what plugin you're using for us
nerds in chat?" It's called
socialream.ninja. Social stream.ninja
and it's got plugin. I I have barely
begun to scratch the surface. We found
and by we I mean will found this 2 hours
and 15 minutes ago. That's correct.
Because we were running into login
problems with another thing we were
trying to use and we couldn't figure out
a way around it. And then we were
actually debating if this test would
even happen today because if we couldn't
if we couldn't test like for instance
one thing we don't have running right
now and we might get running later will
correct me when I'm wrong is bots on
YouTube. So like like you could do
command and then see a specific message
or it can let people know things as we
go. We have that on Twitch that's
running right now. Um Bradbot I believe
is like one of them is uh so on Twitch
because we have scheduled ad breaks.
That's one of the things that lets
people know, hey, there's an ad break
coming up, that kind of thing. Uh the
So, sort of on that note, we don't have
that running for uh YouTube right now,
but that wasn't like a deal breaker for
the test today. What would have been a
dealbreaker would have been if we
couldn't see chat check this chat
interaction back and forth.
Yeah. Um absolutely.
Um similar vibes across the streams.
Yes. Um y'all are ridiculous.
Um, was there anything? Okay. Uh, that
recording is running for 35 minutes. So,
I'm going to Let's uh let's kill that.
So, do you have to hit the button to
make the thing? Press the button again.
Uh oh. I have to press this button
first. Enjoy this outro intro. The same
one we do every time. Yeah. Right. It's
exactly the same except it's always a
little bit different. It's
[Applause]
[Music]
not. And that's how the show would end
if this was a show. That's correct. Uh,
did that play the music? Yeah. Chat,
could you hear the music on both sides?
I just want to make sure. They should
have been able to. I have it set to
monitor and output and I can hear it.
Okay. Cuz I couldn't hear it, but I know
that always doesn't matter. Okay. Grass
heard it on Twitch. Everyone in Twitch
did. YouTube. B Dragon says yes on
YouTube as well. Thank you so much.
Cool. Great. Awesome. Thank you. That is
Yeah. Uh, her just double checking. You
never know. like we could do F1 and then
we could be running this for 6 months
and YouTube just doesn't have right cuz
YouTube doesn't know what to expect and
they're like I don't get it. Yeah 100%
100%. And I can um actually I'm going to
do this now too. Log files upload
current log file in in I love a log
file. I'm going to go through our doc
here. Will make sure we're not
forgetting something to test. You know
what I you know what I love when I
launch a log file on a new test and it
says there's nothing wrong. There's
nothing remotely wrong with anything
you're doing. OBS has um very powerful
log files and an open source log
analyzer function. Uh so you can it'll
parse log file out for you and like call
out specific errors and problems. And
right now it says everything is green
across the board. So all right. Um well
sometimes when good stuff happens oop
that wasn't the right one but I'll read
it. My mouse cursing went towards the X
button on reflex. No. Uh hold on. This
is the one pull did it. He did.
That is something I will have to as the
chat moves fast. Uh lining up what
you're what you're trying to click. You
can also uh uh bottom left corner if
you're trying to grab something
specific, you can pause it and then
it'll resume. Oh, cool, cool, cool,
cool. Yeah. Um good afternoon, Marcos.
Good afternoon to you. Good afternoon.
Um, Plaz says just checking. Yeah, they
are exactly the same uh video. Yes,
correct. But the process that gets run
on the on the back side is different,
right? So, we use that to cover up the
scene transition to black in different
directions on both sides because it has
an alpha channel on both sides. But then
what OBS does is different. So, we got
to make sure that that works. Basically,
what we're trying to do is get the the
pre-show and the post show cut out
automatically as we're doing the show,
so Will doesn't have to edit and
re-encode the show for uploads to places
like Nebula, right? It's much faster
this way. It used to
take two to one edit to live time at
least. But that was also because we
never managed to track down a gremlin um
that I had to squish every week. Uh
yeah, and now it's remix upload repair.
I don't know, Zar, do they?
Uh yeah. So um BTTV doesn't I can work
on see if it will. Um and then the
animated ones do. Also on YouTube, um,
as we get more members over there, if
that becomes a thing, uh, we do have a
whole host of emotes that we'll be
adding as soon as slots are available,
but because we don't have memberships as
like a primary thing on YouTube. Um,
currently we can only have like four, I
think. Uh, and the next like when we get
like 10 members, I can put like a couple
more in and a couple more in. So, as
soon as um, if that happens, great. And
I will be populating the emotes over on
the YouTube side of things. Yeah. Uh, I
have a question before we sort of wrap
up for the for the YouTube folks here.
Uh, do you folks in in in Janet, do you
often engage with uh live streams on
YouTube or were you a EC sub that you
just saw something was happening that
said you shouldn't come and decided to
come anyway? Or both? Like what's your
what's your use case with live streaming
on YouTube? Because real talk, Will and
I are kind or noviceses at that. We've
been doing Twitch forever. Uh, and we've
been run and and I've been running with
Jeff the the YouTube side of of of an
actual like uploading uh episodes of of
series and things to YouTube channels,
but the live part is something that we
haven't sort of dove into. Yeah. Okay.
The right channel. So, the sub caught
it. Yep. For the right channel, I'm here
for both. Um,
you used to watch the VODs. Okay. Cool.
Great. Awesome. Uh, almost refused to
use Twitch as of late. Yep. Yep. Cool.
Cool. Cool. I hate YouTube because
unless you're YouTube app, you can't
participate in chat, but also because
you're on the YouTube app, you get to be
as part of this. Yeah. Okay, cool.
Twitch is locked on company computers,
but YouTube isn't. Very good to know.
Interesting. We do broadcast during work
hours. Yeah. Uh Emry says, "I've been
desperate for YouTube content, but due
to scheduling, I end up in VODs." Okay,
cool.
Um Okay, cool. Cool. Oh, interesting.
Uh, Pavara,
all the other streams are YouTube. Okay,
cool. Cool. Yeah.
Okay. Awesome. Yeah. Yeah. Uh, works
better natively.
Yeah. Uh, BTTV is a um is a add-on. It's
a common add-on. Better Twitch TV. It
adds a couple of features. I will go in
and configure BTTV for our channel. Uh,
and I will see if I can get BTTV working
in the overlay. And then I will teach
Matt how to BTTV. and that will be on my
list of things to do. Um,
uh, B Dragon, let's see, what do you got
up here? Uh, Don, I want to hear if
story apps are happening, please.
Uh, oh. Um, oh, tell you that, please.
Yeah. Uh, the I think they're talking
about the the story uh episodes that we
used to do about James, I'm guessing,
and James' journey through design land.
Is that it?
I don't know. I don't know. Uh, like we
said before, and you can go back in in
this VOD, when it is a VOD, uh, we are
going to Here's the weird thing about
Twitch or about YouTube. It is already a
VOD. It can't already be a VOD. We're
still live. No, no, it is consistently a
VOD because if people got here late,
they can choose whether to jump in now
or start at the
beginning, which is one of the cool
things about YouTube that I really wish
Twitch would do.
Someone give me the Someone give me the
the replicant test right now. Oh, I
don't understand what's happening. Oh.
Uh, so you haven't read. It might be So
you Haven't read. Oh. Uh, we actually,
uh, R. Kevin, writer of So You Haven't
read, uh, is working on a a specific
short about a specific topic. If there's
Oh,
okay. How much do I say?
Um, I would love it if So You Haven't
read came back. um the the the issue
there is
uh the numbers just didn't support it
like continuing on. But I love that
series. I feel like it was such a good
primer for uh anyone who wanted to get
into a book like to know if they liked
it or not without spoiling the entire
thing or going into a review and just I
don't know. I loved it very much. Yeah.
Uh cool cool cool. I think I I am I am
satisfied with all of my technical uh
Okay. Well, we can we can jump off. Um,
so everybody listen, thank you so much
for coming and uh even though we
instructed you not to, you uh
you you disobeyed orders but understood
the assignment and I very much
appreciate that. Um because we couldn't
be able to test all these things without
sort of all of you here. Uh yeah, uh
Zar, I know about that. That's not the
same thing when if you double speed the
YouTube VOD and catch up, you just join
the live stream in progress. The Twitch
VOD uh becomes a video at that moment
when you open it and then you can't
watch further than it was when you
opened the video. They're not
functionally the same. Wish they were.
Yeah. Um so with that, here's what we're
going to do. We're going to say goodbye
to YouTube uh for now, but uh if you are
able, please join us because this test
went very very well. I think we're going
to do our first games for breakfast
Monday at 11 a.m. Eastern Standard Time
next week. So, in four
days, four days. 11 days. 11 days. Um
come say hi. Come hang out. We'll be
talking about there's Yeah, Will already
brought up there's some decent news
already coming down the pipe. Oh, yeah.
There there's a there's a video game
reunion. Yeah, I know. Yeah, that's a
big one. That's a big one. Yeah. Um and
then right
now uh if you are still jonesing to hang
out with us two nerds, uh we will be
moving over to Twitch solo. Right now,
I'm going to be continuing on my Elden
Ring adventure. Uh something nice and
light and I just need something to
continue on and get it through before
night rain is done. We're in the moon.
uh uh Morith Ruins and we're going to
head north to try to find that that
pesky last map piece. So,
twitch.tv/extrits if you'd like to join
us over there. Otherwise, we hope to see
you here on YouTube Monday morning.
Yeah. Uh um
very much appreciate the time and the
test and I don't know. This means a lot.
So, thank you very much for for coming
and hanging out. Yeah. Okay, cool. Uh
bye, YouTube.