"There's a tendency among the press to attribute the creation of a game to a single person."
That was a statement made by Warren Spector, creator of Thief and Deus Ex
I just did the thing he was talking about, didn't I?
[Intro music plays]
It''s true, the gaming public often sees game development this way
and the rise of indie games and larger than life public developer personas has only led the press to reinforce this notion
It's just easier to think of games as having sprung fully formed from the mind of a sole creator.
But the truth is almost no game is the work of a singular visionary,
behind that visionary stands a team of hundreds
or a small crew of specialized freelancers
or even just a few behind the scenes partners.
So let's talk about why credit for these games that we love is so often attributed to a single person
and why it can do harm to think that way.
This is a particularly easy trap to fall into when thinking about indie devs, so let's start there.
Just as an example: when people think of Vlambeer, they generally think of Rami Ismail
and this is a perfect example because Rami often literally introduces himself as half of Vlambeer.
He is in no way trying to hide the fact that he is part of a duo,
the other half is Jan Willem Nijman, who very few people outside of the industry have heard of.
Now you might ask, why would only half of the team stand in the spotlight?
Well, not everybody wants to be lead singer,
being the public face of a company is a lot of work,
it takes time and energy
and just like other dev tasks, like art, audio, level design or programming
some people enjoy public appearances and engaging with press more than others.
Besides, it's often easiest for the press to have a single point of contact too
and it gives them an easier story to tell if it's about just one person.
But even in cases where an indie studio's core team consists of only one or two developers,
most commercially and critically successful indie games are actually developed with additional talented professionals hired on a per project basis,
so even those one or two person teams often have more help than you realize.
And this misconception matters because newbie developers sometimes look at all of these famous indie games
and mistakenly assume them to be the work of only one or two people,
which can create extremely unrealistic expectations of what a one or two person team is capable of.
The difference between working alone and working with a team of half a dozen
can be staggering in terms of productivity and output quality.
It's really easy to just lump both team sizes into the small projects catagory
especially when the team contains a bunch of contractors or part timers.
But from a development perspective, that's a difference of two hundred or three hundred percent as much available time and energy each week
Not to mention the inherent benefits of having people focusing purely on their own specializations,
rather than having to tackle design, art and code single handedly.
Fez, Spelunky, Braid, Minecraft, The Stanley Parable
Most any popular indie game you can name, had more people working on it than you probably realise
These cases demonstrate a common pattern
In the eyes of the press and players alike, the dev team's public face, is often considered the lead singer of the team.
But this common misunderstanding doesn't usually tell the real story, and it feeds into unrealistic expectations around indie development
and AAA games, none of those are made by one person
Will Wright was obviously a very important decision maker and a key source of vision for the game Spore.
But more than a hundred other people had a hand in that game's creation.
A half dozen other designers made many decisions about how the game would play.
And that's not even counting the influence of the studio executives who held the purse strings.
Or, take Civilization.
Sid Meier's name may still be on the box, but he probably isn't doing a lot of the coding,
or building the art assets in those games these days.
And there's another reason why this distinction matters.
Even if we don't fall into the misconception that these games are the result of one person's vision,
It's still very common for that one person to wind up as a lightning rod for credit or blame.
Here's the thing.
When there are tens of millions of dollars at stake, no one person has total control over how a project evolves.
There are just so many people involved. So many processes and team dynamics at play.
It's larger than any one person. And if we get overly focused on one person or personality, we risk
overlooking valuable conversations over how those processes and dynamics play out in what's right
or wrong with a game.
And thus, fail to learn all the lessons that such failures or successes have to offer us.
When Hideo Kojima split with Konami after decades of work there,
his public stated reasons included wanting more creative freedom.
If even Hideo Kojima found himself lacking creative freedom, given what he's accomplished,
then AAA development is clearly not as simple as one key person calling all the shots.
Or Mighty No. 9. When that turned out to be a public disapointment, it was only natural for some to blame
the game's writer and most publicly visible connection to classic Mega Man, Keiji Inafune. He even accepted full responsibility for the blame in
an early Twitch livestream.
But no one person is singularly responsible for a game that size.
If you transplanted Inafune into a different team, even if he did everything the same, the game would turn out differently.
People doing programming, art, music, level design and sound are not interchangeable.
Different people work together in different ways, and the games we play are a result of this talent soup.
So don't feel like to have to go in alone. Of course, there are a handful of great examples of games where one
person really did do everything themselves.
Art, programming, design, music, all of it. And if that's you, then awesome. Do it.
But one of the great things about games is that they can be a mixture of so many talents and voices.
Part of what's wonderful about making games is how they can be an opportunity to work with a different
mixture of amazing people.
There is so much to learn from the people around you, and so many ideas, which you as a lone developer may
never have come up with.
So despite how some of the press might read, remember that game development is almost always a collaborative
art, and that learning how to share a vision with a team, and to incorporate a team's ideas into that vision,
it's part of truly what makes a truly great leader, for a true visionary in this industry.
See you next week.
(outro music)