[Music]
Hello again. As of this week, Allison is
officially on her break so she can
recover. And I think you know what that
means. Yes, guest artist marathon. Over
the next few weeks or months, I don't
know, we'll be bringing in a bunch of
guest artists to help us out. I think
this is going to turn out to be rather
fun. On that note, say hello to Molly
Maloney. She's a concept artist
currently working for her MFA out in San
Francisco and she's here to help us talk
about pre-production. Huh. How come we
haven't talked about this before? I
guess we're usually more about offering
possible solutions to problems rather
than just raising them. But this is one
of those problems that I'm not sure
we've got a great answer for.
Unfortunately, it's a pretty big issue.
So hopefully talking about it will at
least provide some perspective on the
industry. Most bad video games are the
result of bad production methodology.
That is to say, bad planning. I know
that sounds super obvious, but here's a
specific case that's unbelievably common
in our industry, and it's responsible
for a plethora of bad games. The
complete lack of pre-production.
Pre-production is the time when you try
to figure everything out before you
actually start building it. Basically,
the planning phase. Not having enough of
this time means things like story,
characterization, art style, even
mechanics get pushed into the we'll
figure it out later bin. Now, as I'm
sure most of you know, planning is
everything, especially for big
productions. Not having enough time to
think about stuff before you just jump
in and try to make it is almost
guaranteed to cause problems. It's
obvious to you, it's obvious to me, and
it's obvious to everybody working in the
industry today, too. So, the question
becomes, why aren't studios making time
for pre-production? After all,
pre-production should be the cheapest
period in a game development cycle. You
don't need nearly as much staff as you
do in actual production, and investing
in that pre-production time is likely to
save a studio money in the end.
Unfortunately, there's one quirk unique
to video games that prevents this, and
that's the question of what do you do
with all of your programmers. During
full production, you're going to need a
lot of programmers to put together all
the technology that goes into making a
game. But in pre-production, there's
really not much for them to do. You'll
need a few veteran programmers to
investigate what technology you want to
use, so you can create unique features
for your new title. But when you already
have an engine to work with from a
previous project or you've licensed an
engine like Unreal, there's just not
much work there for a software engineer
before any key decisions have been made
about the game they're going to build.
Sure, a few of the engine guys can
tinker with the engine and optimize it a
bit. And the shader guys might
experiment with new shaders, which can
be an integral part of establishing the
art style, but what about the gameplay
guys or the networking guys? They're
stuck doing busy work or coming in for
half days. And programmers are
expensive. When you factor in salary,
insurance, and paying rent for
workspace, as well as paying for the
licenses and technology they're going to
be using, a mid-level programmer in
Seattle runs roughly $110,000 a year, or
$8,250 a month. Say your standard
midsize developer has about 30
programmers on a AAA project. Now, let's
say maybe 10 of them can do anything
worthwhile during pre-production. That
means you're wasting
$165,000 per month you spend in
pre-production. Or put another way, more
than one half man years of engineering
time. Those are man hours you could have
spent actually building your game. This
is almost impossible to justify in many
of the corporate hierarchies we have set
up. And it's even harder to justify to
investors. When you add to this the
internal social pressure at studios to
get people work to do, you can see how
naturally pre-production often gets cut
short. So there it is in a nutshell. The
problem of finding enough pre-production
time. It's one that plagues our industry
and ruins many multi-million dollar
projects. Now like me, many of you are
probably thinking, "Well, with a little
better planning, this could be solved by
yanking the pre-production team off the
studio's current project a few months
early." The QT answer to that is, "Oh,
with a little better planning, we could
do a little better planning." You don't
say. But joking aside, I actually
suspect that is the solution to this
problem. There are a few reasons why
game studios aren't doing it that way
now. First, it would require them to
move highle staff off a product shortly
before it ships. Unfortunately, the way
this industry runs, games tend to be all
hands-on deck affairs near the end. And
even when they're not, games have
another weird quirk. The more of a game
you build, the more you realize how you
could have done it better. James has
never worked on a game project where
they managed to get in every feature
they wanted. And I don't know anybody
else who has either. This means that
even on projects which are coming
together perfectly, people tend to want
to see if they can squeeze in just a few
more awesome features from the design
document that they thought they were
going to have to cut or see if they can
get one more iteration in on some of the
things they didn't know were wrong till
they actually got to play test the game
themselves, which in the end leads to no
one wanting to jump ship to pre-produce
the next project. Well, that and the
weird sense of guilt industry folks seem
to get about doing pre-production while
their studio mates are still slaving
away at the last game. For some reason,
people tend to think of pre-production
as not real work. Ironically,
pre-production can also lead to
productivity issues, especially when
your team's just coming off a long
crunch where deadlines were specified
down to the hour. Pre-production time
can lead to a feeling of having all the
time in the world, and things start to
run less efficiently as people recover.
Okay, so we have a few problems to solve
here, but games aren't the only
high-tech, multi-disiplinary art form
out there. How are those other
industries doing it? Maybe we can learn
from them. Let's start by looking at the
film industry. When a movie is finished,
the cast and crew and everybody involved
go their separate ways. The people
involved in pre-production start
developing new projects and the main
production staff join other projects
that are just coming out of the
pre-production phase. It works just fine
for film, but I'm not really sure this
model fits the game industry as it's
currently structured. Keeping a
development team together tends to be
more important in games than in film. Or
at least that's the conventional
industry wisdom. I'm not really sure how
true it is. Even if it's not, though,
there's also the fact that we don't have
agents in our industry. Hiring and
jobseeking are such a nightmare in
games. No one wants to try to staff up a
project every time they start a new one.
Besides, people working in the game
industry tend not to like that kind of
risk. Many developers want to know
they're going to have a job after the
game ships, and it's tragic how often
they won't anyway. So, the film industry
may not be the ideal role model, but I
think I know another one that might be.
Animation. Maybe it's just because
animation's my industry, or maybe it's
because Pixar is like most game studios
and that they keep their staff from
project to project. But I think the
model might work. Pixar generally spends
at least two years in the story and
pre-production phase for every film, but
the vast majority of the crew is working
on a different project at the time.
You've got your main bulk workforce of
artists, all the modelers, animators,
and lighters and such, and most of them
are probably working on the current main
project, trying to get the film finished
in time for theatrical release. But all
the while, there's always another
director working with a small team on
the next film in line, refining the
story reels and doing R&D on the
technology they'll need. Meanwhile, yet
another director is working with a
handful of guys from the story
department putting together early story
boards for the next film in line. And
all of those directors probably have
ideas in mind for the next film they
want to pitch. So, at any given time,
you've got your main force working hard
on a project. And by the time they've
finished, there's always another project
ready for them to jump to. Now, I am
definitely no expert on this sort of
thing, but I think the system has some
merit. Even if you keep things limited
to just two projects, one in production
and one being planned by a small team of
leads, there's always a project to work
on and another one in the chamber ready
to go. all the benefits of planning
ahead with none of the downtime. Now,
despite everything I've been saying,
it's probably worth reminding all of you
budding developers out there that it's
very, very easy to get trapped in the
pre-production phase when you have no
deadlines. James sees a lot of excited
young guys fall into the trap of
constantly revising design documents,
drawing sketches of their world, and
talking about their game, but never
actually starting to build anything.
It's important to know when to stop
planning and start building. And you
should never be afraid to prototype your
ideas early on. But the value of
spending this time thinking before we
begin to build cannot be overstated.
There have been a few games out there
that ended up getting an extended
pre-production time. Bioshock, Fallout
3, Portal. I think the results speak for
themselves. It's one of the few things
most developers can agree on, but
failing to get this time is endemic to
the way we build games. I will say this,
whichever developer solves this
pre-production problem is already
halfway to being the next Valve, Boware,
or Blizzard. If any of you guys work in
games and have some thoughts or ideas on
the matter, get in touch with us because
we'd love to hear them. Thank you,
Molly, for the pretty pictures. Thanks
for watching and see you next week.
[Music]