In the past, we've talked about designing to reinforce the
fantasy of your game. One key pointer was that it's
super effective to align the mechanics of the game with
your intended theme. For instance, Spider-Man is great
at giving players the experience of swinging through
New York City. But it might not work quite as well if the
if the city exploration relied on, say, bartering
mechanics. A bad mismatch between theme and
mechanics could pull you out of the fantasy. But what
happens when a game has one core set of mechanics,
but many different stories to tell? Well, you probably
shouldn't change a game's mechanics to align with each
new piece of content, so how can you sell the fantasy of
web-slinging in a game where you can't actually sling
webs? In this episode, we'll explore how you can use a
limited set of mechanics to design a
variety of diverse character experiences.
♪ "Penguin Cap" by CarboHydroM ♪
To help us tackle today's topic, we've invited Paige from
Demiurge Studios, the team that makes Marvel Puzzle
Quest, to help talk about using mechanics to reinforce
your character design. Because, honestly, they do an
amazing amount of with just match-3 mechanics.
Thanks, Paige.
The strongest character designs are the ones that
succeed on multiple levels. For instance, a well-
designed character might fill a clear role in their game
and, introduce a new gameplay strategy, and have an
authentic-looking field that reinforces their identity. And
character design goals can be as unique and varied as
the games those characters live in. But all compelling
characters usually have one thing in common: they
successfully capture the fantasy of being that character.
So, since Marvel Puzzle Quest is what Paige knows
inside and out, we're going to use it as an example.
If you're not familiar with Marvel Puzzle Quest, it's a
match-3 RPG where players build teams of Marvel
characters to battle against other teams of Marvel
characters. And because these are Marvel characters,
they all have rich histories, personality, and lore that
inform how the players expect them to feel in-game.
So, If I want to play as Ant-Man, I'm kind of hoping to
plan and execute awesome heists, but if I choose to
play as The Hulk, I'm pretty sure my fantasy is going to
be getting very, very angry, and going on an arcade-like
rampage. Even though the game's core mechanics are
really just matching tiles and firing character powers,
each of the two hundred or so characters have to be
designed to capture the unique feel of their namesakes.
Now, there are a few approaches for leveraging game
mechanics to achieve this. One is to shoot for
ludonarrative resonance. That's a fancy term for
aligning what the character should do narratively, and
what the player does do mechanically. As an example of
this, one iconic Captain America skill is his ability to
throw his shield at an enemy and catch it on the
rebound. In Marvel Puzzle Quest, Cap has a shield throw
power that stuns a targeted enemy and puts a tile on
the board to represent said shield. If you can protect
this tile from being matched away for a certain number
of turns, the shield rebounds, returning some of the
energy used to fire the power. Now, Cap was a pretty
straightforward example, but we can use the same idea
to tell much more complex stories as well. Consider one
of my personal favorites: Jessica Jones. She solves
problems relying on two things: her detective skills and
her strength. In Marvel Puzzle Quest, Jessica is most
effective when she can chain those two talents together
so her design gives players a clue-finding minigame to
play within the game's match-3 mechanics. Okay, it
works like this: one of her powers passively creates
hidden tiles. Now, the enemy team can see them, but
you can't. If you can locate and match these tiles,
Jessica will deal damage to the enemy. And you'll
charge Jessica's two other physical powers. Sure, you
might get lucky and stumble upon these tiles randomly,
but what you really want to do is hunt them down. And
since Marvel Puzzle Quest represents the concept of
knowledge with the color blue, more on that in a minute,
saving enough blue energy will briefly reveal the location
of these tiles at the start of every turn, giving you a lead.
So, playing with Jessica Jones lets you live out a
match-3-sized detective fantasy. You'll follow the clues,
find the evidence, beat up the baddies, and win.
In general, this approach means rewarding players for
playing the game as if they were the character. If I'm
playing as Kingpin, I should cut off my opponent's
resources to keep them from becoming a threat. If I'm
Loki, my best strategy is to create distractions and
manipulate my opponent from the shadows. This
character design strategy is all about aligning the
character motivations with mechanical decisions.
Another approach is to design characters with an eye
for how they'll interact with each other. Just like
relationships between people, relationships between
game mechanics themselves can be collaborative,
competitive, or even antagonistic. Since Jessica Jones
tends to work alone and only rely on herself, her powers
self-synergize well. However, the classic duo of Luke
Cage and Iron Fist work better when used together.
Most of this synergy comes from powers that feed into
each other. But one of Luke's powers is explicitly
stronger when Iron Fist is on his team. Behold: the
power of friendship. But Hulk, on the other hand,
definitely isn't what I'd call a "team player". When he's
enraged, he barely knows what he's doing, and his
powers create wanton destruction, making
unpredictable changes to the game board and
destroying random tiles, even ones you might want to
keep. What's more, his strongest powers also have a
chance of hurting his allies. So if you want to unleash
raw Hulk power, you're going to have to accept the
consequences in-game of not being entirely in control.
Finally, let's talk about one more tool: establishing a
design language. Have you ever seen those masks used
in Italian commedia dell'arte and Japanese Noh?
Those classical masked theater traditions relied on
limited, fixed sets of masks. But, because the audience
was already totally familiar with the masks and what
they represented, actors could use subtle changes like
body posture or lighting to tell intricate, nuanced stories.
Ideally, we should employ the same principles in
character design. We don't need to invent new sets of
mechanics whenever we want to tell new stories with
our characters, so long as we've established a strong
enough mechanical vocabulary to tell interesting stories
by varying how we use those mechanics.
Fortunately, games at large already share a deep library
of design affordances and conventions. For instance, if
you're choosing a starting character in an RPG you're
beginning, I'm betting the character in white clothes is a
support character, and the character in red clothes is a
damage dealer. As character designers, we can lean on
conventions like this to make character use more
intuitive. Those shared conventions give designers a
nice foundation to start building narrative on, but
game-specific design language is often helpful too.
Adding mechanical constraints can fuel creativity and
create more opportunities to tell unique stories. Like,
remember when we mentioned that Marvel Puzzle
Quest uses blue to represent knowledge? That mapping
helps tell the story of a huge variety of characters
whose powers cone from intelligence or technical
know-how. It represents Iron Man using novel
technology, Professor X laying out a strategy, Jessica
Jones hunting for clues. So as long as game content
continues to respect and showcase the game's design
language, players can come to internalize it at their own
pace. There are many, many different approaches to
using mechanics to reinforce character design, and this
is just a small slice of them, but they all, ultimately,
serve the same goal: the mechanic is the
message. So let's let that message shine.
♪ "Sword of Sand" by Hylian Lemon ♪