Our world is run by incentives.
And games are the perfect tool for showing us how.
Not wholly, but in the big,
complex machine that is modern society,
how we incentivize things drives 
on a macro level a lot of what goes on.
The problem is we don't always incentivize things right, and we don't always realize what we're incentivizing.
Actually, heck, sometimes things just are 
not thought through at all,
and no one is even really considering 
what they're incentivizing.
But you know what else runs on a system of  interlocking incentives?
Video games.
One of the most powerful things a game can do 
is help us to understand the kinds of decisions 
that human beings make,
given the web of 
interlocking incentives they're faced with.
So when designing a game experience,
rather than beating the player over the head with what the designer may think is some grand message,
often the best way to get people to
understand the world,
and some of the deep-rooted problems within it,
is simply to build it into the game's incentive systems.
Human beings have always been bad with incentives,
getting ourselves into all sorts of 
situations we don't intend to,
because of how we try to direct how groups behave.
Back in colonial India, the British decided that there were too many Cobras slithering around,
so they offered a bounty for cobra corpses.
At first this seemed to work, 
but actually it just led to people setting up cobra farms,
breeding them and 
turning them in for the bounties.
Obviously as soon as the British figured this out,
they cancelled the bounty,
which caused the cobra ranchers to just
 release their now worthless cobras,
and now there were even more Cobras in India 
than there had been before.
In Vietnam there's an even better attested example of the French doing the exact same thing with rats.
They put out a bounty for rat tails.
So rat catchers would now simply 
clip the tails of the rats they caught,
rather than killing them,
before releasing them back into the wild 
so that more of them would breed.
For some more modern examples,
well, how about the welfare system?
Now I am a hundred percent in favor 
of a social safety net
and there's a lot of economic evidence 
that it actually benefits everybody
 to have that sort of system in place,
whether or not you ever end up
 collecting a welfare check yourself.
But, it's one of those systems, where,
 at least in its early forms,
nobody in charge seemed to be drawing the connection between the goals they were trying to achieve,
and the incentives they were putting into place.
Imagine a system where you got to collect welfare money up to whatever amount would take you right above the poverty line each year.
Enough to make sure that you didn't starve.
I am sure that some of you are 
already seeing the potential problems here.
Let's say that the poverty line is 20,000 dollars.
Well, the minimum wage in the US is 7 dollars 25 cents.
So if you work a full-time job at minimum wage,
you will make 15,080 dollars a year, 
which falls below that poverty line.
Which means, that under this system, 
you bring in a total of 20,000 dollars.
Congratulations! 
You have just worked 2,000 hours this year,
and not made a single cent more 
than you would have if you hadn't worked at all.
In fact, you probably made less,
since the income you did bring in might cause a decrease in other benefits you receive, like Medicaid.
So unless you could find yourself a job 
that paid like 30,000 or more a year,
it was not worth finding a job at all.
And that's just not how getting out of poverty works.
And while that may sound insane,
that's pretty much how aid to 
families with dependent children,
one of the largest parts of the U.S. welfare system,
worked all the way up until the 1980s.
What they eventually realized, 
is that by being more generous,
and not reducing people's benefits 
as they started bringing in a small income,
you actually pay out less in welfare benefits 
over the long run;
because it encourages people to get that first job 
and get some experience on their résumé,
so that they're able to make the step up 
to bigger and better things.
So, if the goal is to spend as little as possible
to help get people back into the economy of society,
the incentives that they had originally set up 
were all sorts of wrong.
Or, how about this one?
Smog in Mexico City.
In the 1980s,
smog in Mexico City was TERRIBLE.
So, in 1989, they passed a law called:
"You Don't Drive Today"
which basically stated that each day of the week,
if your licence plate ended in specific numbers, 
you couldn't drive.
So, maybe plates ending in a three or an eight 
can't drive on Saturday.
Well, since it was tied to licence plate numbers,
people came to an easy solution.
Buy a second car with a different number.
But since you only had to be driving that car 
one day a week,
what most people ended up doing was buy the 
dingiest, cheapest old beater they could find.
And now, instead of cutting traffic by one seventh,
Mexico City had just converted one seventh of the vehicles on the road at any given time
into the worst polluting, 
least environmentally friendly junkers possible.
Now, games are great at helping us 
to see and understand perverse incentives, 
and that's really valuable,
because sometimes it's not that the world's 
incentive systems are designed wrong by mistake,
sometimes, it's that a small group of people 
who have influence over something
think they can pull a fast one on society,
because no one's going to see 
what their incentive systems really mean.
And showing this is where games really shine.
Take Prison Architect.
It doesn't overtly say anything about
 the U.S. prison system,
it doesn't make any moral judgement 
about for-profit prisons,
but as you play it, you start to 
feel the pressure of the incentives.
You start making choices to 
value profit over the welfare of the prisoners.
Or if you don't, you find yourself
struggling against the system to do so.
And you can't help but start seeing and 
thinking about the questions these systems raise.
Is it a perfect simulation?
Well no, it shouldn't be.
It's meant to engage you thinking about these problems,
not be a system where if you just play long enough,
you'll find the perfect solution for America's prisons.
But just the same, it's a jumping off point 
to start pondering, in the broadest sense,
what some of these incentive systems 
might cause in the real world.
And when games do go deeper,
they can make us think about how 
the interlocking systems of our world interact.
Back when James was teaching, 
he used to show students Fate of the World,
a game about climate change.
And one of the first things that students would try to do 
was incentivize people switching to electric cars,
much like we've done in the real world.
But then, they would be shocked to find 
that their carbon output had barely changed,
because it turns out,
those cars have got to get 
their electricity from somewhere,
and these students' countries were still generating 
that electricity with coal fire power plants.
This was an eye-opening experience;
and because it's done in a game,
you as the player feel out these different systems 
and find yourself walking down the wrong path,
because you didn't think deeply enough about them.
These games get us to explore those systems,
and think about them in a radically different way 
than simply having them explained to you would.
So if you want to make a game showing 
the consequences of say,
having a largely unregulated financial sector,
or maybe showing what 
unlimited, anonymous campaign donations
 might do to democracy,
simply preaching that message 
and hammering it into the player
might be a less effective approach than
presenting players with a rough version of 
the incentive systems that exist,
and letting them form their own conclusion 
as they interact with them;
Because experiencing the consequences and 
the insidious pull of incentives first hand
is something games are uniquely qualified to offer.
It's one of our greatest strengths.
Of course,
simply experiencing a simulation of 
a bad incentive structure
isn't where the 
exploration of those problems should ever end,
but if you want to 
make a game to get people thinking,
letting them experience first hand the consequences
of some of these incentive systems 
we've set up in the world might be the best way.
See ya next week!