Hey guys!
Today, we're going to talk about the uncanny valley.
I'm sure some of you are probably already very familiar with this topic,
but I'm always surprised to find how many people haven't heard of it before, or who have heard of it
but don't know what it is.
So, enough beating around the bush
(whatever that means).
Let's do this.
Let's start off with a little history lesson
The concept of the uncanny valley
was introduced in the 70s
by a Japanese roboticist named Masahiro Mori.
The story goes that Mori liked to build robots
a whole, whole lot,
and over time, he started building his robots
to look increasingly human-like,
and the more human qualities he gave to his bots,
the more people liked them.
Their vaguely human characteristics were charming.
They looked like big, bolted, awkward children
and everybody loved them.
But as Mori continued to improve his humanoid robots,
adding synthetic skin and
rudimentary facial expressions and such,
He discovered a strange trend -
he was surprised to find that
people didn't respond to these new robots so well.
Oh sure, other members of his field
were impressed with his advances,
but just being around these robots made people uneasy.
This observation led Mori to come up with
the theory of the uncanny valley.
The premise is simple: if something that is clearly not human is given human qualities,
we find those qualities endearing.
But give it too many human characteristics
and it starts looking like an imperfect simulation,
which we find kind of disquieting or even revolting.
But once you get past that and make the object
look and act almost like a perfect human, we start to...
You know what? Hang on.
I brought a chart.
Ah! Here we go.
This graph depicts the uncanny valley theory.
It shows the relationship between
how human something looks and how much we like it.
Let's start at the beginning of the curve.
At this point, the object isn't human looking at all
and people respond to it with a big...meh.
But if we add a few human characteristics to the object,
suddenly it's a lot more appealing.
Now it's got personality. 
It's cute, or awesome, as the case may be.
But then, if we keep adding past a certain point,
we hit this huge drop in appeal.
Suddenly, the object isn't cute anymore.
Suddenly, we're freaked out.
But if we keep pushing past this point,
eventually the object will become
indistinguishable from human beings
and we'll be okay with it again.
That area right down there is the uncanny valley.
So why does this happen.
The idea is that if an object is clearly not human,
then its human-like characteristics
will stand out and appeal to us.
But if the object is almost but not quite human,
its non-human characteristics are all we're going to see.
We know what a human looks like.
I mean, we see them every day.
So when something is off we know it, and it's unsettling.
So, now that we're all on the same page,
let's steer this sucker back on topic.
What does this all mean for games?
3D artists and animators have been
fighting the uncanny valley for some time now.
And they've made a lot of progress over the years,
but the battle's not over yet.
Graphically, games have advanced to the point
where we're having to struggle with this problem too.
So, what are our options?
Theoretically we want our games and characters
to be visually appealing,
which means we're going to be aiming for
one of these two peaks.
That gives us two options.
Photorealism, or stylization.
Let's start with the first one.
There's a lot of appeal to the idea of photorealism.
It's amazing to look at,
it lends itself well to simulating reality
in a visually believable way,
which many game concepts can definitely benefit from.
But technologically, we aren't quite there yet.
And it shows.
One of the main problems with aiming for photorealism
is just how easy it is to screw up.
As I pointed out before,
the main problem with a character
that's almost but not quite human
is that all the areas the character falls short in
become glaringly obvious.
And it's not just an issue of
model detail and texture resolution either.
Movement has a huge impact on photorealism.
Think of all the times you've seen
a beautiful screenshot from a game and thought,
"Good God, this is going to be incredible!"
And then you see the game in motion 
and it all just ... falls apart.
There are a host of other factors that can
compromise the humanity of the character.
Flat voice acting, subpar animation,
lame acting performance...
(...Smartass.)
Even environment interaction.
I've seen a gamer play a hyper-realistic game,
get stuck on geometry, and say,
"What the hell, this is stupid! I never get stuck on that!"
And then play a Mario game and have
the same thing happen without it bothering them at all.
My point is there are so many, many,
many layers of detail required
to create a completely believable human.
If just a few of those details are missing or off,
then the whole thing tumbles backward into the valley
and all that hard work is for naught.
The fight to create believable photo-real characters
is a huge money sink
and it's a very, very easy battle to lose.
Let me give you an example.
You remember that Final Fantasy movie, Spirits Within?
Square tried to create a film with
photorealistic CG characters.
And it did look pretty cool -
I mean, especially for the time,
but you remember how awkward and
vaguely inhuman the characters seemed ?
Now, think about The Incredibles.
Even though they're clearly stylized -
caricatures of humans, really -
they look more lifelike and human
than anybody in Square's ill-fated movie.
And even though it's been
over 10 years since Spirits Within,
even with all of the technological advances
we've made in that time,
the same trend still holds true today.
The characters in all of these movies continue to
kind of just - freak us the hell out,
while the much more caricatured humans in these films
somehow seem way more human
and lifelike by comparison.
On that note, let's have a look at our second option:
Stylization.
Go ahead and make a quick mental list
of your favourite game characters.
Just the first five to pop in your mind
I'll wait.
No, I won't wait.
Let's just look at a few well-known characters.
Let's say Mario, Kratos, and...
Some Final Fantasy people.
These guys are some of the most
recognizable characters in gaming.
All extremely appealing,
but not one of them photorealistic.
Some of them may look more real than others,
but you'd never mistake any one of them
for a real live human being.
And since they're clearly not human,
it makes their human characteristics stand out.
That's what makes Mario so cute and funny,
Kratos so brutal and ruthless,
and Final Fantasy characters so earnest and expressive.
Those are their most human characteristics
We don't expect them to move perfectly,
or react to danger like we would,
or when they get stuck on a two foot wall
we're willing to excuse it as
an annoying idiosyncrasy of the medium
rather than being completely torn out of the experience.
The beauty of sticking with this side of the Valley
is how open it is to aesthetic variety.
You can go for any look you want to.
You can go for a cel-shading look,
Try a painterly style,
keep it simple, go retro,
50s illustrations...
The number of style possibilities are endless!
And unlike the colossal expense of
pursuing photorealistic graphics.
Even small developers can
create a visually memorable game this way.
Of course, this option's not without
its own little pitfalls and challenges.
The task of creating characters
that are human enough to resonate with an audience,
without putting the caricature too far,
is a fine line to walk.
And for games that thrive on a feel of simulation,
a stylized look could undermine
the authenticity of the experience.
It's a delicate balance.
So, as you can see - in the end, we have two options
when creating game worlds and characters.
One, we can strive for photorealistic models,
and try to increase fidelity by -
removing glitches, improving animation,
perfecting voice acting and...
well, pretty much ironing out every last kink.
Or, two - we can try and perfect the craft of
exemplifying human characteristics
in non-human characters.
I don't really think
there's a wrong answer to this problem.
I don't think pouring money into our graphics
is a bad thing...
That's the only way we're going to keep pushing
the limits of the realism we can achieve!
And, maybe one day,
see what the other side of the Valley holds.
But it's important to remember that 
graphical fidelity does not equal human fidelity.
The graphics whore in me is as eager as anybody
to see the first believable
photorealistic character in motion.
But just... don't forget how green the grass can be 
on this side of the Valley.
...You may have noticed
it's very brown looking over there.
See you next week!