[Music]
We've often been asked why the US
produces so many more first-person
shooters than Japan. In the past, I've
always given the standard industry
answer. The first person shooter
originated in the US. With companies
like ID and engine creators like Epic
based in the States, it's simply always
been easier to recruit the talent needed
and get the support required to build a
first-person shooter here than anywhere
else. But that answer has always left me
a little unsatisfied. Is the answer
true? Well, yeah. Does it explain why we
create more first person shooters in the
US than the rest of the world combined?
Sure. But it doesn't answer the
fundamental question. Why did we invent
the first person shooter in the first
place? What caused game creators in the
United States to look to first person
shooting while the game makers in other
countries were looking elsewhere? To
find the answer, we have to go back to
the nativity of the first person shooter
and take a good hard look at the two
great game developing nations of the
time, Japan and the United States.
Because the answer lies in how each
culture sees warfare, conflict, and the
gun. In the Hagakur, Yamamoto Tunitomo,
a samurai turned monk, quotes Lord
Soninori saying, "In the midst of a
single breath, where perversity cannot
be held is the way of the samurai."
Thomas Payne, revolutionary pamphlete
and inventor, said in his crisis series,
"Those who expect to reap the blessings
of freedom must, like men, undergo the
fatigues of supporting it." These quotes
show us a contrast. The Marshall
philosophy of Japan comes out of Shinto
and Buddhist traditions and so is
focused on spiritual attainment and
mastery. This philosophy is the legacy
of a warrior culture which greatly
predates the advent of the gun and is
itself intimately tied with the
spiritual life of the nation. The
Marshall ideals of the United States on
the other hand are the product of
enlightenment philosophy and thus focus
on personal freedom. The nation itself
was born by the gun in support of just
such principles. But what do these
varying cultural outlooks mean for
gaming? Quite a lot really. Because
whether they realize it or not, the
cultures in which these developers grew
up often influence their games. In
Japanese games, the gun isn't so much a
gun as an extension of the self. The gun
is a part of the person, the suit, or
the vehicle, and as a representation of
internal force rather than a mere
firearm. When an actual gun is given to
a person, it's often a tool for survival
whose use indicates that everything else
has gone wrong. Of course, there will
always be exceptions, though,
interestingly, these exceptions usually
star American heroes rather than
Japanese ones. This idea of the weapon
as an extension of the self, of
channeling inner force rather than
relying on external power, is distinctly
a Shinto and Buddhist conceptualization.
It allows for concepts like Mega Man's
internalization of new powers and his
need to become a unified hole before he
can put the world back to the way it was
and restore peace. It even allows for
games about martial artists who can
project fireballs due to their mastery
of their art. What it doesn't facilitate
is the first person shooter. For the
FPS, you need a different
conceptualization of the gun. First, you
need to see the gun as a symbol of
independence. You need to be able to
view the gun as a tool that enables its
owner to ensure that the expression of
their will is not unduly constrained.
Here, the gun empowers the man rather
than as a part of the man. This is the
American conceptualization of the gun,
hammered home from our revolutionary
origins to our pioneer expansion. It's
what lets us put the gun in the hands of
the player, but have that gun be
infinitely replaceable. In this case, an
individual weapon is meaningless. All
that has meaning is what that weapon
lets you do. Second, for the FPS, you
need the idea that anyone can be a
warrior. that it's not limited by
training or by cast, but rather simply
by determination and the weapons
available. Even though it's been almost
50 years since the last US draft, in the
States, we have the heroic concept of
the citizen soldier, the everyman who
will rise up and fight for his ideals,
needing only a weapon and a cause. This
conceptualization of what the true
warrior is is what allowed US developers
to get rid of surrogate heroes like
Solid Snake and instead have the player
jump in and be the hero, acting directly
from the hero's perspective. Third, we
need a deeply instilled idea of personal
freedoms and the value of individuality
as a justification for violence. If you
look at early first-person shooters, you
never see another person on your side.
Most of these games had human characters
available, but never use them as
anything but enemies. Now, having actual
teammates or even writing rudimentary AI
might have been more than what
developers wanted to deal with at the
time, but they never have you so much as
talk to other characters or see a
captured prisoner. Why? Because
first-person shooters were about the
individual versus the world. They were
the rawest expression of the cowboy
ideal of personal liberty.
Unfortunately, many of the bad aspects
of first-person shooters come from the
perversion of these ideals. Personal
liberty used as a shield for the
irresponsible lack of consideration for
others. The ability to do violence as
justification for doing violence, the
universal right to bear arms as an
excuse to not learn to respect weapons
before choosing to use them, and so on
so forth. The list goes on. We don't
really need to flesh it out. All we have
to do is look at the cultural context
for these games to reveal ways to make
better first-person shooters and how to
avoid many of the low points of the
genre. So, why did the US begin building
first-person shooters before the rest of
the world? Because of the way we see
conflict and the cultural mythology
we've built up around the gun. But if
you look closely, even today, you can
see the effects of these cultural ideals
on first and third person shooters. I'll
leave you guys to find good examples
from the US, but I'm going to highly
recommend checking out Vanquish. We came
really close to putting it in our games
you might not have tried list. Not only
is the gameplay interesting, but it's a
fantastic modern example of the shooter
through another cultural lens. All of
the powers are an extension of the
character's being through a suit. Guns
aren't really guns, but rather the
conceptualization of guns manifested out
of the self through the understanding of
guns. Yeah. And to top it off, they
still felt the need to make the
protagonist American, though that's
probably just for marketing reasons.
Anyway, thanks for watching and I hope
that's given you guys something to chew
on while you shoot stuff. See you next
[Music]
week. Heat. Heat.
[Music]