Now we're also live on YouTube. You're
ditch both of them now. Yeah. Now
there's two of them. There's two of
them. This is getting out of hand.
We will not survive this. I No. Hey,
that's some episode one humor for all of
you out there. Good morning and welcome
to the pre-show for games for breakfast.
Um Oh boy. I'm just finishing up my Blue
Sky post. Blue ski. Uh pre-show. Uh
Janet and Brad, what should I what
should be the one sentence I say about
the Games for Breakfast post right now?
Come meet our surprise third co-host.
Will's migraine. Yeah. Yeah. Will is not
feeling uh Well, he's he's gonna push on
through,
soldier. Uh Grass did get it in there
first, I think. Let's see. Just the
words Baja blast. It is very ta How
about I combo it? How about I say it is
very tasty. We will not survive this.
And that's will be what I what I write.
Okay, great. Awesome. Yeah. Uh it is
very
tasty. We will not survive this. I could
do if I want to go real hard and weird.
It is very itchy tasty. We will not
survive this.
No, I'm not going to do it because it
could be a whole different thing. We're
good.
Chat, why you come to me on
this and you bring me hype? You bring
me why you're hype already? Why do you
do this? Hello there.
[Music]
Uh, I still have all the leftover
birthday things from last birthday. Oh,
that's right. We have to ask about this
the thing.
Which thing?
Uh, future Janet and current Janet and
Brad. Um, we wanted to ask you about the
the the last thing, right? We had a list
of things and we wanted to ask them
about the last thing. like what in like
in theory without any specifics they
would want as as a prize. Oh, I
remember. Yeah, we'll do that in the
show. Okay. I figured we could do it
during the pre-show since Brad's busy
hyping. Oh, we could do it during the
pre-show. Yeah. I don't know. Palpatine,
what do you think? Do we? Okay, good.
Yeah. No, we're fine. Okay. So, um Brad
and Janet, uh because this will apply to
both of you. Uh and yes, that is
foreshadowing. Um we couldn't afford
fivehadowing, so you're getting
foreshadowing instead. You'd be
surprised how much it costs to get the
hardware for five shadowing. I I don't
know if it has to do with ray tracing or
hates ray tracing. Yeah. I just I don't
know. I'm not find a Raymond to lay down
on. Anyway, to trace, right? Yeah,
exactly. At least that's our
understanding. It's very expensive to
have him lie there full time. Anyway, um
so in the future nearish temporally um
to this we will be uh perhaps doing
something for which you will be
rewarded. Um and it is the season for
you to do nice things right around an
arbitrary date when which commemorates a
revolution around the sun of this
planetary body. uh
uh um where you get rewarded for your
good deeds. And we were trying to think
of what some nice rewards you would like
to
see for Oh, I don't know if we reach
certain goals in that venture.
Yeah. That's so like in the past we've
done things like
Baja Nelly's, right? Like that's a silly
one. We're not doing that again, by the
way. That was a oneand done. We will
never mix Baja Blast and Martinelli
Sparkling Cider. Two great tastes that
do not go great together. It's very
tummy upset. Something about them mixes
in a like we were holding it together
when we did it last time. It's
disgusting. Don't do it. Um, thanks
Thunder. Thanks, buddy.
Uh, uh, oh, and just, uh, so qu the
desk, your test is complete. Yeah,
received. That is that is a fast
username change, by the way. Um
uh so yeah, we've done we've done actual
plays. We've done um uh Mario Kart
matches. We've done just silly things
you'd like either big or small. And you
don't have to answer it right now. silly
things that you'd like Will or I to
actually do
um for for a reward for uh you doing a
good deed aka donating to a
charity and Zermit. Yeah, we are. Hello.
This is the pre-show. Welcome. There
will be a show assuming that the
pre-show ever stops. assuming that hype
stops over on Twitch again. How this
works and I think we we will get the
hype meter eventually moving over here.
We're already at the level three over
there. Um
uh and I the show can't start and I
can't have my coffee for another 2
minutes and 13 seconds or until if they
happen to keep hyping even though we've
warned about the dangers of hype. Uh we
just can't move on until it's done.
That's right. Mostly because it then we
have to thank everyone and it's a big
Yep. All right, let's start looking at
some of these things. So, someone says,
"Strap an action cam to Zoe for an
hour." You'd be amazed how boring that
would be, but sure. Uh, do a sick flip.
Um, I would have to get sick first. And
that I don't know if I could time that
out as a reward. Um, uh, Balders's Gate
3 patch 8 run. I mean, I would do it if
people are interested in that. Yeah. Uh,
French press coffee martinelli spritzer.
Also not against it. Oh, I kind of like
this one. An official Zoey DND build.
Oh, cuz
that we could get like we could get like
an artist,
right, to like do up the stat block and
we could get you, me, and Jeff together
to like run through the homebrew in like
an hour and then we could like publish
it as like as a thing with the other
thing that we're thinking about because
that actually makes a lot of sense. I'm
gonna start a document here, a very
official document.
That's right. So, Zoe D and D
block followed by uh Ballers Gate 3
patch
8. Uh followed by what else was there?
There was something else. Uh
uh Jane Austin LAR in Minecraft. I like
Darkwolves commission a physical hype
train model. Oh boy, that's that's a
lot. Also, I'm still waiting on my minis
to show up here from the UK. Uh, and it
makes me sad that it takes so long. Why
do take so long to get here from the UK?
French press spritzer.
Um, we're getting notepads for the funny
breakfast show on the funny cartoon bean
channel. Should we be worried?
Uh, I mean, no more than you should be
worried consistently. The standard
amount of worry. I don't think we can
really. Haha, we're free from the hype
train. It's over. Ah, we've defeated you
once again, hype beast. Uh, that's a
brand, right? Huh? Hype
beast. Hypebeast is a brand. I If you
say so.
Um,
yes. Apparently, if I The first thing on
Google, it says Hypebeast driving
culture forward. So, that feels like a
brand. Monster monster mixer. mix as
many monsters as possible. Great. That's
actually something easy for Will to do.
Yeah. I know. And I have I could borrow
my my roommates have um they work uh
during the summer at a Renaissance
festival. Um and so they they have one
day they confiscated a giant glass stein
and it's it's got to be more than a
liter. And I could make so many flavors
of Monster in there. Um eventually it
will just taste like chemicals. Sure.
But you know that's fine. I'll do that
for for for charity.
All right. So we got some good stuff. I
think this is all good. Yeah. This is
this blindfold backseat bario
cart. Wait. Okay. So, you wear a
blindfold and I have to drive for you or
I have I have I have to tell you how to
drive and it'll be relevant because we
won't be that far off hopefully from the
release of the beach 2. We'll see. So,
you won't know all the maps and it'll be
worse.
We'll we'll do like bob sled practice.
It'll be it'll be good. Good. Good.
Good. Yeah. Okay. Great. Um All right. I
got to thank uh I got to thank a bunch
of people. First off, I'm going to go to
YouTube because it there's the one very
specific one. Zerba, thank you so much
for becoming a member over on YouTube.
Welcome to the extra fans. Uh that means
a lot. Thank you. A reminder, we are
looking at as soon as YouTube lets us
due to the number of members we have.
Get more emotes in there for all of you.
We're going to start putting them in uh
as soon as we can. We have them all
ready because they're all already over
here on Twitch and they should just be
compatible. So, we're just going to
shove them in uh as soon as those
memberships uh happen. Um should that be
something that you want. Okay. Over here
on the Twitch side, I got to thank
Valadonna for bits. Sasquatch for 54
months. Kerrion forbiddes new guy for uh
55 months of prime. Secretos for 42
months. It is the answer. Bionic beardly
for 49 months. Nova for 75 months.
That's three quarters of a century of
months. Stop it. Get some help. Crimson
Coyote and Copper Chef for more bitties.
Mechanism for 47 months, that's almost
four years. Uh, Zip for five community
gift subs. Mr. Bank for 31 months. Proxj
for biddies. That's the end of the hype
train. But we do have to thank Crafty J
for the 59 months. Nice. With the
message, haha, you thought the hype was
done, but it was me. That's true. That
is true. Well, I I am seeing some folks
questioning uh the the the titling of
the episode about the the lawsuits and
things. Don't worry, Rad SG. We will get
there. We will get there. We will get
there. Uh will I have to say uh brava on
on today's topics. Uh as everyone and
we'll actually I won't even get into it.
I'm just psyched to talk about it all
and that it's not all switched to. Yeah,
I I am I am getting a little burned out
like there's no new real information and
all anyone's talking about is like
tariffs, not tariffs is a thing. And I'm
like listen, I I was really happy to do
that last week. I got I got out of my
system. I watched the John Oliver piece
on tariffs, which has a piece on the
Switch 2 this morning while I was trying
to get ready. Um, so that's a thing. Um,
it's rare we get the jump on Mr. Oliver.
That that is that is true. Uh, so that's
nice. Um, yeah. Uh the other the other
one, by the way, is uh and I I did
mention this to Matt, the other thing
that a lot of places are doing that I
have to wade through every time I want
to like look and see what people are
talking about is plenty of places will
take a new game, particularly a new
difficult game, and they will just put
it in a clothes ringer and just ring out
all of the content from it. They're
like, "All right, here's an article on
how you solve each individual puzzle in
the blueprints." And you're
like, "Huh? And they're like, "Yes, we
have four pages of articles on the
blueprints because we want to SEO
maximize. We're SEO maxing. That's how
we do it. We do an article. Losers were
SEO max, right?" Yeah, exactly. That's
That's what it is. And I just
don't I don't Yeah, I don't I don't know
what to do with that, but uh that is
that is always a struggle when there's
new stuff. Um Yeah, totally. No, I get
it. Well, everybody, thank you for
joining us for this uh pre-show on Year
of Someone's Lord, April 14th, 2025.
That's the year and the time and the
things and the stuff. Uh if you are new
here, either on Twitch or on YouTube,
please say hello. Uh we have all the
chats intermingled so we can see them
all. Um and yeah, as as illustrated in
case you are brand new here, um you can
Oh, like and here here we go. Like how
about this? Uh Pavara just gifted one
membership
to the bull. Oh, thanks. You can have
basically if we're chatting, no no
donation or anything is required. We as
we talk, we'll pop up your stuff and
we'll pop we'll talk about it. And yeah,
it's it's a way that we get to sort of
let everyone know uh what's going on in
the other chat without you having to be
in the other chat. And also so that uh
Nebula who for whom we are recording
this um momentarily not yet this won't
be on Nebula but the next thing we do
will be on Nebula um uh they get some
context uh rather than having like all
of chat on screen as like a continuous
scroll. I do that when it's just me
because chat is my co-pilot. Um right I
also need a bumper sticker for the back
of my gaming chair that says chat is my
co-pilot.
that that conveniently no one will ever
see. But even No, they do cuz when I
when I leave Oh, you spit it around. It
like No, I don't even spit it around.
Chair has a mind of its own. It just
sort of like if I'm not sitting in it,
it'll just sort of lazily spin. I got
you. I got you. Can it feature a Zoey
Bean? Yes, absolutely. Um uh does new to
today's stream count? No. No. Uh
um male asked uh any thoughts about
Marathon? Oh, that's the wrong yo
window. Thank you. Um yes, we are going
to be talking about Marathon. I actually
think it looks sick. Um I am more
excited for it than I am for any other
extraction shooter. And we'll talk about
why. Um I wasn't even aware there was an
ARG about it yet. So that's cool. I'll
dig into that. There's like a whole
thing. Um
Uh,
apparently my chair is possessed. I'm
not sure how to tell you this. That's
fine. Also, Richard with a late with a
late breaking uh uh idea for a reward.
Evil Universe versions. I like that. I
like that. That's a good
idea. Um,
writing it down. All right. Well, I
guess we should start the
show. Oh, wait. Will, did you run the
intro?
Not yet. I have to. No, but don't we
have to load it into memory so it
doesn't hiccup? Yes. So, so this is
going to be the fake intro. It's still
the pre-show.
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
Good morning, Matt. Ah, good morning,
Will. Good morning to all of you. For me
and the little man with an ice pick
behind my right eye. Welcome to Games
for Breakfast, the only internet talk
show we talk about this week's gaming
and tech news. But you know, the same
will show that is the only time when
your co-host has a migraine, you have a
migraine with them.
We're going to run this at least for a
while until the reflections get too uh
wrong for me.
Um, good morning. Hello. Welcome,
Benvanu. Uh, we have a smorgish board of
wonderful topics that Will has uh
prepared for us this fine day. Will,
other than your massive headache, how
are you doing? Pretty good. Pretty good.
Had a had a pretty decent weekend. Um,
got to do a bunch of relaxing. Got to
play some Repo. Matt, have you played
Repo? I have not played Repo. Repo. Now,
Repo, bearing of course no similarity to
the genetic opera, though you are
required to make jokes about every
little glass vial being Zydrate. um is a
sort of phenomenal combination of the
cuteness of um Among Us, okay, with the
chaos and idea of Lethal Company.
in that you are you are uh very cute
robots
uh who are
scavenging um items of value out of
abandoned and definitely very haunted
places. Um and you are uh attempting to
avoid or uh fight back against monsters
that are um directly out of the mind of
someone who needs more therapy than
money can buy. Um, and it's a wonderful
time mostly because
uh you can shrink. Like the big the big
shtick is you can shrink and your
friends can pick you up and put you
places so you can get stuff. But it's
it's great fun and very good chaos. So I
got to play a bunch of that with um with
Alchemy and friends yesterday uh on her
stream and that was that was a lovely
time. It was great. Nice. I uh I got to
continue. I still have not beaten Tree.
Um, so I got actually some time this
weekend to to click away at that. I did
finally beat my first furnace
golem. Uh, which which was an incredible
feat of of punching uh big feet to make
thing topple to throw thing and thing. I
was going to say, did you dunk it? Cuz
you got a I Well, actually, the first
one I did, I did two of them. The first
one I did, I I did dunk it. The second
one I did, if you're a faith strength
build, you don't really need to dunk it.
uh you can actually kind of nail it down
enough quick uh to get it there. But it
was good. Speaking of Elden Ring, I am
uh I'm letting people know letting
people know that um we're in the middle
of South of Midnight right now, which
will be playing after this, which is an
amazing game. It's it's a beautiful
amazing game. Um it's Ahmed Best's game
directorial debut. Ahmed Best known as
um the actor who played Jar Banks. Yeah.
uh and has and from that
is it called JS from that he is uh had
this this whole arc with the Star Wars
franchise he uh created a character
called Kellerin Beck who is a Jedi
master in charge of teaching younglings
and that's been like indoctrinated into
Star Wars canon and he's in the
Mandalorian and a bunch of other stuff
but one of the things he's always wanted
to do is direct a video game so he's
directed South of Midnight a game about
um healing inter intergenerational
traditional trauma with
traditional witchcraft in the deep south
of the US in like invoking um the
folklore of the area and it's really
good. Yeah, it's next on my list after
uh when Jamie and I finish um Split
Fiction. I think that's when I'm going
to be I played a bunch of that. Side
note, again, shout out to Split Fiction
as well. Uh Split Fiction slaps and
every time I think I'm going to get sick
of it, it just ups itself. It's crazy.
It's so good. I I've been watching some
playthroughs of it. It looks It looks
very good. And the puzzles, it does look
like you get like each person gets at
least two playthroughs of it because the
two sides are so very different. It's
not like, you know, red blue sort of
sides. It's It's very different. It's
mechanic. Yeah, it's also I I missed
this. Hello to you, too. Hi. Oh, and and
Belle caught uh the Invisa mug. That's
which is right here which does have a
game face on it. It's just you can
barely see him available and I'll find
Nebula stores now. Yeah. Um yeah, after
after we finish with that and maybe a
couple of other things may it'll either
be blueprints or Elden Ring at some
point. Uh I've never played Elden Ring.
Uh I've never really played a Souls like
to completion. I've played some Souls
one and hated it. Uh, but I have I have
grown as a gamer since then and we'll
see if I can grumble my way through
Elden R. And will with seamless co-op
and this community. Yeah. I feel like
every bit of the Dark Souls stuff that
you don't dig or the Souls like stuff
will will wash away like like like
something in a fine night rain. Yeah,
that's right. Um that that's very true.
So, we're going to be tackling that.
Anyway, Matt, all that to say, we've had
a very interesting weekend and we have
have a lot to talk about. That's true.
And if you have anything to talk about
or want to tell us about your
interesting weekends, you can do that
over on Blue Sky, you could do that.
Just say hi, say hello, see if you like
these stories or you want to hear other
things, that'd be great. You can also
obviously comment in the chat right now.
Or if you're watching this on uh the
YouTube, you can type that in there,
too. But uh Rocky, if you're over on
Nebula, that is how you get a hold of
us. When did
they when did they change that? Oh my
god, they changed a thing. All right.
Anyway, well, let's actually we can go
to our first story because, uh, it's a
quick one and that's what we we're
showing you right here. So, uh, last
week the Minecraft movie, uh, definitely
hit theaters and broke a bunch of
records. We talked about it a little bit
last night, but, uh, last night. Wow.
Last week. But,
uh, my other gig, the only podcast about
movies, yes, there is an asterisk in
that name somewhere. Got to have the one
and only Will be B. Credits on our show.
uh and to talk about the Minecraft movie
because it's great. So, pictured here is
all three of us hiding from a creeper.
Uh Shahir Dow is my co-host over there
and we got to basically take three
different people with three very
different experiences with Minecraft the
property, Minecraft the game, and then
going to see Minecraft the movie or a
Minecraft movie as it's called and went
into an hour plus long deep dive of
basically going through what we think
worked, what we think didn't, the
cultural relevance of it. Uh we we don't
get too much into the upcoming stories
of um uh rioting in theaters, which who
knows how overblown or not overblown
that is. Uh listen, I love people
getting excited about movies. What I
don't love is a bunch of theater workers
having to clean up after your nonsense.
So that uh because they are not paid
enough for that. Um, but no, if you are
interested in hearing some really,
really, really great conversations about
the Minecraft movie that is available
over on Nebula right now or uh in the
RSS feed, just search the only podcast
about movies elsewhere. Uh, you can find
actually it'll be in the show notes as
well, both versions there. Yeah. So,
yeah. Uh, Will, it was so good having
you on. It's so like I've I've played
Minecraft, but I have not not like Will
has played Minecraft. Uh, there is a
difference there. and I don't think
Shahir ever touched it once. So, it was
a really good middle ground. Speaking of
Minecraft and playing Minecraft, Shane
was pitch over the summer at some point,
probably in late
June, we are going to be we we we have
have uh a community Minecraft server.
Um I am going to be restarting it over
the summer. So, uh it will be modded. It
will be very modded. It will be
extremely modded. We are either playing
Crafttori or Craft to Exile, both of
which are like high-end, very long, very
deep packs. Um, so if those are things
that interest you, it will be open to
everyone who is in the Discord. So that
means if you're a patron, a subscriber
on Twitch, or a channel member on
YouTube, uh we'll be able to get people
in there. There will be like a
concurrent limit, but if you are uh
interested in those uh support us
sometime in June, it'll be one of those
those membership perks. There you go.
Yeah. Cool. Cool. Cool. Uh Will it sweep
the razies? I actually don't think so.
Uh, here's a spoiler for my thoughts on
it. I I I came up with this phrase or
did I talk about it? Did I say this last
week? I can't remember if I said this on
this show or another thing I was talking
to the show about, but the Minecraft
movie is in my opinion like the
equivalent for me like the best most
absolute wonderful the top tier S tier
McDonald's toy you've ever gotten. Yeah,
I think that that's like a really good
that's where I feel like it like it fits
for me. The Inspector Gadget toys. Yes,
the Inspe uh Okay, so back when kids of
a certain redacted age will know, right?
Uh
um you uh you got all of Gadget's
different parts. So you got like his
legs, they were different toys, and his
torso was a different toy. And his arms
were different toys, and his head and
his hat were different toys. No, his
head was part of his torso, but his hat
was a different toy. And you had to get
all the toys to put gadget together, but
he had all the go- go gadget everything.
Um, so a core memory.
Yes.
Um, yeah. Uh, I I also think it was I
think so someone I saw
um
uh someone on Blue Sky said, "Why is
Chicken Jockey
funny?" And it I realized that one of
the reasons that a lot of people aren't
getting it is that some of the key
moments in the movie are deeply embedded
in like having played Minecraft and
having like an intuitive experience of
Minecraft. Yeah. Like chicken jockeyies
are the worst. Okay, so if you're not
familiar with Minecraft, um a chicken
jockey is a chicken with a zombie on it.
A baby zombie. Baby zombies are already
fast. Chicken jockeyies are a little
faster and they're persistent. And if
you don't have gear, you will die,
right? It will kill you. And the reason
that it's funny is it's shot in Freuda
because many Minecraft players have
experienced being somewhere and thinking
that you're safe and then there's a
chicken jockey and now you're definitely
not. Right. And especially with uh Jason
Mamoa's character, this isn't the
trailer. This is no spoilers. uh the is
in a in a wrestling ring like ready to
fight what he's assuming is the toughest
biggest thing and then it turns out to
be a chicken jockey and then you know
it's
uh it it I think it plays for more so
for Minecraft people. I just anticipate
because I I was not entirely familiar
with it. I just figured it was like a
rare mob that was tough which is kind of
also true. Anyway, that all that to say,
we had a lovely conversation about a
Minecraft movie. Not the Minecraft
movie, a Minecraft movie. That's right.
Though it's the first a Minecraft movie.
So, if there is another, will it be a
Minecraft movie 2 or will it be a
Minecraft movie again? Only time will
tell because there's going to be a
sequel because it made more money than
God. I want it to be a Minecraft movie
as well.
May your Minecraft be with you. And you
as well. Yeah, that's what I want. Yeah.
Right. A another I like Mary's. I like
Mary's. I'm a Gladius.
Excellent. Um, these are all Oh, no.
Don't curse us with that. Snacking.
Don't Don't you dare curse us with Oh,
that's so good. Be Minecraft movie. No,
stop it. Coppers is great, too. There's
a lot of Wow, y'all are a Nether M. Oh,
wow. These are all Oh, a lot. Yeah, a
couple people said that, too. This is
This is the real trick, by the way, to
doing live content is um not another
Minecraft movie is uh you just cultivate
a really funny audience and then you
don't have to be funny because your
audience is funny for you. Yeah. Okay.
Uh and Belle, I I a thousand% agree. Um
having worked a movie theater, it just
it's here. Now, I'll get away from the
fun and go onto a soap box before we get
back to some fun.
Uh yeah, and with your spirit. Um amen.
Uh no,
like everyone having fun, you should
always try to make sure that whatever
fun you're having is not going to
directionally take away from the fun or
the or the make someone's life who is
facilitating that fun demonstrabably
worse without them being incredibly
compensated and also signing on for the
task. Right? People didn't sign on for
this theaters. And again, I do I blame
the people doing the stuff in the
theater, but also I blame theater chains
for not staffing and not paying enough
and not having enough people on hand to
take care of things like this. Like, I'm
still amazed in New York how
few workers they have at the AMC's that
I go to. It feels like they should at
least double it both for convenience
andor
uh better working conditions and safety
for all involved. like it just feels
like that should be it, but they don't.
So any people going into these theaters
and making enough of a mess in like a
ruckus is fine if you're going to if as
long as it's not as long as they I would
say like sort of like a cultural moment
uh and that is sort of expect like
people still cheer and clap for Nicole
Kidman, right? Like that's fine, but
like throwing stuff around and garbage
on the flow like anything that's going
to cause more than a small uh moment of
disruption uh for anyone involved. I
mean, they're either being paid to be
there or paid to be there. Just, you
know,
respect. Postco kind of kind of changed
that a little bit. Yeah. Okay. Uh, all
that having been said, let's go from
shaking our old man canes at clouds
about one thing to shaking our old man
canes at clouds about another. So, we're
going to keep this short because we
spent a lot of time on this last week,
but it Please see last week's episode uh
for more. complete thoughts on the
Switch 2. This is not about the Switch 2
itself. This is about the delay. So, we
uh I believe last week we knew that
pre-orders were going to be delayed. Um
we now know that they will um rolling
pre-orders in the United States will
begin Mar 9th, other M month. Um and the
release is still on track for the same
day in June. Um, the pre-orders will now
be more important because there is a
smaller time window. But, uh, reminder,
if you are a Nintendo Switch online
person with at least 50 hours of
recorded play time on your Switch and
the subscription's at least a year old,
you get priority pre-ordering if you
sign up on the Nintendo site and they'll
send you an email and then you have 72
hours hours to pre-order. So, someone
some people I think the first wave of
that has actually gone out in the US
from what I understand. Okay. Um I I did
not see that, but I uh I could be wrong.
I didn't get one. Uh but I did all the
process. Let me let me look.
Um but yeah, uh and and just sort of as
we're saying here, because they still
haven't like actually officially said
whatever the release date, uh the
pre-release date will be.
Um because it seems as though no one
really can understand what a switch 2 is
and where it falls into these
everchanging tariffs that no one seems
to either understand what it's for,
understand where you collect them, or
understand what a piece of technology
fits into like is this a computer, is it
a something else? No one really is able
to answer those questions. And all of
those things are needed if you're going
to collect funds based around these
products. Yeah.
Um and
then the other like the
the Okay. Dating this episode. It's the
14th of April at 11:35 a.m. This is
relevant because this is changing
hourly. The switch to may or may not,
and no one knows for sure, be included
or excluded from all the tariffs.
It's going to be May, right? Yeah. Uh,
so that Yeah, I have seen that the
Switch won't get any tariffs. I've seen
that the Switch will get the full 145%
because final assembly for the Switch is
apparently in China this time. So,
that's great. No one knows. But I've
also heard that they're stalking them up
from Taiwan or something like Vietnam.
Vietnam. Yeah, I've I've heard that
they're they're going to have a bunch of
Toad cosplayers, fly over from Japan
with giant Toad hats full of Switch
Twos, and then bribe the Koopa border
guards with Toad coins. But like, who
knows, right? It no no one knows. If
anyone tells you that they 100% know for
sure how this is going to land, they're
probably about to try and sell you
something. usually subscription access
to their website. They had way too many
wonder flowers and now they're just
staring up at a at a a rainbow of
information that changes on the minute.
Yeah. Yeah. So, who knows? Uh but there
was um something a little bit silly
surrounding this as well. Um the game
that is supposed to be the tour of the
Switch 2, we talked about it. I forget
like it's I don't even know the title of
it, but it's was you figured it would be
like the thing to show off all of the
Switch's bells and whistles, right? Uh
that would come packaged with the game
turns out to be a $10 download because
it's a experience to get you to pay more
money. Um a lot of push back on that
because especially because the Wii
famously came with Wii Sports, which was
a phenomenal hit and one of the reasons
why that system took off as it did.
Well, uh, our old pal
Reggie, pictured here, uh, from his
guest spot years ago on Mega 64,
um, basically took to social media
lately and not like Reggie doesn't work
for Nintendo anymore, but Reggie
famously pushed to include Wii Sports
with the Wii. And apparently the team at
Nintendo was very, very, very against
it.
Um, now just for funsies,
uh, Reggie has sort of just been posting
about that story. Uh, there's a whole
documentary on how he was pushing for
this to happen and blah blah blah. Uh,
and so he's posted twice. He's just like
the story of the Wii Sports Pack in. And
he just put the the the YouTube video
that that is about. Um, and then and
then he did a followup that just says
and the results and like just basically
pointing from a place of no power and no
influence, but also just as a quick
reminder that maybe the software that's
made to show off your fancy new hardware
and make people feel good about their
now everinccreasingly expensive purchase
might be worthwhile to just sort of
include in the package. Um, that seems
like a no-brainer. Mhm. But that uh
that's neither here nor there, I guess.
Yep. Absolutely. Um, so we we we're
going to stop talking about the Switch 2
unless we have confirmed from Nintendo
information that is relevant and then
we're only going to talk about that.
There's a bunch of press events and
stuff that we didn't get invited to
because Nintendo knows that we don't
need that. We'll we'll do our own press
event with with Zoe and Monster and I
don't know, invite us to your press
events and
uh we don't need you unless you really
want us there. Yeah, it'd be great.
Thanks. Yeah, maybe next time.
Confirmed. Yep, that's right. We'll get
Zoe in a cat backpack. You can come,
too. We'll put a webcam in the in the
backpack. Uh P says, "What about
confirmed information from the White
House about tariffs?" Uh no, that no
that doesn't count. Yeah, because it's
gonna change again. Yep. Uh correct. Um
it's going to especially when the uh not
to get too all political up in here
because everyone knows there are no
politics of video games. Absolutely not.
I won't stand for them. Um there I sit
down. That's right. There
are conflicting reports from within the
administration about what will and will
not be hit by which tariffs when. Like
literally people in the commerce
department who are supposed to know
about these things don't know what will
and won't be exempt and what will and
won't be tariffed at what rate. This
is the most
disorganized
hackneed
terrible sham of a job rolling out a uh
uh piece of financial policy which is
demonstrabably drastically affecting
global markets to the extent that it
must be on purpose. You could not be
This is like getting all of the answers
on a true false test wrong. You have to
be doing it on purpose cuz you would get
it right at least half the time if you
were guessing. But if you got all of the
answers wrong, you had to have been
doing it on purpose. This is that this
is real bad. So, we're going to see. But
I'm not taking anything from a White
House uh on tariffs to be gospel about
the Switch 2 until we get the Switch
two. Um, it's we're in an interesting
spot in human history when I will trust
Nintendo over the White House on
information. To be fair, to be
fair, I can think of several spots in my
lifetime where that's been true, but
I've lived in interesting times and I'm
tired of living in
unreing times. We can trust in
precedent. Like we can figure out like
the chaos isn't going to stop in the
government and uh Nintendo will never
ever ever put anything on sale and keep
trying to sell things for exorbitant
amounts of money. We know this. We know
this to be true. Yep. Anyway, we have
some uh the actually I'm going to make
an amendment to Will's comment about not
talking about the Switch. We have some
lovely comments from y'all in the
community that we'll be talking about
later which is talking about last week's
episode which does talk about the
Switch, too. But until then, it's gone
from our minds. Thank you, Reggie, for
your glowing red eyes of justice. All
right. And now for other blasts from the
past, Matt, before there was Halo,
before there was Destiny,
there was Marathon.
Yep. But not like this. The not like
this. Uh, Bungie released the gameplay
trailer and a bunch of information about
the new marathon game. I want to play
this with you. I think this is going to
be great. Yeah, I think this is um, if
you're not familiar yet with it, uh, it
is a extraction looter made I it feels
like for
um, a group of people that might not
normally be into extraction looters,
if that makes sense. Yes.
It has so much even just from the
gameplay trailer. It has so much of what
I love about Destiny's like momentto-
moment physicality gunplay feel to it in
it that I'm already on board. Like
again, many times on this show we've
said, me mainly, but I will I think
you'll agree the reason we don't play
Destiny is because we fell off and it's
really, really, really hard both
monetarily and from a narrative
perspective figuring out what you need
to do when to actually onboard yourself
to Destiny 2 again or to start. The
actual gameplay of Destiny 2 continues
to be great. Uh, other than I will say
other than, and I'm hoping they improve
on this here, Bungie's weird obsession
with first person platforming.
Get some help. Seek seek some therapy.
Just talk to your children about
first-person platforming before somebody
else does. Don't. Okay, great. Anyway,
um uh the
um I I think that this is going to be
very interesting. Uh, and and I agree
100% that the thing that sold me on the
trailer was it's got Bungee gunplay.
That looks really good. It also fixes a
problem which I've had with all of the
other Extraction games, which is it's
not dark and gritty. It's like It's like
neon cyberpunk, right? Which like is
great. I I think I'm tired of like
really dark, grungy games. I This looks
like
somebody just dunked everything in like
high viz paint and I'm all about it to
be honest. It's a good mix. It It rides
right up to the Fortnite edge that I'm
comfortable with. Yeah. While still
feeling like it might be made for
someone uh with my proclivities. Yeah.
Uh by the way, I I I I do want to point
out Hell Divers kind of an extraction
shooter. Kind of. mostly an like yes
there are elements you don't lose your
weapons you don't lose your equipment
you you lose your um samples samples
which then help you unlock things sure
so it has it has
extraction looter shooter vibes to it
but I would not call it I I actually
really enjoy I think the reason why I
played Hell Divers for as long as I did
was because it wasn't that if I had to
go back and get my guns and
No.
And there also actually I'm not too
familiar with this, but like the way
that Hell Divers 2 allows you to do your
load out, but then call your stuff in.
Mhm. It's almost like
you're uh what's the opposite of
extracting, will
intracting. Intracting all of it's an
intraction shooter. That's right. Um,
uh, Bet ask, "Is Deep Rock Galactic an
extraction shooter?" Yes, more than Hell
Divers is. Um, there's also, by the way,
a Deep Rock Galactic Rogike coming out.
I'm so excited. I'm so excited. Anyway,
so, uh, back to Marathon. Um, the they
released a whole bunch of information.
It looks really good. It looks really
bright. They have a cool world. It's
classed. Yeah, people are also, like AMP
says here, uh, they like the original
Marathon trilogy. nervous nervous about
this new marathon. Um yeah, I'm curious
how it all will feel like it ties
together because it does look very
different. Yeah. Yeah. Um and then
related to
that in celebration of this,
speaking of Yeah. Uh so the original the
original marathon games I believe um one
two and I forget what the third one is
called.
Um, guess what gamers? They're all free
on Steam. They're just free. You can
just go get them. I haven't played these
in ages. I just was reminded of this
this morning and you can just go grab
them. And I I put them on my account and
I will play through these again because
it's really really cool to sort of
revisit and see where we came from.
Yeah. Uh, thanks. Oh man, nobody
remembers the original extraction
shooter, Descent. I I remember I was
that I guess you did collect things.
Yeah. H. And also, by the way, the other
big thing about Marathon that looks
really good is that they do it does look
like they have a solid way to
um keep you from being stuck
uh in the I don't have any gear because
it died too many times state with like
sponsorships and like other things. So,
it does look like they they've
compensated for what in my opinion is
one of the biggest potential weaknesses
of extraction shooters. Yeah. Yeah. Uh,
and I don't believe anyone from the
original Marathon team is working on
this currently. Sounds right. But
listen, it's it's not like this is the
other thing. Marathon and and and its
sequels are great. It's also a series
that has not been really talked about
much re in recent times. So, um, yeah.
Yeah. Uh, Belle, I don't know if it's
Steam TV compatible or you probably need
a PC is my guess,
but yeah. Anyway, I guess I am very
excited about
um Oh,
interesting. Uh male, that's a good
thing. Uh the devs are actually
answering every gameplay question.
Yeah, cool. Yeah, that that that is a
big deal. Um, also,
uh, related, um, there are there is a,
uh, we're not going to spend too much
time on this because the people who are
causing this don't deserve much time to
be spent on them. There are a segment of
gamers who are large upset. There's
spaghette. It is upset. Uh, because the
leads of this are two ladies. I mention
it only because it is the other thing
that keeps coming up about Marathon. Uh,
and to those
people, then don't play it. You know
what? We're gonna go have fun with our
cool looking weird cyberpunk looter
shooter, extraction shooter video game
with like all kinds of improvements to
the genre made by a studio that does has
done historically excellent gunplay. And
you can cope and see, sit in the corner
and face the wall if you're upset about
that.
Yeah, I'm Yeah, hope mold. Sit in the
corner, face the wall. Right. Okay. Um,
uh, next up, speaking of games, uh, that
are really awesome and excellent and
keep on giving, Balders Kate 3's patch
uh, eight launches tomorrow.
There are 12 new subasses, meaning that
you have an excuse to play the game
through again or can to start the game
telling yourself that you're going to
play through it again and then bail like
midway through 12 other characters.
Yeah, midway through the first act or
something. Um, yeah, there is a new
subclass for every class. Uh, and you
can play all of them. There are also a
photo mode and a bunch of other stuff.
It's been in beta for a while, but it is
officially coming out tomorrow. So,
please do look forward to that. If
you're a Balders Gate 3 fan, you uh have
another playthrough in your midst. Death
Domain, my Death Domain clerks, where
you at? Uh I'm very excited about that.
I'm excited for Path of Giants. Uh
Drunken Master looks cool. Swarmkeeper
Rangers, always a
favorite. Uh oh, and Shadow Magic
Sorcerers will be very, very fun. Uh
yeah. Oh, is it Star Druid is the new
druid?
Circle of Stars. Yep. Yeah, Circle of
Stars druids are always interesting. If
you're not familiar with with D and D
stuff in particular, a lot of these
things are uh might sound like gibberish
to you. However, uh these will change
the the play style of these classes
quite a bit. And it's very very cool
that we're getting this. What? Two year.
How old is Bald? When did Baldersgate
actually release? 04. This game of the
year 04. That's right. because last year
it was as I get confused because it was
um in early access forever. I just
didn't play it. Uh some people are
surprised it took so long for Hex Blade.
No, Hex Blade's stupidly broken. That's
why.
Like DND is not balanced, nor should it
be. But there there is some expectation
that there's some amount of balance in
this game. Yeah. Theoretically,
practically there isn't. But like I've
seen enough people who are doing solo
honor mode playthroughs that like I
don't believe in balance anymore. Um
well speaking of balance, uh Dark says,
"I wish I'd get rid of the level 12 uh
cap to be honest, but that's just me."
At first I agreed. I really did agree at
that. The issue is what the challenge
that this game is building and and this
the adventure that you're on does just
only go to that. If we could break it,
if we could get to level 20, Yeah. we
get all these cool abilities, but then
they'd have to change
the the structure of the difficulty of
the game and the missions. Like I know
at the end, I don't want to spoil for
Balders's Gate 3 and the ending gets
pretty big.
Um, but you're not punching God there.
Like that's where you're level 20. Not a
JRPG yet, right? Cuz cuz like by the
way, it's at least seven Final Fantasy
expansions away from that, right? Yeah.
Yeah. No, no, no. Because remember
remember we we've we've discussed this
when I've been talking about new games.
Um any game with any style of combat in
any genre is a JRPG if you kill God with
a power friendship. If you kill God with
a power friendship, it's a JRPG. That's
what defines the genre. Nothing else.
Just killing God with a power
friendship. You can have a turnbased
JRPG. You can have a first-person
shooter JRPG. JRPG is any game where you
kill God with a power friendship. Fight
me. Um,
anyway, I'm very I I I know this is the
last true harrah outside of mods for
Balders's Gate 3. Yeah. And I'm really
thankful that Larian is doing this and
keeping it going. It feels really nice.
It it's it's really nice to have a game
set in this world have characters and
moments that have sort of resonated long
and far beyond the like I feel like if
you showed a picture of a Starian or
Carlac to even people that don't really
get into this genre or play these games,
they're like, "Oh yeah, I know them." Or
Shadow Heart like or Lzelle. Like it
feels like there's they just have sort
of
transcended the medium and uh it's
really nice to see. Yep.
Okay, speaking of games giving you free
stuff, the Epic Game Store has a mobile
store now and they're they are currently
following the path of if it ain't broke,
don't fix it. Um they have done user
acquisition on
um desktop by giving away free games
every week for a gajillion years.
They're doing the same thing on mobile
essentially. Um this is another
opportunity for you to take money from
Epic. Uh I if you are at all interested
in the idea of Epic's mobile store, I
encourage you to check it out and then
take their money. Um because they're
giving you it's free money. They just
like if you're really worried about
privacy concerns, put it on an Android
emulator on your computer and then just
take their money. Just it's free stuff.
Just take their money. Like it's not
This is like Bezos bucks. Okay. Where my
primer is at? If you're on Twitch and
you have Twitch Prime, you should be
using Prime every month to give creators
money that you don't have to spend from
big companies. So there is So your
principle is sound. I do want to make
one very very very minor tweak. Sure.
Your the keynote there that you said was
if you're a Prime member because if you
if you're a member of Amazon Prime, you
get one free Twitch sub everything and
you get to just do it. You get to give
it to whoever you want. Uh and that is
Bezos bucks. take you literally money
that didn't exist before or being pulled
out of one place and giving it to the
content creators that you like. The only
difference that I just want to make very
clear with the Epic Store and and
there's the reason why Epic does this is
user acquisition, right? I It's funny
because Prime I don't
think they're doing uh Twitch Prime subs
for user acquisitions. It just kind of
falls into that ubiquitous like, "Oh, we
own this thing, too." And like, "Oh,
here's another little thing you get." No
one No one's signing up for Prime
because you get a free membership to a
Twitch channel of your choice, right?
Whereas Epic is really trying to get you
into their ecosystem with all these free
games. So, you know, you still sign up,
you still use your email, it's still a
new thing with someone who will have
your data. It's just something to think
about. I personally believe the value
proposition of getting all the free
games and having and if you can have the
wherewithal of like not buying things
you don't want over there. Um I do think
I agree with Will completely, but it is
a sign up and that is their end goal. If
something is free, you are the product
yada yada y but it's just something to
say whenever we're like yeah this is
cool. I just always want to be
like reminder as to why this cool thing
exists. Yeah, we are all the product
now. And listen, if we're the product
and I get a bunch of free games, for me
personally, I'm I'm okay with that, but
mileage may vary. Yeah.
Uh, okay, cool. Great. Awesome.
Excellent. Let's Oh, Grass said they got
Prime for that many years ago. Also
included the ad free mode back then.
Interesting. I stand corrected. Yeah.
Um, it's not much more expensive than a
sub every month as long as you use it
every month. Yeah. or at least wasn't
way back when. I don't know how much it
is now. I I haven't paid attention in a
long time.
Uh okay, cool. Great.
Matt, you you may now celebrate as
Astrobot cleaned up at the BAFTAs.
Bastrobot. Baot. The BAFTAs. Uh
the I'm not going to try and unpack that
acronym because my brain is cuckooked.
Yeah, don't worry about it. Uh, cleaned
up with five wins for animation, audio
achievement, which I completely agree
with. Um, best game,
uh, family game, and game design. Yeah,
I love that this happened. Uh, I still I
again, we've talked about this before. I
won't go over this in great detail.
Astrobot is not only a great game, you
know, in and of its own rights, it also
had to transcend corporate chillery.
That's right. And I think it really
does. Like it is a giant PlayStation
commercial and you don't care cuz it's
so good. Yeah. Um, and I I do really
really really like that is being seen
uh for the quality that is going behind
what is essentially uh IP
play. Uh it's it's so it's so it's so
good. Other other notable winners at the
BAFTAs, by the way, uh were debut game
Elatro, artistic achievement, Nava,
um and there was uh evolving game
Vampire Survivors, which I really
appreciate. Yep. Uh game beyond
entertainment, Tales of Karo Zhao. Um
and multiplayer uh and music to Hell
Divers 2. Um those are sort of the the
really big ones. Um
the I like the Baptist for this. I think
I feel like this is this is much
more
honest. I don't know about honest. It's
just not as an award show is still it's
still marketing, right? It's it's less
um sold for advertising, I guess, would
be the way that I put it, right? Like it
feels like this is less trailer happy
and more like, "Hey, we're here to tell
you about some games that we think are
neat and please support our industry
than, hey, here's a bunch of trailers
and we're going to slam all of the
technical awards into like, you know,
super fast rapid fire things between
trailers with no time for acceptance
speeches for some of the most
influential like choices that were made
this year in gaming." Yeah. Yeah. Uh
there is one last dark thing that I did
want to bring up and actually Thega
brings it up. As Jacob Geller pointed
out, most of the studios that uh
featured in Astrobot are closed. So it
is not a commercialism memorial. Uh
yeah, like the many of the things that
are now these uh characters, IPs, etc.
that we know and love that are featured
here, uh they don't exist anymore. So
it's
also that's a that's a a lovely thing
and a terrible thing. It's not lovely
that they don't exist anymore. It's
lovely that we get to still see them uh
in the memorial sense and it is terrible
because uh the industry rolls on as it
does, right? Also uh my my lighter note
from the BAFTAs was as always local funk
doesn't go places to accept awards
because he values his anonymity and good
for him. So Jimbo the Clown showed up to
accept the Bolatra award and god the
actor they've got playing the actor
they've got playing Jimbo the clown is
like committed like full committed
wasn't he also the voice of the marathon
trailer I think he might have been
um so uh yeah Benar yeah Benar um
just phenomenal just that that is now
the bit right is great. Um also uh at
the same time this week I did see uh
just a minor aside from local funk that
he's uh planning on making a new game
and it's going to be un like in his own
description unplayable trash. And I
can't wait. I can't wait. I can't wait.
One of the best indie one of the best
indie devs currently working is go is
intentionally making a game that he says
is going to be unplayable trash. He's
accidentally going to hit gold again. or
I'm going to play it and label it
unplayable trash and be happy about it.
What a what a testament to how good your
game is where your your follow-up game
you're like don't play it's going to be
awful and it will still sell probably a
million copies and you're being very
honest about it. Yeah, you're like 100%
honest that it's unplayable trash.
Amazing. Yeah. Um Yeah. Anyway, I like
the Baptist. I'm glad Astrobot won a
bunch. Yeah. Uh, speaking of indie games
and indie darlings, blueprints. Talk to
me, Will, about blueprints. Okay. There
will be no blueprint spoilers because I
haven't played blueprints. Yeah. So,
that goes for you, Brad and Janet. No.
No. No. And Rocky, if you blue sky
us. No. Okay. Blueprints is a new indie
game. It's actually made by the
same person people who make the magic
site mythic spoilers. Really weird.
Um, it is a old school style puzzle
game. You need a notepad to solve some
of these puzzles. Some of these puzzles
are beyond jank. Some of these puzzles
don't work if your computer isn't set to
a time in the US in a language that is
in uh like the the uh Roman alphabet. If
you're not in that, like some puzzles
don't work. It's a it's janky, but the
puzzles are apparently lovely and the
experience is apparently very unique.
And my advice, and this is the advice I
will be following when I play it,
hopefully in the nearish future, is
don't look up anything about this
game, and I don't This is the only thing
you should know. Yeah, that's correct.
The game is blueprints, and it's
intended to sound like blueprints.
That's correct. That's it. Right. Don't
Don't spend uh time looking up reviews.
Don't fall into the um uh into the
stuff. It
is 78% positive after almost 1,400 views
on Steam and is currently 10% off. It's
$27
until April 20th.
Yeah. Uh so there's a lot of places you
can play it for air quotes free. Um and
then it will be fairly Yeah. Game Pass
NPS Plus. Yeah. Um, it but it is one I I
I appreciate and I want to bring this up
because I appreciate the indie space for
this phenomena, right? Because in the
AAA space, right, you'd get marathon
style advertisements and there's a
secret twist. You need a notepad,
notepad. Notepad this Sunday, Sunday,
Sunday, right? Like it's not that,
right? Um,
brought it. I I know. I know. All right,
Matt, do we're going to do some ads. Oh,
man. Okay, you go first. Okay. Ready?
Yep. By the way, if you're not, this is
your first time here, we for cuz Twitch,
we can't control uh the ads come on or
off. So, when you're subbed over there,
you get us selling you fake things that
you can't buy instead of real things
that you can buy. It's better, trust me.
Okay, here we go. Will, uh, what what
can you sell our audience today? Hi
there, everyone. Well, from Extra
Credits here to sell you a world where
you ignore advertising just like it.
It's very difficult. It's almost
impossible to be like deprogrammed from
advertising cuz it's like ubiquitous,
right? It's all around you. It's on the
bus on the train. It's on every
billboard. It's in your home. It's in
your eyeballs. They beep it directly
into your brain while you sleep. Imagine
a world without that. Imagine a world
where you simply hear about a cool game,
know nothing about it, and then get
this, play the game, enjoy the media
without being saturated or exposed to it
constantly ahead of time. Just do the
thing, not the advertising or the thing.
Wow. I I you know, well, I really
appreciate uh what you just
said, and now it's time for me to sell
you something that you can't buy, right?
Hey, Matt from Extra Credits here.
Listen, you just heard Will give you an
incredible pitch about not buying
things, advertising to you to not be
advertised to. But what if instead you
just changed the way that you were
advertised to via a thing that Will
previously was very excited about based
on his monster truck voice? Of course, I
am talking about notebooks. What if I
could sell you a notebook with all of
the spoilers to all of the games that
you want and then you just flip to that
page? Ready? I'm gonna ruin Blueprints's
ending to you here. Uh let uh
routine gone there and see. Oh, but
you're gonna have to pay for it to
actually get that. Just get a notebook.
Seems good to me. Three out of 10. Not
my best.
Um hi Matt from Extra Credits here.
Selling you ranking your own fake ads.
Did you just do a fake ad that was kind
of butt? Well, you can always give
yourself a rank to try again. Listen,
it's hard out here trying to sell you
things that don't exist. We have to make
them up constantly. Will just took an
amorphous concept and actually did what
I would consider a 7 out of 10 ad where
I had to think on my feet quickly and
grab whatever prop was in front of me.
Next time, I'll probably just end up
trying to sell you this second
handsomest Matt trophy with a pigeon on
it because that's all I can do when I'm
trying to think of these things that
quick. This is even a five out of 10
because it's self-referential. It's
pretty
[Music]
baseline blueprints. Yeah. Uh and we're
back from ads. All right. Cool. Great.
Awesome. Um the Yeah. So, so this is
sort of the next in a series of indie
games that I think are much like Outer
Wilds, much like um trying to think of
the last one. Undertale, Cave Story,
Delta Rune. um a lot of these other
games where just
don't just engage with the core media
right Nava Journey Flower right some of
the gallery
games
don't we are privileged I would say to
have a part of gaming that is just
itself right we don't it it doesn't it's
not over prodduced it's not over
marketed it is just itself and
Blueprints is the latest in that line
and I would I would suggest that it's
worth your time. Oh yeah. Yeah. Torn.
Boom. Yeah. We got uh we got Tunic, we
got Oberden. All also good. Yeah. I I
played Tunic. Um uh the uh my favorite
part about Tunic was that their entire
system for handing out codes ahead of
time was a Google sheet. Like literally,
you put your name in a Google form and
they were like, "Are you going to make
content about it? Like, do you promise
not to break embargo? Great. Here's a
copy of Tunic. Go play it. Uh, yeah.
Majestic. Also, I have seen this phrase
uh CirX be kicking around for
blueprints. Uh, I love
it. I I don't normally dislike new
things like that, but that's so fun.
Yep. Okay.
Uh now on to our main story which is oh
a story that okay so we've mentioned
this before and I know we've mentioned
it before but we didn't give it a lot of
time and I think personally it's the
biggest story that's happening this week
in gaming and it's getting super
overshadowed because of tariffs and the
Switch 2 and everything else. The and I
did want to take just a brief moment
before we begin to talk about this
problem. The one of the big problems in
gaming specifically is because it's a
niche market and that niche market is a
luxury good, right? Gaming is a luxury
good. No one needs gaming to survive in
these strictly
um physical
sense. It is sometimes very easy to have
all the air sucked out of the room by a
couple of really big stories if they
seem like existential threats to
gaming. And I would agree that the
tariffs could be, right? For all the
reasons we talked about last week and
the reasons we talked about at the
beginning of the show, we don't need to
go further in tonight. But well, ALS and
also just so we're clear, it's
interesting we're seeing this in the
gaming space. Obviously, one story
sucking the air out. So, a more
important in our opinion story is not
being here because that's literally
what's happening with every other piece
of news outside of gaming. Also, kind of
due to tariffs. It's very, very strange.
Regardless, kind of like they're doing
that on purpose, but we won't get too
deep into that. No, we'll get too deep
into that. Okay. Um, so,
uh, next up we're gonna talk about the
crew lawsuit. So, who, before we start,
who here in in Rocky, uh, you can
message me on Blue Sky, on Janet, on
YouTube, and on Brad on Twitch, who
knows what we're talking about when we
talk about the Crew lawsuit? I don't
want to say anything yet. I want to see
some comments trickle in real quick
because I want to know in
general if people understand what this
is. Okay, I'm seeing about half I know
me I think. Nothing months ago. Nope. No
clue. Yes. No idea. So I'd say 70% of
this thing I just did the bad math in my
brain. 70% of the live people watching
right now don't know what we're talking
about. Yeah. Will, would you like to
give a um a recap breakdown of this
before we go into the new stuff? Indeed,
I shall. So, The Crew is a racing video
game or was a racing video game
published by Ubisoft. Um it started in
2014ish and the servers shut down in
early 2024.
Um, following the shutdown, two players
of The
Crew sued
Ubisoft as uh they had physical copies
of the game The Crew and were now unable
to play in any way because it's an
always it was an always online game
after the servers were shut down. Right.
Um, this lawsuit got batted back and
forth kind of like Zoe with a ball of
yarn. Um, and uh, the main
complaint is that the that Ubisoft
violated a California law regarding
honesty and advertising. That was the
original the OG the OG filing. The OG
filing. The reason we're bringing it up
this week is it's been refiled with some
new complaints and uh some new
developments. Let's let's real brief
talk about this real quick. Ubie um
Ubisoft's
counterargument to to the to the
complaints uh essentially, and I'm being
a little simplistic here, but not overly
so, boils down to you don't own any of
your video games, any of them. If
there's language on the box that says
that you uh that that you know um that
it might shut down, you don't own any of
your games, uh you are just purchasing a
temporary license to them. Uh and that
you you don't own them at all. Uh and
that they are allowed to shut them down
whenever they want with like 90 days
notice if they want to. And that that's
for the consumer just kind of a tough
break. The refiling is kind of a huge
deal in my opinion. It's really what
takes this from being like a a what is
more or less already a settled question.
Right when this when this California law
went into effect about truth and
advertising Steam updated reminding you
that you're not actually purchasing any
of the games you own on Steam. You're
purchasing temporary licenses which are
revokable and non-transferable and all
of the other stuff.
But the way that this is going to get
argued, yeah, it might be 30 days. Um,
the way that this is going to get argued
is going to matter a lot. Um,
how's that for a summary? My brain is a
little No, that's great. You did a great
job. Um, yeah, it's just interesting
that uh that was sort of
Ubisoft's basically argument to it. They
said that it says clearly on the package
that this is a thing and uh that you
truly don't own your stuff. Now, there
is let's back up for a bit before we get
to the new section of what's going on
with the story for a little bit of
context. We do live in a uh a world
where software licensing is a thing. In
fact, uh, a clearer place, at least in
my world of this is either a streaming
service where you have access to all of
the content, but you don't own the
content, you can move that into even
game pass or PlayStation Plus, etc. That
kind of thing as well. um or if you are
in uh digital creative fields, the Adobe
suite, you used to buy the new versions
of Adobe and you owned those versions.
Now, whether or not you like it or not
or think it's better or worse, I think
there's pros and cons. You do not own
Adobe and you have license to use that
software, right?
Um but and now that games have gone
truly uh the the digital space has
basically blown up and brick and mortar
slowly dying yada yada yada physical
media we've talked about it to death
here. Um, it feels like in the game
space companies wanted to jump to the
natural place of uh of either
understanding or they don't care about
understanding faster than the actual
community who engages with their product
is willing to go. Um, that might be an
oversimplification. I like my like many
of you I think want to like own the
thing. We talked about this last week
with the Switch cartridges, right? Like
the Switch 2. I'm not terribly
interested in the licensing key for a
game because uh that still requires the
server to be up to run and that's a
point of that's a point of reliance
outside of me buying the game and me
preserving my Switch 2 and the cartridge
and it working. That's a third party
that also has to be functioning for the
value proposition to go through. Again,
that's my specific value prop. There's
tons of media, games, movies, books, um,
music that I also do get through
licensing.
Yep. But I think that as consumers of
video
games, we have, much like the way we
think about pricing, much like in the
way we think about a lot of these
things, it always feels like I own this
game. This is a game I bought. It is
mine.
and the ULAS and the way that companies
have been treating these things, even
the best of companies like Steam and uh
you know, other digital
storefronts, deep in their in the in the
guts of those user
agreements, no one's really owning
anything, right?
Um, but when you're still going to a
store and buying a thing, especially in
states or or countries or regions that
have laws to protect against this sort
of thing, if things are not stated
clearly throughout of what you are
doing, that becomes a problem. Ubisoft
has said in this particular case that
the crew did say the 30-day thing,
basically the online components would
only run for up to 30, you know, 30 days
notice, blah blah blah blah blah blah
blah. And that's why they came back and
wanted to basically throw this suit or
this this lawsuit out. Now, I will tag
Will in for the update on on the goings
on currently. Okay, so the reef file on
March 18th and this is from the Polygon
article which is linked down in the
comments for if you're not live. Um, uh,
includes two major changes and I think
they're both very relevant and I think
Ubisoft is very likely to settle out of
court because they don't want either of
these to get an actual judgment in a
court by the way. That's that's what's
likely going to happen. And now with the
10-centent acquisition, they do have
money to burn. So, correct. So, okay,
thing
one, in
[Music]
um
California, it is illegal for a gift
card to expire. Okay, that is that is
the law in California where this lawsuit
is taking place. And a reminder that
while it seems weird that
um California law is dictating a bunch
of this, it's important to remember the
size of California's economy and the
number fifth largest economy, isn't it?
Something like that. It's it's a
unbelievably massive economy and that um
California law because of the size of
its economy often drives lots of
functional nationwide US law because
we're sort of a hodgepodge of many
countries in a we don't get along shirt.
Great. Awesome. Um, so the plaintiffs
are arguing that because the crew had um
iname
uh
credits that were
sold
separately, that those are the same as a
gift
card. and that because those credits
were a value that was sold as a gift
card legally in
California, they can't
expire. So, that's a very interesting
legal argument and I don't think Ubisoft
wants that proved in a court of law at
all ever under any circumstances because
dear god that would be horrendous for
the gaming industry for all of the
places that are like, "Oh yeah, you
bought stuff for this premium game and
we're taking the servers down. Goodbye
forever." Right? Imagine how much Epic
would have to cough up to refund
everyone who still had remaining uh um
Fortnite V-Bucks, right? Or Fortnite
credits if Fortnite ever went down,
right? They would have to keep money in
escrow in case they needed to shut it
down. Wild, right? Beyond wild. So
that's that's Yeah. Yeah. And and the
secondary thing here is uh there was a
thing for the activation code of the
game in if you bought the thing that
lets you activate it, right? uh that
that does not expire until 2099, which
would imply they're arguing that it
would remain playable during this time
and long thereafter per the amended
complaint. Correct. Uh this comes to us
from a couple different places, IGN, I
believe, and Polygon. They'll we'll link
in the show notes. Correct. Um
so both of these are kind of are are
very interesting legal arguments. I am
of course not a lawyer, though sometimes
I play one on the internet. Um, and none
of this is deeply steeped in in legal
advice. But my intuition is that a
defeat of Ubisoft in this place would be
um pretty catastrophic for Ubisoft
specifically and potentially pretty
changing for the industry as a whole,
especially because the lawyers here are
very happy to take time and do this,
right? They they are open trying to open
this up as a class action lawsuit, which
would mean that the lawyers are very
down to take a chunk of whatever the
class action uh victory is rather than
take it specifically from the clients
that started the lawsuit, which means
that the lawyers are willing to work
much longer. One of the ways that
Ubisoft could theoretically defeat this
from a legal strategy perspective is
they have enough money to have their
lawyers work forever. Yeah. And just not
care, right? And the lawyers for
individuals or for small groups of
people um generally run out of funding.
And so it's sort of like a a siege if
you will, right? Where the smaller party
just gets um starved of resources and
and that's how that ends. Um
because something something American
legal system something something uh
money insert screaming here. Great.
Awesome. Excellent. Um this that might
not be the case here. Um so
yeah. Yeah. I I
I agree that I do not believe that this
will actually go to any sort of trial. I
think uh it will either be dragged
forever and uh hoping that it
it the whoever is is running the class
action sort of runs out of funds or um
that they just settle it sort of out of
court because you don't want this.
Corporations who rent you software don't
want this precedent especially in in
venues that have more restrictive and
better protection laws for consumers,
right? Uh so yeah I do think that this
it's interesting because this is the
kind of and again it's small now but
these are the kind of things that can
set precedent right so I when when we're
like oh the thing that is not being
talked about it's not I don't think it's
not being talked about because like
there's a plot to not talk about it. I
think it's just us. It's a small feeling
story that both Will and I believe will
have larger ramifications in this space
that is being sort of um cast aside due
to all of the other hype that's going on
for other things. I mean, I feel like
every time we get a tariff story, right,
the entire news cycle gets flashbanged,
right? Because there's and which is I
think part of the purpose, right? But we
are there's constantly a rush and a
scramble to figure out which countries
are being affected to what degree and
where the Switch is being manufactured
and what Nintendo is likely to do and
and all of that. Right? So, uh, I I I
kind of want to undo that and say, you
know, this is this is a thing that
matters. And I think that we should I
want to redraw attention to this because
I do think that this court case and the
idea that you don't own your video games
or maybe you do or maybe you don't own
the game, but you do have some legal
standing for credit, right, and that
game companies need to be more
transparent about shutdown dates or
expiration dates, right? that they um uh
you know need to need to have some
amount of money to pay back credit that
is on your account when the game shuts
down. Like that's all that is all a
really interesting court case which
could have broad-reaching implications
if it goes to trial. But I agree that
it's probably not going to go to trial.
And it's funny uh I I do agree with
this. I I believe companies start
putting guarantees of a certain amount
of time to access things or buy their
own stories or service being up for each
game. It's funny. Either that
or just be brutally honest about it.
Yeah.
Like I like Okay, this is this is where
I kind of go I I get the weird sort of
brain feedback loop. Well, Flixelsticks
is going to release Flixel Sticks with
friends, and it's going to be an always
online game where you and your friends
can play Flixel Sticks uh until the sun
burns out or the servers go down. Okay.
So, when I'm selling this as a $90
Switch 2 exclusive,
um Sure.
It would not behoove the narrative of me
selling it for $90 to include
information that is uh that would
basically say, "Oh, by the way, this
could go away at any
moment." But what
if they just sort of did? Like I get
that it would cause sales to plummet,
but you're like, "Well, okay, well, if
sales are gonna if you're worried about
sales plummeting because you're being
honest about your product,
design, it's either a it's either a
poorly designed product or a grift. Like
the goal of
of call me oldfashioned, but the idea of
trading goods uh and services for legal
tender should be uh somewhat equitable."
And I know many tenants of capitalism
would argue with that, but that's kind
of why we want to engage in any sort of
system of
currency. So I I know I'm speaking crazy
here, but what
if you just were more honest about
it and didn't try to price gouge? I I I
I I I know that's
wacky, but like and look to be clear, I
we're I'm being very facitious and doing
a lot of globalizing here in this
description that I just talked about in
u the very real Fixel Fixel Sticks with
Friends game that will be dropping on
the Switch for $90. Please buy it.
Um Flixel
Sticks, what a weird meme from forever
ago.
Um, there are games that do this. Yes,
there are games that are honest and and
with their with their value proposition
and their pricing. We've talked about a
few of them on the show already today.
And there are Yeah. And even in terms of
online games, right, there are many,
right, that are in it for the long haul,
but have been honest that someday they
will stop working. I'm reasonably
confident at this point. Blizzard has
said at some point WoW will stop
existing. probably when Blizzard stops
existing. But yeah, also Jacob brings
this up too. This is another way around
it.
Yes. Right. Like so so for instance,
this would be Yeah. Sorry, Will. Go.
This was one of the goals I think
originally of the of the original suit
was to get uh companies to need to cave
on the idea that they release some kind
of server package when the game goes
down uh so that the community can take
it up. There's been one very successful
example of this. It's with City of
Heroes. If you want to play City of
Heroes and like it doesn't hold up that
great, but like if you have nostalgia
for City of Heroes, you can go download
the game for free and play on a fan
server that's officially recognized as a
an authoritative place to play City of
Heroes. That's a thing that exists that
you can do, right? um and other other um
groups of gamers who are very passionate
about specific games want that to
happen, right? They either want some
kind of peer-to-peer, they want what um
Islands of Insight did, which was to uh
change the game fundamentally so that it
no longer required server access and was
purely single player. That was a whole
thing that Islands of Insight did when
it stopped being a puzzle MMO and just
released as like a puzzle game. Um
right. And so, yes, that is a thing that
many people want. Here's the
problem. That is more difficult and more
complicated both technically and legally
than I think a lot of the arguments that
are calling for it give credence to. And
I I'm not saying that it's like super
complicated, difficult. I am saying it
is a more complicated untested piece of
law and um tech than I I think a lot of
people want to give credit to. Right?
I'm not saying like it it's impossible.
I am saying that it does require some
amount of setup work both in the game
when you start it like in the game when
you start building it and in the legal
way that you build your server
architecture. Yeah. And and and to be uh
both fair and balanced, um I believe
Ubisoft for the Crew 2 and The Crew
Motorfest has announced that there will
be singleplayer modes for those games if
they are offline uh when they go offline
or if they already have. Um but not for
the original crew. And
again, there's a lot of different
reasons that could be happening. Could
be from a legal perspective, could be
just from a keeping it alive
perspective. We don't know. Um, I just
think I I don't know.
I I will be curious how long this suit
continues on before it is basically
settled out of court. Um, because the
longer it goes
on, the more even a chance that
something like it comes up. But again, I
don't know. This is the this is the flip
side of it.
I don't know
if like has the ship already sailed of
public opinion about this because I
think if you
asked I
mean let this is not a a a type of game
that I engage with but let's look at
Madden right
essentially for the last 20
years you just bought the if you're a
Madden player you just buy the new
Madden Right.
Back before the online stuff, I believe
it was probably more likely considered
that you own Madden, right? Like you own
the game and you get the new roster and
you get the whatever. And now with
technology moving along the lines where
you could like it's it's basically
outside of some changes and some things
and again, sorry if I'm oversimplifying,
but like you're paying for the new
roster. It is essentially if you're like
a subscription service you pay annually.
Yeah. Um Oh yeah. What do you got? It
gets more complicated uh even with DLC
for games for physical games like
Madden. That's sort of the other um in
between, right? So you have a physical
game Madden which you have some
intuition that you own. You have a disc,
the disc plays the game. Let's even say
that there aren't any updates, right?
the disc play. And we talked about this
a bit last week and we'll talk about
this a little bit more in the comments.
Um you because uh this comes up with
game key, right? You have the disc, the
disc plays the game, you also have DLC.
It's entirely possible that you own the
game but have a license for the DLC,
which is also weird, right? There is a
middle ground here between the extreme
where like you own the whole thing
outright and have right of first sale
and all of the resale stuff and all of
that and you don't actually own
anything. It's all just right. And then
it gets even weirder for versions of the
game where the DLC's on the disc. That
gets right. You could see how this gets
really weird really fast with all the
gradation in between those two extremes.
Yeah. And
and I guess it all comes down to what
the majority of consumers consider is
the value proposition. Mhm. I don't
think most people that engage
with most digital media at this
point, outside of maybe being
disappointed when a movie they're
looking for isn't on a streaming
service. Like like I I would argue and I
think companies are making this this
decision based on statistics that they
have. Most people do probably don't care
that it is more of a subscription thing
because access is a greater is a greater
draw than permanence, right? And and I
think
that we are likely very we're very
vulnerable both us personally and us as
a community to the idea that we must be
part of a larger movement because we com
like the the gaming community like the
the very
analytical community that we have that
cares a lot about game design and game
preservation and the history of games
and playing games into the future cares
a lot about this and cares about it
loudly that other people must do the
same. And I think that Matt's very right
that I think the majority of people
don't care, right? That we are in the
small, very
loud minority. If the majority of people
cared, companies wouldn't be doing this
because companies in our current system
exist to make money. And they think
they're going to make more money by
doing this. If they thought they'd make
less money by doing this, they wouldn't
do it. Now, that's not to say like
they're all correct. that's just what
they're betting
on. So, going back to this and again,
like I I want to make it very clear. I
don't think that every game you pay for
should be playable in perpetuity
forever. That doesn't make sense based
on a lot of different things. Um, I just
really want honesty about what we are
buying andor renting when we are buying
andor renting it, which I think is one
of the benefits of the game key, right?
If it's a game key, if this is a game
key cartridge, right? It has all of the
problems of digital download buying
ownership to a license thing, but it's
transparent about it. It says this is a
game key. You're going to need to
download the game and have this game key
inserted when you play the game. But the
g the game isn't on this disc. That's
transparent. They are being honest about
it. Yeah. Right. That so like whatever
the other problems are, the honesty is
an asset. There has anyone actually seen
because I think what would assuage me
from a lot of the problem with the game
key idea is like is
Nintendo and I I guarantee you they're
not doing this guarantee, but I would
love like a fully like fully accessible
from our servers for 10
years. Do you know what I like they're
not going to do it because anything
could happen and then they're screwed. I
think they're also selling the myth that
it might live forever
and it
it in in humanes theory it could live
forever. Please, there's a lot of
asterisks floating around. The context
is is dripping them all over the place.
But but knowing
Nintendo, heck, knowing companies that
supply digital goods, servers do just
stop. Nintendo just takes down the
stores when no one's using the store.
Like Oh, okay. This might be a little
too I have a halfbaked idea that's
probably
bad. What if instead of saying this is
going to be available until the year
2037 or this is going to be available
until forever, right? What if it says
like this is guaranteed to be on our
servers active until a set number of
people like haven't accessed the servers
in a period of whatever days. Do you
know what I mean? Like giving them an
offramp. And again, I don't I think
there's lots of bad with that idea. It
was just something that came to me and
no one would like if that was in the
fine print because that would give a
company an off-ramp to be safe. Yeah.
Yeah. The the f I agree. I agree very
much with Timothy. That's the Final
Fantasy 14 house. Woo, not that one.
This one. You uh that's the Final
Fantasy 14 housing model. That's you can
you can have it as long as you're using
it. And if you stop using it, it goes
away,
right? Um
again, not perfect either. And I look
and I want to go back. I know we said
we've been talking about switch, but the
key card
things, there's a lot of good in that.
Even though I have problems with ele, it
doesn't have to be all good or all bad,
right? And I think that I think that is
drifting a little bit, right? Because
one of the problems here is that The
Crew was an online only game from the
beginning, right? The Crew was a
multiplayer I should not open my eyes.
Um, sorry buddy. Online uh it was a
multiplayer online game from the
beginning. Um, and that was a big part
of that was a big part of its its draw
and its appeal. I think the other part
that's worth mentioning in the lawsuit
is that the problem that the original
plaintiffs are mentioning is that the
um uh the single player portion went
away as well. All right. There was a
single player portion, but that also
demanded online stuff, so you couldn't
play the single player portion, right?
So like this is a split issue, but The
Crew was different than a game, well
kind of like a game key, an always
online game, right? that necessitated
being online by its design.
Um so yeah um anyway it will be
interesting to see where this goes. Um
thank you all for engaging with a story
with us that is not on the top of the
pile I feel like this week and that's
something that it's funny the thumbnail
for this will probably be some element
of of this thing and we will and I were
even talking about this. Uh that also
does kind of mean that it might not be
the most popular thing because it's not
doing whatever the algorithm is looking
for. But like I don't know this is the
kind of stuff that like I truly believe
and I think Will does as well will be
important in the next 1015 years of this
medium that we engage with and uh I
don't know I just think little things
like this deserve to be paid attention
to as well and so thank you for uh
engaging with us on this topic. Yeah
absolutely. Uh, well, can you take us
home to our nice dessert story? I can.
Matt, you've heard of the test for uh uh
any kind of device, which is can it run
Doom? Of course. Doom runs on
everything. I've seen Doom on a smart
fridge. I've seen Doom on a pregnancy
test. I've seen Doom on everything. Doom
runs on crabs. They figured out how many
crabs it would take to form logic gates
to run
Doom. But Matt, ask yourself this. H
what if you had Doom that ran Doom?
I am dangerously close to trying to save
up some money to get this stupid thing.
I This is a new edition that limited Run
is doom is dooming. Uh called the Doom
and Doom 2 will it run edition. Uh we'll
have links in the show
notes. It's it's so meta. It's perfect.
Uh for the mere cost of I believe $666.
That's correct. Uh you get all of these
things that are sort of small and
pixelated right here, but not one
element of this package plays Doom, but
two elements of the package play Doom.
First of all, the box the game comes in
plays
Doom. Cool. Great. Then there's a
handheld version that uh there's one of
the demons on the left there. That is
also a thing that plays Doom. That's
correct. Uh, you also get it for
whatever system you might actually play
Doom on. Uh, by the way, excuse me.
That's both original Doom and the
rebooted Doom. It's this is like one of
the Wait, the rebooted Doom. I thought I
thought this this is just OD. This is
Doom and Doom 2, but it also has um
what's it called? It has the um uh uh
Sigil or uh and Sigil 2. Okay. I thought
this also had uh I thought I saw in the
marketing that this also had a copy of
the 2006 Doom, but that could be I don't
see that anywhere. Okay, I hallucinated
it. It's okay. But either way, this is
dope. It also has the Legacy of Rust,
which is a new episode collaborated on
by ID Software and Night Drive Studios
with Machine Games and a bunch of new
deathm match maps featuring 25 packs. I
think altogether on the page it says
there's 187 mission maps and 43
deathmatch maps in Doom and Doom 2.
If you are of a boomer, uh a boomer
shooter generation,
uh which really is honestly millennials,
uh this is pretty neat. It's too
expensive. It's it's a it's the
definition of a luxury item, but in a
day of Hey, are you worried if you're
going to if you own your game? Well, you
you definitely know you own it if the
box you're playing it on plays the game.
Yeah, absolutely. Which I I love. I
think this is great. Uh I love I Doom
and Doom 2 are are are games that I just
go back and visit constantly. And uh
there's there's a mod I keep meaning to
try out on stream that turns it into a
rog light. Turns Doom into a rog light.
Uh which I think would be very very fun.
Um I don't know. Anyway, this was just a
fun little thing that will found and I
kind of fell in love with. Um, Doom is a
part of my gaming childhood and I'm glad
to see it is still doing weird wacky
stuff. There's also in this package, I
just want to point out there's a couple
things I don't care about like trading
cards and actually the cassette tapes of
the soundtrack are pretty neat, but
there's a um uh Kodak Demon uh basically
floater like magnetic floater. It's the
thing on the right of the image that
like just would float and hover. I I
don't know. I thought that was pretty
neat.
All right. Uh, which brings us now to
the end of the show where we do some
questions, some comments, some questions
that you all had on last week's episode.
Thank you so much, uh, for for leading
those. Uh, first up, uh, Simon or Simeon
Snow says, uh, would love to hear more
of your TTRPG tastes. I'm more in that
space than video game one these days.
Um, Matt, you're up first. Uh, okay. So,
uh, let's see. Outside of D and D, I
used to play Pathfinder a I used to play
vampire a lot. Vampire uh my crew uh was
thinking about getting back into just as
a sort of change even though we just got
out of Raven Loft which is strange just
for a different uh mechanic. Also,
Lancer I've been playing over with the
Dwarf & Forge uh folks over there. That
game is phenomenal. It is also uh a bit
complex. I was debating trying to
introduce my home crew to Lancer, but
like they need to do a decent amount of
homework, which is fine if you want to
do it. It's just not something that's
like easy pick up and play. I just for
an RPG fest I just played there's a game
that was kickstarted called Die
um that uh I'm not sure how ubiquitous
it is but basically it has a couple
comics and a couple other things but you
you roleplay players that are ro playing
a tabletop RPG that get sucked into the
RPG. Um and I played a modified version
with my buddy Nate. It was very very
fun. Um, and actually something that I
got um a Kickstarter I I just got the
Kickstarter for a couple maybe remember
a couple months ago. This might key out.
I apologize. Oh yeah, it does. Let's see
if I can rotate it. No. Well, it's
called Jukebox and it is a karaoke
musical tabletop role playing game and
I've been reading up on it. I'm very I
have not played it yet, but I'm very
much looking forward to it. And I I I'm
starting to like more and more of these
like high quality zenesque kind of
things. There's another one um that I
really enjoyed called Save the Music,
Damn the Man, where you play basically
like an Empire Records uh you would play
the day in the life of a dying record
store and you have to try to save it. Um
yeah, so that's kind of where I'm at
right now. I don't know, Will. What
about you? Uh I have the Final Fantasy
14 RPG sitting on my bed. Uh that's been
sort of my pick apart reading. It's a
very interesting take on how to do um
both how to do combat and the action
system and how to mirror the feeling of
an MMO in a tabletop space. Both of
which I think are really interesting. I
don't know that I'd recommend playing
it, but if you're into RPG design is
probably worth picking apart. Um, I am
uh al likewise and for the same reason,
a big fan of Blades in the Dark and
Burning Wheel, both of which are very
interesting takes on dice pool systems
and non-combat ways to resolve conflict
in different fashions. Um, that is like
a whole arc of RPGs that I really like
is um you could fight these people and
choose not to. Uh, my number one
recommendation for weird games that you
should know about and probably never
play is Dogs in the Vineyard. Um, Dogs
in the Vineyard is you are religious
cops in a place that's legally not Utah.
Um, and it is a game about conflict
escalation. Uh, which I think is is uh
remains just really great. Um, and so uh
those are probably my top pitches. And
also, if you're in the D and D space,
but you want something a little bit
different than D and D, you've probably
seen kicking around. Uh, the reason I
bring this up is because their
Kickstarter for their second one is live
right now. Uh, Humblewood, which I've
actually been really enjoying very much.
So, I've been doing some one-offs on one
shots in in their world, which is sort
of the anthropomorphic animals there.
Humblewood Beyond the Canopy Kickstarter
is going on right now. So, if you if
that sort of feels like up your alley,
uh, please go check that out because
they are doing some good work over
there. Um, yeah. All right. Uh, next up
we have uh a couple of comments on the
Switch 2 and tariffs and all that. Uh,
Mitch, we're switching back. M Mitch
McNair says, "I'm personally a huge
gamer. I have multiple systems and try
to buy a game a month, even if it's a
smaller one. I never get consoles when
they come out, though. It's just too
expensive for jumping on early. I've
never happened to have enough money
laying around to buy the shiny new
thing. So, instead, I save up for it
over a few years and get it later. It's
still new and fun for me, even if it's
late, and there are a lot more game
options available. So, the Switch 2 is
exciting, and I'm looking forward to it.
But the pricing controversy and other
issues won't affect me for years to come
and who knows what'll happen by then. I
think this is a really
reasonable like like straightforward
take from Mitch that like yes it is
really cool to jump on the new shiny
thing. Hey chat,
how big's your backlog?
That's the thing, man. Like like like
Yeah, it's really cool to get the new
shiny thing and that's great. Here's
here's the only the only reason
like it's being part of the whatever the
current discourse is like like case in
point this is not the same thing but I
like jumped on to enter the dungeon way
later than when it was like truly
popular right uh everyone had already
done it and by the time I jumped into it
I wanted like a community but it was
kind of small by that point so like if
you're looking for like the shiniest new
thing has value in that like community
thing but other than that truly or or if
you have a just a group that you talk
about or engage with games with for
yourself There is no reason that you
need to jump on the new shiny thing.
There is so much old shiny thing at this
point to engage in that is far cheaper.
Um we we do I think that does get lost a
lot and I'm glad Mitch brought this up
because I think now is a time where we
and rightfully so the price of games and
a bunch of things are being brought into
question and what what is the value prop
and what is too expensive etc. It has
never been cheaper or easier to play
video games than it is right now. And
that's not saying the newest, shiniest,
whatever, Switch, portable, whatever.
It's you can get access to a thing that
will play
Bellatro and
uh at at a at a cheaper cost than I
think ever before or something along
those lines, right? Like there's just
there's so much out there by sheer
volume that if you do limit your stuff
to stuff that's like 3 or 4 years old,
you can find some exquisite deals on
Steam or elsewhere. And a reminder,
right, I'm I'm going to I'm going to I'm
going to plug our own channel. If you
see a game and you think it's a game I
might play, let me take the risk for
you. Oh yeah. Right. There are tax write
off, baby. Right. I I'm going to I'm
going to play it cuz it's content and
tax write off, right? Like for instance,
if you're not convinced that uh South of
Midnight is an amazing game, come to the
stream after this and allow me to
persuade you. Right? If you're not
convinced that you're totally in to play
to buy and play Clear Obscure Expedition
33, come to those streams when that gets
released uh next week. Next week, next
Tuesday. Next Tuesday. No, next
Thursday. Next Tuesday, something else.
Next Thursday. And let me convince you
of that. Right. There are ways to
experience games without paying for
games directly, right? And then if you
like the game, go buy it, right? And
that's that that is another option. Uh
uh as we jump to the next topic, one
quick thing back about tabletop RPG
stuff. Uh I did see a comment somewhere
um that is a story that I wish we did
talk about uh about uh Jeremy Crawford
and Chris Perkins leaving Dungeons and
Dragons. Maybe we talk about that next
week. I I most of what I saw was uh
knee-jerk reaction uh stories to it. I
didn't hear a lot of like deeper
analysis. Um and I didn't I think it'd
be worthwhile I think it'd be worthwhile
diving into that um a little bit with
more time. Um yeah. Uh okay, cool. Uh
next up from Tac Blueberry, imagine a
cartoony kitchen being more reasonable
with the discussion of tariffs than
political podcast or AAA news
industries. Thanks, Jack.
You don't have to imagine it, right? Uh,
and I think that that's that is one of
the things that we are constantly
striving for is particularly right now
um and particularly my request to say
more which we'll get to in a second.
That's our goal, right? Is to is to have
this sort of more in uh more informal,
more like take the time to talk about it
discussion, right? Because I think a lot
of people the anti- headline if you
will. Yeah. Right. Yeah. I I like being
anti- headline. Um anti- headline often
doesn't get you more views or anything,
but it is an important part of an
ecosystem about talking about literally
anything, right? We we are uh we're SEO
mining instead of SEO maxing. We're like
un we're are we smurfing? Are we We're
SEO smurfing. That's what it is. Yeah.
Right. Um our numbers aren't low. We're
SEO smurfing. That's right. Yeah. Yeah.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. We're getting so above
our weight class.
Uh, please share us with your friends.
We need more people to watch our show.
No, but that is one of the points. Uh,
and and and this the reason why Tag
Blueber's comment, I asked Will to put
it in the show notes because it was so
funny and it did make me very much
smile. So, thank you so much. Uh, but
Will has been asking folks to say more
and many of you in the comments uh did
and so I really appreciate this. This
actually comes from a Nebula viewer I
believe over on Rocky. Yeah. who
messaged us on blue sketch. Do you want
me to read this or do you want to do it?
Okay, I can do it. Um, so this is from
Shiro Tkumi. Uh, and by the way, many of
you said a lot and we read all of it. I
just we can't read all of it here and
then respond to it. But Shirou had a
very well-ritten um thoughtout response
uh on a bunch of these topics. So, we
wanted to read that one and we'll we'll
talk a little bit about it. Uh, hello
Rocky member here. Regarding in
increases in prices to games, I both
understand why this is probably being
done and I understand the complaints
people have to it. No one wants to spend
more money on things, especially when
income levels aren't rising to match the
inflation. However, here in Canada, the
price of AAA games have been $80 for
several years now. I dare say perhaps
even a decade. Dear lord, my bones. And
it's not unheard of to see AAA titles
for more than that, though it is
uncommon. So, while I get the pain, I
also think the reaction to increase
prices needs to chill a little bit. You
can't afford the price increases. Trust
me, I get it. I encourage you to find
games used or purchase any of the exist
excellent indie titles available
basically everywhere. That said, the
Canadian prices for these titles is not
listed anywhere yet for some reason. We
know that the Switch 2 will be 629 alone
and $6.99 with Mario Kart, but the
individual games themselves have no
price. We can only speculate so far.
Price increase in the US does not
guarantee a price increase in other
regions. However, the lack of pricing
doesn't bode well for the price to say
the same. I'm not sure what my point is.
I guess things are expensive but more
expensive outside the US. Try to keep
that in mind when building your
perspective of the cost of things.
Gamers, thank you, Sher. That's a very
good point, right? is that
um things from the we often do this as a
US- centered discussion because we're
both in the states. Um but it is
important to know the animated United
States, right? Yeah, that's right. Um uh
Brain Brain Brain wants to start in on
50 nifty United States, but that's not
No. Okay, backing up. Um I do think it's
important to realize that and and the
Canadian dollar is not that weird off of
the American dollar. It is a bit, but
it's not that far off. Um, it is really
worth noting that Americans are now
experiencing some amount of the pain
that Australia, Canada, Dear God,
Brazil, where my Brazilians at, you all
are troopers. Games are hideously,
unbelievably, unaffordably expensive in
Brazil. Um, for a whole bunch of
reasons. uh and um the
um that whole phenomena is a thing that
we often don't take into account. But
also, I think the point that we're not
going to be able to change price
increases except by not buying games.
So, cool your heels, play an indie game,
play a game you already own, play a used
game, whatever, until prices like match
is a reasonable one, right? Because a
lot of I think I think this is the the
thing that I'm getting is a lot of
people are very upset and that's okay.
I'm not saying you can't be upset. I'm
saying that the reaction to being upset
being blowing up Nintendo Treehouse's
uh YouTube comments with dropped the
price instead of being like, "Okay, I
can't afford that. All right, I'm gonna
do something else with my time, money,
energy,
effort." Seems a little weird to me,
right? it. Look, I I understand the
treehouse thing. I understand because
because again, I go back to companies
only make decisions because they think
it'll make the most money. They made
this pricing, you know, tariffs
notwithstanding. They made this pricing
because they believe even though it is
going to be expensive for many people
that they will still make more money
doing it this way than less money.
That's why they're doing it. And it's
understandable for people that are being
left out in the cold to be frustrated
with that. And it's understandable to
have like there's no real venue for
those people to have and I'm not saying
that the treehouse like meme or just uh
you know spamming lower the price it's
not going to do anything. Um there's no
real recourse for those kind of people
because the only recourse truly would be
for no for for the people in the
demographic that don't care that the
Switch 2 costs more money and its games
to not buy the Switch 2.
Um,
it's I don't know. I I I want to lean
back
on the sort of like back catalog stuff,
too. Like
I there's so many great games and I feel
like the hype cycle makes us lose sort
of track of that oftent times. Um, I
don't know. I wish there was a more
effective
way. I also hate
Yeah, I I don't know if you saw the
thing and I think the Xbox folks did
this first and then Nintendo jumped on
the train. Someone at Nintendo was like,
"Oh, well, if the Switch 2 is too
expensive, there's always a Switch One."
And it's funny
that both works and absolutely does not
work, right? You know, it's super
tonedeaf. It's true, but you shouldn't
say it. Yeah. And I don't I'm trying to
think of the best way kind of around it.
Like
I don't know. We We'll be t This isn't
the last time we're going to be talking
about this stuff. It turns out it's
complicated. Um
I just I I really appreciate the the
longer takes on this sort of stuff
because again, right, outside of a
headline of switch to crazy, exorbitant,
like there's a lot to unpack as to where
the frustration actually resides and
comes from and and how people are
dealing with it. Yeah, absolutely. I I
also want to take this opportunity to
thank uh
OWD2960 and uh Shinoru 14 for also
taking time to say more. Both had very
excellent salient points in the comments
from last week's show. You can go look
at them, read them, respond to them um
there. Thank you so much. And and as
always, I do want to say that our
comment section is a place to take time
to say more, right? We do read text
walls. Um, I I spent I enjoy spending
time reading more detailed takes and I
people are starting to engage with each
other in good faith in the comments
section of a YouTube
video. My hat smurfing baby, right?
Yeah. Like just do that, right? Take the
time, say more. And if you're a member,
a patron, a subscriber, join the
Discord. We do have that thread going
about uh pricing in the game industry
and there's been some chatter. Uh I'll
probably kick that at some point this
week. Um, and uh, it's always a good
place and time to say more there. Yeah.
No, thank you. And if you have any
specifically on this video, if you've
made it to this part of the end of the
video, first of all, thank you so much
for staying with us for almost 2 hours.
Second, please write us a comment about
what you think about the stories in this
video. Also, if there's a new story you
think we missed, let us know. You can
also message us obviously on Blue Sky. I
have one more
um
request for that. I just got distracted.
I had one more request before we were we
were finishing uh the show for
something. What was
it? It'll come to me. Maybe it
will. Oh, I got it. I got it back. I
should have known because Jamie walked
in and it was actually about guests. So,
we do this show, right? We do this show
uh just the two of us and we can make it
if we try, but sometimes I think we're
we've gotten this co-streaming thing
down enough where we're ready to start
doing things we used to do on on Games
for Breakfast, which is bring in guests.
So, if there's any guests that in in the
gaming space or other spaces that you
would be interested in us having on this
show, let us know on Blue Sky or in the
comments. Um, and uh, I think we're
going to try to start doing that in the
coming weeks and or months because it is
always fun to get another perspective on
here as well. Um, I think we had talked
to Dr. Aaron McDonald uh, a while ago
about doing it, but that was forever
ago. I'd love to get her on here, a
couple other folks. Yeah. So, if you
have anyone you think would add to the
conversation, it would be awesome for
you to let us know that as well. Yep.
All right. I think that all that remains
then is for Matt to do our traditional
sign off, the same one we do every time.
Uh and and and close us out together as
we, you know, a family of SEO Smurfs.
That's right. So, uh, the reason we do
this is to build community and make sure
that everyone is on the same page
knowing that not only the show is ended,
but we can go forth into the week
together as one wonderful family that
just knows that the week is going to be
good and we're going to play a bunch of
games and and even though we're apart,
we're all together in this weird little
existence called life. Here we go. Are
you ready to join me in the same ending
we do every time?
[Laughter]
[Applause]
[Music]
Jamie is staring at me through my
computer monitors like like I'm a
psychopath. Jamie, that was the Doom
sound. The music. Oh, now I see. Now you
get it. Now it all makes sense. Silly
me. Silly. Yeah. I mean, really, shame
on you. I mean, it's not that far off
from Master of Puppets AM. Yeah, it's
also true. Thank you everyone for
joining us today. Uh we're going to let
uh Janet go here. Janet, friends over on
YouTube, if you want to come over and
hang out while I play South Midnight, uh
it's an excellent game. We're on chapter
4. Um we'll be playing that for a couple
of hours here. So, please do hop on
over. Otherwise, uh we will see all of
you Thursday for design club. Jeff and I
are doing a game ride along. Uh we'll be
deciding what game it is tomorrow. So,
you can leave comments in last week's
design club if you want to see us play a
specific game. So, nice. Uh, everybody
say bye, Janet.