So during these last couple of weeks talking about humane design and exit points
we've touched on the idea that play session length is important.
Well, a few developers actually reached out to us
and asked us to talk about the idea of a play session in more detail
and we thought that sounded fun, so here we are.
Later we may even do an episode about design tricks
that allow us to deliver on satisfying play sessions in a shorter amount of time
but today we're gonna focus on how to know how long a play session for your game should be.
The idea of a play session is pretty straight forward:
it's just the amount of time we expect the player to play our game in one sitting.
At first this may seem arbitrary
like, how could you predict that: doesn't it depend on the person playing?
But session length is actually something designers can carefully plan and build into their games
and it's important they do, because the wrong play session length can kill a game.
The easiest place to clearly see examples of poor play session length is when it's platform dependant
like the mobile games that you totally would have played if they were on a console
but you just couldn't get into them because they demanded a half an hour of your time in a single sitting
which just isn't how you really wanna play games on your phone
Or those console games that have some bite sized repeating activity
that you totally would have played for a few minutes whenever you were bored if it was on your phone
but on the console you never bother loading it up
because there's always there's always something more substantial you want to dive into instead
But it's important to remember:
proper play session length is not just a matter of platform.
It's just easiest to see there because a game's chosen platform so dramatically impacts the design of a game.
Which brings us to the big question:
How should you decide what the ideal play session length is for your game?
Well, that depends on how you want the player to interact with it
which in turn depends on everything from your platform, to your core play, to how you monetize
So let's look at each of those.
Your chosen platform is the easy one, so let's start there
How do players generally interact with your platform?
Is it one where they sit down for an entire evening of play?
Or is it one they just play for a few minutes at a time when they've got nothing else to do?
Or is it one where the player's looking for something they can do for an hour at most?
Next, we have to look at your target audience.
Do you expect players of this game type to only have a few minutes a day they can dedicate to playing games?
Or do you expect them to crave those weekend long binges?
After that we've got to consider the main reason the player came to our game.
Are they here for an intricate narrative or adrenaline high?
Do they wanna kill time for a few minutes while they've got nothing else to do?
Or are they looking to lose themselves in a world totally different from the one they know?
Finally you've gotta ask yourselves
how do you monetize your game?
Because, the truth is money is what allows us to keep making games
At the end of the day you need players to pay you
We could do a whole episode on properly monetizing diffferent types of games with different play session lengths
but I'll just give the simplest example.
There is a reason old arcade games weren't built to have hour-long play sessions.
Something else worth remembering is that talking about play sessions in units of time isn't actually very useful.
The exact number of minutes isn't nearly as important as the experience those minutes represent.
Think of how you expect your player to play your game.
Rather than asking yourself if they'll be playing for five or fifteen or fifty minutes,
ask yourself: Are they going to to play it on a bus ride?
In the bathroom?
During a lunch break?
Over the weekend?
Waiting for a commercial to end on TV.
Thinking in these terms will help you to better understand your player
and allow you to better craft many elements of your design
And, really, it's also the easiest way to talk about and understand play session length
When you're ready to see if you've nailed your intended session length
go try it under those conditions you planned for.
Is it a good fit?
Or did you find out there's actually a much better session length target you should pivot to?
Embrace this data. It's useful.
Next you have to ask yourself about frequency of play.
How often do you expect your player to play your game?
Every day?
Multiple times a day?
Once a week, maybe?
This too will affect how you design multiple parts of your experience
For example if you expect the player only to play once a week
because your target audience happens to be people who don't have a lot of free time
you're gonna want to include more reminder tools like quest logs and story recap options.
And it'll also dictate how long you want your play sessions to be.
The more frequently you expect the player to play your game,
generally speaking, the shorter you want to design play sessions to be.
So if you expect them to pick up the game eight times a day
a play session should probably be maybe five-ish minutes.
Whereas if you're aiming to get them to play once every day
you should probably take a lesson from MOBAs or Call of Duty
and aim for about twenty to thirty minute sessions.
And this doesn't at all mean they couldn't binge for far longer than that, of course.
We're just talking about the minimum amount of time
that the player has to put in to have a satisfying experience with your game.
As a side note:
With games that you expect the player to only play once a week
just make sure you're very conscious of who your players are
Are you aiming for the type of people who like to binge play a game all weekend
Or the type of people who really only get an hour or so of game time all week?
Very different design requirements for those two types of once a week players
Lastly we have to think about how long we want to keep the player engaged with our game
Do you expect them to play your game for a weekend?
For a month?
A year?
Forever!
Usually this one's more of a business question.
Do you want to make sure they're still playing your game by the time the next DLC comes out?
Do you want them to play your game right up until the sequel lands?
Have you made a perpetual game like a MOBA or an MMO
and benefit from each day you can keep them playing?
This affects session length too because if you only need them to be engaged for a month or so
but want them highly engaged when that DLC comes out
You generally want slightly longer play sessions
where the player can fully be immerse and get deeply enmeshed in your game
Of course, this also means you have to make enough game for it to last them a month at that rate
If you want them playing until the sequel comes out like Call of Duty or Madden
You want shorter play sessions
Something in the range of a half an hour
because you're expecting them to invest at least that amount of time a couple a week for a year
If you're making a perpetual game you have to do both.
You have to design a satisfying short session experience
that the player can do pretty much every day they play games
but also a binge experience that allows them to get deeply, deeply invested in your game
MMORPGs are the clearest examples of this
with small quests that can feel rewarding to complete in an hour,
but also multi-hour dungeons that allow the player to really dive in.
And one final note:
I think that even in the PC and console world
sucessful games are trending towards having a satisfying half-hour experience
And, again, that's not to say that we shouldn't build in longer experiences too
but eighty-hour RPGs that demand at least three hours per session to feel satisfying
are simply too exclusionary to reach the size of audience they need to
So even if you are making that eighty-hour RPG
and you should cause those are great
you may want to find a way to make even a half- hour sitting feel satisfying
so that those players who think they only have a half an hour a week to play games
find themselves not only wanting to play yours
but wanting to find more time in their week for games.
I hope that helps. We'll see you next week!