[MUSIC: Penguin Cap by CarboHyrdroM]
Hello, welcome to the new look we figured we were due for a bit of an update
We've discussed elements of this topic in our project $10 and digital resale episodes before
But used games have become a pretty important subject of discussion lately and a lot of you been asking about it
We're going to try to avoid repeating too much of what we said in those previous shows, so it might be worth
Refreshing on them if you're really interested in this I put some links in the text in case you don't feel like hunting for them
also
[we] did originally write this before E3 and everything that followed so apologies if any of this seems a bit outdated
Anyway on to the questions at hand first the most basic question why are used game sales such a big issue
Well on the consumer side, it's pretty clear you bought a thing. You should have the right to sell it back
That's how it works for most physical goods in our society by law on the developer and publisher
Side things are a little more opaque but the short version is that when you buy a used game at Gamestop
[the] Developer and the Publisher see none of [that] money
Nada, zero cents in a world where the triple-a market is shrinking and publishers are trying to find ways to squeeze every cent
They can out of their games, This is a big deal.
They feel like they need [to] reclaim [that] money if they're going to continue making the big budget titles
We all know and love so as you can see there's actually a fairly reasonable
Argument on both sides but one thing needs to be made clear used games are not inherently bad for the game industry
It's not uncommon browsing the internet to see people say that used games are terrible and 'if you buy used you're a bad person', [which]
Is ridiculous not only because in many ways
It's a right given to you by law, at least in the states,
But because used games have actually been a huge boon to the industry for the seven generations of consoles that relied principally on physical Media
[what] would have happened if you eliminated used games well after they stopped printing discs for a certain game?
You just wouldn't be able to get a copy anymore [a] mini gaming franchises
Have gained a lot [of] fans by having people pick [up] a cheap
Copy of the [original] when a sequel is about to come out or by having a friend tell them [about] this game that came out
Two years ago that
They really should try
But now that we've entered an age where digital releases will become more and more prevalent where publishers can leave something up for sale forever
Without having to worry about manufacturing runs
or the costs of Goods sold that longevity
advantage that used games used to provide publishers has sort of [disappeared] at the same time publishers are less reliant on Physical distributors now than
ever before [which] means they don't have to worry as much about
Reprisals from retailers as they used to which means they can lean [on] console
Manufacturers to prevent used sales which leads us more or less to where we are today?
[we] recently had quite a storm brewing over the idea of next-gen restrictions on used games and with good reason
Manufacturers were threatening to take away from us something that we used to be able to do freely but before we get too riled up
I think it's worth asking why isn't there this outrage over steam or iTunes both of these services sell us DRM filled Digital media that
We can't ever resell, yet they don't garner
The same level of fury. In fact about eight weeks ago a US district court made it official [it] is illegal to sell your iTunes
Library without permission from the record companies that own the copyright
why aren't we angry about that?
Because you know maybe we should be, I mean I don't want to live in a world where I'm
Just leasing all of my property from the companies that sold
or, I guess, rented it to me. It gives them too much power over how we consume.
We've already seen players get the banhammer just for asking for a refund or complaining about a game.
Now I strongly believe in terms of service and the right to remove disruptive members from the community
But taking ownership of the basic product away from the players is going a little too far. All right enough soapboxing.
Just know that the fight for whether you will own anything digital in the future is going on today. As for games
I think there's actually a great middle ground solution that I haven't heard anybody talk about which is to give publisher specific credit for [trade-ins]
Of digital goods, imagine if you trade it in Assassin's Creed and got $15 toward your next purchase of an Ubisoft game.
It's a great way for publishers to help establish brand loyalty and really get consumers to know which games they make.
On the flipside it gives players away to at least get some return on their investment and, the developers can still get paid.
There is the question of what happens with small games and independent games and, who knows maybe that's why
Microsoft is trying to get all indies to use a publisher with them
But it's a piece of the puzzle still to be worked out
Still it would allow publishers to do really cool things that are good for everybody
Publisher, consumer and developer alike like doubling the amount of money you get for a game shortly before the next one in the series comes out.
It reminds the customer that the games coming out, it gives them some extra cash toward it so they can feel better about buying it,
and it helps to push day one sales numbers.
Now at first I was a little worried about the idea of giving publishers control over the buyback price of their own games,
But I'm 90% sure that the way the free market plays out on this one
Publishers are likely to give much higher trading rewards than GameStop does because they would know that all that money is coming back for their
Games, and a lot of people already seem okay with trading in at Gamestop as it is.
That just leaves trading and selling with your friends, but we covered that pretty extensively in the digital resale episode,
so I'll just point you back to that one again.
Besides, I have one last can of worms to open, digital return policies. When we talk about consumer rights
Why doesn't anybody talk about returns on Digital Goods?
Heck, I might be old
But I still remember when electronic boutique used to give you seven days to return anything you bought there, new or used.
Now is it because piracy is an issue that were denied returns?
But on physical products sure, but do you know how hard it is to cut through steams DRM in the digital age we've actually gotten
Better protections than the physical products, not worse, if you couple that with an always connected requirement
there's no way you're telling me you can't protect your product enough to have an equitable return policy and
Truth is all of us have had the experience where after 30 minutes
We realise a game wasn't as advertised or back that we just didn't like it.
Now I don't care if you only give back store credit for such returns,
but there's no reason why in the modern age if you're gonna make the customer put up with all the hassles of DRM and
always-on internet requirements and such that we can't give them some benefits to go with that.
See you next week.
[MUSIC: MOSAIC by Stemage, Cory Johnson]