Recently, you might have heard about
Nintendo receiving two new patents. The
first covers a riding and flying system
that many thought might have been a shot
aimed at PAL World. And the second and
scarier, in my opinion, covers aspects
of summoning and battling creatures,
such as in Pokemon video games. Then the
internet did its thing. Gamers like
myself were furious. Game makers were
terrified. And attorneys were well,
we'll get to them. So, I wanted to find
out what the heck does all of this mean?
Can Nintendo really do this? And how
might these decisions affect the games
industry for years to come? And the
answers we found may surprise you.
[Music]
Enjoying the return of Extra Credits?
Then please consider supporting us over
on Patreon. Real quick up top, please
welcome guest writer for this episode,
Aaron Jacobs. a partner at the law firm
Prince Leel Thai with 25 years of patent
litigation experience, a teacher of a
patent trial practice course, and most
importantly, our studio director Jeff's
best man and Dn D party member. Glad to
have you in our tavern, Aaron. Ooh, but
also, he did ask us to say that all of
this is our interpretation and not legal
advice. So, please do not disbar him.
Thank you very much. Okay, so before we
can figure out what Nintendo's patent
means, first let's talk about what a
patent is. In short, it is a government
grant that gives somebody the right to
exclude everyone else from doing the
same thing. That's it. Basically, it's a
monopoly and it's usually even more
boring than the game. Oh, I went there.
Still playing a game from like 15 years
ago. But if the patent owner wants to
enforce its monopoly, it has to sue
anyone it thinks is infringing in
federal court. And that is where patent
litigators like Aaron come in. And fun
fact that I didn't know, it turns out
patents are essentially laid out in the
US Constitution. Yeah. In Article 1, the
founding fathers gave Congress the power
to promote the progress of science and
useful arts by securing for limited
times to authors and inventors the
exclusive right to their respective
writings and discoveries. Neat. Next, we
should talk about what can be patented.
Well, according to patent law 101,
that's not a cute euphemism. It's
literally section 101 of the patent
statutes, you can get a patent on any
new and useful process, machine,
manufacturer, or composition of matter,
or any new and useful improvement
thereof. Basically, you can get patents
for new things and new ways of doing
things. But the Supreme Court has also
said there are some things that you
can't patent. You can't patent laws of
nature, natural phenomena, and abstract
ideas. Now, to figure out if you're
trying to claim abstract ideas, you
first figure out if the patent is
directed to an abstract idea, like say a
method of investing money. If that's the
case, you could see if there's an
inventive concept that takes it out of
abstraction. If so, patentable? If not,
no. And of course, that whole last
section probably has all of you patent
attorneys screaming into your pillows
right now. And Aaron would definitely
hand out Fs to any of his students that
said they could easily tell the
difference between claims that are
abstract and those that aren't. Yeah,
turns out it is incredibly complex, more
so than we have time to cover here. So,
that is why we're going to stick with
the broad summary above for this
episode. Anyway, Aaron is fairly sure
that you can get a patent for something
like a new type of table, or you can get
a patent on a new method of building a
table, but you cannot get a patent on
the basic math used to build a table or
ways of investing money specific to
table making companies. Also, courts
have found that things like dice games
and wagering games using a deck of
playing cards were unpatentable. And
courts have found that patents covering
rules in computer games were also
unpatentable. But for a moment, let's
circle back and say we just want to
patent that table that I brought up
before because I got to tell you, I got
some sick ideas. How do we do that?
Well, first we write and then file an
application with the United States
Patent and Trademark Office or PTO. The
application has a specification which
describes in writing what has come
before and what our new ideas are. It
will usually have drawings and figures
to help clarify our intent. And it will
have claims, our precisely worded
statement outlining what we want to well
claim as ours. Using fancy lawyer words,
Aaron explained that the claims define
quote the meets and boundaries of the
patent holder's right to exclude. Sort
of like how a title to land describes
the exact boundaries of the property.
Then the patent office begins reviewing
and rejecting claims. The applicant
usually has to amend these claims. And
if the applicant is stubborn enough, the
PTO eventually issues the patent in a
process called patent prosecution. No,
we're not talking about putting patents
in jail, although that would be more
interesting, I think. Basically, the
application includes our ideas, which
stay pretty consistent during the
application process. But our right to
exclude others from doing what we patent
is defined by the claims. Those can and
usually do change during the patent
prosecution getting more and more narrow
as we go. So, back to our table patent.
In our specification, we described this
neat new thing. We've come up with
tables. There are round tables, square
tables, hexagon tables, and so on. There
are pedestal tables and tables with
legs. There are red tables and blue
tables. Then, in our first claim, we
claim a table using these fancy patent
words you see on the screen right now.
But remember, we can only get a patent
for something that is new. So when the
examiner at the PTO finds a table in a
catalog that was mailed before our
application was filed, she rejects our
claim. That catalog is what's known as
prior art. As the name suggests, it's
anything that was publicly available
before we filed our application. The
catalog has tables, and so that catalog
anticipates the claim. Anticipation is
legal jargon for the idea that every bit
of the claim is found in a single prior
art reference. So here my table claim is
anticipated because the catalog has my
one and only requirement tables. So we
go back and amend our claim. We look at
our application and decide what we are
excited about are square tables. So we
add this lingo. Every time we add to the
claim, we are subtracting from what we
can exclude others from doing. Now we
only exclude people from building square
tables. All other types of tables cannot
infringe on our patent. Unfortunately,
the examiner flips through the catalog
again and finds a square table. So my
amended claim is anticipated. So we
amend it yet again to add four legs as a
requirement. Now we can't go after
pedestal tables. But the examiner finds
yet another catalog. and this one has
four-legged round tables. She rejects
the claim as obvious between the square
tables in the first catalog and the
round four-legged table in the second
catalog. The word obvious is more of
that legal jargon. It means that our
claim would have been colloquially
obvious to combine the tables from the
two cataloges to come up with a square
four-legged table. And damn it, who knew
they collected this many furniture
cataloges? So, we amend again and limit
it to red tables.
The examiner can't find any square
four-legged red tables, even combining
the cataloges. So, we get a patent. But
of course, our claim only covers square
four-legged red tables. But what if we
want to cover green tables? Well, this
patent can't, but we can file what is
known as a continuation. Continuations
let us continue to get more patents from
the same specification and drawings. It
simplifies the process as we can point
to our previous patent and say that
thing we already got but expanded to
cover this new idea. More on that later.
Okay. So, now imagine we've just spotted
someone making a square, four-legged red
table, and we've decided to do our
patriotic duty as Americans and sue them
into oblivion for infringement because
we believe our patent excludes them from
making the type of table we patented.
What specifically happens in this
situation? Well, they can argue that
their tables don't infringe. For
example, they could say that their
tables aren't red, but more of a burnt
orange. And they could argue that my
patent shouldn't have been issued in the
first place because the idea wasn't new
enough. They could point to tables that
existed before my application, like
square four-legged tables that are green
and round four-legged tables that are
red, and say that it would have been
obvious to combine those two to arrive
at my patent. Or they can file an
interparties review or IPR. In an IPR,
anyone can go back to the patent office
and say that the patent shouldn't have
been issued because of prior art that
the examiner didn't find. If the patent
office decides to institute an IPR, then
the court will usually pause the
litigation to let the patent office do
its thing. The patent office will then
do a mini trial on the patent's validity
and decide whether to cancel it. If the
claims are canceled, the lawsuit is over
since the patent no longer exists. If
not, it is back to the litigation. And I
know that is a lot of information to
parse. Actually, speaking of that,
Aaron, how long do you think this whole
process will take? Up to three years for
an IPR and then four more for
litigation. And an IPR costs $500,000
and up to 2 million for litigation on
just one patent. That is a huge yikes.
Big enough for me to want to smash
someone through my table I just
patented. And maybe I actually add that
to my patent. Wait, no, wait. I'm losing
the thread. Okay, so I know that that
foray into my burgeoning woodworking
business was a lot of setup, but it
gives us the perfect context to talk
about the Nintendo patents. So, let's
dive into both. Their September 2nd
patent lists Chagarro Amorei as the
inventor, and his application was first
filed in Japan in August of 2022.
Therefore, anything that came before
August 2022 is prior art and could
invalidate the patent. Anything that
comes after would infringe on this
patent. Nintendo filed the US
application in March of 2023. Side note,
each country and the European Union has
its own system for handling patents. In
the patent office's first response to
the US filing, get this, they straight
up allowed the claims, y'all. This is
deeply weird. No rejections or even
comments on whether this computer game
claimed patentable subject matter. No
discussion of prior art, nothing. Kirk
Sigman in an article in PC Gamer
referred to this as an embarrassing
failure of the US patent system. And
this non-legal animated narrator would
agree. But what did Nintendo actually
get out of this patent? As it turns out,
not a lot. Okay, here's claim one. Now,
remember, words in the claims are
important. If you don't do even one of
them, you don't infringe. Like remember
our patent on tables? If your table was
blue or green or chartreuse, you didn't
infringe. So keep that in mind as I give
you a line by line breakdown of this
claim translated into layman, which I
happen to speak fluently. Here we go. A
computer with a game. The game does a
thing using the computer's processor.
Move a trainer or avatar in a virtual
field based on user input. A sub
character, aka Pokemon, appears on the
field based on the user's input, such as
throwing a Pokeball. When there's an
enemy character where the trainer's
Pokemon is, the Pokemon and enemy battle
based on user's inputs. When the enemy
character is not where the Pokemon is,
move the Pokemon based on movement
instructions toward the enemy character.
And when the Pokemon gets there,
automatically start and run a battle
where the Pokémons fight. Now, to
infringe on this, a game in question
would have to do each one of these
things. So, if you can't control your
trainer's movement, no infringement. If
the player can only deploy their Pokémon
onto a battlefield where an enemy waits,
no infringement. If the Pokémon doesn't
move automatically to a distant enemy,
no infringement. Or after moving, if the
Pokémon asks if it can battle, no
infringement, and so on. So, kind of
like, okay,
breaking news. While we were animating
this episode, the just installed
director of the PTO personally ordered a
re-examination of the Omari patent.
Aaron is still trying to come up with
adjectives to explain how bonkers this
is. And we'll be talking more about this
later in the episode, which we return
you to now, already in progress. That's
what news people say, right? But what
about Nintendo's patent that was issued
before on September 9th? That one lists
Kazumasa Iwayo as the inventor and was
first filed in Japan in December 2021
and the US in September 2022. That
application led to a patent number
12,246,255
in March of 2025, which no one really
seemed to care about when it came out.
Before that patent came out though,
Nintendo filed a continuation. Remember,
that's where you take a patent you're
already getting and ask to add different
claims. And that led to the new
September 9th patent number 12,49,387,
which everyone seems to care about. The
US patent office's response to the
second EIO patent was slightly less
bonkers than the Amorei patent, but
truly just slightly. The examiner
rejected the claims the first time
around based on prior art or things that
were publicly available. Again, no
rejection on patentability, mind you.
And after several rounds of amendments
narrowing down their claims to exclude
the prior art, the patent was issued.
Here, Nintendo actually got a bit more.
Here is claim one. So, really, it's a
lot of words to say something
deceptively simple. Layman's degree,
don't fail me now. Here we go. A
computer with a game. Control a trainer
or avatar in a virtual space based on
user input. The user selects a boarding
character, like a mount, and the trainer
boards it and can move in the virtual
space on the boarding character. The
trainer owns multiple mounts. The
trainer can capture and then own
characters. While the trainer is in the
air, use different user inputs to board
a flying mount. And now the trainer can
move in the air. And while the trainer
is on the flying mount, move the trainer
through the air based upon another
different user input. All right. So,
what's going on here? Well, let's say
that we're in a Pokemon type game based
on the bit about being able to capture
characters. You use one form of controls
to move the trainer around. There are at
least two boarding characters or mounts
the trainer can board. The first
apparently can have any form of
locomotion, ground, air, water, or
cliff. The second boarding character,
though, is a flyer. When the trainer is
in the air, flying, falling, jumping off
the ground, whatever, input a different
type of command to board a flyer. The
trainer can then fly using a third set
of commands. That does seem pretty
broad. It also seems like it might have
been written to cover what they thought
PAL World might do, which was announced
5 months before the patent was filed.
But that is allowed. If your patent
application was filed before the accused
system was made public, you can write
claims to cover specific products.
Yippee. Here, a few things stood out.
First, these patents seem like the types
that should have been at least
questioned on that patentability ground
that had lawyers screaming into pillows
before. When claims like this get
through without a single question about
patentability, they're either super
impressive or super suspect. This is
close enough to other claims that were
invalidated by courts that it seems like
it should fall into the super suspect
category. Second, the fact that the
Amorei patent issued without even a
single rejection is mind-boggling. Aaron
even turned to a thesaurus to find a
better word for it. Amazing, arguing,
breathtaking, extraordinary, incredible.
And that's just from the first half of
the alphabet. When claims get through
without even a single rejection, they
are also either super impressive or
super suspect. Third, he pointed out
that the Amorei patent claim is really,
really narrow. How often are you going
to do those specific things? And even if
you were going to do that, this brings
up the question of damages. When a
patent owner sues, it can try to get
lost profits or a reasonable royalty.
For lost profits, the owner has to argue
that it would have earned some of the
infringers profits, but for the
infringement. So, would anyone really
choose one game over another because of
this? If not, then the owner is limited
to a reasonable royalty, which a jury
decides. And really, how much would
anyone pay to be able to include this
tiny aspect into a game? Meanwhile, the
OIO September 9th patent claim is
really, really broad. It seems like it
covers having a trainer who can board a
flyer when the trainer is in the air,
but that's its own problem. Now there is
an old word salad saying in patent law
that which infringes if later
anticipates if earlier. Think about it
like this. An application is filed at a
point in time. The AIOJapanese
application was filed on December 22nd,
2021. A Pokemon type system launched on
December 23rd that does all of those
things of the claim infringes. But if
that exact same Pokémon type system came
out on December 21st, then it would
invalidate the claim because it was
already public and is therefore prior
art. And how many games out there do you
think had a feature where a character
could capture mounts, one of which was
flying and had to be mounted when the
user was off the ground? Even if we
ignore the ginormous headache of
patentability, the Amorei patent is
super easy to avoid. For example, if the
game requires the user to direct the
Pokemon type creature toward the things
it's going to battle, no infringement.
Heck, even the AIO isn't that hard to
get around. The story of this patent
caught fire when people learned the
patent claim included the idea of
capturing and owning characters, right?
But in truth, that's just one small bit
of a much, much larger claim. And all of
the words are important. Like if you
just use the same user input for moving
the character regardless of whether
they're on the flyer, there's no
infringement. It could be that simple.
Plus, there's a good chance that
someone, maybe even one of you, will
find prior art that does all of the
things and give it to any company that
is accused of infringement. But on the
flip side here, if all of that is the
case, you got to wonder why Nintendo
went to all of this timely and expensive
trouble.
Bingo, bud. Aram's razor would suggest
Nintendo is using the threat of patents
to block future competitors, especially
ones with modest development budgets.
Because even if those competitors think
they might win the lawsuit or IPR, the
cost of doing so would be much too high
to handle for a smaller upand cominging
company. And just speaking for me
personally here, may I say not a great
look. Nintendo,
we break in again to elaborate on the
breaking news we already broke in about
before. As we mentioned a few weeks
after we went into production on this
episode, the brand new director of the
PTO unilaterally decided to re-examine
the already issued Amari patent.
Apparently, there was enough noise in
the industry that it caught even his
attention. To be clear, a director
instituted re-exam hasn't happened in
more than 15 years when they did so on
patents that were asserted against
BlackBerry. The director's decision this
time round explains that there are a
couple of patents that seem to cover at
least some of the claims of the Amari
patent. So maybe these claims go away.
Heck, maybe they all go away. Or maybe
some are invalidated and some survive.
Either way, we'll be sure to monitor and
update you on this breathtaking
adventure, perhaps on our live show,
Games for Breakfast, Mondays at 11:00
a.m. Eastern Standard Time. And until
then, we return you to the calls to
action already in progress. I'm tapping
the papers like the news people do, but
it's lower than the desk. IT'S LOWER
THAN THE DESK.
But what do you all think now that you
have an introductory grasp on how
patents function? Are patents like this
going to styy future game development,
or is there enough wiggle room in the
pocket monster genre for future
competitors to still make their marks?
Please let us know in the comments. I'm
dying to hear what you all think about
this, and I hope you enjoyed this deep
dive into a topic that I thought I
understood, but Aaron proved very
quickly that I did not. Thanks, buddy.
This episode was made possible due to
our awesome patrons over on Patreon. If
you'd like to help ensure the future of
extra credits and even get your face
immortalized in bean form as you've seen
in the credits, then click or scan right
here to join the stellar ranks of Angelo
Valenciana, Dominic Valenciana, Friezo
Fenant, Hunter Z, Joseph Bla, Kuya Koy,
Lotuswolf, and Zelad's Architectures are
the best legendary patrons. Hold for
applause.