Hi Janet. There's a funny thing that
just happened and I'm really sorry you
missed it. Uh, all right. Hello
everyone.
Uh, it's it's an interesting Thursday
for industry news. By the way, Jeff, I
don't know if you've you've seen I've
been working all morning. Okay, great.
So, let's let's catch you up. We'll do
we'll do a little susant of industry
news before we get into our topic. All
right. Uh, number one, Xbox has
announced that the price of consoles and
games will be going up before holiday
2025. They are raising the price of
consoles about
$80. Uh, and they are also raising uh
the price of firstparty Xbox games to
$80. Uh, and that will be kicking in, I
believe, over the summer. So that's that
is a thing that uh the industry is
drifting to be in line with Nintendo
more or less. Although the Xboxes are
both I believe still more expensive than
the Switch 2, which is kind of fair cuz
it's been the writing and Matt and I
have talked about this extensively. The
writing has sort of been on the wall
that Microsoft doesn't super care about
the physical Xbox platform as much as
they care about publishing games and
getting people into the Game Pass
ecosystem and doing that. Uh
subscription good. Yeah. Uh subscription
good. Uh and then the other one is uh
that uh there was just a acquisition and
mass firing over at Polygon. Uh Polygon
uh got sold off and the new owners
immediately laid most of the staff at
Polygon off. Uh which begs the question,
why did they buy it? That's a really
great question, Jeff. And the answer is
none of those answers are good. None of
like none of the potential answers for
why you buy a media outlet and then gut
it are in my opinion great for
consumers. So well we'll see how it
goes. Zariah, thank you so much for the
72 months over here on Twitch. Um I mean
yeah Darter brings up Darter brings up a
great point, right? That um it's totally
because Xbox console sales were doing so
well. I mean, that's not
this far into the console cycle, though.
Like, right. Well, it it's it will be
impossible to compare either PS5 or Xbox
sales at any current gen Xbox sales at
any point during their run to Switch 2
sales for a whole host of reasons,
right? The timing and supply chain
issues of both the Xbox and PlayStation
5 is very different than the Switch. The
Switch is launching in the middle of
tariff central, which is great. It's
launching into a probable American
recession. Just great, right? But also,
uh, people have a lot of emotional
attachment to the Switch family because
it got a lot of people through co. So
there's it's they're not directly
comparable. I think also again,
Microsoft has the whole ecosystem thing
that they're really pushing for, right?
That's that was the whole point of the
this is an Xbox ad series, right?
Um, so yeah, uh, I bought it so I could
man dismantle it. Exactly, Adam.
Exactly. That's precisely it most
likely. And I mean, the brand name of
Polygon is worth quite a bit on its own,
right? They've stood as a reputable
source for games journalism for a while.
And of course, the real concern is where
are those people going to
go get jobs now? And I hope they all get
jobs someplace soon because game, as
someone who talks a lot about news in
the gaming industry, I really like when
there's reputable, wellressearched
sources for talking about news in the
gaming
industry, right? Yeah.
Um Oh, yeah. Uh all right. So, the plan
for today, chat, and you can be thinking
about this while we get through ads here
on Twitch.
Um the
uh the plan is we're going to be talking
about crowdfunding. So most of this is
going to focus on Kickstarter because
Kickstarter is the most common way that
stuff gets crowdfunded, but it'll
encompass others. So as we're doing
this, I want you all to think
about the the video game that you were
excited to kickstart that actually
delivered in the way that you wanted it
to.
I got one but okay yeah does that exist
right because uh our topic today is why
you can't crowdfund video games and
there the obvious what is people have
crowdfunded video games for a long time
and that's true sort of but but people
have run crowdfunded campaigns so we'll
talk more about that in a bit but I do
uh I do want to put in your minds that
the thing that you can be thinking about
today is Kickstarters or other
crowdfunding efforts for video games,
what you participated in, why you
participated in it, what you got out of
it, right? How long it was between when
you kickstarted it and when the game
came out. Um, there's a special place in
my heart for uh the the the doomed I
don't know that they're I'm not going to
say that they're all necessarily doomed,
but most of them at this point have been
doomed. Uh MMOs that hit Kickstarter,
right? MMOs on Kickstarter is just like,
"Yeah, we're gonna form this new openw
world thing with like all of this stuff
and and then you never hear from them
again, right?" Um, yeah. Okay. So, uh,
Zach has a really great example, uh, but
I I'm going to I'm going to specifically
call this out because I think it's
really great. Um, Zach brought up not a
video game. We're specifically talking
about video games here and a bunch of
the concerns and problems are about
video games. So, when we get started,
we're going to make sure that we're
focused very heavily on video games. We
are going to talk, we'll have a
supplement at the end where we talk
about board game, card game, tabletop,
correct? And how specifically some of
the problems that games have for why you
can't kickstart them. And there's going
to be an asterric after this, but
um exist in different ways for different
kinds of games. Yeah, exactly. and why
I'm sort of eternally frustrated that
Kickstarter's games category is just g
is is all games when video games and
tabletop games are two of their top
crowdfunding brackets and each should
probably have their own but they're
not. All right, so we'll talk about that
in a bit. Um, there's a certain mention
that we must get out of the way. Potato
salad. Yeah, I don't want potato salad
in the episode, but yes, potato salad.
Uh, the
The best Kickstarter ever, Jeff, was a
Kickstarter by a guy who wanted to make
some potato salad. And his goal was like
$50. And he ended up making several
thousand to make potato salad and then
like live streamed making and eating the
potato salad and like sent people
commemorative postcards in honor of that
batch of potato salad. And it was sort
of a meta commentary on the nature of
crowdfunding.
See, some things like that actually I
believe have a better chance. Yeah. Than
absolutely because it players did it
because they were going along for the
ride. Excuse me. Thunders did it. like
um there was a Shark Tank pitch years
and years ago for a company called I
Want to Draw a Cat for You and this guy
walked out and basically did literally a
song and dance routine which was so like
bad BBOP movie which was music which
basically just said I want to draw a cat
for you and this guy was commissioned on
the internet to draw bad cat sketches
and then send them to people and he got
funded because Mark Cuban thought it was
hilarious and realized that what the guy
really was was just providing
entertainment. Yeah. And that it was
kind of that same as the potato salad
thing. Yes. Yeah. Not we're we're going
to we're going to have a special caveat
carve out for novelty for sure. So I'm
90% sure it was funded by Cuban. It's
been a while since I've seen that
episode, but that's irrelevant. Yeah.
Okay, cool. So, uh be thinking about
those things. We're done with ads on
Twitch. We're all here. We're ready.
We're going to talk about crowdfunding.
So, let's go to black and then we'll
start this episode. So, uh if you
haven't been here, don't panic. We're
just going to go to black so I can start
a clean recording for our friends over
at Nebula and then we'll start the show.
I see a Twitch and YouTube stream and I
want to paint black. That exactly.
That's 100% it. All right. Black
[Music]
Good time zone, internet. Hello and
welcome to Design Club, the only game
design show on the internet where we've
officially adopted summer attire cuz
it's too warm here for hoodies. Uh I am
your humble internet host, Will, joined
as always by my pal Jeff. Say hi to the
people, Jeff. Hi to the people, Jeff.
Hey everybody, I am Jeffrey Zetkin. I am
the studio director of Extra Credits and
Extra History and long, longtime game
designer, 20 plus years. And
today, well, you look like you turn
slightly older every time I say 20 plus
years. Listen, listen. It's the gray and
the beard. It keeps like every time I do
this, right? It and it's not Twitch
chat, right? Hi everyone. I'm Will, your
resident analysis enthusiast and voice
of the people here on uh Twitch and
YouTube for all things live streaming.
Um, yeah. So, today, as as you may have
guessed by the title, we're talking
about crowdfunding.
Thursday, Thursday, Thursday. That's
right. So, actually, if you're launching
a
Kickstarter, you always launch it on a
Tuesday, unless it's the first day of
the month, in which happens to be a
Monday, in which case you launch it on
the Monday.
Fascinating. That is an absolutely
fascinating Yeah, we uh Oh, sorry. I
I've been diving deep into some of this
cuz last year we did a Kickstarter for
our extra history calendar, which is
behind my green screen. I should have
had it right here to show it off, which
was a was and is a beautiful calendar
that you can buy in our store. But
specifically, I'd done a lot of
consulting on Kickstarters before, but
this was the first time I'd actually ran
one. Mhm. Excuse me. With the team.
Yeah. Kickstarters are almost never and
should never be solo person affairs. No.
But crowdfunding to put out a thing is
takes work. It is time consuming. It is
not a free thing. And we can get to a
little bit about why of it. Yeah. Well,
I mean, let let's I mean, we can cast
our mind back, right? We were talking a
little bit in the pre-show about the
potato salad Kickstarter, right?
Crowdfunding has evolved into a much
more um sophisticated part of the gaming
industry than it was back in May day.
Right. I remember I remember the the
days of infinite stretch goals and
people not really knowing how to format
a campaign or what pledge levels look
like or like people or you shouldn't do
too much physical merch because you're
going to end up losing money because
they added a thing at the spur of the
moment and suddenly realized that that
$5 add-on they were doing was going to
bring their their Kickstarter to
unprofitability. Yeah, there's all kinds
of stuff, right? But we we've come a
really long way from since
then. But one of the actually keep going
for a second. I'm going to bring the
calendar on screen because people are
talking about it in chat. Okay, great.
Um, so while Jeff grabs the calendar, so
the thing that we've been asking people,
uh, in the Discord for our patrons and
subscribers, uh, and channel members,
uh, and here in in chat, live chat, has
been what? We want to frame your
thinking about this in what was the last
video game, not tabletop game. We'll get
to that later. Video game Kickstarter
that you backed that you were happy
with. All right. Hold on. Let's see
here. What is May? Yeah, you should show
off May. It just was April. Whoops. It's
upside down. Okay, great. Awesome. Yeah.
Uh, which was our worst moms and dads
playing poker. And let's flip over to
May. Oh,
May is Elanor with a Parasol. Yeah.
Which was when David tackled
um what is this? Monae. That's a Monae.
Funny. I wrote all of these, but I have
a child and have not slept a lot. Yeah.
But beautiful custom art for all though
I'll have to say February is still with
the glint. Oh yeah, the lovers. Still
one of my favorites. Yeah, absolutely.
Okay, so um we should probably issue a
clarification, right? Because I've got
an excellent comment here from YouTube.
Crowdfunding as in Kickstarter, not
Patreon. Yes, we're talking very good
clarification that we should probably
get out of the way right at the top.
Thank you for that, Goldie. We're
talking about a crowdfunding a
short-term timelimited crowdfunding
campaign, right? Like a kickstart versus
Patreon, which is let me Patreon and
Kickstarter. I'm going to use
Kickstarter and crowdfunding
interchangeably for this. Yeah. The goal
of Patreon is to say, here's a group
making content that I like. I'm going to
chip
in. Hold on. I didn't silence my phone.
Silence phone stay. The goal of a
Patreon is to say, "Here is a group
doing stuff I like. I'm going to give
them a little bit of money every month
along with lots of other people so that
together we can help fund them to
continue making the thing that we like
because the due to the fact that they
have a kick a Patreon, it probably means
without that it is not sustainable for
them to do this as a part-time or
full-time thing." Yeah. And so as
opposed to one or two people paying
large amounts for it, a whole bunch of
people chip in little bits on a monthly
basis, right? They are not expecting to
get, for example, a finished game at the
end of somebody's Patreon in most cases,
right? It's a it's for example. Oh, go
ahead. It's ongoing art, right? It
Patreon is much more like sponsoring an
ongoing artist or an ongoing streamer,
an ongoing studio rather
than going towards a specific finished
goal.
So, for example, extra history and extra
credits together runs a Patreon. And
specifically for history, what our
patrons get to do is help vote on the
topics that we will cover in the future.
Both proposed topics and vote on them.
Mhm. This isn't a oneanddone. This is,
hey, we're making an ongoing show and
YouTube revenue alone isn't enough.
Yeah. And people like history, so they
chip in. Yep. So, that's a thing.
On the other hand, you get a Kickstarter
or a crowdfunding, which is let's go
make Hecnommancer, right? And out of
that, what you expect from what you
pledge with your crowdfunding, you
expect to at the end receive a copy of
Hectomancer, it is a one-time payment in
return for which you get that plus other
possible stretch goals. You might be or
when Matt goes and does dwarven forge,
he expects to get a box full of dwarven
forge that weighs more than showing up
in the mail at some point. Yeah. Yeah.
Yeah. Yeah. Um importantly, right? Uh
the and those those those extra rewards
are range from everything, right? It
could be your your pet snake will appear
in Hecnommancer to we'll make you into a
snake and you appear in Hecnommancer to
whatever. But all of those all of those
rewards uh in the case of video games
are sort of ancillary to you will
receive a video game that resembles the
thing that you were pitched in the
crowdfunding campaign that is playable
on a system that is currently relevant.
Uh with few exceptions for like retro
game Kickstarters, right? But like
that's the general goal of a video game
Kickstarter specifically, right? I think
we can agree on that.
And I am going to So Will, what's our
title? Why you can't crowdfund video
games? Yeah. And so Will, are there a
lot of crowdfunded video games?
There are a lot of video games which
have had crowdfunding campaigns run for
them, right?
But if we are looking at the crowdfund,
the name of it or the premise from
Kickstarter, I am raising money to make
a game.
This implies that the game is getting
funded by either the Kickstarter or the
crowdfunding. Yeah. Like as per the name
that you know it's like we're going to
go make Hecnommancer, right? We are
doing a we're going to go run a
Kickstarter for it. We're going to raise
$100,000 on that and we're going to go
make the game. Right.
So, just straight up as somebody with 20
plus years in development, this works
like 1% of the time. Correct. Yeah. That
you fund the game through the money that
comes in through crowdfunding.
There are plenty of other reasons to run
these things and we'll get into that and
we'll talk about also why the economics
don't work. But at a very high level,
you cannot fund a video game through
crowdfunding. You cannot raise enough
money. Yeah. To me, 99% of the time,
there will always be exceptions. We'll
mention a couple of them. Right. We
we've got some I've I've uh I've spent a
fair amount of time uh diving into and I
have a a a wide array of examples of
different Kickstarters um that were
success that were all successfully
funded for the amount that they asked
for originally. We'll talk about that
briefly. Um and were all successful in
different degrees and in different ways.
And let me just let me bring this in
here real quick. Hey um everybody
watching this is because games cost more
to develop than you can raise on
Kickstarter. Yeah. And I think I think
saying that again cost more to develop
than you can raise on Kickstarter. And
there are exceptions. If you have a game
that, let's see, hold on. Just like
Goldie said, if you have a game that
makes 100,000 people for brings in
100,000 for two people for one year,
depending where you live, that can be a
successful thing. But most games have
more than two people, take more than a
year. And therefore, when you do the
economics, and I made Will go get a
whiteboard or blackboard. We're in a
sketch on for this today, the economics
of what it costs to make versus how much
you can raise off of crowdfunding with
very rare exceptions do not work, right?
And and I think it's really important
that we as consumers understand that,
right? Because I think there
is I think Star Citizen is probably the
flagship example, right, for and punag
intended. Um, so Star Citizen, for those
not in the know,
raised a lot of money on Kickstarter and
the reason I'm not giving a number is
because it's not really the bulk of it.
They also crowdfunded independently at
the same time and have raised millions
and millions of dollars for a game that
is still in active development
asterisk, right? There's um there is a
bunch of stuff with that, right? And so
people are uh saying the the most common
thing that we hear with um about Star
Citizen is they've raised all this
money. Why isn't the game done? And the
answer is because the amount of money
they've raised versus the game that
they've set out to make are inongruous.
They're like, and we'll get to that
because that is and this is also, by the
way, not me saying do
not do not not back games on Kickstarter
or crowdfunding. You should, but what
I'm what today's episode is about is
understanding what's actually going on.
Yeah. so that you as a person who likes
games can make an informed choice and
you know what you're actually buying.
Yeah, I think that's a great goal. So,
so let me give a tiny bit of history
here.
For a
while, people actually made good faith
on I'm going to go fund my game on
Kickstarter. But one of the problems
with this besides everything else is
that Kickstarter's audiences have become
increasingly sophisticated. You used to
be able to go and you could pitch an
idea. Here is my idea for a game. I
would like people to give me money for
this. So many of those failed that as
and the audience got sophisticated from
this. Hey, not every pitch is going to
turn into a cool thing or come out that
they've started to look for more. They
want more than a pitch. They maybe want
might want to see a demo of the game,
concept art, footage, maybe that it's
playable at a certain point like you can
see, you know, here's the alpha build of
a thing. If you are trying to fund
development of your game, by its very
nature, that means you don't have the
money yet, right? Or theoretically, you
don't. So, you can't have an alpha of
your game or highle concept art or other
things because you do not have the money
to make that. and people no longer fund
things that they can't see that a good
portion of it exists. And part of that
is the general trend in Kickstarter that
has moved away from um sort of the what
I'll call the Patreon model into the
pre-order model, right? So the Patreon
model is I'm supporting this thing
because I think it's cool and I want it
to exist, right? And I might get a
benefit like voting on episode topics.
And the pre-order model is I'm gonna
wait three years and then I'm gonna get
this really cool shiny thing at a
discounted rate because I helped support
it on Kickstarter, which is pretty
common. But and part of that premise is
I want this game. It's still the I want
this game to exist. I am willing to give
my money 3 years early. Correct. And
hope it comes out. Correct. And the
expectation is now much more um I think
at least as someone who's uh friends and
who has backed a lot of Kickstarters,
the expectation is now much more
um that there will be a onetoone
correlation between what's pitched and
what's delivered. There's less room for
deviation and expectation in the
Kickstarter audience because of that
level of sophistication you're talking
about. Right. Before there were games
that were like, "Hey, this game is gonna
be green and then you come out and
you're like, it's actually turquoise and
kind of blue and everyone's like, "Oh,
that's how cheeky that is. What an
interesting change." And now people are
like, "Back to green game. Back to green
game and the game's blue. What have you
done? This game is a failure because
it's not a green game, right?" and like
not um giving room for the drift that is
a natural part of development as you
figure out what can and can't be done
and new ideas and that's one of the
tricky parts of pitching early too is I
can tell you from having made lots of
games the game you set out to make and
the game that gets made are very rarely
exactly along the way because as you
start playing your own game and
designing it you have additional ideas
you're like oh we could make it better
for this oh this thing we thought of
won't work because the frame rate can
never get to the point we need it to
because we wanted to show too much
therefore we have to change. You know,
there's all of these things that happen
during development. Mhm. But part of it
too um is again how much people want to
see. Like if we were pitching this
calendar 10 years ago, we could have
said we're going to go make a history
calendar based with the art style of our
show and we're going to redraw famous
art into the art style of our beans.
We're going to have a history factoid
every day and people would have been
like cool. When we did our Kickstarter
last last year, we had 10 of the 13
months done. The art was done that we
could show off. We had mockup screens of
exactly what it was going to look at
with factoids for every single day. We
were showing the postcards and the
digital art. like we
had 90% of the
calendar done because that's what it
would take to show off and get people
excited to come pledge and do the
Kickstarter for the calendar. And one of
the things that's important to keep in
mind is that that amount of that
percentage of the finished product being
delivered to the consumer is what is
expected. even though the amount of work
it takes to get to that percentage of
the finished product varies greatly by
product type, right? So, for instance,
much harder to make a an alpha or a demo
or a vertical slice of a game than it is
to do all of the planning for the
Kickstarter, right? because you need a
certain amount of assets and time and
programs and knowhow in order to do the
vertical slice in a way that you don't
you don't need as much um as many
pre-erequisite
uh costs to design a calendar, right?
The the big straight up Yeah. But hey,
Will, can you give me a couple of good
examples of some high-end
Kickstarter games? Yeah. So, uh let's I
want to be small while you say this. Oh.
Oh, you want you we want to you want
Actually, never mind. Are you No, no,
it's fine. We can do this. Okay, so I
shrunk. Wow, look at how big the game
cups are now, Will. Yeah, I know. I
know. I You know how much latte I could
fit in one of those? One day I'll uh
I'll figure it out. All right, so number
one, uh Bloodstained Ritual of the Night
raised
$5.5 million.
Okay. And uh it did that in 2015. That's
probably one of the best examples of a
big Kickstarter. However,
uh I've got two more. Ashes of Creation,
uh which is an MMO. That's very
important to keep in mind. Ashes of
Creation is an MMO that raised 3.27
million. Mhm. Uh in 2017.
Well, quick question. Will we be able to
keep this screen and come back to it
later? Mhm. We can do that. Okay. And
then uh yeah yeah yeah. And then uh last
up is a game that has been mentioned
multiple times in chat already.
Mighty number nine. Nine not zero. Nine
raised uh oh sorry this is wrong. I got
my numbers mixed up. Ash of creation no
Ash of Creation did raise that. Uh
Mighty Number N raised 3.84 million.
Okay. And that was in 2013. And this is
uh by the way, Mighty Number Nine did
not launch to the critical acclaim it
was expecting. So I don't actually
remember that one. I know the other two.
There are reasons for that. Right. Well,
and that's and that's actually a really
good point. That is a really good point
that Jeff just made. One of the problems
and I've chosen this selection of games
that we're going to talk about in their
funding levels
um that's really important is uh there's
a massive amount of recency bias and
survivorship bias when we think about
crowdfunding, right? Because uh plenty
of crowdfunding campaigns fail. In fact,
so many fail that Kickstarter generally
won't give numbers for it because they
don't want you to think about it.
They're like,
"Yeah, a whole if you raise more than
20% of your goal, 79% of Kickstarters
succeed, which is like the most weirdly
specific
uh number, right? If you raise more than
20% of your goal, 79% of Kickstarters
succeed." Oh, actually, there's a reason
for that. There's if you look at the pie
chart of like I used to do some of this
for my awesome video game data talks on
because Kickstarter has a tiny tab at
the bottom where they'll show you a
whole bunch of data for their different
categories. And part of that was a trend
that basically said so many games have
such trouble getting any audience at all
that the person just thinks I need to
put up a Kickstarter and people will
magically appear. Yep.
that what they're saying really is look,
if you can do the leg work to get people
in excited about your game, you know, if
you can get 20% funded, at that point
there's a 79% chance you'll actually go
all the way to 100% funded. Y but that
also shows how many people then if you
look at the total numbers couldn't even
hit that 20% because maybe their
presentation sucked. Maybe they, you
know, couldn't get people interested.
they've done no like marketing or
outreach to bring people in. Um, and
that's part of as we get to like one of
the ones on your medium list. Actually,
do that. Do Banner Saga. Okay. So,
Banner Saga 3. So, again, this is three.
This is not Banner Saga 1. This is the
third game in the installment. This is
People have played number one and two
and were they were both wellreceived
games, right? Raised
416K in 2017. Yep. So, just under half a
million dollars, right? Uh, Blasphemous,
uh, which has gone on to be a
muchbeloved, incredibly grim dark
Metroid vania, if you're not familiar
with it, uh, raised
333K. So, half of the money that we
really wish that it would have raised
for a really funny joke about a
blasphemous video game, but
unfortunately, uh, they raised that in
2017.
And then, uh, the this is actually one
of the more recent ones that's still in
development. Um, most of these have come
out or have come out and tanked. Um,
Solar Punk is still upcoming.
They raised
344K in 2023. I should also point out at
this point um several of these, if you
go look at these Kickstarters are uh in
non US currencies. I've translated all
of them to US dollars just to make the
comparison easier. Yes, there are
problems with doing that with today's
conversion rate versus But we're in the
right ballpark. We're in ballpark. All
we're talking here is ballpark. Yep.
Honestly, even if we were off by 20%.
Yeah. On any of these, we would still be
in the right ballpark. Yep. Will you are
missing a dash between solar punk and
the revenue? I'm sorry. I'm sorry, Jeff.
There I fix and I'm missing a word in or
I'm put in in some of them and not I
will fix my formatting, Jeff. I'm so
sorry. Okay. Could you actually do me a
favor which is going to help just
because of the numbers? Put a dollar
sign in front of the revenue portion.
Yeah, you can do that just for people
coming in late kind of thing. Okay. So,
while I'm working on that, so these are
all medium tier games. These are if you
search by most funded in video games,
these are 10 to 20 pages in. Um, they're
not uncommon, right? But there the these
are what I would say are uh a decent
chunk of the games that people consider
successful versus Bloodstained which is
the number two game ever funded in video
games. So it's also worth noting the
second most funded game ever in video
games. Could you put that like a number
two in front of Bloodstained or
something just so we know that that's
like our I'm Did it say how many games
have raised more than a million? Uh,
or is
there I could probably go poke around
and find out while we're talking. Um, if
that's a piece of data that's of
interest. I'm just kind of curious like
um I'm
curious of the game.
Yeah, of of the game. You're a welcome
grass for getting Will to do some
formatting. Yeah. Okay. Yeah. Yeah.
Yeah. Yeah.
Um, wasn't uh someone asked, "Wasn't
Shovel Knight a Kickstarter game?" Yes,
we're not talking about every
Kickstarter game. We're talking about a
selection of games that I found to talk
about. Wonder how much we could um
actually maybe somebody could chat could
look up what Shovel Knight raised.
Yeah. Oh dear. Uh, and then again I will
at this point once again bring up my
grievance that video games are part of
the games category on Kickstarter and
don't have their own category. Uh, which
makes it incredibly difficult to parse
this data. Also, we could even say of
the game I would actually also hazard a
bet that at least 75% of the high-end
things will represent video
games. Actually, maybe
not. I wonder what that distribution is.
Part of the problem, too, is that
Kickstarter doesn't publish a lot of
this data and a lot of it is uh they
publish aggregate views, correct? Oh,
god. This is also like a trip down
memory lane. Who remembers War Machine
Tactics?
Oh yeah, that was right around a million
dollars. 1.5 mil. So, we're getting
there. Oh, okay. We got a number from
Alex of Ohio for Shovel Knight. Okay, I
will I will stick that in there. Shovel
Knight was
311,000. Okay. So, um, also let's talk
about that of goal number, right? And
why that's not Oh, why that's Will
Should I Should I talk about behind the
curtain for that? Yeah, let's talk about
that real quick and why we're not
mentioning the goal number for most of
these.
So, there's an interesting psychological
thing which is
people because Kickstarter will not give
you a thing until it's funded. Like,
you'll get a
refund. People have realized that they
should set their goal really, really
low. If it costs you a million dollars
to make a game, I'm just pulling a
number out of an air for a moment, but
you really want money. You might set
your goal at say
25,000 because that way if you only get
a h 100,000 though you want a million
you still get that
100,000. If you set the goal to a
million and you raise
750,000 you would still get zero money.
So remember the incentive for the person
running this money only received if
money equals greater than the goal.
Therefore, over time, people have
started setting their goal lower and
lower and lower and lower to make sure
that they get at least some of the
money. If you think you need a million
dollars to make your game, you're still
pretty happy to get $250,000 of it
because that means that you have that
much to go make with while you're
looking for other funding. Yeah.
Therefore, people will do something like
like Shovel Knight setting at 75,000 is
actually fairly high. I've seen a lot of
games that would cost a good amount of
money setting themselves at something
like 25 or 50,000. And I think for
consumers who aren't aware of the real
cost of game development, that really
skews their perception because they're
unaware that there's behindthe-scenes
math to help the studio fund is in
place. So they believe, ah, yes, this
video game really only does cost
$25,000. Hey, look, it's a 2D
cell-shaded game. How much could that
cost? Right.
Exactly. So,
um, okay. I so yeah when you Oh, go
ahead. I I went and looked. It's round
about 60 games have made a million
dollars or more in video game in the
video game category specifically. Can't
find an exact number. Does it give a
number like currency valuations and uh a
bunch of other stuff, but it's about
there. I'm on page five by sorted by
most funded. I'm on page five and I
found the last game that made a million
dollars and it's about how many? Uh
there's uh about 60 total. Okay.
Yeah, cool. That's a good number for us
to remember. Actually, could you type
maybe type that at the top? 60 plus
games and put it here. Oh, 60ish games
greater than $1 million. Games
over
uh I can't find the dollar sign on my
keyboard. Why? Because I'm just bad at
typing apparently. And this would be
over a 20-year period. Kickstarter goes
back to at least I was Kickstarting
things in 2011. So more.
Oh, no. That's No. Huh? I can't do math.
That's 16 years. That's 16 years. Like
let's But I think we'll say at least 16
years. At least 15 years. Yeah. Right.
Okay. Okay. So, what we're looking at is
maybe four games a year if we averaged
it out have done that, right? Um
anyway, so going back to the pledge
amount. So, because you only get the
money if your funding goal is hit, the
other one is everybody loves the stat
funded in less than an hour or funded in
less than a day. This is also an
incentive to set your funding your
minimum very low cuz say you think
you're going to raise say you think
you're doing a history calendar will
like I bet we could get at least you
know
$5,000 in our first hour. Let's set our
funding goal at 5,000 because then we're
going to be able to say funded in an
hour and people can be like wow this
must be a really popular calendar. It
was funded in an hour, right? And uh
this is another great example. Uh Ryan
asks, "Are you allowed to pledge on your
own campaign?"
No, you're the account that made the
campaign is not allowed to pledge on the
campaign, but this has happened in a
bunch of places. Um, and you can look
into it in different Kickstarters, and I
have no value judgment on this idea, but
there have definitely been plenty of
Kickstarters that have had large
anonymous donations immediately before
key break points in time or key goals in
or they just random big anonymous
pledges. Do with that information as you
will. I'm not going to get too tinful a
hat about it, but no, you're not allowed
to pledge with the account that made the
Kickstarter directly, but it happens
straight up. So, what you're saying is,
I'm going to give my X% of money that
Kickstarter charges, that couple
percents to Kickstarter in return for
getting all the rest of the pledge
money. Yeah. Like that is what it that
is your trade-off. Yeah. Exactly. Oh,
really quickly since I can answer this.
Um, oh, sorry. I thought you were
talking about something else. Um, if you
don't set a goal at least a certain
amount high, people think you're running
a scam. Yep. So, like if you said, "I'm
going to go make this MOA a MOA for
$50," people would be like, "Yeah,
that's You have to set it high enough
that people could be like, "Oh, maybe
they could make a MOA for $25,000."
Right. Like, you can't, right? Right.
But like that's listed there. I thought
I thought it was like why do you allow a
$1 pledge? And the reason for that is
it's basically a bookmark. A lot of
people will bookmark a campaign by
pledging a dollar. So every almost
everybody puts a a$1 or $2 level or
something because then they get all of
the emails about every stretch goal you
hit and everything else. And it kind of
it Kickstarter will then let you adjust
your pledge at any time. So, you can
pledge for a dollar and once you see
it's doing well, come back and adjust
that up to like $22 for your calendar.
Yeah. Okay. So, let's Yes. Moving on.
Anyway, no, no, these are all good
diversions that we need to establish as
we're looking at these numbers, right?
Okay. So, we've got about 60 games that
made a million dollars or more. We've
got a healthy chunk of games in this
middle range, right? Banner Saga 3. Now,
we'll get to why this isn't enough money
here in a second. Um, but let me say a
thing here. looking at banner saga.
Yeah. So, Kickstarters, the biggest
thing about Kickstarters, this will
surprise nobody, is that to have a
successful Kickstarter, you have to have
a lot of people come by, look at what
you've put up, and say, "Oh, that's
cool. I would like to give some money to
get the thing that they would like to
do." Notice that first part. You have to
have a lot of people come by.
What this means is that you either need
something with
reach like, "Hey, we're a history
YouTube channel. We're doing a history
calendar. We could put out a couple
YouTube videos and shorts saying we're
doing a history calendar." And use that
to direct people over to the Kickstarter
to come pledge on the history calendar,
right? Or maybe you're like Banner Saga
1 and two and you're like, "Hey, we've
done this before. people will recognize
our name and for everybody who's bought
our name or who's on a mailing list, we
can send out we're doing another banner
saga and get them to come by. Like if
Slay the Spire 2 had decided they needed
to do a Kickstarter, they don't. They're
a tiny dev team who's, you know, been
able to take five years to work on their
next version. Slay the Spire 2. Slay the
Spire is a popular enough brand and is
followed by enough people that if they'd
said, "We're doing a Slay the Spire 2
Kickstarter," they would have funded
well. But again, these are the rare or
they're coming in with an existing
thing. Yes. Look, you know what Slay the
Spire was? How would you like it if
there was another one, right? And we
have a great example of this, right? We
have an absolutely great example of this
because one of my favorite examples of a
game that didn't fund particularly well
still turned out okay is your favorite
Metroid Vadia and mine Hollow Knight
which made adjusted to US dollars
because this isn't Australian dollars
because remember Team Cherry is
Australian
$36,000 US
right dollar sign I'm working on it I'm
working on it my hands don't go to that
part of the keyboard often and that was
a 2014 uh Kickstarter, right? And that
was that's relevant, right? Because
nobody knew who Team Cherry was in 2014,
right? Nobody they made and it's it's a
decent number of backers, but nobody
knew who they were, right? And now if
Silkong was a Kickst if they were like,
"Hey, we're having a Kickstarter.
Silkong will launch when we reach a
million dollars in pre-orders for
Silkong." Silkong would come out
tomorrow. Mhm. Right. If Wow. That would
be such an amazing Kickstarter, right?
When we hit the game is done. Buy it
here. Will not release until Yeah. Or at
the end of the Kickstarter, 30 days, but
you can buy time. You can buy it early
to have it come out earlier.
Yeah. It would reach a million dollars
in the first hour. Yeah. Right. And I'm
going to throw a comment from Grass up
here. Yeah. For being an industry
defining game that is cheap. So, I
guarantee
like Grass is being a little snarky
there because it costs more than $36,000
to make that game, right? And it's just
that's how much the devs raised on
Kickstarter to help fund the project.
And I say help, right? Well, the these
uh if I recall correctly, the Team
Cherry crew was hobbyists, right? So for
hobbyists who are doing this as a thing
in their spare time, right, this might
be enough to fund the development
packages and the computers and the
upgrades and the licensing and the, you
know, a little bit of time off and maybe
some uh travel to PAX a couple times to
show off their game in the indie alley,
commission uh music, beautiful,
beautiful, amazing music that helps make
their game stand out more, right? and so
on. In those cases,
more of the crowdfunding is going
directly to the stuff you need because
in those hobbyist cases, you're not
paying the people a salary right away
because it's like two dudes in a garage.
Yeah. Um, yeah. Me deciding to go make a
game in my spare time. Yes. Doesn't need
to go raise money in the same way
because I'm extra credit studio
director. my day job is that my evening
passion project might be fiddling with a
game over three years. That's a very
different case than, hey, we're going to
go make Crowfall, which is going to be
the next badass PVP MMO
and we need to go crowdfunded, right? Uh
which and we're going to have a whole
team in Austin making it. Yeah. Um
Profile actually brings up another thing
which is very interesting, right? So,
lots of these games, Hollow Knight,
Shovel Knight, Blasphemous, Banner Saga,
Mighty Number Nine, Bloodstained, kind
of Solar Punk. Solar Punk has
multiplayer elements are all single or
closed system multiplayer games. Mhm.
Ashes of Creation is
not. Ash of Creation is an MMO. So is
Crowfall. There are a lot of games.
MMOs, I think in particular, it is
easier to demonstrate this with the
amount of time, energy, resources,
everything that it takes to develop an
MMO. I think we all know is far greater
than singleplayer play once 40hour
Metroid vania that you play through and
love dearly, right? But it's not nearly
as big a game with as big a scope as an
MMO, which makes it really interesting
to me that Ashes of Creation only raised
3.27 27 million on crowdfunding, right?
We'll talk more about like what the
actual cost is, but yeah, something like
a Stardew Valley is a lower overall dev
cost than an MMO, which is why the
continued trend of MMOs getting
kickarted over and over again only to
maybe launch into a beta and then fizzle
out or maybe launch all of the way and
then go dark or whatever is particularly
interesting to me. Um, if I remember
right, Ashes of Creation is also
secretly the secret passion project of
some billionaire. Yeah, that's correct.
Ash of Creation is also its own unique
thing that's captured the hearts and
minds of much of Twitch and Yeah.
Um, okay. That's its own whole right
story. Well, I might be getting it mixed
up with it anyway. But yeah, so like
funding wise, right? These are coming in
with a name. Coming in with something
like it's easier for Slay Inspire 2 than
you know Bob's first time studio. Yep.
Because we have this increasingly
sophisticated audience. You need to
bring people in to fund it. Um and
people don't fund concepts right
anymore. So let's get to the let's get
to the to the the second part of this.
So we have here a suite of examples
which we can come back to of how much
games raised. Jeff
How much does it actually cost to make a
video game? It's like 10 bucks, right? I
buy it for like, you know, 20 and like
half of that's profit. Let's pick a mid.
Is there a What is a game that
has decent development size team on
there? Like, how many people do you
think were on Banner Saga full-time?
Uh, let's find out what the size of the
current Banner Saga studio is. So,
that's Stoic Studio. Okay.
Um, they've just made those and I don't
know that they have their Oh, they're
also making Towerorn right now, which is
coming out.
Um, I don't know that Stoic publishes
team size. Scroll scroll up. Let me look
for
solar punk.
I should have gotten this ahead of time.
I do apologize. Let's do this. Ashes of
Creation. Okay. Yeah, sure. I would bet
that Ashes of Creation has at least 50
full-time people on it as an MMO. Sure.
I think I have I have some numbers. I
pegged at 50. So, and we can go up or
down. Actually, let's talk about this
for a moment. A small team. So, there's
like there's like twoerson indie team.
We're not going to talk about two person
indie team for a moment, but we're going
to talk about a small development
studio probably has 10 to 20
developers working on a
game. A midsize studio for a single
game, the let's call it like an A
quality game is probably like 50 people.
Okay. AAA game is probably like 200
people. Yeah. And if we're getting to an
S tier game like the next Grand Theft
Auto, the next Grand Theft Auto probably
has a thousand person development team.
That sounds correct.
So for I was will going to write down
how much each um position costs by
seniority and then I realized I was just
going to have to have you type out a
spreadsheet. So we're going to shorthand
here. Sure. So for the moment we're
going to make a caveat. All of these
prices are listed in North America for
the North American region meaning it's
getting developed in US, Canada or
Mexico with the majority being US and
Canada because Mexico doesn't have a
robust game development scene. Prices
will be different for development in
Europe and in Asia and in South America
because there's different cost of living
and there's different payments. So, for
the moment, we're just going to do US or
North American dollars. Mhm. It's
actually lower because we're averaging
Canada, and US costs more than Canada,
but I wanted NA. So, this is caveed to
Western development for the moment
or NA, but like Europe is going to be
kind of similar. Yep. And again, this is
going to be average numbers. So, the
survey I found, Will, listed five levels
of people. Sure. So, we're going to have
junior and this is and we're going to
average these across all of the
disciplines. Junior,
midle, senior,
um, lead
slashmanager and principal. So one of
the things that a lot of slight tangent
you will find plenty of people in
development who are really good at say
being an engine programmer or a
virtuoso animator or something who also
would be very very bad as a manager or
team lead. And so the first time I heard
about this was Microsoft. I'm sure it
started before that. They put a new
track in because like when I was a
designer starting out you in junior
mid-level senior designer lead and when
you hit lead you had to start managing
people and what this didn't do was leave
room for people who were very good at
something but were very poor at managing
andor scheduling and planning. Didn't
want to spend half of their time doing
something other than their corp. And so
there became a separate track of
principle which is basically you are
really good at what you do but you will
never manage people. It's the I'm really
good at what I do you have picked. Yeah.
It's the I'm really good at what we do
what I do. Leave me alone in my corner
office. You manage the team and come I
will bring you a work of art. Great.
Cool. Awesome. I I remember actually and
this is carried on like one of my best
researchers when I was running my
research studio. I'm like I was chatting
with them. I'm like hey are you
interested in becoming a research
manager? And they're like, "Oh, God,
no." You know, for the love of God,
never make me manage or deal with other
people. I really like what I do. Yes.
Yeah. And and so that is why this
position is also lit. And often
principles will get paid more than a
manager. Like a really expert
engineer is incredibly valuable. Yeah.
Uh okay, cool. So let's let's look at So
let's see. So Will, if you could let's
go to Junior. Can you tab to a couple
where the money amounts will all line up
or does this program not do that? Uh I
could have done that in advance if I
thought about it but no. Uh okay I mean
a junior averaged across
design art. Actually if you want to put
the four disciplines above that we're
listing actually it doesn't really
matter but it's going to be design art
programming and production. Production
would be like managers and project
managers and producers all of that. So,
a junior level averaged across all four
of those disciplines earns about 45K a
year. Uh mid level
uh earns about
60. A senior earns about 100
and uh a leader manager also earns about
100 and a principal is about 145. And
again, this may seem high or low. Like
artists get paid less than programmers.
Designers are in the middle. So like
again, this is averaged across all four
disciplines, right? Right now. So this
is a per year
cost. I did a little bit of research to
see if it was still right. Usually what
happens is you take a person's salary
and you multiply it by
1.33 to get roughly a what we should be
what they cost cost. This will cover
health care. This will cover offices,
computers, software
licenses, all of that other stuff that
goes around.
Yeah. Things. Yeah. And yes, this does
seem fairly low. Um, but again,
remember, we're averaging in artists and
other things, too. And we're averaging
across the entirety of North America.
Yeah. So, this there are game engineers
really good in the Midwest who get paid
way less than if they were in San
Francisco because the cost of living in
the Midwest is significantly less than
living in San Francisco and they're
willing to take that. Yep. And so, um,
we'll do a final multiplier for that
1.33 at the end. Will Sure. So, if for
the moment we were going to put together
a 50 person
team, let's say that we're going to go
with
um five
juniors. You could put like a bracket
five. Yeah, there you go. Times five. 25
mid levels because the mid-levels are
the people who are actually doing the
brunt of the work. Okay. 12 seniors.
Okay, five
leads/managers and three principles. And
this in my mind is a fairly like we may
be skewing slightly more senior like
they might have more juniors depending
on the project, but this is I think a
fairly decent one. And one of the other
reasons is there's a lot of longevity in
the game industry. I regularly meet
people who've been in you know 10 to 20
years. So we get a lot of seniors. Yeah.
Right. And and you want nobody wants 25.
There you go. Yeah. Nobody wants the
game that got made by a bunch like
nobody wants to publish or crowdfund
probably the game that a bunch of people
put together was their very first
project without some assurance that it's
going to be amazing at the end. Right?
One of the things that mid-levels and
teen or that seniors leads and
principles do is they add name
recognition. Right? Like, okay, Richard,
this is like slightly Garfield, right?
Uh, has added his name to so many card
games which are instantly
instantly seen as more legitimate
because well, Richard Garfield's working
on it must be good, right? And there are
that that does apply to seniority
elsewhere, right? Yeah. Junior would
basically be new grad. Okay. So,
somebody coming in for their first
couple years. Yep. And again, we might
be overindexing a little bit. I'm
throwing out. So, let's see. Midle,
uh, that'd be uh 1.5 million will. Okay.
Uh, yep. We're just going to we're we're
going to we're going to do some some
shorthand here even though it won't add.
Um, senior senior would be 1.2 million.
Yep. That one I can do in my head. Uh,
uh, leads is 500,000.
that one I can and principles is 435.
Uh,
yep. Why can I not type today? I'm
sorry, chat. I'm sorry. I just We're
looking just at this. Our cost just from
employees in a game studio with nothing
else added in is going to be 3.86
million.
And is that with or without the 1.3?
That's without the 1.3. If you add the
1.3, it goes to a little bit over 5
million.
And I have people in chat saying that
they think by 1.3 is low. Sure. And
again, we're making a very uh if Okay,
this is back of the napkin, right? And
and I think that just makes the point
about this even stronger, right? that if
we're making incredibly lowball
conservative estimates for what this
might be able to do according to a
survey of like if everyone lives in
Idaho, right? If you have a game studio
in the middle of a corn field that's
turned barren in Idaho that nobody
wants, you might be able to get it done
for this, right? And if the real cost is
higher, that just goes further to the
point, right? Yeah. So if so, we could
for really quick math say 5 million. So,
let's say, will that we have a game
that's going to take two years to make,
which is a pretty quick
turnaround. Two
years would be $10 million. And that's
without without uh the uh the expected
cost of living increases, Christmas
bonuses, etc., etc., etc., for two
years. Right. That's this is also
without marketing. Yeah. Or any sort of
publicity. And this is without possible
contract positions like I'm going to go
hire a music, you know, producer. I'm
going to go do some motion capture. I'm
going to go do other things. So, hey,
Will, can we scroll back up a minute?
Yep. Absolutely.
To Okay. Two years, $10 million.
So, Ashes of Creation, which was
crowdfunded in 2017 and is still in
production, 17, assuming they started
then, which they didn't, 17, 18, 19, 20,
21, 22, 23, 24,
25. So, they've been going for 9 years.
So assuming they have a 50 person
team, that means that they are $45
million in at a very very conservative
guess.
Bloodstained. When did Bloodstained come
out? Do we know when it was released? Uh
I have that somewhere. I actually looked
it up. I think it came out in 2017. I
believe Bloodstained is was a two-year.
Okay. Um let me check.
back. Bloodstained Ritual of the Night
came out in No, I was wrong. I was
wrong. June 18th, 2019.
Okay. So, let's say it was a
four-year project. Yeah. Was Blood Stain
How I actually don't remember looking at
Bloodstain. How like is Bloodstain a
medium team game? A small team game?
Medium. Uh it's it's also a cost that's
not factored into any of the math that
we've shown so far. localization that's
not included in this cost. That might be
a publisher cost, right? But it might
not other thing to keep in mind. Um it's
like a mediumiz blood stained was if
Bloodstain was a 50 person team working
for four years, that means that it was a
$20
million development
cost minimum, right?
and they were the second highest
ever funding on Kickstarter, raising 25%
of that, right?
And we're we're going to get to a minute
why you should still Kickstarter games,
but this is just talking about like the
de the highest cost of all game
development is the people. Yes. Like
actually, Will, you want an interesting
one? Mhm. For a minute. Okay. Let's say
Grand Theft Auto 6 really is a thousand
people. Sure. Okay. Okay. So, let's see.
Every 50 people
um is actually it's $5 million a year
for 50 people, right?
So, let's see. 20 more people. 20 times
as many people
is Yep. 20 times as many people. So,
what we're looking at, let's see, 5
million $100 million a year, right?
Conservatively.
Yeah.
And I know for a fact that they have
offices in New York and San
Diego, which are not the cheapest
places. So, let's see. We're looking at
a minimum of a h 100,000 a year, and
it's been in development for at least
seven
years. So, we're looking at $700
million. So, already worth of just
people development costs.
Yeah. Yeah. And I think I think Dog's
totally right. Right. the billion dollar
estimate total cost for GTA 6 not far
off. Not far off at all. Not at all.
Seems entirely reasonable. But I think a
lot of people don't go into this
breakdown, right? Because one of the big
problems uh specifically with video
games is that consumers
conflate the price they pay Bloodstain
is a $10 game on Steam
with the amount of money it actually
costs to make that thing, right? Even
for the indie space, right? Let's let's
say that Blood Same was only 25 people,
right? Which is possible. It's like a
smaller team, right? That's still 2.5
mil a year, right? That's still uh 10
million over the course of a four-year
development cycle. That's still half of
what they totally in total needed,
right? And if you guys remember um three
or four weeks ago, we did a one where
Will and I went through the Unity store.
Yeah. Because I'm I'm starting to put
together a game just on the side for
fun. And we're talking about allocart
development where I'm like, "Wow, look.
Will for 40 marked down to 20 because
it's on sale right now. I can buy a
system that does handles all my saves. I
don't have to program that and it will
save it to all the different cloud
sources. Oh, look, you know, here's one
that lets me do a front-end integration
and I can pay 60 bucks for it." When
you're starting to look at some of these
costs here, you can see why I was
getting excited. It might take me a
month to write a save system. I can pay
20 bucks. If you start thinking people
are the highest cost of game
development, you start seeing like or
even game engines. Look, we don't have
to spend, you know, 2 years with 40
programmers building our own game
engine. We can just go use Unity. Oh,
Unity is going to charge us a little
bit. That is still or Unreal will. That
is still infantestimally less of a
development risk than going to try and
build that all
yourself because of the cost of people.
Yeah, absolutely. So, and so yeah, just
like looking at this here, you can see
this is why you can't actually fund a
game. Excuse me. This is why you can't
fund 99% of the games. There's always
the 1% that will be an exception, right?
And those are usually tiny tiny teams,
right? That's that is that would be
kickstarting Silk Song, right? That
would be Slayer 2. Two people were going
to work on that again and they went and
raised $250,000.
Actually, that still might not cause for
five years of development cost for
correct, but they also Well, okay. So,
and this is where it gets interesting,
right?
Because it would amplify their war
chest, right? which is one of the other
big advantages that the returning
studios have that new studios don't
because returning studios get to have
the profits get to live off of the
profits from the last game, right? And
Team Cherry doesn't actually need to
make Silk Song for money reasons. They
don't. Team Cherry really doesn't. We've
done the math. Team Cherry doesn't need
to make a game again, just like Local
Funk doesn't need to make a game again,
right? Like they just probably will, but
they will because they love doing this
and that's great.
I I believe personally that we're going
to get a much better product because
they're not being rushed because of
costs, right? Um so because of that, the
amount that they kickstart is less
relevant, right? But uh and someone did
bring this up earlier that like in the
case of Ashes like other they they have
other funding sources and that's true,
right? But the point is that there's
this indust there's this consumer
assumption that we're trying to to stick
a stick a pin in and pop like a balloon
here that the crowdfunding that you're
doing for a game is what's paying for
the game. Yeah. And it's not right. It's
pretty demonstrabably not just on the
basis of how much it costs to pay people
to do these things to do basically to
hire them to do their job which is
creating the game. Yep. And as a quick
note, most game stores take 30% of the
cost of a game. Your publisher takes a
certain amount as well. So even if you
go sell $5 million worth of your game,
your studio is probably only getting
half of that. Yep. 2.5 million.
Just putting that out there with these
other Yeah. things as well. But so
having said all of this will right there
are still a lot of good reasons to go to
Kickstarter or to crowdfund a game.
Yeah. Can we and they are not the actual
fund funding part. Sorry. What can we
take the math out? Um do we need it?
Your call. I I don't I think we're I
think we're done with the with the math.
Let's scroll down one more. Actually,
never mind. Yeah. Um okay. So look,
we're so close to each other now, right?
I know it's weird. We're big. Um so go
on. You get on your side. get on your
side. Wait. Yeah. Yeah. Okay. Okay. I'm
on my side of the room. Um, so you were
talking about there are still plenty of
good reasons to do a crowdfunding
campaign, but the money that you make
from the crowdfunding campaign isn't the
primary one because you know going in
that it's an all but mathematical
certainty that you will need to find
more money somewhere else, right? Yes.
And again, this is very video game
specific. We will get to other things
later. Yeah. But specifically for games,
because it costs so much to make them
and because before you can show off your
game and get people to get excited about
it, you need to have done a lot of the
work, it's a weird matchup. Yep. But one
of the industry terms that I absolutely
love, this is not a Kickstarter
industry, this is a gamedev behind
thescenes one, is we call it kick
finisher. Yeah. It is not where you go
to start a game. It is where you go to
finish your game. This is, hey, 80% of
our game is done. We really could use a
little more money to take what, you
know, our publisher gave us this much to
go make the game. Wouldn't an, you know,
an extra 500,000 or million or even
couple million more, let us make x more
amount of game? Or if you're not with a
big publisher, maybe that's your
marketing spend for the game's release.
Right. Good point. Yeah. Tons where we
take this money that we raised and use
it to market it to go sell more copies
of the game. Yeah. But like number one,
absolute most common thing for a game is
let's try and get some money in early to
offset risk. Because you could have just
put the game up for
pre-sale on Steam. That's not nearly as
exciting, right, for a lot of people as
coming in, looking at this almost
finished game, and saying, "I could help
fund this thing to get it across the
line, and I'm going to get a discounted
copy or a pre-release price of the
game." I mean, at the end of the day,
kicks kick finisher is roughly let's
pre-sell our game with some extra
excitement and wrapping. And and the it
should be noted at this point that the
psychology built directly into
Kickstarter is very effective at that,
right? Pre-ordering a game on Steam is I
put click I click, right? But in a
Kickstarter, right, or any crowdfunding
campaign, it's I've pledged and my money
won't be collected till later. So I need
to make sure that the goal gets hit and
there are going to be stretch goals and
exciting things announced and it becomes
an event reveals. Yeah, it's an event.
It is. I would say that in many ways
crowdfunding campaigns are the spiritual
successor to midnight launches,
right? It's that same sort of the game
is coming. There's going to be a thing.
There's an excitement. There's an
atmosphere. There is a reason to be
emotionally invested in
that event around making a purchase,
right? And what you're hoping is that
all of that turns into buzz and news,
which I just thrown um Odin here's
message up on stream. It's also added
marketing. Yeah. Like the buzz that
you're hoping to get off of this is
people post, hey, I just, you know, on
Blue Sky or Facebook or Twitter or
whatever. Look, I just helped fund you
know what are you greening at? I like
this one. It's marketing that you make
the customer pay you for. Yep.
Correct. That's very correct because
what you're talking about is very true,
right? The I became the ex the backer,
right, thing, those posts that it's now
so easy to make. Oh, yeah. Very much on
purpose. But I mean that is there are
games that do not have a marketing plan
that basically use Kickstarter as a
marketing plan andor then use the funds
raised off of that to continue their
marketing and promotional efforts. Yeah.
And part of that pre-sale that I wanted
to bring up here, particularly for those
live service games, particularly MMOs,
is what I'm the process I'm going to
call finding your true believers, right?
So, you probably have some idea of
people that you know about, right, who
are very interested in your game. The
people who are going to be your first
GMs, community moderators, whatever. you
probably have some idea because they've
been involved in some way towards the
finishing process either through you
know QA or through your socials or
whatever but there is a percentage of
your like the true believers the people
who are like crowall evangel they're
evangelical correct crowall is going to
become my whole personality I am all in
on crowall crowall is everything I want
out of an MMO and it's going to be where
I spend all of my time in those people
are in some ways is attracted to the
idea of I want to get in on the ground
floor with a new project to be one of
the first people and they're willing to
pay money to get in on the ground floor
sometimes with a swanky title, a special
castle, a unique mount, a whatever,
right, to do that. And so that's a
process because those people are um very
important to keeping the community of
particularly of a live service game
stable and to be the that evangelical
force and they're often their lifetime
spend is often much higher. Um, oh yeah,
if they're willing to if they're willing
to pony up, puny intended, for a custom
horse mount in the Kickstarter, they're
probably going to be one of the people
who's in for cosmetics and future
expansions and DLC's and and they're the
ones who will actually buy the horse
armor. Yeah. Yeah. They're the ones who
will buy the horse armor, right? And if
that that is a thing that you do need to
consider for a live service game
particularly less far less so with a
single player game, but you still need
the people who are like, "Oh my gosh,
Hollow Knight's going to be my whole
personality." By the way, well, I What
game was it? Um, there was just one that
came out that the horse armor actually
added classes and professions to your
animal. It was actual bard.
Oh boy. All right. And we're gonna keep
moving. Um but um so yeah, Kick Finisher
pre-sales. One of the interesting things
about publicity, by the way, that often
bites a whole bunch of people running
Kickstarter campaigns. At the very
beginning of Kickstarter, many media
outlets thought that was
interesting. I have been told by
multiple journalists at this point that
Kickstarter is no longer a story. Yep.
Running a Kickstarter is not a news
story. There are there can be a story
around a Kickstarter, but there are so
many Kickstarters and crowdfunds that
happen now that no game journalist is
going to be like and today here are the
43 Kickstarters that all you know while
I was doing research I looked uh and
2024 at the end of 2024 Kickstarter
released a report. 2024 was the biggest
year ever for Kickstarter. bunch of
tabletop stats that I didn't take a
close look at, but the number that stuck
out to me was that there were 441
successful video game Kickstarters.
So, even successful. Yes, successful.
Right. So, more than one a day, right?
Successful more than one a day. So,
we're not going to talk about all the
ones that didn't succeed, right? And
that's which is a significantly higher
number. Correct. So, there's just too
many of them in Yeah. And it's just it's
not something that their readers want to
read about. Yeah. Like if there's an
interesting story around there like
Richard Garfield comes out of retirement
to kick, you know, to make one last game
and is kickstarting now. Like that's a
story, right? That is an actual
something that people will write about.
Kickstarter is an and right. It's Yeah.
And and they happen to be Kickstartering
it right now. Exactly. Yeah. The the
real story is Richard Garfield's last
game, not the Kickstarter. Yeah. And
Yeah. So that's why a lot of people who
run Kickstarters do try and find a story
around it because they're actually
hoping to get news coverage. Yep. And
one final one which is actually
surprisingly common but that is never
talked about is that Kickstarters and
crowdfunding are used as a validation of
a concept. I have a friend who sometime
in the last couple years ran a
successful game Kickstarter because
their studio had basically run out of
money and publishers were hesitant to
invest in it. So they ran a Kickstarter
as a hailmary to basically say, "Look,
publisher, look at all these people
willing to pony up money for this game
and how far it is right now. we're going
to take that money and the money you
give us because you've seen how much
interest there is in it and use it to
finish the game. So, it's basically
being able to go to a Kickstarter or to
a publisher and say there is enough
interest that you should fund the rest
of this. The people have spoken and they
have voted with their dollars which is
the best kind of speaking. You have seen
people will buy this, but that is a
surprisingly common game thing is to use
the success of a Kickstarter to then
actually go get a publisher to fund the
rest of their game. Yep.
So, in all of this, right, as we talk
about video games, one of the things
that's come up in chat repeatedly and in
the conversation we had the Discord
earlier, and it's it's a very relevant,
very salient point, um, 100% to this
leverage and negotiations.
uh is is that um but board games board
games kickstart all the time. Will will
board games board games, RPGs, card
games, right? So So let's talk about
physical games and why this particular
suite of problems doesn't super apply to
them and why it's almost entirely
flipped, right?
Um Kickstarter is ideal for board games.
In fact, there are so many uh tabletop
gaming is the number one category on
Kickstarter. It has been I think
forever. It's pretty close to forever if
it hasn't actually been forever. Um just
because uh it is so well suited to that
because So will can I talk about a
thing? Yeah, absolutely.
Can we look one quick more time at the
big series of numbers just to make you
just to make Yes. Absolutely. Small
maybe small. Okay, here we go.
Okay, great. Okay, let's scroll down to
the cost for a
second. Midsize team, 50 people, 5
million a year, two years for a game,
$10 million needed because this took 50
people, two years to do. Cool. Okay,
well, that's what I just wanted to look
at again to bring that back in.
Okay, we're going to go design will a
nice
board game. Hectomancer the board game.
Sure.
We're going to have a designer work on
it for a couple of months. We're gonna
have a couple months worth of art time
and a couple months worth of graphic
artist time. Okay, cool. We've added one
year basically 3 months, three months,
three months, three months of developer
time total in there. Some more, some
less. Some people will do this for 3 or
4 years, but like you're just seeing the
difference right here for a moment. You
know, this is less than a
year for a small number of people. So,
the development cost upfront for a video
game, you know, we are looking at that
$5 million plus a year where for a board
game might be h 100,000. Yep.
But you look at the other end, delivery
video game. Once it's done, they can put
it up on Steam and the Xbox store and
PlayStation and iOS. Digital delivery.
Whether they sell a 100 copies of their
game or a million does not cost them
anymore. Once the game is made, digital
product is equivalently free to give out
to people. Board games are the exact
opposite. So small development team cost
versus large for video games. video
games zero cost basically for
distribution. Board game super high cost
because they then have to go print the
board and the cards and the standies and
maybe the dice and they have to and the
box and the rules. They have to pack it
all in together and they have to get it
shipped out. Yep. All of that is
significantly more expensive. So, if
you're looking at Kickstarter of can I
raise a nominal amount of can I go raise
$250,000 for this awesome looking board
game. Well, if it only cost you a h
100,000 to
develop, awesome. You've marked up your
kit, you know, you then go print all the
physical merch and you've priced it out.
That is a good successful model for
running and you're not having to tell
some it is the actual funding part.
Yeah. Crowdfunding. Yeah. it that is a
case where you can say each copy like
because most of the time they'll already
they have to have the the printer in
mind they have to have in a lot of cases
prototypes in mind to show them off
right so they know what the unit cost is
and they'll usually tell you what the
unit cost is right this is how much the
standies cost this is how much the minis
cost and this and that and the other one
of the reasons that minis are so popular
is that minis
um once you hit the break point where
the molds are paid for the cost to the
cost ratio gets much better for minis
because people are willing to pay a lot
for high quality minis and once you've
paid for the molds that are making the
minis then it's a lot of profit as an
example right the big one too about
things like board games and RPGs and
other things is you can use Kickstarter
to help refine and hone your marketing
pitch and you can then take that into
yourself you know when Eddie went and
made Pugmire Eddie was on last
you know, he wasn't able to sell that
for years and years after doing his
Kickstarter and then he went and did a
Pugm 2 Kickstarter and is continuing to
sell that. It's a good fun game. Our
friends over at Hit Point Press with
Humblewood are just finishing up their
Kickstarter for Humblewood 2. you know,
be just because they finished the
Kickstarter, you know, that's their
validation of the concept, chance to,
you know, see what sticks with people
and then use that to not just fund that,
but then to fund the development of or
the production of all of the rest of it.
And one of the big things we learned in
with physical merch is the more of a
thing you print, the lower it costs to
make each individual unit. Yeah. If I
want to
print 500 of these calendars, it's going
to cost me X. If I want to print 2,000
of them, each one is going to cost
onethird X to print it. So, if I can get
basically do a whole bunch of calendars,
I make more profit on a per calendar
basis. If I'm going to go sell Pugmire
or Humblewood, if I can sell a thousand
books, I make a lot more profit than if
I can only sell a hundred books on a per
book basis. And because of that, it
should be noted that one of the ways you
can roll forward board game Kickstarter
profits in a way that you can't with
tabletop or with digital games is you
can just increase the size of the print
run. Yep. So, like if your profit margin
is X, instead of taking X as profit, you
can just say, "All right, increase the
size of all of the print runs and now I
have stock to ship to game stores and
that's covered, which means that all the
money come back in." We had 2,000
Kickstarters, you know, people saying
it, so we're going to instead of
ordering 4,000 copies out of our book,
we're now going to order 6,000. All of
our costs drop. Yeah. And we have more
inventory to sell. Yeah. though of
course
um as Grass is right you don't want to
print too much because then you got a
warehouse full of things you can't sell.
Very true. Like there is a balancing act
here. Yeah. But one of the weird things
about physical is the more you can order
at one time the cheaper it is and
therefore the more profit you make on a
per sale basis. And digital it is
ideally suited to Kickstarter because
you get to see how many copies you need
before you order anything. Yeah. And all
of those are huge benefits to physical
goods which digital doesn't really share
because the distri the development cost
is so high that the per unit profit
margin doesn't exist until you finish
the perunit profit margin doesn't drop.
If I sell a 100,000 or a million I don't
make more money on a per unit
basis going between the two of those.
Yeah, correct. So yeah, that's that's
our our thoughts on why you can't
kickstart video games or crowdfund video
games. Uh you you should support ones
that are out and look fun. Yeah. But
you're not actually funding the So the
TLDDR, you're not actually funding it,
right? You're maybe funding a portion of
it, right? But you are never ever ever
excuse me. 1% of the time you're you're
covering the funding of it, but you are
not actually covering the funding of
most games. though you very much are
helping them complete right and get you
the game. And I think that that mind
shift is really important for us as
educated consumers to have, right? As we
were talking about before, the consumer
base that um frequents Kickstarter,
right, that frequent other places like
um Backer Kit, right, is a more
sophisticated audience and they've
become more and more sophisticated on
the tabletop side. there is still some
amount of people being shocked that they
didn't get a whole video game made for
$50,000 US. Um, and so we thought it
would be cool to to sort of debunk that
and to to take a look at Kickstarters.
Um, yeah. Yeah. Uh, an important note
for all of you here on stream and, uh,
off in Nebuland. There will be no stream
next week as Jeff is away uh, at PAX
East. If you're going to be at PAX East,
uh I believe we have a panel on we're
Oh, Friday. We are doing a panel Friday
afternoon talking
about Minecraft and Until Dawn.
Basically, the last two big video game
movie adaptations because they each took
wildly different swings at how they did
their
um adaptation. And we have a couple of
game people on, we have a couple of
movie people on. So, it's going to be
it's going to be a good panel. Yeah,
that that's going to be stop by and see
us. Yeah, it's going to be an excellent
time. Uh, thank you all so very much for
joining. If you uh want to talk about a
Kickstarter that you backed and were
really happy with or unhappy with or
talk about Kickstarter or your
experiences with it in general, do it in
the comments. It is up on Blue Sky. Uh,
and we will see you all not next week
but the week after. So, that is the
which will will be streaming. I will be
Yeah, not this there will not be a
design club next week. Correct. Uh we'll
be back on the 15th with our next design
club and uh we'll let you know what it's
going to be in a couple days in advance.
So uh until next time everybody take
care of yourselves, take care of each
other. Uh and we'll see you all then.
Say bye to the people, Jeff. Bye to the
people, Jeff.
[Music]
But we didn't actually stop the stream,
just the recording. Yeah, cool. I
thought that went pretty well. I like
that's what I've been wanting to talk
about for a while. So, that was fun.
Yeah, it was a good conversation. And
thank you to everybody in chat for the
for the examples and for the comments.
That was really helpful. And even if we
didn't pull your comments up on stream,
uh we're reading them and they're
helping guide the discussion. Um so,
thank you all all very much for that.
was very uh useful. Yeah. Uh I'm still
uh I personally, by the way, I'll give
you I'll give you mine. I'm still sad
about Crowsworn. Um I did at one point
back uh Star Citizen for like the $20
level, 20 bucks. Um and I'm still a
little bummed about that. But uh those
two I I also got burned a bunch on
minis. Um but those are my At this
point, a lot of people have I've been
burned
on X from Kickstarter. The most
interesting one. The most interesting
one. My the weirdest Kickstarter update
I've ever gotten. Here you all get this
one for freezes. Um I got we got a
message that the project would be un
incomplete and we would not be able to
receive our funds back because the the
lead on the project whose brainchild
this this whole project was had been
arrested and uh convicted for murder uh
and would be going to jail. And so we
would not be receiving the the the open-
source laser tag system that we had uh
backed. Um and I was like, you know,
that's fair, but like what a Kickstarter
message, right? That's that's the
weirdest one. Um
well, can you keep going for 30 seconds?
I'll be right back. Yeah, absolutely. Uh
yeah. Yeah. Did they kill someone with
the laser? No. No, they didn't kill
someone with the laser. I was really
bummed too because they had a they had a
mesh network open networking idea for
like ad hoc laser tag like arena setups
which was really cool and interesting to
me. Um but yeah that's yes that is in
fact how that one ended. Odinir yeah it
looked really cool. It's a great idea.
The the concept is very sound right. You
use instead of having base stations or
instead of having the the arena monitor
everything, you use a mesh network
between all of the systems and then if
the if two mesh networks get out of
touch with each other, you have a method
to reconcile when they come back in
touch. It's kind of cool. It's kind of
nifty. Really great. Yeah.
Um so, uh yeah. Um chat again, thank
you. I really enjoyed this one. Uh
uh I need to make a thumbnail. I
completely forgot yesterday. That's
okay. Uh we'll we'll do that. So um I
think what should we actually quick um
comments? What do you think sell this?
Like if you were going to see a
thumbnail, do I need a big Kickstarter
logo with a slash through it? Um do we
have a
bean asking for money?
We have Zoe busking somewhere, I think.
Right. What if we replaced the head of
that with
Kickstarter? This is why you can't
kickstart video games and it's
Kickstarter
busking or crowdfund. We're specifically
calling it crowdfunding because I I uh
full disclosure, I think that
crowdfunding is a more apt
um description of the problem, right?
Because Kickstarter, there's a reason to
do a Kickstarter for a game and it's
often pretty good, right? We talked
about it. true believers and proof of
concept and pre-sales and all of that,
but you're not actually crowdfunding it
then.
Um, so,
um, yeah, you can get rid of our
networks and stuff like Ziggb's. Yeah.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
Yeah. Absolutely. Did HFL not Okay,
there we go. Yeah, like that. Yeah,
Brain, just like that. A crowd of sad
Zoies, right, sir? Please sir, can I
have some funding? No,
more just an Oliver Twist reference.
Well, look, last week's was a Dickens.
We could keep with the Dickens theme.
Last week was a Muppets Christmas Carol.
This week can be Oliver Twist, right?
We'll just go through all the Dickens
novice novels. Quick, someone give us a
way that we can get a Tale of Two Cities
into a into a thumbnail. Anyway,
I have some more.
Um, yeah, Kickstarter is just the most
well-known brand name way to do it,
right? But
the the Kickstarter campaign is more
than crowdfunding, right? Crowdfunding
is the underlying reason and the
ultimate deliverable in a like tangible
form, right? Is the crowdfunding, but
the Kickstarter itself has become so
much more than that because of the
culture that's arisen around it, right?
Um, the money, it's not about the money,
it's about sending a message.
Maybe it's that. Wait, hold on a sec. Is
it the Joker sitting on a giant pile of
Kickstarter cash?
It's not about It's more of a breakfast
thing as you No, that's fair. It's not
about the funding. It's about sending a
message. Oh, that would be so
good. I'm grumpy that I thought of this.
A tale of two developers. Yeah. Elite
Dangerous versus Star Citizen. Yeah.
Kickstarter is kind of like Q-Tip or
Kleenex. Exactly, Hunter. Yes. Uh, it
has become the genericized brand name
for a thing. I asked actually Will
before we started if Kickstarter was
Kleenex and he thought about it. Yeah.
Like Right. It is. We're just I like
drilling down to the idea that crowd
also crowdfunding is I feel like invokes
the curiosity gap which is the Okay. If
I ask a question, if I say is the sky
blue in a in a YouTube video title,
right?
We get, "Well, of course it is. Duh. And
of course it's not. Let me grab my tin
foil. It was all manufactured as part of
choose your conspiracy." Um, right.
There's no curiosity gap there. There's
no, "Oh, I wonder what they're talking
about." Right. Um, so here, you can't
crowdfund video games. Oh, what do they
mean by that? There's a little bit of a
curiosity gap. Mhm. And that's actually
one of our biggest things is we try and
get a title thumbnail combination that
people look at and say, "Oh, that is
worth watching and spending my time on."
Yep. Because your time is one of the
most valuable resources out there. If
we're going to do it, we need to
deliver. Correct. Absolutely. Um so
yeah, uh chat like like Jeff said, uh
there will not be a stream next week. I
will be here. I'll be playing more
Blueprints. Uh, if you're not familiar
with Blueprints, uh, you are the nephew
of an eccentric uncle who has a mansion
that changes every morning at dawn, and
you have to try and discover the 46th
room of a 45 room mansion. Good luck.
Mhm. And it's a puzzle rogike uh, that
I've been enjoying a lot. So, I'll be
taking the time when the crew is away at
Paxis to do an additional day of
blueprints streams. So, please do come
join us next week for that. Even though
there won't be a design club, we'll be
talking about it the whole time. It's
relatively leisurely paced, so we don't
need to worry too much about
in-your-face
action.
Um, yeah, it's phenomenal. Uh, Jeff, we
can I think we can we'll we'll talk
thumbnail. I think this is probably a
good place. You can I'm already looking
around at like other images and stuff to
put on. I'm looking at the the chat and
like Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I'd put
Hornet on, by the way. Who did Who said
Hornet?
Um, but I did um but I did Hornet in
something like 3 months ago when we were
talking about Silk Song. Yeah. And and
hype, undeliverable hype. Oh, yeah. That
was a good title. Yeah. Well, it was
very good. Very, very, very happy. Uh,
we'll be back tomorrow as well with um
more Clare Obscure uh Expedition 33,
which is a hell of a ride. Uh, it is it
is one of the darkest, weirdest, most
topsyturvy turn-based RPGs I've ever
played. It's gorgeous. It's amazing.
It's heart-wrenching. It's dark. I love
the combat. I love the story. Come
follow along. It's going to be great. I
think this is a good place to let Janet
go. So, Janet, we will see you all
Monday for breakfast. There is a
breakfast on Monday, so we'll see you
all then. Please take care of yourselves
and we'll see you all uh next