Okay, so I admit that the title is a little bit click bait-y
and a lot of what I say here is going to be, maybe, nit-picky
but it points to something really interesting about the types of games we create.
There are a lot of science fantasy games out there,
but we pretty much never create actual science fiction games.
Also, by the way, this is Char.
She's our guest artist today, and she's great!
So say "hello".
♫ [CarboHydroM - Penguin Cap] ♫
So what do I mean by that question, "Why aren't there science fiction video games?"
Well first, we'll have to define "science fiction" and "science fantasy".
I'm going to use a slightly looser definition of these things than most purists would,
but in the broadest possible sense:
it's the difference between Star Trek and Star Wars.
Star Trek tries to make you feel like the things going on in each episode
could happen in our universe. Sure, some of the events are fantastical but
in general, the goal is to make you buy in by having you believe in their technical possibility.
In Star Trek, they want you to believe that a transporter could possibly be a device that
might actually someday be made.
They want you to believe that faster-than-light travel was solved through an act of engineering.
Star Wars, on the other hand, simply wants you to embrace the Force.
You accept that it's just something that exists in that universe.
You also just accept that sword-fighting is a reasonable way to go about combat in a post-laser gun world
Sure, it may have robots and it may have spaceships, but at its heart
it's a fantasy adventure, filled with magic, where you believe in it because you love to believe in it.
You don't actively conceptualize it as taking place in the same mundane universe that you yourself exist in.
And this allows Star Wars to get away with hand-waving many, many things because they simply
exist in this fantasy universe. They don't need explaining like stuff in the Star Trek universe does.
In fact you're better off not even trying to.
John W Campbell, perhaps the most important science fiction editor of all time,
once said that science fiction should make the marvelous seem mundane.
And then, mundane life will seem marvelous.
And that's the key distinction.
Star Wars lets life in its universe
remain marvelous, while Star Trek makes
mundane life seem marvelous, by
creating a universe where technology
that seems marvelous to us is just
mundane to the characters within the show.
Now again, these are extremely loose
definitions of science fiction and science fantasy.
In fact, there are a lot of people that
would argue that Star Trek is also
science fantasy, because of story
elements like the Q continuum, but
whatever - for our purposes here, you get
what I'm saying.
Now let's bring this all back around to
video games.
When you really look at it, even though it might seem at first like there's a flood of sci-fi games out there,
with all the spaceships laser guns
and aliens you could ever want,
almost all of those titles are actually
science fantasy.
They're almost all just fantasy stories
in a setting that we think of as high-tech.
Some of the more recent Final
Fantasies are the easiest go-to examples for this,
but even when you look
at all the space marine games out there,
those heroes aren't the Alien-style
corporate Leathernecks of sci-fi.
They're knights in space.
Even games like Doom want us to just accept that there's a portal to Hell on Mars
rather than trying to convince us that this could possibly exist within the universe we know.
And let me be clear: none of that makes these games bad. I love so many of these games.
Hey, I love science fantasy! Star Wars is
great, but i also really like Star Trek.
And I'd love to see some more games in
the spirit of Star Trek.
Or Dune,  which goes out of its way to explain why knife
fighting is important in its highly
technological world, in a way that Star
Wars simply doesn't have to.
The closest we've come in terms of narrative games
have probably been things like
Mass Effect, System Shock, and Fallout.
And the reason for this goes back to the
idea that science fiction asks that we
believe in the improbable, rather than
simply embrace the impossible.
Which means that tasks like enemy design
become much more difficult.
If you look at the diversity of enemies in Mass Effect, compared to the diversities of
enemies in something like one of the
modern Final Fantasies,
you'll immediately notice that Final
Fantasy has a ton of wildly varied enemies.
Some of them are dragons, some of them
are tanks, some of them are dogs.
Why? No reason! It's fantasy. Doesn't need a reason.
But in Mass Effect, you spend most of the game fighting humanoids, or the vehicles they pilot.
Why? Because you can believe in these.
If a dragon suddenly popped up in Mass Effect,
it would totally blow you out of
the immersion, because Mass Effect
requires the sci-fi form of buy-in - that
you believe what's going on is semi-possible,
So when they do stretch those limits, they've got to offer an explanation to build back that belief,
which costs them some of the valuable limited narrative space that video games offer.
Fallout, on the other hand, manages a little better
in terms of enemy diversity because of
the sheer scope of the game,
and because it manages to really cleverly cheat the problem by spending its time getting you
to believe in one aspect of the story - nuclear war, and the amazing power of nuclear radiation.
And that allows them to justify basically anything else.
Another reason we rarely create science fiction games is because
we as an industry tends to be afraid of making things mundane.
The argument goes that when watching characters on a screen or reading about them in a book,
you're totally removed from them, so seeing them treat marvelous things as mundane can make those things
and the world therein all the more
marvelous to us as detached viewers.
But when we are the characters - when we are the player - you can't pull that same trick.
You can't make things mundane without making the world mundane.
This is a view I disagree with, though.
Yes it may be difficult, absolutely. But impossible? I don't think so.
We just have to talk about how we use interaction to achieve it.
Here, games have dangerous advantage.
One of the easiest ways to make
something in a game feel mundane is to
have the player repeatedly interact with
the same thing.
I mean, anybody who has played Final
Fantasy VII knows how mundane Bahamut Zero
and Knights of the Round Materia become after a while.
Unfortunately this is the bad sort of
mundanity - the type which doesn't make
the universe seem all the more magical because people in it takes such amazing wonders for granted.
So what does good mundanity look like?
Well have you ever started seeing the
real world through the lens of a game
you enjoyed,
wishing you had some power or gizmo from the game in everyday situations?
Like, maybe after countless hours of Assassin's Creed, you look at a building outside and you think,
"That would be amazing to climb."
Or maybe you wanted to get a soda from the fridge and you thought to yourself,
"This would be so much easier if I had a
Portal gun."
That's called mechanical transference, and that makes an aspect of the game become mundane
in a way that makes the game world seem that much more magical.
If we can figure out ways to achieve the
right kind of marvel through mundanity in our games,
maybe we can start exploring all the
possibilities that science fiction offers us.
Because as much as I love
science fantasy -
and I will happily play another thousand science fantasy games -
there are so many interesting stories we
haven't explored
because we have such a hard time creating sci-fi.
Again, I know I've been super loose with the terminology,
and it's actually really easy to argue that Mass Effect is actually a space opera
and that System Shock has elements of horror fantasy - and fine, sure.
I will happily delve into
quibbling about how we subdivide and
categorize our games, after we've figured
out how to overcome that central divide
between these two larger categories in
our medium.
I hope you've enjoyed this sci-fi talk.
I am sure we will do it again sometime.
James has actually had an episode on philosophical sci-fi games rattling in his brain for years,
and if he ever magically finds time to replay Xenogears, maybe that will actually happen.
But until then - thank you again Char for the help, and I will see you next week.
♫ [Outro Music Playing] ♫