All right. Now, now YouTube stream
begins with the the thing.
[Music]
That's it. 100%.
Uh, okay. Yep. All right. Great. I'm
going to need to figure out how Oh,
that's so annoying. I thought I changed
it
globally. It's fine. It's fine since I
don't know what you're talking about. I
don't actually know. It's It's totally
fine. Um the uh the problem is that the
default stream latency setting in
YouTube keeps defaulting to normal when
we would really like it to be low or
ultra low and it keeps resetting itself
to normal despite what I've set. So very
upset about that. Yes. Uh Janet, sorry.
And Brad, sorry we are late. Um, I uh
went to set up the stream, opened OBS,
and OBS said, "You don't have a camera."
And I said, "No, I'm I'm pretty sure I
have a camera, OBS." And OBS went, "No,
you don't have a camera." And I went,
"What?" And then I I did I did the most
frightening thing, which I was telling
Jeff about. I opened up the camera
control app and I was like, "Hey, camera
control app, what's what's the problem?"
And it goes, "Oh, you don't you know
your camera card, the one that controls
your camera that you need to do your job
every day?" Yeah. The firmware update is
000000 and your device ID is
000000 and I
went
huh. So it's fixed now. But I had a
little panic. So that's why we're a
little Did you do the thing where you
like
No, no, no. I I I do not engage in
percussive maintenance. I understand the
desire to. I do not. I am a
professional. If I'm going to whack my
computer, it's going to be with a brick
because it's developed sentience. Um, we
call it the emergency brick for a
reason.
Um, so yeah. Uh, it's super great. Yeah,
Odinir. Um, devices and Windows updates
get along like
oil and water, fire and gasoline. Um,
fries and honeybees. Sure.
Do you know by the way, Will, that my
very, very first car I ever had, okay,
had a SP its radio AMFM because this was
before I could afford it. Well, before
CDs were common in cars. Yes. Um, the
radio would just go out sometimes. Sure.
Because I got a used car because I was
16 and lucky enough to get anything with
wheels. Yeah. And I found that there was
a spot on the dashboard that if you hit
it just right, the radio would always
come back on. Yeah. Because there was a
loose wire or something. So, you get to
f it every time. I completely did. Like
I never like took it apart to fix it
because it was way way more fun. to be
driving and have it go out with friends
in the car and just be like bam. Yeah.
And have it just come back on. Yeah.
Like I would have actually paid money,
extra money for something that did that.
Yeah. Uh by the way, uh find is
completely correct. OBS is indeed weird.
I have both seen the video where OBS
crashed and then forgot that that should
make it not work, so it just kept
working. And I've also had that happen.
We've done that during a live stream. I
just didn't tell you about it because I
don't have a display capture set up
because I don't like display captures.
They tend to be messy. Um, so all of my
I didn't have an easy way to capture it,
but it totally crashed. It was like,
hey, I'm going to crash now and I just
left it alone and didn't click okay. And
the stream kept going because
OB was allowed to crash. Correct. OBS is
kind of like OG Pokemon, which is you
will get an absurd amount of aberrant
behavior before it crashes. You can make
it
crash, but the amount of weird missing
no style behavior that will happen
before OBS crashes is significant. Like
it'll just start playing every eighth
frame if it doesn't have the resources
to do the thing. It will keep chugging
rather than crash unless you find a way
to make it crash and then it'll crash.
So, it's like some of the old robust
Soviet era machinery. Yes. It may break
down, but it's going to keep working
while it breaks down in a variety of
ways. That is correct. Yes. This is the
uh we do airplane maintenance with a
sledgehammer style technology. Um yeah,
that that's correct. Uh that's right.
The backbone of the tech you love is
held together with positive thoughts in
the dark arts. Yeah, obviously. I
there's a new dead chicken inside my PC.
I just sacrificed that thing and blood
everywhere. It was great. It was
awesome. Um Oh, so that's why it's
airtight so it won't smell foul. That's
correct. So, well, I think we should do
a plugin for OBS that just we'll re
we'll record we'll
um the old Queen Flash Gordon song and
instead of Flash, we'll say Crash and it
just plays it as it's going down instead
of the beep.
I love this idea and hate this idea and
also am required to tell you that it's a
useless idea because almost everyone I
know who uses OBS mutes all their system
sounds because otherwise they show up in
OBS. So, I I haven't heard a Windows
sound in that was from my PC in years
because the first thing I did when I
built the new PC was muted all the
system sounds forever because I don't
need Well, you realize if it was a
plugin, we could actually mess with some
of those settings. No, don't. No, no,
compite. Stop it. Stop it.
Um, yeah. Uh, okay. So, uh, today we're
going to do uh a, uh, thing. We're going
to do a thing. already played the
opening once. I played it before you got
here, so that's okay. Today we are doing
We We could hire Brian Blast for um
for a soundboard. Yes. Yeah. Wait, where
is that message? Why could I not click
on it? This one.
Oh, there it is. Ha. Okay, I got it. Um
for those of you unfamiliar, Brian Bast
is a legendary Shakespearean actor.
Yeah. who has also done parts in some
movies, including a Robin Hood Prince of
Thieves. He is the He is Robin Hood's
father who's on screen for like 5
seconds. Yeah. But you see him ride out
into a ring of masked figures drawing
his sword and yelling something like for
King Henry and God and King Henry. God
and St. George, right? Maybe it's been a
long time since God England and St.
George. Yeah, it's it's the um it's the
Morgan Freeman uh Kevin Cosner Robin
Hood, which is not as bad as you
remember it, though. Kevin Cosner's
accent is worse than you remember it
because the breath that it wanders is
significant.
But the supporting actors, Morgan
Freeman, Christian Slater as um Yes.
Christian
um Alan Rickman. Yeah, Alan Rickman.
Yeah, like the whole cast is great.
It just it's unfortunate that Kevin
Cosner's in it for God and King Anyway,
in the Flash Gordon one, they somehow
get him to play the King of the Hawkmen.
Sure. And he just owns it. He comes in
in campy7s
gear holding a big mace with big
prosthetic wings and just is like,
"Well, you know what? I'm committing.
Yeah, I am going for it." And it's so
over the top and so having fun. Yeah.
That just also, as Compai uh points out,
uh when typed, his name is always in all
caps. Brian Blessed.
All right. Anyway, now that the tech is
fixed and we're set up, we're going to
do a show. Uh we're going to do a show
on So, this is kind of weird. I think
we're gonna we're gonna set some
guardrails when we start. There's sort
of two sides to this discussion. And
when I talked with Twitch chat about it
yesterday, we got immediately off onto
the second track and ignored the first.
So there are two sides of this. One of
is what has happened to video game
prices for the past 20 years that have
made them stay $60 in an environment
where very little has stayed a fixed
price. And that's sort of a big
complicated question that we want to
dive into because a lot of that topic
gets ignored in favor of should video
games cost $60 and we'll talk some about
that at the second part. But I think the
first part is necessary to understand
the second part and the first part often
gets elided in oh obviously this is what
it was. Um and I think that that's sort
of an important thing. Does that make
sense chat Jeff? Is that like we'll have
to say that again? Yeah, we just I'm
just preparing chat for guard rails
because chat needs some prep to be guard
railed
and we could get to or and if we don't
we could make that a full other episode.
Yeah. What should games cost?
Mhm. Somebody was doing a I saw a short
video on like video game cost based on
utility like how much people use it.
Mhm. And he was saying that there were
definitely some 60 and 70 and $80 games
that should be 20, but he's like in that
same breath, you should then be paying
like $3,000 for Slay Spire, right? Or or
for Minecraft or for um uh Stardew
Valley, right? Or for Yeah, there's a
bunch of stuff that's um or for Binding
of Isaac or any Yeah, it's a very Your
poison, right? And it's very Hold on.
Hold on. That's a good topic. Let's save
that until we get into the thing. So,
um, chat, we're going to go to black
real quick. We're going to play a
sticker. We're going to come back. We're
going to introduce ourselves for the
folks over on Nebula. Then we're going
to do a show. Hang on to your butts. I
hope you're ready. I might be. Who
knows? We'll find out in a second.
[Music]
Good time zone internet. Hello and
welcome to Design Club, the only game
design show on the internet that is
cursing Windows update with every fiber
of its being. I am as always your humble
host. Well, joined again as always by my
pal Jeff. Say hi to the people, Jeff. Hi
to the people, Jeff. Hey everybody, I am
Jeffrey Zach in the studio director of
Extra Credits and long long time game
designer hill with here here with my
good buddy Will over on this side. I
will remember we're mirrored cuz I am
pointing at my wall instead of Will.
Yeah, right. I'm coming at you from the
west coast. Will is from the east coast.
So this is our virtual coffee shop
studio and today Yeah, Will. Yes, we are
have a topic that I have loved talking
about for over 20 years. which is weird
because 20 years is a very relevant
period of time to our discussion.
Actually, it is today. It is actually.
So,
uh, in the news recently, there's been
quite a lot of stir, a lot of commotion,
a lot of fuss over about what what will
is the commotion of fuss about the
switch to prices specifically, which is
kind of interesting. Now, in the same
period of time between when we're
recording this live on Twitch and
YouTube and say hi, Brad. Say hi, Janet.
Which is Oh, what is it? May May 22nd.
May currently coming from May 22nd,
2025. Correct. So, we uh we had the
Switch announcement and people were
upset over the price of the games and
the price of the console, neither of
which changed in response to tariffs
immediately. The pre-order prices that
were originally listed will be honored.
price of the accessories went up, but
the core console price and the price of
the games remain the
same. In the intervening time, actually
rather surprising, but we'll set that
aside for the moment. Yeah, we're going
to set that aside. That's a that's a
whole other thing. In the intervening
time, Xbox also announced that they
would be increasing the price of their
hardware and their games. And that, at
least in my circles, and maybe my
circles are following this a little less
keenly, sort of just sure, fine.
whatever. Like it was it was not a big
commotion. The big commotion was largely
focused on the
on the Switch 2 its prices, its launch
price for the console. When you say big
commotion, Will, like what do you mean
by big commotion? So, here's a great
example. So, uh, Nintendo did a whole
bunch of, um, live streams to announce
the new console to show off footage from
the new games because they're releasing,
uh, multiple brand new games, a new
Donkey Kong game, a new Mario Kart game,
and they were trying to show them off.
And the chat was an unusable wall of
people spamming lower the price
constantly for the entire length of the
treehouse stream. Probably an hour or
two, just completely unusable. The
comments on all of these Nintendo
announcement videos have been off. But
the general response to Switch 2, at
least for its initial release period,
was that the price is too high, lower
the price. Mhm. And this actually
permeated pop culture enough. I was
shortly after that having dinner with my
sister and my nephew and my niece. And I
was asking my nephew and niece, "Hey,
did you hear about the new Switch
thing?" And my sister went, "Oh, is that
the new expensive one?" Like, she is not
somebody who follows games. But it had
somehow permeated its way all the way up
to mom of teenagers who doesn't follow
games, right? Still had heard that a new
Switch was coming out and it was
expensive. Sure. Like that was all she
knew, right? And so, um, we wanted to
talk a little bit about that
because as we began to talk about the
price of video games, we
realized, and this is, you know, I'm
showing the gray in my beard, right? And
Jeff's showing his his designer scars
here. Um, where's there's a good one.
Yeah, there's a good a good designer
scar right there. Yeah. Um, the games
have been $60 for 20 years.
almost to the almost exactly 20. Yeah.
So
why which is an unusual thing and the
reason I know this is in 2005 and 200
well 2005 we'll just peg it there. There
were a trio of consoles that were coming
out. The Wii, the Xbox 360, and the PS3.
The Wii game prices were set at
$49.99,50 bucks. But the Xbox 360, the
PS3, that was when universally games got
moved for consoles to $59.99 or 60 bucks
and Steam followed suit. That became the
price of video games. That was if you
went to the store, that was what you
were going to pay. And
importantly, at that point, the iPhone
app store did not exist. Yeah. This was
pre-9 cent games. This was pre
free-to-play games, meaning anything
large and significant numbers permeating
the internet. Right? So if you and this
was arcades had kind of died down. So
really from that
time if you were going to go buy a game
you were and you were looking for kind
of a regular style game your Halos your
Call of Duties your Grand Theft Autos
$60. So actually we dug up an artifact
for this and I feel like it's it's a
helpful element. So we found uh and this
is I I dug this up from Reddit. Uh, this
is uh I'm going to credit this properly
cuz they they they did me a solid. This
is from Reddit user
uh I believe it's Reddit user Yu-Gi-Oh
king of games. Amazing username.
This is a launch ad from Circuit City.
Y'all remember Circuit City? for the
Xbox the Xbox 360 and its accompanying
launch title games.
And well, is there a way to zoom in on
pieces of that? Not terribly easily.
That was that was among the Can you call
out what we're seeing here? Can you walk
us through this ad? Sure. So, up at the
top we have the um the the the Xbox 360
like standard edition. There's a core
edition, which less expensive, but the
the the version that they want to sell
you is the
$400 Xbox 360, and that comes with the
hard drive, the headset, the Ethernet
cable, the HDAV cable, all of that. And
actually, let me tell you for a second
how revolutionary this was. Will, do you
see that Xbox there? Yeah. This is the
first generation of consoles that came
out with built-in hard drives. Yep.
Not like little memory cards you were
sticking in, right? This is the first
generation of consoles that came with
built-in internet compatibility. You
could plug your Ethernet cable in.
Although before this, you needed extra
hardware. Yep. For that. So, this is the
first generation set up to be online
consoles because they wanted you to
download things like games, hence the
need for a built-in hard drive and
built-in internet. Yep. No consoles
generation before this. This is, by the
way, the seventh generation of consoles.
Y, which is the 360, the PS3, and the
Wii. Every generation before this lacked
all of those as regular features. Yep.
Okay. So, I want to I want to highlight
a couple of things just because they're
a little chuckle to me. Number one, that
hard drive 20 gigabytes.
It's a 20 gigabyte hard drive that was
marketed as a great value because in
2005 it was. Remember when we were like
how many gigabytes of space could you
need on a game console? And now we're
like is a terabyte going to be enough
anyway? Um so that's part of it. The
other part of it and I I Hold on a sec
real quick. So consoles before this had
access to internet but you needed to buy
extra hardware to get to it. Yeah. There
was a there was an external modem that
was an add-on for both the PlayStation 2
and the Cube, but neither of them
achieved wide adoption. One exception.
One exception. The PlayStation 2 version
of Final Fantasy 11 is the reason that
the modem did so well in uh
Japan because Final Fantasy 11 was much
bigger in Japan than it ever was in the
West until much later. So yeah,
Dreamcast could Yeah. Um, okay. So,
speaking of internet, one of the other
things that I wanted to point out is
that that wireless network adapter,
there's a little dongle there in the
middle next to the Lynxys router, which
probably looks a lot like a Lynxys
router that you could buy right now for
a similar price, which is also amusing
to me, was $100.
So, for $500, you could get a console
with
wireless, which is now standard. Right.
Right. At the time, everybody was
plugging in cables because wireless was
not as um ubiquitous. Absolutely
correct. I remember when my uh when we I
helped install all of the Wi-Fi on my
college campus while I was a student
there in in actually funny story, Will,
before we had smartphones that were
permeating everywhere and smart tablets,
Wi-Fi was a lot less um necessary. Yeah,
absolutely. Because if you couldn't be
moving your computer or what your
cordable computing device Yeah. Yeah, if
it wasn't
portable, it was perfectly fine to have
a computer. You would set up your TV
wherever the Ethernet cables came in,
right? And same that was the corner of
your room, you'd set up your desk for
your computer. And and the reason and
the reason it was such a big deal deal
in college residential areas was that
everyone had laptops. Mhm. Right.
So other than the tech specs for the
console though,
the prices look much like prices today
would look. Yeah, that's a $400 console,
right, for the regular version. Hey,
Will, can you read me off the game
prices? Uh, they're all $60. They're all
$60. That's correct. Tony Hawk's uh
Underground, Tiger Woods, PGA Tour,
Madden05. Did you hear Madden's getting
a movie? Anyway, NBA Live05, Call of
Duty, Dead or Alive, Cameo. Oh, remember
when they thought Cameo was going to be
a thing? and $70 for a year of Xbox
Live, which is more or less equivalent
to what those prices are today.
Console's about $400, give or
take, right? People are throwing an
absolute tizzy over the new Switch
costing
$450. Absolute tizzy. And these are
$25, right?
And so this is where we've been for 20
years almost exactly not like with
little increases for inflation or supply
chain rattling or as formats have
changed right we've gone in a lot of
cases from these came with um DVDs to
Blu-rays later on games have come on
Blu-rays are more compact forms of data
storage so these have been
largely the
for 20 years. And and and here's the
important part, which is kind of crazy.
Yeah. Chad's been chat's been talking
about whether or not games should cost
$60. That's not the point yet. We'll get
there in a little bit. Right. We're
talking about that is a very good
secondary like whole other discussion.
For the mer this 20 years ago, yeah,
this is weird. This is really weird that
this is sort of like the land lost to
time as as far as prices go. that uh
there are a bunch of market effects and
uh specific companies that have sort of
just
timelocked pricing for console gaming.
Certainly PC gaming is a little bit
different because some parts are much
more expensive now they used to be and
some parts are much cheaper than they
used to be. Um graphics cards are now an
arm and a leg, your first born and a
kidney. Um, and games are now a dollar,
$2, the $3 bullet hidden thing. So, this
is largely consoles and big AAA games. I
acknowledge that PC gaming has done more
things, right?
So, yeah, I I I like this. This is
exactly right. An entire industry that
managed to remain just as uh consistent
as the Costco hot dog. Yes, that's
weird, right? This is bizarre, right?
Especially when we consider other
luxuries. So importantly, nobody needs
video games to live. Insert wave of
comments about needing video games to
live. Yes, I'm sure. In the same way
that no one, strictly speaking, needs
capital N needs Starbucks to
live. They're both
They're both luxuries. They're both
luxuries. You could make um instant
coffee at home, right? You could bring a
lunch from home. You don't need
Starbucks. You don't need video games.
You could read books from your public
library instead, right? There are plenty
of ways to get the entertainment and art
that video games provide you. You don't
capital N need them. They're great.
They're wonderful. I think more people
should have access to them, but they are
by definition a luxury. Okay. So,
Starbucks. So,
let's let's look at Starbucks real quick
cuz Starbucks
uh so this is not 20 years by the way.
This was a 10 years 10 year I think
thing I found. Yeah. We couldn't find
2005 Starbucks prices in any kind of
format that was good. Um so even over
the past 10 years right even over the
past 10 years Starbucks another luxury
good that people consume daily as part
of their daily
lives has gone up rather significantly.
The cake pop doubled.
Cake pops are sort of one of their
probably highest profit items because
cake pops I think they initially came in
as like loss leaders or something like
the little thing extra thing you any
actually we sorry we don't need to get
into pricing strategy on consumer facing
food. Yeah. Right. Um the uh so so
Starbucks another luxury good has
experienced cost increases over the past
10 years and we can assume that this is
also extrapolated back a bit for the
past 20 years. Right? So luxury goods in
general not immune from this time lock.
Right? Cars have gotten more expensive.
Luxury cars specifically have gotten
more expensive. Uh luxury clothing more
expensive. Lots of things are more
expensive than they were 20 years ago in
the luxury goods category. Games
Workshop has gotten more expensive.
Magic has gotten more expensive. We can
talk about whether or not they should.
Again, that's a different conversation,
but they have
and games haven't, right? Video games
specifically have not. So, let's talk a
little bit about the psychology behind
this cuz I think this is a this is a
absolutely fascinating uh discussion
that we could have about why it seems to
us that the video game industry is
immune to these forces, right? Or and
one thing here, Will, do me a favor.
Yeah. Actually, go back to the Starbucks
thing real quick. I want to point
something out that is going to become
relevant fairly soon. Mhm. Can you pick
a couple of items for me because my eyes
are having a hard time seeing them.
Yeah. Tell me what the item is and read
the old price and the new price. Sure. A
cake pop is now $2.95 and used to be
$1.50. Okay. A venty chai tea is now
$5.15 and used to be $3.95.
Mhm. And a grande cafe mocha is $4.95
and used to be $4.15. So, we've got a
97% increase, a 30% increase, and a 19%
increase. So, let's go back to read me
that um what was the middle one again?
The venty chai tea $5.15 and is now uh
and used to be $3.95.
So, really quickly just and this I
promise this will be relevant. 3.95 is
an excellent consumer psychology price.
Yes, it is a thing that is under $4, but
scraping in really close to it. They
could have made it $3.99, but for this
kind of thing, $3.95 actually feels
better. Those 4 cents, like they could
have been making four more cents, but
they are they're getting better consumer
sentiment out of the 395.
My guess is this is over the past decade
probably had somewhere around four price
hikes on it. The first one was the
hardest because as soon as they raised
it, it went over $4, right? And there's
a lot of anchoring which we'll get to in
a couple minutes on the this is a under
$4 thing. Yes. But if you look at where
it is now, they probably went to
something like
425 and then
445 and then probably
$475 and then one more to probably 495.
And if these numbers sound familiar to
you, nobody is going to make their drink
$463,
right? They're not doing a exact
percentage multiple to be like, we need
to raise this 10%. They're finding these
break points in your mind where it
sounds like an okay or it sounds like a
price you are used to recognizing. Yes,
things get rounded. The only time we
ever see a non-5 or zero number is when
it's a nine. You never see 431. You'll
see
435,
439 or 450. Like there are very certain
numbers that just we have been trained
with our minds. These are the numbers we
recognize, right? And I I would argue
that we have been trained, right? How
many of you in the
audience got into
gaming sometime in the Gamecube, Xbox
360, the Gamecube, Wii, Xbox, Xbox 360
era? Because I'm willing to bet it's a
reasonable number of you, right? This is
for many gamers, right? Many gamers. If
you started at like the only price, the
only price for games you've ever known
has been $60, which means that it's
deeply anchored. Now, some of you are uh
venerable elders of the hobby, and I
will fully bow to the fact that there
are plenty of people for whom this has
not always historically been true. They
in some cases, they used to be more
expensive. Correct. $60 was actually a
lowering of prices for games in some
cases. Yeah. Around like Yeah. Just
saying. For sure. It's a weird thing
that games actually in some cases used
to be more expensive than $60 and got
brought down to be a uniform price.
Correct. And this is we we intentionally
are skipping the entire era of N64
prices because N64 prices were the wild
west. Uh, N64 game prices by all
accounts were like, uh, we threw three
darts in a board and that's the price.
Have fun, right? Um, so we're
intentionally eliding that period in
time.
Um, so, uh, let's let's talk about this
anchoring idea, right?
So, Jeff, real quick, what is the
psychological concept of anchoring?
Um,
yeah,
there you go. Sorry, Matt was asking a
production question. So, Matt has now
answered. Haha, look at me.
Multitasking. Good job. So, anchoring is
a psycholog is a psychological concept.
It comes up in a lot of places. A lot a
lot of places. It comes up in review
scores. It comes up in the way you
recommend games to your friends. It
comes up in um your opinions of a your
your value judgments, non-monetary
value, but value judgments of a great
many things. Anchoring is a big
psychological concept. Today,
specifically, we're talking about price
anchoring. So, anchoring is actually one
of those hacks that your brain does left
over from a long, long time ago where it
needed to be able to process information
quickly. And basically it's a cognitive
bias where you rely more heavily than
you should on kind of the first piece of
information you've gotten and
internalized when look when making a
decision when looking at
something. And this was really good for
a long time actually and still is in a
lot of cases. You know if you're walking
through the desert and you hear a little
rattle rattle rattle you're thinking ah
rattlesnake and you back up. You're not
thinking maybe it's a baby, maybe it's a
like, right? You're going for that first
piece of information, you know, which is
rattle in the desert equals
danger. GTFO. Yeah. Or if like, and
that's kind of going back to like some
of the survival Yeah. things where it's
dangerous out in the dark. you learn
this like there's a whole bunch of stuff
and this comes even into basic things
like how much should a cup of coffee
cost right and this is the weird thing
is this is
relative in other words you can walk in
and be like I expect a cup of my cup of
coffee at Starbucks we're just we're
going to keep going with Starbucks to
cost $4.95 so you walk in there and your
brain says this is what I think my cup
of coffee is going to my or my fancy
latte is going to cost. If you walk in
there and it's
$2.95, your brain's going to flip out.
You're going to be like, "Wow, they're
having a huge sale on this. That's
almost 50% off. That's
amazing." If you walk in there and it's
instead of $4.95, it's
$6.95. Your brain is also going to freak
out and be like, "Wow, why is this cup
of coffee so radically expensive?
It's almost 50% more than I'm used to
paying for it. Right? Notice here we're
talking about a $2 swing. Right? If you
go in to buy a TV and it's $4.95 for a
nice big screen TV, $495 for a big
screen TV and you go through and you
pick it and you chat with your spouse on
they're like, "Hey, I found that same TV
across town and it's 485." You're going
to be like, "Nah, I'm here." like you're
already used to this price and that $10
less because it's so little in value
difference even though it's $10 versus
that $2 on coffee we were just freaking
out about. It's not worth your time to
drive across town for that. And they've
actually done studies on this literally
that exact scenario. TVs mean cheaper um
for something like that. But because
your brain came in, saw that price, you
thought it was a good price, you're not
enthusiastic about this. And we actually
did a study back when I used to run EDR,
which was the video game market research
firm, where we went to a college campus,
and this was one of the favorite studies
I think we ever ran cuz usually we were
doing other kinds of things, but I liked
the anchoring effect. Mhm. I got to go
talk on G4 TV about this one where we
went on a college campus and we grabbed
kids and we sat them down playing um
Plants Versus Zombies. The prerequisite
was at the time you hadn't seen it. And
before they played it, they were waiting
in a little waiting room and they got to
see a sheet showing the review score of
the game. And we had three sheets
planted. one that showed the actual
review scores which were high, another
one which showed them that were even
higher and another one that showed them
that were very medium. So they saw this
and then they went down and sat and
played the game and they were told they
were going to get paid I think it was
like $10 or $15 for doing this study and
then after they'd played the game for
half an hour they were offered the money
that we promised them or to take a copy
of the game. So this is real money. This
isn't, oh, I say I'm going to do this.
This is, would you like to walk out with
cash or a copy of the game? Yeah. The
people who saw the highest review
scores, the ones who are anchored that
it was going to be really good,
disproportionately at like a 2x version,
took a copy of the game instead of the
money versus the people who saw the low
review scores, who are anchored to it
being low. So just this one initial
perception followed by them playing the
game for half an hour where they could
make up their own dis their own mind was
enough to 2x the number of people who
took the game versus took the money
right so that show excellent example of
anchoring like in the real world your
first impression of a thing that sets
your mind to it is almost impossible to
overcome in a lot of ways. Yeah. Uh, and
I think that that's that's a really a
really fascinating example, right, that
we have this Oh. Um, to answer in chat,
the cop the game basically cost as much
as we were going to be offering um them.
It was a roughly equal trade. Yeah. So,
so that's anchoring. Your mind is really
interesting in a lot of ways. And the
anchoring effect plays into a lot of the
way people perceive things and is known
by a lot of people who are in the
industry who use it as a tool. So this
is also saying people know about this
and are using this as they're designing
the world for you both real world and
game worlds. Right. So it's also handy
to know about this thing. Yeah.
Absolutely. So uh there's there's a
really great
um Demon Works has hit the nail on the
head, right? because the sale price is
the real price. The higher uh price the
rest of the time is just there so you'll
get it when it's on sale. Yeah, that's
another really great example, right? And
Steam is one of the reasons why PC
gaming is so interesting, right? And and
that is in fact an argument that a lot
of people in chat and people
historically have made in favor of it is
that PC gaming is cheaper because things
go on sale. Right? Now, that's not to
say that you're wrong, but the reason
that you perceive sales as such a good
value is that if I show you two things,
one of them is
$50 and the other one is $100 50% off to
$50, you're almost certainly going to
regard the thing that's 50% off as a
better deal even if it's the same
product at the same final price. Yeah, I
see. And let me tell you, having set the
price of video games, you know, having
run a
studio, we absolutely like when putting
our last couple games up on Steam, one
of the things we said was we are going
to be discounting this often because we
know people buy on sale. If we want to
actually be making X for our game, what
is the pre the standard price that we're
setting? Why? Because the X price is the
price that we're happy to get and that's
the one we're going to be discounting to
on Steam sale. So, if we wanted to be
getting say $19.99 for a game, right, we
would probably be pricing it at 25 or
even
$29 just so that when we mark it down to
20, which is the price we're actually
hoping to get, we can have that big
percent number of how much the discount
is right there that people look at and
be like, "Oh, wow. This is great."
Right? And everybody does this. This
isn't us being evil. This is just how
you price things in the modern industry,
right? So there's um there's sort of
two facets to this as well. One of them
is prestige pricing which is its own
whole psychological concept. I will sum
up in short. One of the things that
often but not always occurs and this
occurs more in way in places that you
are not uh an
expert is more expensive is better.
loosely. If given a choice between A and
B, if I tell you that something is more
expensive, there's generally a
perception that in some material or
ephemeral way that thing is better.
Unless, and there's a huge unless
because a bunch of people are about to
start typing in chat and I'm going to
cut off all the comments. You know a lot
about that thing, right? If you know
enough about that thing, you can undo
that prestige pricing sort of impact,
right? The the flashbang effect. And the
second
one has left my brain while I was
talking about prestige pricing. And
actually part of the prestige pricing
like I have done research and studies
around this again having run a video
game market research firm for a while.
Sometimes a discounted price hurts the
game. Like if you're looking at if
you're selling your game on the Xbox 360
at the time and Call of Duty is $60 and
Grand Theft Auto is $60. You know, if
you see all these coming in and then you
see a game that's coming in at
$50, part of your brain is thinking,
"Wow, this team must have thought it
wasn't as good as those games. They're
therefore marking it down to make it
more appealing to me." Yes. But because
for a lot of And this would work in some
cases except because people don't have
unlimited gaming time. Yeah. They are
often willing to say, "I will spend a
little more for the better experience
because I'm going to be playing this for
50 or 100 or 200 hours." Like, saving
$10 to play a crappy game is not as good
as paying 10 more dollars to play a
really good game for a long time. Yes.
And so the prices just kind of all stay
uniform because lowering them actually
makes it look like you're trying to
cover for something in certain
circumstances. Yeah. I remember the
thing that I forgot. Um, the other
really important thing is if you've ever
heard me
estimate total uh profits for a game,
when we're talking about the ludicrous
amounts of money that particular games
have made, you'll often hear me talk
about the number of copies sold at the
lowest price it's ever been on sale.
That both covers a bunch of assumptions
that I have to make in order to do that
math with available data. But the other
one is that's the price they expect to
get for it most of the time, right? Is
that lowest sale price. So that lowest
sale price um lets me do a whole bunch
of uh shortorthhand uh for that reason.
So let's talk about this real quick. So
we've talked about prestige pricing and
the problems of going on sale. We've
talked about all these things. Um but
let's let's back up. One other thing you
can be anchored to as well. You could be
anchored to games should always be at a
reduced price. Like Steam has very well
taught us along with a couple of other
places, but particularly Steam, you do
not buy things when they don't have a
little slash through them with a lower
number next to it. It's why often uh
games will often go on um sale,
especially like mid-tier indie games in
the 20 $30 range will go on a 10% sale
when they launch. That's that's an
example, right? Is that they will expect
to do that and and that and that is
carried through excellently. Thank you
uh to Nova Fire over in Twitch chat for
being a silent participant in this uh
little discussion. Um they've run a
poll. How how many games have you bought
on sale and never played? Oh man. None.
1 to 5, 6 to 15, 16 to 30, or 31 plus?
And 31 I didn't vote because I didn't
see it. I would have been in that 31
plus. 31 Plus is winning in a landslide
because people perceive it as a value
to own the thing that they got on sale
even if you never use it. Which is kind
of interesting, right?
That that people will say, "Oh, I'll get
to it eventually." And spend money on
something that they never use at any
amount, right? Even if it's like $10,
right? It's $10 that I might play this
game from 20 years ago, right? that the
we are so heavily anchored to the idea
that sales are a good value and that
acquiring things on sale is good
actually that we're willing to do that
even if we never actually use
them right um so I I think that that is
that's that's part of it right I'm just
laughing at chat saying don't forget the
humble bundles are bulking this up sure
yeah totally that's the same concept
chat you're just continuing to make that
point so let's go back quick question
out of chat will um
I one know this cuz I'm not as big of a
Nintendo person. Mhm.
But so Nintendo very very rarely does
limited sales, but
overall their strategy is that they do
not. They are also the only one of the
console manufacturers who has said, and
we don't know that this is true for the
Switch 2, but we're kind of assuming who
has said that they are not loss leading
with the Switch 2. I can explain that in
a minute. But um one of the things
though that's important about Nintendo
not running sales is because Nintendo
never runs sales, you know, with limited
exceptions, never. People aren't sitting
there waiting to buy the game hoping
that in two months it will go on sale
like it does on Steam.
That's
correct. Um and so sorry, I've been
attacked by spring, so I keeping myself
Okay, that is totally fair. It's it's
spring here, too, and it's gross. Yeah.
So, at the end of our poll, we have 42%
of respondents have said that they have
purchased 31 or more games on sale that
they've never played. I am easily in the
larger end of that, definitely probably
in the 60 plus range, but I also
purchase, play, and review video games
professionally, so that's like a whole
other factor, right? So, I'm removing
myself from data, but like I'm right
there with you. Like the um so quick
industry fact. Um, since we just
mentioned it, one of the things that has
been done by most consoles for a long
time. So, Will, did you know that a
console is basically just a PC optimized
for gaming? Yeah, I did.
It's like most people kind of know that,
but it's a different way to think of it.
Yeah. Like you can go buy a $1,000 PC or
you can go buy a $3,000 PC. And if
you're buying a gaming PC, they will
tend to be at the higher range because
they're going for Yeah. faster stuff and
graphics card. Only $3,000. Yes. Okay.
Or more. Anyway, go on.
But so when you think about it, going
and buying an Xbox, especially when it
just comes out, like they are usually
comparable to fairly high-end gaming PCs
when they come out. Yes. And at this
point, they're selling it for $500 or
$600, but you're comparatively getting a
$3,000 plus gaming console, right?
Excuse me, gaming PC. They've removed of
a lot of other PC stuff, but it is a
piece of hardware that can run games
similar to your $3,000 plus PC because
of the way it's extremely optimized for
doing that one particular purpose,
right? Its architecture, its graphics,
just the whole thing.
Sadly, for a lot of these companies,
they can't actually make it cost. They
can't make a $3,000 gaming machine for
the $500 or $600 that they're going to
sell it to for. Especially when you
remember that there's a markup price in
there because they're not selling it to
the retailer for that. You know, if
they're selling a batch of these to go
sell in Costco and they want to charge
600 for it at Costco, they're selling it
to Costco for like three or 400, right?
Like there's there's extra bits of
markup. So almost every console
manufacturer out there for the as long
back as we can think of sells the
consoles at a loss. Meaning that they
lose money for every console they sell
because they make money on every game
they sell because Xbox games are prop
proprietary to them and you know the
encoding and everything else to run it.
Microsoft gets a cut of every Xbox game
that gets sold. Mhm. And over time, if
the console lasts for, you know, say 8
years on the console life cycle, the
cost of the components slowly come down
over time as manufacturing gets more
efficient. So maybe it used to cost them
$900 to make each console. Four years in
it might be costing them $500. 3 years
after that it might be down to say 400.
Like they keep dropping in price. And
there's the other additional um design
costs, right? there's the one-time cost
of building a new product uh and you
know designing it and designing the logo
and designing the box and all of that
that goes into it initially and
eventually they'll recoup those costs um
and the the per unit percentage that
goes into profit is higher after you've
recouped that cost. But yeah, just going
off that. So that's one of the things
that console manufacturers just do. They
put out a better piece of hardware than
you could actually buy for that price,
usually by a long amount, and they just
slowly make it up as you buy games and
other things, right? Nintendo famously
doesn't do that. And that's one of the
reasons that their consoles come in less
powerful than say the, you know, the Wii
when it came out or the Wii U when they
came out were both significantly less
powerful than a comparable Xbox or a
PlayStation. Yeah.
But they also didn't have the pressure
of need to push games as hard because
they weren't actually losing money by
selling the hardware, right? So, let's
let's bundle all of this together into
like this big this big thing. So, we've
talked about prestige price and we've
talked about um things being too deeply
discounted, right? We've talked about a
bunch of stuff. So, let's go back to
that $60 $60 for a game, $400 for a
console thing, right? The consoles have
varied. The games have been 60
bucks at some point for for part of
this, right? And and Chad brought this
up before and forgive me, I I did not
see who. Part of this was nobody wanted
to be the first one to flinch. No one
wanted to be the first one to raise the
prices on their games because they
depend on selling those games to make
back the money that they lost selling
the console, right? they depend on those
game sales to actually generate a
profit. So, it really matters if they
accidentally mess up and um severely
hurt sales of a new game that they're
really relying on selling a bunch of
copies of to help recoup their cost for
the console, right? Like a launch title.
So, no one wanted to be the first one to
flinch. And then no, there was also a
price weird price sensitivity on that.
Like if you're going to be the ones
biting the bullet to raise your price,
how much do you raise it to? Unlike
Starbucks, which went
$3.95 for a drink to, you know, $425 to
$4.49. Like raising a $60 game to $62 is
a really weird look. Yeah. like they'd
get a whole and so there wasn't really a
good price up until maybe you were going
to say okay $60 games are now
65 but like there isn't kind of these
small prices that you can do with say
like a coffee shop you're looking at
larger price jumps if you're going to
bite the bullet of getting the consumer
backlash. Yes. And so one of the other
reasons is we did see some kind of in
that $65ish dollar tier, but they were
very uncommon. Like you literally saw a
price going from $60 to
$70 as people were considering this
because of the weird way our minds
anchor on prices in between that there
wasn't a lot of good. It wasn't going to
be like cool this is now 6523, right? I
actually went and looked Nintendo has
released a bunch of and I am excluding
bundles here. There's a bunch of
Nintendo bundles in the $100, $90, $80
range. There is one singular title at
$70. That's Tears of the Kingdom. We'll
come back to Tears of the Kingdom. And
then a bunch of stuff in like the weird
$60 range and then every in like the 60
plus dollar range. And then everything
else is 60 flat or below in some cases
where it's like a retro game or remake
or whatever, right?
Um, it is very interesting to see. Now,
let's also address this. It really
matters that this is
Nintendo, right? It really, really
matters that the reason that people are
getting upset over crossing into $70
territory right now is that it's
Nintendo.
Actually, Will, can I bring up one thing
before we hit that? Sure.
The other thing that's really changed
since
2005, 20 years ago, is remember I made a
bunch of caveats when I was talking
about game prices. It's like there were
no mobile games. There was no free to
play. Arcades were kind of on the way
out. In the 20 years since then, we've
had a couple of things
happen. These are one of them. Yeah.
Smartphones and the fact that you can
play games on them. And we'll talk about
maybe we'll talk about pricing on games
later, but you know it started as 99
cents because Apple strangely enough
when we were first started putting out
games on mobile they had a policy where
they wanted everything to cost 99 cents.
A song was 99 cents like and so they
pressured the game industry really
hard to make things cost
99. And that's a very low price for a
game. And a lot of game companies push
back and they're like we need to sell it
for more. But remember that anchoring
effect. Say you come in and you're like,
"My game is $4.99." Because everybody's
used to paying 99 cents for something on
at that time on a smartphone. The bra
everybody's brain screamed. It was like
that's five times as much as something
should be costing on this platform. And
that's one of the reasons you saw a huge
shift into freeto play on mobile is that
it beca it was just easier to say get
the game for free we'll charge you later
than to try and convince people to pay
like five bucks for a game or 10 bucks
for a game. And that's one of the
reasons freeto play and
microtransactions came in is that 99
cent thing, right? But so anyway, games
came in at low cost and free. Free to
play became a thing. Mhm. And Steam,
which was a small thing in 2005, has
grown to be a juggernaut. Now Steam is
very, very happy to let people because
it's digital delivery, price things at
whatever they want and to do frequent
sales, like they kind of broke that $60
price point. And with the range of
mid-tier games coming in and the indie
movement, the indie movement also wasn't
a thing really back in 2005. people were
okay coming in and saying my game isn't
a prestige Call of Duty. It's still a
good game, but you know, this is
Journey. This is um Binding of Isaac.
This is like a whole bunch of things
where they're just like, "Hey, this
isn't $60. This is a smaller team. We're
okay to sell this for $20 or $30 or
15." And they were, let's just say,
appropriately priced. Well, for a
moment, we'll just make that argument.
And so what we've had in the interimm
since the 20 years is we've had freeto
play come in lowcost mobile and the rise
of the indie movement and pricing of
games in a price point other than $60 on
things like PC. And remember I said
these consoles were the first ones that
had hard drives on them. They were
already selling games at less than 60 as
download only. You know, here's an old
PS2 game that you can buy for $30. And
especially as their cataloges have
expanded, you can now buy literally
thousands of games on the Wii in, sorry,
in the Nintendo, Microsoft, or Sony
ecosystems on their respective consoles
for much less money because they're
happy to have you buying a 10-year-old
game. Yeah. Or $20 at that point. Right.
So, we've also seen in addition to this
that there's suddenly a whole bunch of
other alternatives of pricing for
non-new for nonbrand console games. And
so, I think that's also part of what's
working against Nintendo as we get to
our next part is there are now actual
alternatives of lower prices that people
are used to. Correct.
So, um, uh, there there's a really, uh,
Mark in, um, in YouTube chat has a
really, uh, um, has a really great thing
that I want to bring up. Digital
manufacturing scarcity makes no sense
when you could just sell more copies at
a lower price. There is scarcity. It's
just on the other side. There are a
limited number of people who play video
games, right? There is a limited market
appeal for something
like Call of Duty, right? someone's
going to buy a copy of Call of Duty or
they're not. It's very difficult to
convince someone to pick up gaming as a
lifestyle. Like no, very few single
games are going to do that. One of the
biggest exceptions biggest exceptions
was Animal Crossing. Animal Crossing
during the pandemic was like one of our
big one of the very few like really
break out of the gaming ecosphere thing.
But there is a scarcity and it's how
many like what's the install base for
that console, right? That's that's a num
known number, right? If I have a limited
number of Xboxes and I only sell on the
Xbox, what's the install base for that,
right? Y um and what what's the
theoretical maximum size of my target
audience? How many people are willing to
play an MMO daily? That number is small
is both larger and smaller than you
probably think it is. There's also one
more big thing which I'll just bring up
now. There is more there are more things
competing in what we call the attention
economy. Yeah. In 2005 it was a
different landscape.
I don't think Instagram existed or
Facebook. Discord didn't. Uh Twitch
didn't. Um YouTube didn't in any
meaningful way. You didn't have constant
app or you didn't have the smartphones
with all of your social media on them.
The ability to watch YouTube. There's a
whole bunch of things now competing for
our retention. We didn't have awesome
Netflix programming. I mean there or
prestige Apple stuff. Like there is a
whole bunch of cool stuff to do. There
is more cool stuff to do than anybody
has time for straight up. And all of it
competes with each other. Video games
aren't just competing against other
video games. you playing a game is also
you could have been reading a book,
watching a show, looking at YouTube,
watching Twitch, like all of these other
things you could be doing all also
compete with games. And so one of the
things on pricing is people do very
sophisticated models on this. They're
like, "Okay, what if my $60 game was
$30? Could we sell twice as many copies
of that?" And sometimes the answer,
actually often the answer is no. that
people who are willing to pay 60,
there's a certain amount of people who
might buy it at, you know, 50, 40 or 30,
but you're losing all of the people who
would have paid 60 for that. Yes.
Because it was worth it to them on the
time. Yes. And there's some weird
calculus that you weigh trying to figure
out pricing on all of these things. But
this is a weird one where you would
think lower price sell more copies. And
that's often true, but it isn't as true
as you would think on digital
entertainment,
right? So, it'd be nice if it was, but
it isn't, right? And Nintendo's got this
pretty drilled in, right, as a company
specifically, right? Nova was bringing
up earlier during um the discussion
about Nintendo sales that Nintendo has
um built a brand on the idea that if you
buy a Nintendo game, you will play the
whole Nintendo game and enjoy it.
Whether or not that's true is a
different story, but Nintendo games
pride themselves on being these sort of
prestigriced high quality entries,
right? First party Nintendo games
specifically. Third party Nintendo games
run the gambit. I remember the Wii
shovelware era pretty well. Oh yes. Like
we're fully there on that. But humanity
do you know by the way will I once did a
graph review scores over time by
console. Mhm. The Wii was the lowest
rated average game. The lowest rated
average games I think was like eight or
nine points on a 100 point scale. Yeah.
Because of the shovelware. Yeah. Like
that is a huge like almost unbelievable
dip. Yeah. Sorry. Anyway, just back
away. No, I I I think it's it's totally
reasonable, right? So Nintendo products
don't go on sale because they think that
they're that they are like these
prestige things. And I think that that's
part of why there's the backlash is that
in the same way that we've slowly become
anchored to the $60 game as the as the
price that games
should huge air quotes be, right? We've
also slowly been acclimatized and
anchored to the idea that games go on
sale. We buy them on sale. That I can
play games for free on my phone. You got
games on your phone, right? That there
are entire ecosystems of free games
looking at Riot or Blizzard, right?
There are whole ecosystems of free games
that I can trade my time for rather than
trading money for. Right? Those are also
things that we have because like those
are the things that I'm hearing from
chat that there are yes games are $60
but there are other games that don't
cost $60 or I can buy them on sale or
whatever. And I feel like that's what's
really freeish games um that that the
[Music]
um
the anchoring effect is working on the
audience in multiple directions, right?
that $60 is the price that games could
cost, but there are plenty of things
that cost less. So, if the $60 moves for
any reason, then I'm just going to go
with indie titles, free-to-play games,
old games, backlog, etc., etc., etc.
This or Yeah, keep playing the game you
love. Yeah, keep playing the game you
love. This is also where I'm going to
remind people something, and Jeff and I
both probably need this, too. When we
think about buying
games, we are nowhere near the average
consumer.
We're not even close. Yeah, most of you
in chat probably are also not the
average consumer. Very willing to bet
that you in chat are not the average
gamer, right? You are here on a channel
about game design talking about the
psychological impact of of game prices
across 20 years.
you're already so bought into this like
idea that you're well outside the bounds
of what the average gamer is interested
in, right? So like that is another big
part portion of this is that when you
when we're talking about our gut check
experiences or the games that we want to
play or all of those things are we are
extremely biased, right, compared to the
general public, which is another thing
that we need to keep in mind, right?
Um, yeah, there are a lot of game devs
in chat. There are a bunch of people
with a bunch of deeply held opinions
because Hey, game devs. Good to see you.
Right. Yeah, exactly.
So, does that make does it seem right
that we've covered like the majority of
the reasons that that they're like
stuck. There's this competition, right?
They need to sell a number of copies in
order to break even on their consoles.
Actually, yeah, let's get to that. Um,
there's one other thing we should talk
about.
You don't get to change prices often.
Correct. Every price change that has
gone up has always happened when it's
the new shiny thing. Hey guys and girls
and everybody else out there, there is a
new console, right? It's shiny. It's
about to come out. We are allowed to
raise the price at this point without
people throwing a fit as much. Like if
you were if 3 years ago they were like,
"Hey, Switch, I know you've been used to
paying X for it, but now it's X plus
20%." People would be like, "Wait, why
are you raising the price of the Switch
now?" Or if Nintendo was suddenly like,
"Hey, you know, games have been $60 this
3 years ago. We're now just going to say
they're all 70." People would be
furious. You don't raise games in the
middle of a console cycle. It's just not
done. Yeah. Almost ever. You might raise
an individual price of a game that you
think can sell a whole
bunch, but um
yeah. Am I Oh, sorry. No, you're you're
you're good. I I'm having I'm having a
weird tech problem with chat. It's okay.
Keep going. Just keep going. But anyway,
so when like every price change of
significance has always happened at the
beginning of a console cycle and like
non Nintendo, Sony and actually
particular Microsoft and Sony like when
games for
them went from 60 to 70, they did it at
the same time. Yeah. Like everybody
tries to do it at the same time because
they know there's going to be backlash.
But if somebody else does it, that's
when they're like, "Oh, thank God. we
can now raise our games and do this. So,
the same with like console pricing, like
when the new consoles come out, they're
kind of setting their high water mark
for what they're going to be, right?
Like there was the weird one we just had
where the Xbox price went up, but that's
more that's tariff based. Yeah. Well,
and so a they get to point at tariffs
and be like, "This is a tariff thing."
and
B, Xbox doesn't seem to be like, I'm not
sure how much of it is them pointing at
tariffs and how much of people expecting
sale prices to save them from raised
overall prices for Xboxes. I don't know
what the math on that. Excuse me. I
mean, they literally might have been
like, "We're going to raise our prices,
but they're also going to run like six
more sales before the end of their
console cycle." And yeah, like and just
so people are like, "Oh, it's on sale.
I'm going to pick it up." Correct.
And then just wanted to say the console
cycle start Yeah. is a key. That is why
it happened now. Correct. Like Nintendo
like every other console group knows
this is when we can do it with the least
amount of friction. Correct. Because and
and this is also very true. I think all
of the people who were
in Treehouse streams chanting drop the
price, drop the price in
chat were I'm going to say 90% of them
going to pre-order it anyway. They just
wanted to spend less on it. I don't
actually think I I do not actually think
that the the difference in price for
games or for the console is large enough
that as many people will get off this
ride as claim they will,
right? I think that is another thing to
keep in mind. Now 100%. Now Nintendo
does have a thing that's working against
them a bit. Um and this is heavily
biased in coming. Okay. This is a lot of
my bias incoming. Okay, Nintendo tried
the $70 thing once already with Tears of
the Kingdom. And Tears of the Kingdom
was not worth $70. Tears of the Kingdom
is
fine. It's not
$70. It didn't have the impact that
Breath did. It has some cool It has a
bunch of cool tech to it, but it's fine.
And so Nintendo only gets to shoot that
shot on our first $70 title on the
Switch once. Like and by the way again
that solo title successful or more
successful I think we would have seen a
steady follow pattern. Correct. But the
reason that it's the only one is
um the is cuz it was fine.
Right. So I I think that that is that
that is a thing that the audience is
acutely aware of. Right. If I asked
people what their favorite Zelda game
is, I don't think a overly large section
of the audience would say Tears of the
Kingdom. I think more of them would say
Breath than Tears. And I think that
that's a big deal, right? Because they
fumbled this. A certain other number
would say Smash or would say cart or
like there's a whole bunch of sure great
Nintendo games. Sure. And and and I
think that they could have um I think
there are other games that they could
have done this for, right? I think if
they done it just I think they would be
getting less push back if they were
doing it for the first time properly on
the new generation. And I really do
personally think that the attempting to
make Tears of the Kingdom a $70 success
is severely hampering their current
efforts because people have an example
of a $70 title they can point at and
say, "This wasn't it. Why should I
believe you now that this might be it?"
Right?
Um, there's also a really interesting
other point around this that almost
nobody in this discussion is talking
about. Yeah. So, my sister with their
two teenage
kids, they're not going to be the ones
paying for most of their Nintendo
games. You know, at some point they're
going to be like, "Hey, we get a Switch,
new, one of those new Switches for our
birthday or for Christmas." And, you
know, uncle here is going to go buy Once
the console's there, I'm going to buy a
Christmas game. Like my nephew, I had
bought a game on the Switch for his past
like five birthdays and five
Christmases. Yeah. This last one I
actually there was a there was a virtual
sale going on. So, I bought him a store
credit and like here are the four games
you need to go download because I I
picked out four games I wanted him to
play. But there is a lot of gifting from
moms, dads, aunts, uncles, grandparents,
etc. with Nintendo hardware and Nintendo
games. Because it is aimed at a target
demographic, a lot of whom don't make a
majority of their own purchases.
There's also a bit more price elasticity
because, you know, when Johnny's whining
at their mommy that they want the new
Mario Kart, two months in, it doesn't
matter if that game is $60 or $70. Mom's
going to buy Johnny that thing just to
shut Johnny up, right? And Johnny's
going to go play it. So, and and then
there's another there's another element
which I think is hurting Nintendo
specifically here.
Mario Kart
World is
$80, but DK uh Bonanza, Donkey Kong
Bonanza is
$70. And that's not helping this at all.
Wait, wait, say that to me again. My
brain just say that again. Mario Kart
World, okay, a physical copy, we're
talking about physical copies only. We
can talk about digital later, is $80.
Okay. Donkey Kong Bonanza,
another firstparty launch title from
Nintendo, is $70.
So now we also have them um
interesting, right? They're having this
big problem where they're competing with
themselves in a weird way, right?
Because like because so there's already
this anchoring idea, right? game should
cost $60. And now when we look at two
games, one of which cost $70 and one of
which cost $80. While we might grumble
about the $70 game, it's a bargain
compared to the $80 game. And now
they're competing with themselves, which
is increasing grumbling because of the
two, I'm very willing to bet more people
are interested in Mario Kart World than
they are in Donkey Kong Bonanza.
I I Nintendo actually has a small
history of pricing like that where
they're just like, "We know you're going
to buy it." You know, actually, I'm
going to be curious to see what the next
Grand Theft Auto costs.
I think Rockstar is very appropriately
going to be able to say, "We can charge
a lot more than most people are happy
with us charging, but they will buy it
anyway." Yeah. Especially given I I saw
I saw the the number of millions of
units that GTA 5 still moves per year.
Yep. That is a I think the numbers I
think the number I saw was that GTA 5
still moves close to 5 million units a
year
still. Right. They still sell they can
do Rockstar. Right. Right. So So there
are exception companies. Right. Rockstar
can charge whatever they want for the
next Grand Theft Auto game. Almost
literally. I would be shocked if it is
not at least 80. Yeah, correct. And I
will be shocked if there's not some sort
of bundle that puts it at 100. Sure.
Or package prestige something.
Yeah. So, okay. So, that's that's the
that's the why, right? We we've gone
through the the the why is it, right?
Why are why is it locked to 60? Why are
we moving to 80 now? Chad has been
chomping at the bit for the second part
of this discussion, which is Oh, wait,
there's a second part. Yeah. What do we
got? Well, this is much more opinion
based. So, Chad, take off your analysis
hats and be prepared to have good faith
conversation about your opinion. I don't
have my sack of hats sitting here,
right? Yeah, I know, right? Ben, which
is should AAA games cost more than $60?
And we're gonna say more than $60
because there's a bunch of Yeah. Okay.
That's your discussion hat. Um there's
they don't have money. There there's a
bunch of
um there's a bunch of room in that,
right? Um there's, you know, $70, $80,
$100. Some people are being hyperbolic
with it and saying, you know, all games
will cost $100. I don't think we're
there yet, but you do you.
Um, so, okay, this is distracting. Yeah,
you're telling
me. Um, they will. It's distracting,
right?
So, should they, and that's a difficult
question, right? Because I think there's
a lot of one of the arguments that I
hear, right? And I'm going to sort of do
as much interpreting as I can of the
general vibe of chat here rather than
giving too much of my own opinion. Um,
one of the one of the comments that I've
heard is that AAA games have um, in many
people's opinions decreased in overall
quality relative to the offerings which
are available at lower price points in
the in the space in the industry. So
what we're saying is that the delta in
other words if AAA quality let's just
say remained constant at here right that
other games lower priced have raised
their quality up to be closer to the AAA
mark and they are charging significantly
less say a 20 or 30 that the delta the
difference between them has gotten
closer. Yes. Okay. Just making sure I'm
understanding what we're saying. Yeah.
And I think that that is and some people
would argue and I think that there is
less
cold analytical consideration to back up
the idea that AAA games are just bad
now. That that's a hyperbolic take that
I often hear that AAA games are bad
actually. Um, and I think that that that
argument usually comes from a deeply
infranchised part of the games uh
consumer group, right? gamers, capital
G, um who have very high standards and
who are often um very biased against the
industry because they're aware of the a
lot of the other shortcomings from the
gaming industry that aren't necessarily
reflected in the quality of the product,
if that makes sense. Like there's a big
complicated package of ideas there that
often sums up in I don't like AAA games
anymore and they're bad.
It's fine to say I don't like AAA. Yeah,
I would unequivocally say that people
are saying and they're bad are wrong. I
I agree. If you play the latest couple
Spider-Man games, the latest Madden,
like the I mean there are any number of
amazing AAA games and these are games
that you know have 100 to 300 to 500
person teams that work years on them to
put them out. Yeah. the level of
sophistication, spectacle, and gameplay
on AAA has arguably never been as good
as it is now. Like if you But that
doesn't necessarily mean people want to
play them, right? There are separate
those are separate issues. I agree
because as
um Mark here just said like there's also
been a lot of good games that have come
out like the back catalog of games is
strong and that's one of the other
things that everything's competing
against now. not just lower price games,
but they will when my kid turns old
enough, right? You they're not right
now, right? I'm gonna introduce them to
um Halo 3, right? To Dragon Age
franchise, to the Mass Effect franchise,
right? To Bioshock. Like, I'm just I'm
sticking pure triple. I mean, there are
so, you know, to Cotor
um to Portal. I mean, there are so many
good games that have come out that I
love. Um, yeah, home world if it's still
I mean there I'm sorry I don't want to
just keep naming games like no but but
you have a this is another thing that
we're also competing against is when my
son gets to the right
age I won't nec I could I will introduce
him to games that came out that year but
there's also going to be 30 to 40 years
worth of you know me cherrypicking some
of the absolute best games right on each
year to be like check these out and by
the way they're all in dad's Steam
account already, right? So, I also think
there's a bunch of really good comments
in chat. You've got some very chat has
been on fire with some very good
comments. Yeah. So, um uh chaos for now
has a really great point. Inflation says
it should be higher, but minimum wage
says it should stay the same. That's a
great point. The minimum wage in the
United States and in other places, but
we're mostly focused on the US because
we're both in the US, has remained
stagnant, right, at a federal level.
Some states are higher, some states are
lower, some states do different things
because we're 50 countries in a we don't
get along trench coat. So there is that
additional problem, right? That is that
a lot that drives a lot of people's
feelings about this, right? It drives
their opinion. They feel like their
wages are uh not keeping up with their
ability to purchase it. And I think a
lot of people their buying power is not
keeping up with the increase in prices.
Correct. And I think one of the things
that drives this conversation from the
consumer side is the fear that they will
be priced out of a hobby that they love.
Right? That is and I that's an
understandable and very reasonable fear
to have about this conversation. Right?
That totally makes sense. That's what
I'm reading a lot when people say, "I
don't think they should. I don't make
more money. I want to be able to
participate." Totally valid. Completely
valid. In no way are we attempting to
say anything otherwise. Right. But that
is a thing that like there's sort of a
bigger problem at work here. There's a
bigger problem at work outside of the
industry which
is the current state of late states
capitalism in the United States which is
not the topic of this talk. So we're not
going to get too deep into it. But that
is a thing that we're aware of that
exists around this. Right? And in some
cases you might praise the game
industry. Coffee's gone up. All of these
other prices have gone up. Netflix has
gone up. you know, console games for a
long time didn't
Yeah. Like they were one of, as we just
examined, they were one of the few
things that didn't actually go up,
right? For a super long time. And so
people, and this is going to be the
price jump. I would bet you we will not
see another price jump off of this for
the next decade, right?
So, this is the reframing of what prices
are, but they're not going to be like,
"Cool, now it's $82 or whatever." Yeah.
Yeah. I think that's definitely it. And
I also think that
um I
think I don't think that people are
going to leave gaming over it, right? I
think a lot of people will be upset and
that makes sense and that's totally
valid, but I don't actually think a
large number of people are going to
check out of gaming entirely. I think
they're going to be more selective with
which games they buy. But that's already
true. More games come out every year
than the year
before and then we can play
significantly. There's also less because
of the 30, sorry, 20 years ago or 19
when Halo 3 came out, everybody I knew
was playing it. Mhm.
I can't think of a game that everybody I
know is playing anymore because gaming
has expanded so widely. And in some
cases that mean, you know, if Well,
what's the 33 game you're playing right
now? Expedition 33.
If I play that five years from now, I'm
still going to enjoy it. You will still
love it. Yeah, it's still a masterpiece.
It's still going to be a great game that
there is less of the I must go buy
immediately. And because people also
know game prices come down over time in
back
catalog, it's kind of a double hit. Mhm.
You might say, "Wow, Expedition 33
sounds amazing. At some point, I will
buy it and add it to my back catalog of
games to eventually get to." Yeah.
So, like there's a whole bunch of like
even if a game starts high, we're not
even necessarily saying we're pricing
people out because people also know at
some point because that game can be
bought on Steam. Even if it's $60 now,
it's going to be 50 and then 40 and
eventually 30, right? And they'll pick
it up four years from now. And because
there isn't this huge rush to do it,
like there's a whole bunch of weird
factors at work here. Yeah.
And and I think uh so so I'm going to uh
I'm going to pick a very specific
comment that I think is really great.
I'm gonna pick Cross Donut here. Right.
So for Cross Donut, how can they justify
$80 for Mario Kart when there's many
games that go on sale constantly that
provide so many hours for five and three
can put 100 hours easily and they're
like $25 each on sale. And that's true
for you, right? And I think that this is
this is the other big thing.
Each person is going to have a different
relationship to this change in game
valuation. And I think a lot of people
want their view that games should be
less
expensive to be more broadly adopted
because I agree that games should be
accessible, right? But there are people
for whom Mario Kart World is absolutely
worth it at $80, right? Um Matt's one.
I'll throw Matt right under that Mario
Kart, right? Matt is a Mario Kart fiend.
Matt's favorite pastime is uh hustling
people at Mario Kart at parties. Like
Matt is Matt loves Mario Kart. For him,
it is worth it at that price. And I
agree for him. It might be worth it at
200, right? But I'm not saying that. I'm
just saying that. So the utility around
it is different on a per person basis.
Utility meaning how much value you get
out of it. Sure. Sure. Sure. Sure.
the
um and I think that the math has been
done on the corporate side of this that
they expect to sell fewer units and
overall make more money. They expect you
to not they expect there to be fewer
people who will buy that game. I think
it is a smaller number of uh it's a
smaller reduction than I think a lot of
people believe.
But they do expect to sell fewer games
and that should be noted, right? Um,
it's Yeah, I'm I'm curious because I
haven't done this in a while, how much
executives are now counting on like back
catalog sale. Like game is overx, you
know, a year old but still selling. Like
Rockstar obviously is doing a brisk
business with that. Yep. So, let's I I
got a I got another really great one. Uh
Janet's on fire today. $60 isn't
actually the price, though. Look at the
seven different versions of every
Ubisoft game to pre-order. There's also
DLC. Mhm.
Yes,
but a remember when we were talking
about hard drives on consoles 20 years
ago, map packs were a thing on Call of
Duty 2. Map packs were a thing on a lot
of things, right? There were there were
microtransactions. There weren't as
many, right? But we're also choosing a
an era of console to anchor this against
that did have access to DLC. So, that is
in the picture. But
not just DLC. Horse armor. Horse armor.
Woo. Comes in the uh comes in the deluxe
edition of the new Oblivion remaster.
Please look for really. Yeah, that's
funny.
So,
um
the how do I put
this? There was always going to be a
price to enter, right? And I am 100% in
favor of g of studios releasing complete
games for the list price. I think this
might be radical when we're talking
about this. I'm obviously going to
continue to games that release
unfinished or that demand the DLC to
tell the complete story or whatever,
right? I think that a game when released
should be a complete hole that does more
for an optional purchase. Right? I think
DLC is fine. If you want to spend more
time in that world rather than making a
new game, release a DLC for it. That's
great. That's awesome. Borderlands 2
DLC, great example. Borderlands 2 is a
complete story. Tells the whole story.
You can play all of Borderlands 2 and
you can get some DLC that tells some
pretty wacky side stories, including
Tiny Tina's, which is Tiny Tina,
arguably one of the best DLCs ever,
right? So, I think that that is
um I think that that's like a big part
of this, right? I think there's a lot of
criticism of DLC and of games that
release with intentional DLC, right? But
I also want to say that we can criticize
that and also look at the selection of
games that does release feature complete
without intending to do DLC as a
complete whole when we're talking about
this conversation, right? Because I
think it's very easy to muddy the water
and try and have two conversations at
once, right? one about the number of
add-ons and one about the core price to
buy a game, which is really what we're
talking about here, right? Those are
related conversations, but I do think
that they're two conversations. I'm
going to throw a monkey wrench at Will.
Sure. Like game should be complete,
right? The whole story. Yeah. Like the
Final Fantasy remake.
Each of the legs of the Final Fantasy
remake is a complete game. Also, I'm
super excited that they debuted the new
version of Safer Sepharoth on a Magic
card.
I'm now granted if it were any other
franchise and any other card game, I'd
be super upset and I don't blame anyone
for being super upset that they did
that. It's totally Emperor Palpatine has
a message for you and you can only
listen to it in Fortnite. But since I
like both of those properties, I'm going
to sit in my joy. Um, and I know it's a
problem and uh I'm still happy. So, u I
know I just like I I completely agree
with you. It was just funny you said
that in my mind was like wait I played a
game a couple years ago that sure didn't
go as far as I thought it was going to.
Yeah. So Jeeoff I think this has been a
really good conversation. I think this
is probably a a good place for us to
sort of sort of wrap it up but I think
this is really interesting. So let's So
to recap real quick, games have been
stuck at $60 for a variety of market
force reasons and psychological reasons.
Anchoring 20 years for 20 years.
anchoring to the price that games should
cost $60 has been a big part of it. No
one wanting to flinch first has been a
big part of it. Um and uh only wanting
to really change game prices when
possible at generational transitions in
consoles has been another big part of
it. And the the reason that Nintendo is
the one that's getting all the flack
here is that Nintendo has sort of stayed
out of a lot of the processes that other
companies use to sell games like sales
and um loss leading on consoles and are
now saying this is the new price. And I
think a lot of people are getting very
upset about that. And then there's sort
of this also the fact that people are
anchored to Nintendo being the lowcost
alternative Yeah. to the PlayStation and
the Xbox. Yep. Absolutely.
Absolutely. Um, and I think that this is
a very big topic which we could have
infinite conversations about, but I
think that this is a good start. What do
you think?
I could go for another couple hours on
this, but yeah, I think you're right.
Yeah. All right, cool. Well, because I'm
also looking behind me at that espresso
machine and I'm like, I could go get
another espresso. Go get an espresso.
Absolutely.
Um, so that is going to do it for our
episode of Design Club today. Thank you
all so very much for joining us. Thank
you to Brad and to Janet, our Twitch and
YouTube chats for chiming in. You all
were fantastic good faith interlockers
for this. I really want to call out that
it's very easy to to tilt out and just
absolutely go off the handle on this and
both of you both chats have been
constructive with wellreasoned arguments
why people feel the way they do. That's
really great. If you have comments about
this, leave them in the YouTube comments
below. Hit us up on Blue Sky. Do
whatever. Let us know how you're feeling
about this. Does it make sense why we've
been stuck for so long? What what what
do you think is next? Is it going to be
$100 games? Is it going to be $80 games
and that's the end of it? Are games
going to Stay tuned for Grand Theft Auto
to find out? Right. Exactly. Exactly.
Um, as always, that's been Jeff. Uh,
I've been Will. Thank you ever so much
for spending some time with us and we
will see you all next time. Say bye to
the people, Jeff. Goodbye to the people,
[Music]
Jeff. Time for the post stream or post
cut. Yeah, post show. There we go. Yeah,
I think that was good. I felt like we
wrapped up on a good point. I felt like
we could have gone like another hour and
a half. Oh yeah. Um but this is this is
a good point. Um yeah, for real. For
real. I see a lot of people uh in both
chats who have been engaging in good
faith with this. It is like I said, it
is so easy to tilt out on this, right?
Because this is a thing that a lot of
people feel very deeply about because a
lot of us here have lives that are
deeply intertwined with gaming, right?
Like I I chose to wear this for a
reason, right? I am decked out in
Monster Hunter Final Fantasy 14. I've
got a Hollow Night crest under like 100%
right. It's Yeah, it's it's a very easy
thing to get just absolutely tilted out
by. Uh, and I I really think that one of
the important pieces of work that we are
trying to do here, and if you're
watching this in the comments later for
you as well, is to pick this apart and
to talk about it to like actually have a
good conversation that doesn't just
devolve into, well, of course games
should cost less because industry pay,
industry pay, by the way, I I I sort of
skirted that. I think that is another
adjacent but separate conversation,
right? The way that companies spend
their money is a valid conversation that
we should be having, but that is a
different topic than this and it would
be very easy to get very meer down in
that. Um, for the record, I am 100% pro
pay developers more to work less to make
fewer games for more money and I'm
serious about it. Uh, and pro union and
all of that, right? I think that there's
a there's a huge like there are so many
adjoining conversations that I was
trying to like gently navigate us
around. So like if you were talking
about that I see you, I hear you. You're
right. But not a topic for today. Um and
I think I think the bull has a really
great point, right? That
um
uh that they're not worried about what
the price increase means to them.
They're worried about what it does to
the overall gaming ecosystem.
I
think I understand your fear and I share
it to some extent, but I do think that
gaming is more resilient as a as a hobby
and a pastime than I think a lot of
people
think because again, we've talked about
the breadth of gaming
um as being much larger than a lot of
people see, right? If we focus only on
our communities and on people who talk
about games like us or play games to the
extent that we do or develop games like
we do, then we can get a little myopic
on
how how the state of the industry is as
a whole, right? But uh I believe the
data Jeff, please correct me if I'm
wrong here, is that more people are
identifying as people who play video
games recreationally every year and that
there is some amount of as long as we're
taking into account things like mobile
gaming, hidden eye games, console gamers
who play one game, right? All of those
topics. I I do think gaming is more
resilient um than it than it may seem. I
share that fear, but I do want to point
out that I think we're more resilient.
Um,
yeah, it's it's funny. The game industry
is always myopic, right? Yeah. Both the
game industry and the players in it
because whatever you're playing is the
game industry and whatever you're making
is the game industry. Yes. Absolutely.
Just and it's a weird thing to say, but
like if you are constantly playing
League of Legends and Fortnite, right?
Like your experience of the game
industry is radically different than
Will who's playing a different rogue
every week, right? I'm playing who dives
into like, "Hey, let's go play Rogue
Tech again." The mod of Paradox's Battle
Tech, right? And like or you know, the
person who only plays farming games on
their phone, right, between picking up
their kids. Like all of those people
have a very different view and hundreds
more different like and the same with
developers. Like I've talked to people
deving mobile who are like I don't
believe anybody's still making console
games. I'm like well they're still
making billion dollar plus console games
or you know people who are like I can't
believe mobile is still a thing. It's
like well like
all of these kinds of things. Right.
Exactly. And people wonder how Magic's
surviving when they're raising their
costs and Magic is doing just fine.
Final Fantasy is the best selling set
ever despite costing more than normal,
right? Like there is a huge amount
of there is more than it is possible for
two people to cover in a reasonable
amount of time that's going on in the
industry that it it's so multifaceted
now. It is really absolutely massive
because of all the entertainment forms,
games often slip most seamlessly into
people's lives. Right? You play games
while
you're waiting for the bus on the way to
work at your lunch break. You tune into
Twitch. You watch a YouTube video. You
do whatever. Of all of the forms of
entertainment, I would argue that music
and games are sort of the two that just
sort of
insh themselves deeply into your life in
a way that the others um can surely but
often don't. Right. Um Yeah. No,
absolutely. New guys got it. New guys
100% got it. Eldered Ring and Bellatro
being in the same industry is kind of
weird when you think about it. Yes,
that's it. That's the synthetic idea.
Those are both in the same industry.
Elden Ring and Add a third. Elder Ring,
Bellatro, and Fireville. Yeah. Are all
the same industry. Mhm. Right. But some
of those feel like TV games and some of
those feel like indie art house movies
and some of them feel like Game of
Thrones or Avengers Endgame or whatever,
right? And so it is really weird that
those are all gaming, right, when we
talk about those. So I do think it is
together into the ubiquitous ubiquitous
term. Exactly. Exactly. Um yeah. So uh
chat, thank you all so very much. Uh
Janet, we are done over on YouTube for
today. Thank you all so very much for
joining us. If you're watching this on
the VOD, thank you for being here. Um uh
we will see you all Monday for
breakfast. Oh, Monday for breakfast.
That's right. And then next Thursday for
a topic that Will and I are still
locking down, but yes. Uh and so the way
it's going to work on YouTube, just so
Janet knows, I will put up the uh the
there will be a show notification. I'll
preschedu the show after Jeff and I have
a topic. So on Tuesday night, you can
expect the notification of what the next
design club is going to be about. We're
going to put that out on Tuesday nights
so I can tell you what the topic is for
Thursday. Um rather than doing it on
Sunday night like I was when I do the
schedule for the week. Um so please look
forward to that. Uh so uh I will see uh
I will see all of you on Monday. Janet,
have a