Rearranging and setup. All right. And
now we're live on YouTube because I
pressed the button correctly. Uh yeah.
No, rearranging setups are is like a big
deal, right? Especially if you have like
the rat's nest, right? Like I have a
rat's nest of cables under my desk and
it's about to get worse because I'm
going to try and figure out how I'm
going to get the Switch 2 all set up. Uh
and that's going to make it so so much
worse. Like my switch one is like out of
I can't grab it. It's all the way over
there behind my uh gaming rig like on
another like side table. It's like all
the way over there. But the Switch 2, I
don't I don't know. So, you know, we'll
we'll figure it out. Going to switch
your setup around. H I'm going to switch
to my setup around. Bam.
I'm going to switch to the Switch. Yeah,
that's right. Uh for those of you uh who
are struggling with getting a Switch 2,
good luck. Mayor Switch to console not
come stapled. Uh, and I got mine from
Costco this morning. Like they just had
them. You just had to have a Costco
membership. So that was cool. Yeah.
Costco is surprisingly good at some
gaming stuff.
Uhhuh. It is actually mild Costco rant
on the Oh boy. Here we go. Yeah. Go for
it.
Costco. One of their big things is
Costco will never be like here are 14
types of white shirts. Yeah. It's not
You don't go in like you go into Target,
it's like here are 14 types of white
shirts. Have fun. Costco's like here's
two. And we personally have buyers that
went and vetted them because we had a
hundred people submit to sell white
shirts in our stores. And we chose the
two we thought were the best combination
of like value to this to this to this
and then we made them give us a slightly
lower price cuz we were going to buy a
billion of them. Yeah. like walking into
a co a Costco product means it's vetted
in a way that I'm increasingly over the
years becoming more and more
appreciative of especially having seen
Amazon's
uh the technical term the
initification since I can use that since
it's an actual technical term we have we
have we have ruled that that doesn't
count as the square budget
yeah but curation like it's funny there
have been people doing curation for a
long time, but curation
of curation of consumer goods I think is
one of the new frontiers of quality
hallmark as we get more and more people
making things in online stores that just
try and dump them there to sell and then
disappear. Drop shipping. Yeah. As as a
way to to counteract that. Yes. Uh okay,
cool. We're going to hang out for like
two minutes 15 seconds. uh or so so that
ads finish up on Twitch and then we will
start our episode.
Um yeah, it's fine, Thunder. It's fine.
Uh we've sort of semi we've sort of semi
stipulated the guests are immune. Um but
that's okay. Uh, and yes, Costco has
them, but they were sold out
online about 10 minutes after I got
confirmation from my dad who placed the
order cuz my parents have the Costco
membership.
Um, and he did it from his phone. He
ordered a Switch 2 from his phone from
the Costco app to be delivered to me
tomorrow. Pretty dope. As I've said, I
am Costco. Two thumbs up. Plus, they pay
their people well. They really do. Yeah.
Uh Costco uh is very good for that. Yes.
No heists. No. No
heists. No. No. Stop. Stop it. Brad is
trying to heist things. That's illegal.
Um Janet, uh you haven't seen us in a
while. We do apologize for our absence.
Matt was traveling on Monday. Jeff was
unwell last week. So, we're back today
and we will be back on Monday for more
breakfast and we'll be back next week
for more design club. So, you do have
more content coming YouTube way. I I
suppose you could say hoist as long as
you don't do that thing where you like
substitute one word for another like how
on YouTube people say unal alive instead
of die, right? Oh, I thought you were
going to say sub like hoist for moist.
Nope. Nope. That's illegal. That's
doubly illegal. Stop it. Get some help.
Um, check out my new sweat. Um, I picked
this up at PAX when I sat there. My new
Child's Play hoodie. Oh, that's great.
Yeah, that is awesome. Um, it's comfy.
We will see though if it survives the
entire stream as my lights may slowly
heat up the room enough that he goes.
Jeff, I'm in a room with poor
ventilation and two full-sized
computers.
I'm going to die this summer. It's going
to be terrible. I'm actively looking at
getting um I have to see if the condo
covenants around here have anything to
say about uh window mounted air
conditioners. And if they do, I have to
get a low profile one and put it into
place where they can't see it. Cuz how
about a heat sink?
Yeah. Yeah. Um maybe I'll just flood my
room with dry ice. Maybe I'll just get a
bunch of dry ice and just do like dry
ice fog over like the bottom of my
floor. That'll be great. Um yeah. Costco
uh was is very pro- union at the
management level. Yes, that is correct.
Um in that they say if you if you feel
the need to form a union, great. But if
you feel that need, it means we're not
treating you well enough to begin with.
Uh so that's pretty great. Okay. Uh
today's episode is going to be on
breaking conventions to make better
games. We're going to do some Monster
Train 2. Don't worry if you're not a
huge fan of Monster Train 2, that won't
be the whole thing. We're going to use
that kind of as a Wait, wait. I like
Monster Train 2. Sure, but like not
everyone does. Oh, yeah. And it's not a
Monster Train 2 stream. We're going to
use that as a specific object lesson
sort of example thing, and then we're
going to expand out into other um other
games, other games, other genres, other
things. So, we're we're going
to Yeah, there are less expensive ways
to suffocate. No, because I can vent I
can vent the excess CO2, right? That's
fine. That's easy cuz it's
heavier. CO2, heavier than N2, heavier
than O2, right? Per molecule. That means
go down, not up, right? It settles at
the bottom. Evacuate.
Fine.
Fine. Listen. Listen. Chad asked me a
science question. Okay, cool. Great.
Awesome. So, uh, you know the deal. See,
I was impressed that you were doing that
off the top of your head on walking down
the periodic table of combination of
molecules.
Yeah. Or particles. In a previous life.
Okay. So, I have a ma I have a master's
degree. My master's degree and my gra my
undergrad degree are functionally both
in media. Um, by which I mean like the
classics, right? So, my undergrad's in
um liberal arts. my masters in the
liberal arts. But the way that both of
those manifest is in like media
literacy, um, media analysis, film
analysis, all of that, modern
communications, all of that sort of gets
rolled into it. So, it's actually pretty
appropriate for what I'm doing. My high
school was the science of technology
high school, and I was in the fasttrack
science and technology thing. One of the
other people in my program literally did
as a senior project anti-angioenesis
factors in cancer treatments to help
cure cancer. That's the level of high
school that I went to for science and
technology, which has nothing to do with
my current job, but I took organic
chemistry my senior year. There's no AP
test for organic chemistry. Not enough
people take it. I love chemistry.
Chemistry was like my jam. I took
regular chem, AP Chem, organic
chemistry. I took all of the chemistry
that they would let me take. Uh, and
yeah, so I learned a thing about you
today. Yes, that is correct. Um, if you
have functioning floor vents, CO2 is
fine. Yeah, I don't, so I'm going to
have to rig up a hood. Uh, but that's
fine. Okay, cool. Great. Now that we've
been sidetracked, followup question to
chemistry as we're going on. Yeah. Do
most chemists make good cooks?
I have a theory that people who are good
at chemistry, practical lab chemistry,
also make excellent cooks. Well, and
it's not even just that. It's the
ability to follow instructions closely.
That's exactly why. Yeah. Right. It's
not like just familiarity with like
burner setups or whatever. No. Yeah. The
ability to and it's not just cooking.
Cooking
is season it with your heart. Right. Um
the baking baking particularly pastry
baking is do this exactly right. If you
don't do it exactly right, it will be
ruined forever and there will be a curse
upon you and your house for seven
generations. Don't mess with pastry
recipes, right? So, like chemists make
excellent bakers even more than cooks.
Yeah. Okay. Uh, great. Anyway, now that
we're thoroughly need those up. Well,
you sound a tiny bit soft to me. Are we
at the same levels when you're checking?
Yep. Okay. I mean, I can I can just Oh,
there we go. Yeah, I'll just be here.
Um, all right. Great.
Uh, awesome. Uh, going to black. We'll
be right back. Three, two,
[Music]
one. Good time zone, internet. Hello and
welcome to Design Club, the only game
design show on the internet that's back
this week after a oneweek hiatus and
that isn't talking about the Switch 2
launch. That is today, the day that
we're recording this. I am your humble,
proud Switch to soon to be owner Will,
joined as always by my co-host Jeff. Say
hi to the people, Jeff. Hi to the
people, Jeff. Hey everybody, I'm Jeffrey
Zeian, the studio director of Extra
Credits and the long not the
a long time game designer like two
decades plus who is currently had his
mind blown the fact that I learned a
thing that yesterday will. Yes. Having
gotten back into the Unity ecosystem and
retaching myself things. We did an
episode like two months ago on allocart
game development talking about using
assets from the Unity store to
accelerate your game in the same way you
use things like Photoshop or Blender or
other
tools. Unity much to my surprise where
you buy a software package from you know
tool package for like 20 to 100 bucks
because these are serious tool packages
you're buying.
blew my mind by having a
$2 weekl long sale
yesterday. I spent if I I went and
bought a lot of stuff. I spent four
hours that I should have been doing
other things looking through the store
and buying
things at the same time that they were
running a 10% off June sale. Everything
was really for 10% off. So everything
was really a$180.
Yeah. Okay. and I bought almost
$2,500 worth of software for
$138 like it that so normally I'm not a
fan of like buy it just cuz it's on sale
but at that ratio
I absolutely bought things that I was
like might I need this on a future
project or do I just want to look at it
and see how somebody more talented than
myself built this particular shader.
Yes. Yeah. For for $2. The fact that I
might use it later. Yeah. Okay. Yeah.
That that I might take it apart and
learn from it. Yeah.
Uh absolutely. I just I had to bring
that up because of all I expect that on
like the iTunes store or maybe like
Steam Ultra Indie games down to, you
know, suda. And it's funny though, like
it's a bad proposition for a game
bringing this back in because most
studios, even if you're pretty fast,
you're not making a game every two
weeks, right? Or you know, the game you
make, unless it's really good, is
probably not selling five or 10 years
later. Where if you're doing software
development and building tools and
you're like, "Here's a tool. Now I'm
going to go make another tool. Now I'm
going to go make another tool." Selling
somebody a tool for $2 that they look
at, they're like, "This was a good tool.
What else has this dev team made? Like
it's it's an actual like loss leader
marketing kind of thing. Yeah. Uh which
I think is is very smart, right? Uh I
think it's a very cool way to do it. We
were talking about Etsy too that Etsy
does similar things. Um but it's it's a
little different obviously because Etsy
is physical goods largely, not
exclusively but largely uh and and Unity
is digital goods. And the beauty of
digital goods is once you've made a
digital good, selling an extra thousand
of them does not cost you anymore.
Correct. Where for a physical good, you
can get to a point where it costs you
more to make it than you sell it for if
you've deeply discounted. Yep. Which is
a tangent, but it's also a little bit
since we're talking about breaking rules
today. Yeah. Or breaking um conventions
like $2 software is not a thing I am
used to seeing. Correct. Yeah. And and I
think Grass has it absolutely right. It
is a good price for consumer or for
customer acquisition, right? That that's
correct. Like the the cost of uh and
that's what Epic's been doing for a
really long time, right? Epic's been
doing the
um uh they pay developers for every copy
of a free game that you claim, right?
Times the number of copies. Um and they
have viewed that cost that they have
been paying out money to developers as a
cost to acquire users into their
ecosystem which is accurate right um and
in this case it's it's much the same
thing uh and actually in
um man in the st case case of the um
Unreal wait why did you what what
storefront did you just mention Epic
thank you in the case of the epic store
the biggest thing they're also combating
is it's a two for one thing because
They're like, "Come get free game."
People like, "Oh, I like free game." But
when you're doing that, you're building
up a library. Because one of the biggest
disadvantages the Epic Store has is the
Steam store where people have 20 or 50
or 100 games sitting in their library.
Moving to a new
store means you have, you know, you're
basically splitting where you're
hoarding your things. Yeah. And so
they're trying to get you critical mass
where you're just you're not going to
abandon the Epic Store because you're
like I have 15 games in here, right? And
just sort of like I'm I'm going to like
I'm not I'm not we're not bailing on
this topic, but we're kind of tacking
back towards our our plan our plan topic
for today. That is a thing that Epic
decided to do. That's a big risk that's
breaking one of the rules about
storefronts, which is you can't really
give away your main product for free,
right? You can have a loss leader,
Costco chickens, right? Right. We're
talking about Costco and getting Costco
hot dogs. Yeah. Costco hot dogs, right?
And the food court at Costco, right?
That's a way to get people in. But
giving away your product for free,
that's kind of that that is weird,
right? And the amount of free product
that Epic's given away is more than
$1,000 per account. Staggering. Yeah,
it's a staggering amount, right? But
it's been successful and they had to do
something big and different to compete
with Steam because Steam is the
juggernaut in the room in the room. Epic
came in and said, "We want to 5 to 10
years from now be a competitor for
Steam, and we are willing to spend money
along the way to get to the point where
eventually, like Steam, we will print
money by selling all of these things,
right? They got them. They got those
Fortnite dollars.
Fortnite money, V-Bucks, V-Bucks money
goes pretty far." So, uh, Jeff, our
topic this week, yes, breaking
conventions makes better games. Hi.
Monster Train 2 came out recently. We've
both been playing it. We played the demo
a while ago on stream to just kind of
like take Yeah. Take take a quick look
at it. Walk me through how you came to
this revelation. So So we're going to
we're going to walk through how Jeff
came to this conclusion. We're going to
show you a bit of how that conclusion
came to be and then we'll talk about
some other games. So,
so I played a lot of Monster Train one
just it was it's been one of my rotation
games especially because they have a
really nice iPad port. Yeah. And I have
three games on my iPad that are my go-to
I need to space out games which is Slay
the Spire, Monster Train, and Bellatro.
Those are like my three rotation games
of Those are three games any one of
which has devoured thousands of people's
entire like free times. Yes. Great. And
they all have fantastic iPad ports and
because I don't have a computer in bed
or you know sitting when I'm waiting to
pick up my kid from school or anything
else. These are my easy go-to games and
I put a lot of time into all of them.
Both actually I also put a lot of time
to the PC versions. But Monster Train is
a good game. Just straight up. It's not
my favorite of all time, but it is a
good good game. So, I started Monster
Train 2, and one of the immediate things
as a designer that I noticed was that
they were leaning a lot more heavily
into the differentiation of clans, which
is the equivalent of a character-ish
for this. And one of the biggest ways
that they are differentiating is
basically saying here is the set of
rules for how the monster train game
exists. Yes, every single clan and every
single hero within that is going to find
an interesting way to break the
conventions like strongly so. So if you
analyze monster train in a weird way,
it's kind of a tower defense game. Yes.
and that you are picking your towers,
your monsters to position on three
floors and enemies come in usually
starting on the bottom floor and work
their way up until they reach the py.
And if they do that, they actually do
long-term damage to you. Yep. Your job
is to stop them with your towers plus
your spells along the way up. Yep. And
so one Go ahead. Let's slide into it and
we'll we'll we'll we can we can show
people some some visuals while we while
we do that. Yeah. So, so here we go. We
got we got Monster Train 2.
Uh we're going to depart on a new run.
All right. Let's see. And we're going to
choose some stuff. So, Jeff, you wanted
to take a look at the these are the five
clans. I only have three of them
unlocked. I haven't had a lot of time to
play. Um let's see.
Py P. Actually, do me a favor. Select
py. Let's break two things and go with
um for your second clan banished. And I
want yeah the just cause one. Cool.
Cool. Um what you get by the way when
you're selecting here is you're getting
a hero. We see we've selected the dragon
here. You select a secondary clan. This
gives you the base starting cards of
that clan's hero. In this case using in
the bottom right just cause. Yep. And
we'll get to that in a second. All
right. So, so keep going. So, we have
this game. We're gonna I'm gonna get us
to the first fight and we'll talk about
why this is weird. And so, when you
finish each level,
sorry, what's up? I'm glad we're not
finishing this run. We have to fight
Sarah Fraternus Chosen of Dominion,
which does corruption, too. And I hate
corruption. Yeah, it's gross. Okay.
Anyway,
um there we go. So, select what you
actually hold on. Let's just see. Oh, so
like and when you finish a level, you
get gold. Gold could be spent in shops
to power up your towers or i.e. minions
and power up your spells and a couple of
other things. Yep. So, gold is the power
up
currency. There's literally no other use
for gold than in some way making you
stronger. Correct. Most of the time,
right? And I think that's sort of the
the theme here is that we're going to
get we're going to tell you a bunch of
rules about this game. And I want you to
imagine that every single one of these
rules that we've just described has an
asterisk. Yep. And that's one of the
things that I was most impressed about
Monster Train because like one of the
other basics of most tower defense
games. You put a tower down and that's
where it is to attack the monsters. Yep.
Clan number one, which we took their
card for with Just Cause, breaks that
rule with a common card. Yep. Straight
up. Which, uh, they have a new ability
called advance. Advance means select a
thing, move it to the frontmost position
of your towers. Notice it doesn't say
advance friendly. So, this also means
you can take an enemy in a wave that is
hidden behind the big blockers and be
like, "Oh, let's put you in the front
where you're the first thing that's
going to get killed as combat happens,
right?" Like, positioning in tower
defense of where you put towers is a
pretty basic thing. And I want to talk
about this real quick because I think
this is really important. The game never
says your minions don't move, your units
don't move, because it's building on a
convention of tower defense games,
right? It's building on a set of genre
expectations from tower defense games
that say when you place a thing down,
that's where it lives. That's where it
is, right? That's that is a me that is a
a genre convention of that kind of game,
right? You don't generally I every time
we talk to defense dabble in it like um
Clash Royale is a combination of
actually is a tower defense game. Yeah.
And for example, you know, if you put a
big beefy ogre down and put a little
archer behind it, assuming you know the
move speeds, it's not like your archer
suddenly jumps to the front of the ogre.
Yes. Like it positioning matters in
these games. Like that is that is a
convention of how these games work. Yes.
position well and then see how the
combat happens. Correct. The same thing
with like finish a level well to get
more gold to use for upgrades. Right. Uh
I'm going to Cool. Okay. Having said
that, what do we got here? Uh we're
going to take the Emma. Both of those
are solid. Yeah, we don't have any welps
now. And I hate build I hate I hate
speculating on major artifacts. This is
like a this is a strategic difference
between me and I think you're starting.
Um yeah, we don't have any. Okay,
because we're on zero. We're not on
We're not on Covenant one to keep this
under control. Is this going to give me
the thing? Okay, so so here's here's a
great one. Here's another great one
in uh and and other rogike card games do
this, too. And I'm really glad we got
this one. This one says, "Every time
Lord Phoenix, big beefy dragon boy kills
our hero." Yeah. Kills something, it
gains an attack permanently.
Mhm. Permanently meaning the rest of the
run. Correct. It's not the rest of this
fight. It's the rest of the run. There
are plenty of things that get buffs in
this fight. But for the rest of the run
is weird. And there are other games
obviously that do this. Um you get
stacking bonuses on some jokers and
Bellatro. You get uh things like
sacrificial dagger in um slay the spire,
right? But it is um what's the shield
defect gets the oh um um uh it gets more
powerful each genetic algorithm. Yeah.
Yeah. Um so this is not unheard of but
it's fun to see this coming in as a base
level ability right on something that in
the last version was a lot more rare
actually little flame. Um,
yeah. But well, and my and my larger
point is the idea that the convention of
we're using cards as a way to represent
things. There's an intuition that those
cards are less mutable, right? They're
they can generally be upgraded, which
you can think of as replacing the card
with a better version of the card, but
they're less mutable. And this is a
permanent upgrade, right? This is a this
is a way that the game changes
fundamentally on a turnbyturn basis,
which is weird and cool, right? And
that's that being said, both of these
are solid upgrades. Yeah, but I like
this one better. All right, let's do it.
Um, okay. So, uh, worry not, we're not
going to do the whole run. We're just
going to show you how this works. So,
uh, we get to see we're facing some
zombies.
Uh, and we can choose to face more
zombies to get some gold. But what I
heard was I can choose to face more
zombies so that my dragon can eat more
things and get more powerful.
Um, true. I'm seeing all upside here.
So, uh, you don't need to worry about
that. But we're going to we're going to
look at the basic conventions. So, at
the start of the battle, enemy units
appear on each floor. That's a modifier
to this one. Um, that's unusual. Oh, I
also just noticed because we're playing
the Ascension Zero version. Yep.
Oh, by the way, before you end it, Will,
how big is Dragon? Oh, never mind. He's
three. Dragon three butt.
Um, have you seen the undo button here?
Yes. So, there is I I have praised this.
One of the things that this game does
that I wouldn't consider a rule break,
but I would say is the height of design
that should be praised. It's quality of
life. It is pure quality of life. Is you
can undo an entire turn. You up until
the enemies move. Yeah. You can undo
everything you have done since the last
enemy move. Correct. And it is bananas.
And they managed, the game is such that
it doesn't lend itself to analysis
paralysis, which is a problem that often
occurs when you let players rewind
something indefinitely. Is that you may
want to limit it some because if you
don't, then what happens is they will do
it over and over again until they get
the perfect solution. But the game has
enough tolerance here that the perfect
solution either isn't hard to find or
isn't important. Yeah. Well, and you
can't go quite far enough back because
it's per per turn of thing. It's not
like the mistake you made two turns ago
can be undone. Correct. And that is one
of the things that I dislike a little
about Monster Train is the um the
disconnect between your actions and the
ultimate effect of them because it can
be a little difficult to see why you
actually lost. Um so, okay. So, we've
deployed all of our stuff, right? So,
one of the things I just realized
because we're not getting additional
starter cards, we're not actually seeing
one of the main abilities of the
dragons, which is the ability to
generate obscene amounts of gold in ways
that no other clan gets. Right. I was I
was hoping that we'd get one of the
dragon egg abilities, but we'll we'll
talk about that. This is We don't
because we're on zero. You don't get
extra cards to level one. Uh doesn't
Phoenix have a hoorde ability?
Hold on. Um isn't his third ability a
hoorde ability? Let's see.
Look at his what? Actually,
doesn't doesn't matter for right now.
Let's keep going. Um, so like we said,
it's a tower defense game. Uh, I'm going
to deploy. Wait, wait, undo that real
quick. Why? Let's do positioning real
quick. I was Okay, see that little foot
soldier there, Will? Yes. Let's put a
foot soldier in front of the big buff
blocker soldier.
Okay. I was going to use those
elsewhere, but okay.
And look, you can move and you can undo
this too, right? One of those basic
abilities. Hey, look, we've repositioned
this guy in like that's just the basic
ability that came in with this clan.
Let's move you to the front and give you
a buff. And there are and there are
other cards that care about being moved
as well, right? Yes. So, they get
bonuses every time they get moved. Yes.
So, you end up doing a lot of moving.
And again, in a tower defense game, I'm
just saying this is so unusual that
basically we're seeing moving towers as
a base ability, which is great. It's
them looking to say, "No, here's the
thing. This clan is going to this clan
will be memorable because right you're
going to be in tower defense that you
never do normally instead of
um the clans are far more distinct than
like slay the spire characters because
while slay the spire characters have
different starting artifact or starting
relics and starting decks they generally
operate on the same principles which is
one of the reasons that the prismatic
shard card is
viable at all. That's I would actually
argue that slightly. We can get to that
when we get to Spire. I would say they
start off in the same point and they
start diverging wildly.
We can argue about that. Poison orbs.
Yeah.
Uh yes, they can. They don't have to. Um
okay. So, uh I'm gonna You can undo that
if you want to for this round. I just I
wanted to show that it's like base level
card. Yeah, I know. I I had a I had a
thought of how I was going to
demonstrate a bunch of stuff with the
turn and it has left my mind. So, let me
let me play through real quick. So, uh
we are going to use Oh, that's the other
one. Uh this guy's got an ability, an
activated ability. So, that's good. So,
he's going to murder something in the
back and then he's going to murder
something in the front and we need to
put
something back
here and something back
Why did you all get pyro gel?
When you flame Oh, that's right. Yeah,
they all get py. He flames the whole
row, but only one person takes straight
up damage. Yep, that's right. Uh, and if
you want some armor, you could put it on
the front guy. Um, the Just Cause will
give him armor every round after this
for being in the front. Yeah, Valor is
uh the thing. Uh, yes. Paradox asks,
"Prismatic shard is the one that allows
you to put any card from any class. It
said prismatic is weird
in card rewards. All cards from all
classes and neutral cards are added to
card rewards at the appropriate
rarities. Shops remain
unaltered. That's a minor. And you don't
get to pick them, but yes. Uh, okay. So,
we're going to take a hit and that's
fine.
Yeah, I'm I'm of the the same opinion as
Demon Works that um spire characters all
operate under the same broad rubric. I
would agree with that.
Um more zombies, more stuff. Great. Got
to flame the little imp back there to
get your gold. I'm trying to decide uh
how much damage mitigation I'm trying to
do here versus how much I'm trying to
murder stuff. Yeah. Uh, we
want that guy's going to die to the
wrong thing. So, I got to think about
that real quick. Um, kill that for now.
That's fine. Worry about this guy next
turn.
Schmack. Yes, even defect. Well, defects
orbs um are actually there's a hidden
passive part of prismatic shard because
defects orbs are such a big deal. Um
the guess you're going to kill that.
That's fine.
Um the prismatic shard gives you an
invisible
orb slot. Prismatic gives you if you use
the there's another card um watcher can
do that pulls in a card possibly from
other people as well. Yes. Uh I don't
has to exist for that too. Yeah. I don't
remember if that one
um what I don't remember is if that one
um gives us gives orb slots or not. Mhm.
I'm just gonna stack all this up. You
might want to advance the front guy to
the back just to give one more heavy
hit. Yeah, I
guess. I'm not sure if
that's pyrogel is a unique weird thing.
Uh, okay. Pyro gel basically when it's
on something makes every hit it takes do
extra damage equal to the stacks on
that. Don't forget you have a breath
weapon again. Yeah, I'm getting there.
Boom. And then he's going to die to the
right thing. Yep.
So, it's not piloting at the base level
isn't mechanically complicated, right?
There are lots of good choices, but it's
lots of good choices in a way that makes
sense in a simple way, right? The rules
are pretty straightforward. There are
things on this floor. I have things on
this floor. They're going to fight.
We're going to keep going until someone
is dead. Yeah. The interesting part
about this game and why I think it
stands out is the um
there you got to take I'm I'm getting
there. Um or actually, what's the one to
the No, Golden Touch. Yeah. One of the
reasons that it's so interesting is that
the um is
that taking the base rules and then
building weird on top of it for
different things, especially when you
get to combine two different groups of
people is really powerful for making the
game memorable and interesting, right?
So, for instance, um the pyro gel is a
stacking debuff, right? That stays on
that the basic cards from the Pybor get
to do. that's weird and leads to
specific strategies and the way that
those strategies interact with the
movement strategies means that while the
fundamental rules that underly it are
weird are are simple, right? You put
units down, they fight, something
dies, by breaking some of those rules
selectively, we get a more memorable
experience, right?
And in this case, the memorable is fun.
Yes, memorable is fun and good, right?
And and this is there's all kinds of uh
this is this is a really great one. So
we can kind of see here how breaking one
rule from tower defense games leads to a
lot of possibilities. So here we have a
card that says challenge. Advance a unit
to the front of the floor and it applies
a debuff. Instead of uh our starter
cards which apply a buff, this is a
debuff. I can call someone out from the
back of the enemy line. right here. I
can pull someone forward and make them
take a hit or someone melee weakness
means the next time they're hit, they
take double damage. Yes. Um, uh,
selfless sacrifice lets you negate
damage. And then my one of my favorite
cards, the penitent body suit. It's a
suit of spikes that you put on an enemy
and then every time it moves, it takes a
bunch of damage. So if you want to, you
can put it on something that has a lot
of health and then make it dance back
and forth until it dies. It's really
funny. I like it. It's great. dance.
Yeah. Right. It's really good. So, um,
can I get to this? Let's see. Do they
have magic on? Oh, so here's an
interesting one for the dragons. We, you
saw if we'd actually started one level
higher. We might have had a chance to
start with one of the cards that did
this in our
deck. But they have a new mechanic,
which is collect dragon eggs. At the end
of a match, you have the option to cash
in your dragon eggs based on how many
you have. And so, for example, if you
have two dragon eggs, you can 25 gold.
If you have eight, which is currently
the maximum will can do, you get 75
gold, a minor artifact from the clan,
and your choice of one of two other
artifacts. So basically stacking up your
treasure. They're giving you a separate
miniame to play here, which is, oh,
you're a dragon. You like loot. Do the
right thing. Let's start handing you out
lots of extra gold and lots of extra
artifacts for doing the thing you
probably were going to do anyway, which
is trying to kill your opponents, right?
And you can choose to forego some amount
of stuff that'll make you more powerful
in the game for the ability to hold more
eggs. You only hold eight base. There
are other things that you there are um
artifacts that you can get that instead
of taking something which will make you
more powerful and make it easier to beat
the game, you're increasing your
capacity for dragon eggs. So, you can
get up to 13. And if you get 13 dragon
eggs, you get to select a free boss
relic. You only normally get two of
those the entire run. Would you like a
third one? Right. So again, we it goes
from and and this is really interesting.
It goes from
uh the simple idea that there is an
additional currency based resource that
only that clan gets only that clan gets
that is at the beginning roughly
exchangeable for gold and ends with
there is an extremely precious limited
thing that you normally only get two of.
If you're really good at this miniame
that only one of five clans can
do, you can have an additional boss
relic, right? And so that means that any
run that involves the Pyreorn is going
to be just going to feel fundamentally
different. It's going to have this
fundamental underlying current of I need
to keep an eye out for this because the
payout is so good, right? Because it
allows me to break this rule and get
this third thing, right? Why would I
choose between drawing more cards and
having more energy and having bigger
floors when I could potentially have all
three? I take one of two of those for my
first for my two regular boss relics and
take the third one as my Pybor relic and
now I'm super powerful and it lets me
feel like I've been rewarded for doing
this thing and it's really clever,
right? That's kind of the where then in
addition they build on that by saying
we're going to give you a couple of
creatures that if you deploy them have
power based on the number of eggs
currently in your inventory or in your
inventory when they were played. Yep.
Just to make you be like, "Wait, if I
cash these in, correct, my dragon
hoarder that is shown like clutching
dragon eggs is going to be weaker on
deployment, right? So they lean into
this system. In fact, I can uh let me
I can show you. So, the the things that
we're talking about, uh, also just as
long as we're in Monster Train, this is
bestinass information accessibility for
a card-based
rogike. It's bestin-class. You have all
of the information about pretty much
everything you could care about
referenced in one place in an easy to
digest fashion that lets you sort, that
lets you find all the information at a
glance. It filters. it. Yeah, it
filters. It is wild, right? So, we're
gonna look for Pybor, right? So, we have
um it's an uncommon Pybor card, so you
can just hit the UNC. There you go.
Yeah. So, so we have we have all kinds
of other cards that interact with this.
The Gildmonger, a unit, normally you
don't want your units to die, but when
the Gilmonger does, it gets an egg. You
get an egg, right? We have uh greed.
Greed says, "Deal 20 damage to all
units." That means yours, too. And sle
is for every unit it kills, death,
right? It doesn't care whose it kills.
So you can kill your own units to get
eggs, right? And remember earlier Jeff
was talking about gold, how gold is
exclusively used to make you more
powerful in shops and in events. Yeah.
Which is the the area between the
fighting, right?
Except we have a card called make it
rain where we can spend our gold in the
middle of
combat to do something cool.
Right. We also have an ability called
avarest that lets us build gold in the
middle of combat. Right. So again, the
miser every 10. Every time he hits
something, you get 10 gold. Yeah. Give
him multi strike so he goes twice a
round, you get 20 gold in a boss fight.
If you positioned him last in your row
so he hits the boss like 12 times during
the fight as it goes back and forth, 120
gold, right?
Pretty crazy, right? So this this is
kind of where we're getting to with
this, right? And I think this is a
really great example of this is there's
a
line
between building identity for a
character, faction, unit, um,
archetype and um, and making it
interesting and doing it in a way that
is super memorable because you set out a
bounding box for what design is going to
be for your game and then said, "Except
And then you made all of these weird
little carveouts and doors at the edge
of the bounding box to let things bolt
onto it and break those conventions and
break those rules. This is kind of one
of the the big examples of that, right?
And this is literally the kind of thing
in a design doc as you're thinking of
the clan, you'd be like, "What's the
tagline for this clan?" And you know, or
the hero and it's going to be like
dragons are greedy and like gold, right?
Because you see, there's things that
like encourage you to hoard gold and
there's things that encourage you to use
gold. Yep. Oh, bottom left, by the way,
you were talking about spending gold.
Soldier of Fortune is one of my
favorites
on that. You can spend gold to buff a
specific unit, which is very powerful.
Um there again, there's all kinds of of
very interesting um uh stuff that you
can do, but I think that's probably the
green dragon is the one I was talking
about right there. Yeah, the green
dragon. that for every egg you have, he
gets 10 bonus offense and 10 bonus
health, right? Payoff is another one.
Um, you can uh you can only do it once
per fight, but you can restore long-term
health
based on your long-term resources, which
is weird, right? Because normally those
are things that interact with you
interact with on a different layer.
Healing is done out of combat. Spending
or worrying about your egg count is done
out of combat, but here it's done in
combat. Right? So, we've got a layer
translation between the metagame layer
or what I would call the metagame layer
in between fights and the actual fights
itself. And this is one of the only
clans that does it so far that I've seen
in this game. Correct. So, that's
another thing that they're breaking with
it is here is the interaction that
happens between fights moved into let's
make some of that matter during a fight.
Correct. And I think that that is that's
a really great example. I think that's
probably good for monster training. can
dive into some other really weird
different examples. Um, we just wanted
to like this is a really Yeah, this was
the game as I was playing I was looking
at how cleanly they did it on a per clan
and per hero basis and how much they'd
upped it from number one, right? Like
number one, there was definitely
identity around clans with mechanics,
but man, they took that. They're like,
"Oh, hold my beer monster train one here
comes monster train. There's a new train
on the track, right?" and they just took
it and dialed it up. Probably one of the
best examples. You could play this once
per fight. You gain three uh dragon eggs
and take 10 damage. 10 long-term damage.
Surely between fights, nothing bad will
happen. Nothing bad will happen if I do
this. Right? So, um so that's sort of
what we're talking about, right? We're
talking about this these ways that
people uh that designers create a
system, create a bounding box and then
break it, right? So, um, it's we should
probably stipulate it's really common to
do this in rogue likes and Jeeoff and I
both love rogue likes, right? It is it
is very easy to see um where where that
happens. So, uh it's done in Slay the
Spire, Enter the Dungeon, Binding of
Isaac, uh Risk of Rain, uh um less so in
Spalunky. Yeah. But like if you Yeah. If
you pick if you pick a
deckro thrives on it, right? Every deck,
every deck says this one rule doesn't
apply to you, right, in some way or this
rule about deck building doesn't apply,
right? Like, hey, what are fa uh
abandoned deck face cards? They're not a
thing. You don't need face cards, right?
What if you had a super thin deck that
was all numbers, right? That's weird,
right? Because the base conceit of Batro
is you are playing with a 52 card deck
except when you're not. Right. Right. Um
so but it's also funny to see the
interactions. Like there's an awful
common joker which is get I think it's
get plus one
multiplier per hand played and it goes
back to zero as soon as you play a face
card. Isn't that ride the
bus? Think it's bus. I don't think
it's No, I think maybe. But anyway, like
that's a pretty awful common because
most of the time you want to play face
cards because they give you more points.
In the abandoned deck, which has zero
face cards to start with, there is
unless you add one to you, there is no
chance of playing a face card and an
awful common joker suddenly becomes a
somewhat worthwhile common joker. Right.
Okay. It is ride the bus. You were
right. I remembered. Right. Richard
pointed it out in chat. I will decide to
say if you both you and he say it. Yeah.
Um Yeah. And and I think that these are
um so so we'll just kind of stipulate
that like this is how characters work
and jokers and relics and artifacts and
um upgrades. That's how all of those
work in rogue likes, right? Uh every
every good memorable upgrade I can think
of in every rogike I've ever played. and
I have played literally hundreds uses
this core principle to make it sink
right but there are other places that it
happens where it's a maybe a little less
obvious maybe it's a little less
straightforward and we wanted to talk
about some of those and actually let let
me cap the rogike section
one of the reasons that rogue likes need
to do a thing like this is they are
expecting you to play this game over and
over and over slowly unlocking things or
learning things along the way. Yes. And
if every single run felt the same,
right? These games would get boring
really quickly. And so part of what it
is is almost all these games, especially
in the first couple runs, establish this
is kind of how a thing normally goes.
And for example, in Slay the Spire, you
don't start with all the cards for
Ironclad unlocked, right? You unlock
cards as he levels up. In monster train
you unlock cards as your clan levels up.
You know in Bellatro you un actually you
don't you find new joker actually. Do
you unlock
some of it's unlocked some of it's fine.
You unlock new decks. You need to beat
runs with decks in order to unlock new
decks which are also the things but and
actually I think some jokers get un yeah
some jokers get unlocked when you do
certain things. Mhm.
are basically saying we're starting you
with a less complex version and as you
play more we're slowly expanding the
complexity level and by doing that we're
increasing the amount of interactions
that might happen and provide different
play experiences on a per run basis.
Yep. And that's also the reason for a
lot of these it's weird convention
breaking and random a lotment of these
things because if you could go into
Spire and say I want to pick you know
floor one I want to find budgeon floor
two I want to find flame barrier you
don't get to pick which thing you do
it's here's a small selection pick from
these same with bolatro same with
monster train it's always here's a small
selection because what it means is you
can't say this is the optimal deck, I
will always play it, right? It's here is
what I think is the best one for what I
can currently pick from. And it's really
interesting because when games do let
you do that selection, it's generally
because the game will respond in a way
that requires you to have made good
selections. Risk of Rain has the command
artifact which does let you do that.
Every time you find an artifact of a
certain rarity or category, it lets you
choose which thing of that category
you're getting.
But Risk of Rain is also more than
capable of delivering a run which you
will need that level of control to beat.
Right. Right. Um and so yeah, it's
really cool. Yeah. And so anyway, just
saying for a game like that that you're
going to play over and over and over,
you can see why they want this kind of
combinatoric field of play of all these
things that could happen with it being
different on a per run basis. But not
every game expects you to do kind of
that infinite loop, right? like this is
a solution for a certain kind of game,
right?
But in other games sometimes uh and
we're going to talk about uh two sort of
groups of these. We probably should put
these next to each other and I'll move
my section. Um is uh hero shooters and
moas places where you need to have a
strong character identity, right? Um so
I don't know about all of you, but I've
been playing a whole heck of a lot of
Marvel Rivals, right? or and and I
played some Overwatch before that,
right? I'm not as up and hip on the
Overwatch lingo, but like So, this is
hero shooters, by the way, that we Yeah.
So, hero split into Yeah. Hero shooters
um depend on this to make each character
meaningfully unique, right? What makes
this
DPS different than all the other DPS's?
Right. Both that's part of the identity
of a hero shooter. This isn't
Counterstrike or Halo, right? Yeah.
which is, you know, you're all roughly
the same kind of thing. Or this isn't a
class-based one like Battlefield or Call
of Duty where like I'm a medic, I'm a
sniper kind of thing. This is, you know,
I'm Trace, I'm you know, well, even the
we we could even look at the two the two
snipers, right? Widowmaker versus Anna
and Hanzo, right? Like though they each
have different rules that they break,
right? Widowmaker gets to do oneshot
head shot and Anna gets to heal from
further away than is reasonable in any
circumstance. Right. Normally the rule
is healers have to be up close and like
in the fight to be healing and Anna
says, "Nah, that's for you youngans. I'm
going to be all the way in the back."
Right. Right. As an example, the reason
for this is usually it's frustr.
Yes. It's kind of hard to knock off the
healer. Right. and the healer just keeps
to get healing the person up front and
that's annoying, right? And uh and we
see it if you're if you're more familiar
with rivals, we see it there, too. All
of the teamups are really great examples
of this. Um one of the best ones is uh
you have to move your character except
if you're Jeff or Rocket and you have
Groot because then you just get to ride
Groot, right? Then you get to worry
about healing and putting your stuff
down and doing damage and coordinating
for your team and Groot carries you.
That's a weird rule break, right? That's
a the convention in hero shooters is
that you are in control of your
character most of the time barring like
pushes and pulls and stuns and whatnot,
right? But like you get to do something
different because they said now you
don't have to do that one small thing,
right? And both Rocket and Groot, by the
way, have their own other rule breaks,
but the main one I'm thinking about is
Groot. Um Yeah. Yeah. or like cloak and
dagger. Yes. Like
you don't usually get two separate sets
of powers, right? Unless you're cloak
and dagger, right? You you can toggle
between the two. Uh I'm uh cloak and
dagger is my favorite healer by far.
Right. And it's I'm a healer
except Right. I'm a healer except when I
get dove on and then I'm not a healer
anymore. Now you're going to die because
I can blind you and do a whole bunch of
damage because though I was a healer a
second ago, I can switch, right? And
that's a weird powerful ability
that that they do. And this this is, by
the way, we're talking about hero
shooters and uh in a second when I let
Jeff when I ask Jeff to talk about
League characters and then I lose track
of what we're talking about because Jeff
has so much experience in League. Um,
this is why part of the reason why
they're so difficult to balance, right,
is because they're good and because they
break all of these rules. If you break
you broke all of these rules in
consistent or easy ways, it would be
much easier to balance, but it would be
less fun, right? So, like
uh in League, right, you have to heal
yourself with items or back in the
fountain or have a support to it unless
you're Garen, right? because everybody
slowly heals over time in League.
Garren's passive ability, every without
getting too deep into it, every hero has
three active abilities, an ultimate, and
a passive, right? Garren's passive is I
heal much faster. Yes. Straight up.
Which means that he has a different play
pattern. If you're playing in top lane
with him, usually that's a battle of
attrition. You fight, you back off a
little bit. People have different
trading patterns. Some want to go in and
just keep fighting. Others want to hit
and run. Darren is happy to wait in
whack you for a while, back off slowly,
or excuse me, quickly heal up while
you're like, my healing's doing this and
his healing is like and you're like, oh,
that's not good. And then he comes back
in for another trade pattern and you're
like, I can't keep fighting against him
in this way, right? And and the cost for
that is that Garen is relatively
short-ranged and has a pretty
straightforward kit in the grand scheme
of things, right? This is not to say
that these things are broken. We'll talk
about when you break the rules too far
and things become broken in a second,
but um but that's part of his identity.
Yes. Part of his identity. Like they
found a different way to make him feel
like he can take a staggering amount of
damage. Yes. Some characters have more
armor, some characters have
abilities. and he also has one that does
it. But the fact that you see him, you
know, take half a building, fall on him,
shrug it off, shake for a minute, and
then like come back in, you're like,
"Oh, that's a thing, right?" Malahar is
a character I play a lot. He's an anti-
carry. He does not carry games by
himself. He is good at making other
carries lives significantly
harder. But he also has a really
interesting thing. In MOBAs, you farm.
You kill minions as they come in. That's
how you get gold. One of the basic rules
of farming is you kind of got to be
there. Mahar has a really nice dot,
damage over time, that if it kills
something, jumps to the next closest
enemy unit if it's in range. He also has
another little ability that spawns
voidings. These little like void crap
that come up and they will attack the
nearest enemy with a dot on it.
So you can theoretically once your
ability strong enough throw a dot on the
first minion in a wave, summon your
voidings and leave and they will clear
the wave for you while you go do
something else. Right. Like they're
breaking a rule. You have to be there to
farm, right? You have to be there to get
experience and gold and get more
powerful unless Yeah. Unless Ash is
probably one of my favorite examples of
this from League, right? talk about Ash.
Um, uh, the rule is you have to be able
to fight. You have to be able to see
someone or have an engagement range to
fight someone. Unless you're Ash. And
then Ash goes, "Go long. No longer. No,
no, even longer. Great. Now you're far
enough away. I'm going to hit you in the
face with a global stun." She has an her
ultimate fires an arrow that is a
projectile that just keeps going until
it goes the length of the map. And
anything it hits takes damage and gets
stunned. And the further away you were,
the longer you get stunned. Ash usually
plays bot lane. I've occasionally seen
Ash's lane or shoot an arrow across the
entire map diagonally to hit top lane.
Hit the opponent there. Like it takes
six seconds to travel across it or
whatever. Yeah, like their leading is
good. Stun the opponent for like an
ungodly amount of time and your friendly
top laner is like, "Oh, well, thank you.
I'm gonna go hit them as well." Right.
And so, right, and it's so these are
these are not huge complicated rule
breaks either, right? These are these
we're talking about the simple one. Now,
granted, we're talking about league, so
there's like hundreds of characters,
right? But we're talking about like a
selection that lets that shows how easy
it is to make a memorable character by
tacking an asterisk next to a rule,
right? Carus is one I used to play a lot
of. We were just talking about Ash's
global ultimate. There's League slowly
removed most of the global ultimates in
the game and they left a couple in.
Carus' ability for his ultimate is he
channels for a moment. Meaning if
somebody does a certain kind of thing
and knocks him out of it, then casts a
spell that hits every single other enemy
champion no matter where they are in the
game.
So, jungle Carus became a thing a couple
seasons ago where he's farming in the
jungle and you look you see your buddies
battling. You see the enemy limping away
at like 10% health and you're like, "Oh,
hold on. Let me push my ultimate R
channel." Boom. Every enemy champion
gets hit. You get a kill. You're like,
"Awesome. Back to farming in the jungle
some more." Yeah. And the enem is like,
"How is that fair?" Yeah. Right. because
it doesn't and and that is that is the
other part of the balancing coin is that
it is very easy for this to feel very
unfair right because you get to point
you are pointing at if you're a Garen
pointing at a Carus right you go but I
don't break any of the rules like that
and so it feels unfair until you take a
step back and you realize that Carus can
get dove on and get squishied. Yep. and
Garen can, but Garen's going to be back
in the fight much faster than Carus
would be, and that's his form of rule
breaking. And they're also useful at
different times. Like I have played
games of Carthus where my team's doing
so so and never gets anybody low. Yeah.
For a while. And if I'm playing jungle
Carus, that means my alt is just sitting
around not doing anything because sure,
I could cast it and do some damage, but
I want to cast it in like when it's
meaningful and get a kill. Yeah.
or same kind of thing like
um like every hero and that is part of
the thing whether it be League or Dota
or some of the others that they the
league has each of these games has
conventions on this is how it's
typically played and they establish
character identity by saying we're going
to take one of the conventions of the
game and modify it in some way memorably
to help give the identity to this
character right
uh and it's not always their ultimate.
Their news champion, Mel, has a spell
reflection ability where you you cast a
projectile most of the time or a
targeted one and if the player hits it
fast enough to bring up that shield,
bing goes right back at you, including
ultimates. Like, there's been some crazy
interactions I've seen where you're
like, "Cool, here comes the big ash
arrow."
Well, ping back at the direction it
came. Like, it's a weird thing and it's
fun and that's part of what gives her
her identity as a character. Yeah. And
so, we've talked about some uh some PvP
examples, right? In the PvE realm of
things, MMOs use this pretty handily,
right? We were talking about FF11 the
other day, which is weird. I play a lot
of 14. Um, and I played 11 back in the
day. Yeah. I 11 is on my list of MMOs to
play because it's still kicking. It will
not die is not good after 14. It is a it
is a game where you cannot play solo.
Yeah, you have to party in that game.
Correct. Yeah, I I have I have heard all
of the drawbacks and I understand them
and I want to try it anyway. Get Yeah.
Uh but 11 has twohour cool downs.
They're twoour. So, one of the
especially for when it came out cuz this
came out in the
early 2000s, I think. Early 2000s, mid
early to mid
2000s. So 20 plus years
ago is they threw in these ability every
class and this the fun just like 14 you
could switch your classes around and
make custom one. Well, excuse me. You
could switch your class around and you
could do a subclassing thing that let
you make kind of an interesting combo.
But every class had the ability that was
slanged the two-hour ability which was
an ability with a two real hour cool
down. All of which did something absurd.
White mage with their two-hour ability
healed the entire
party. Didn't matter how low you were,
healed the entire party all the way up
to full full heal all party. Monks had
one that took your attack speed and
turned it basically to 10% of what it
was. So if you were hitting once a
second, you were hitting once, you know,
10 times every.1 seconds.
The Rogues had one I think it was like
perfect dodge where for a certain amount
of time you just couldn't get
hit. Like all of these are things you're
like that's not an ability that fuels
balance and they weren't. But they also
with a 2-hour cool down they didn't have
to be right. It was the you know you're
adventuring with a party white mage is
like oh the whole party's about to get
wiped. Things are going poorly, 2hour,
bam, you feel like a hero, but your
party also then knows that safety net is
gone, right? It is not coming back
anywhere in the foreseeable future.
Yeah. And and 14 inherits some of that.
In 14, white mage's level 50 signature
ability is benediction, which is on a
threeminute cool down. I can uh point at
a party at a party, no, anyone doesn't
have to be a party member. point at a
friendly target and say you are now full
health. That's it. That's the that's the
whole ability. There's no heal for x
amount. It they are now at full health
regardless of debuffs or anything else
or restrictions or no no that person
full health which is incredibly
powerful. And then you realize that
there are a bunch of reasons why you
need that in 14. And um why that's true
in just a lot of cases in MMO design is
that um we were talking about absolute
virtue, right, which is one of the giant
legendary boss fights in 11 that
requires multiple people to have their
two-hour cool down and is a multiple
hour fight. You might get to use your
twohour twice. It's a Wow. Oh yeah. Virt
I think I think original virtual virtue
clear was like a 14-hour fight. It was
not well balanced when it came out.
Don't worry about it.
Um, so it is it's a very interesting
sort of way to both give designers room
to present big challenges and give
players really cool opportunities to
answer those challenges, right? Because
breaking the rule for the players does
mean that you now can expect them to
have that thing, right? Which is really
cool. when when we um every expansion
comes out, right, we get a a whole list
of all the things that in 14 that the
healer gets to do. And some of them are
really really they seem really broken,
right? They seem incredibly powerful.
One of them is everyone in the party
gets a free use essentially of sprint,
which lets you move faster, which in a
game that is about a mechanics ballet is
incredibly powerful. And then we played
the expansion that that Scholar got that
ability in and we went, "Oh, I see why
they gave us that ability now because it
looks really broken because it breaks a
rule." And then we play and we're like,
"Oh, there's a lot of places where we
need to be moving very quickly. We
really want Expedient up for this
because we need to all be moving in a
direction and if anyone doesn't make it,
we all die, right?" And sometimes these
things are thrown in for like specific
reasons, but of course that's a tricky
balance thing because then you look at
previous content and you're like, does
having this now suddenly make every
other thing easier, right? And like um
actually Artemis had asked, how long did
that
go? Um doesn't seem like good design.
Some of these things are thrown in for
identity in addition to the design
aspect. Like the white mage identity or
the the the fantasy of being a white
mage is I'm going to have amazing buffs
in
healing. And this gives you something
where you're like I am going to have
amazing buffs in healing. Watch this
click. Look, I have amazing buffs in
healing. You know, the monk was like,
I'm a badass martial artist. I'm going
to get in there and do my, you know,
martial arts and look like a, you know,
on steroids Bruce
Lee and hit my ultimate. That gives me
my fantasy, right? The rogue is like, I
am going to dance through danger no
matter what is going on. Boom. And
so in some cases they're not necessarily
great design, but in other cases they're
almost
quintessentially amazing design because
it's fra helping frame the fantasy of
what your character is by giving you an
ondemand access to that fantasy even if
you can only use it rarely, right? But
even just knowing you have it, right,
helps give the identity of what it is.
And you can timebind a lot of things to
make those abilities less
um less uh things that you don't have to
worry about as much. Right? If there are
um we see this a lot in 14, there are
things where you will probably use your
limit break for a thing and you won't
have time to generate another one,
right? So that means that you don't have
access to that tool. If you have
multiple encounters in a row and the
first one is something that's probably
going to demand at least one twohour,
you know that that players probably
aren't going to have it in the next one
because the players aren't going to sit
for two hours to wait for the white mage
to get their cool down back cuz that's
boring, right? If you can depend on
anything, players don't like being bored
and like breaking your game. That's just
two things that are universally true
about players and doubly true of MMO
players. Um, right. So there there are
ways around making it truly gamebreaking
instead just being a rule break a
convention. And it's interesting because
also in a computer game, you can enforce
this in a way that like if you look at a
game like D and D, since we've been
talking about RPG, like most MOBAs and
MMOs are are at least to some extent RPG
focused or
feel on that. Something like D and D is
harder because they want to give you
customization options. In a computer
game with a hero shooter or a mobile,
you can say this is the exact character
design. You cannot ch you can maybe
tweak it a little bit but you can't
change it right where in D and D you can
be like I'm gonna be a mage but I'm
gonna take a wizard but I'm going to
take a couple levels of fighter and a
level of artificer and then go back like
you can start kit bashing almost what
you are going to build and the kind of
possibility space that allows like you
look at the update for
um 2024 D&D they changed a pretty simple
wording which is you're only allowed to
cast one leveled spell per
turn. They just they clarified that
where before it was they had some
exceptions. So like you'd get wizards
taking two levels of fighter for action
surge because action surge gave you
another action that was you could
theoretically cast a spell even though
that probably wasn't the intent of it.
Right? So the most powerful wizards
actually had two levels of fighter just
so that once a short rest they could
double cast a spell in a way nobody else
could. Right? And so that's the kind of
thing where when you're designing pen
and paper and you want to give
versatility, it's harder to do rules
breaking because players start to
optimize against it. where with a
computer game that's very defined and
doesn't give you that same flexibility,
they can go in much more and say
characters are partially at least
defined by the way in which they
interact with the game's rules and
memorably change one of them to help
form an identity. Yeah. Um I think it it
is worth noting that that sort of
example brings up this this um there is
a real possibility and there is a real
downside to this which is when you break
the the bounding box right the box
around things that are allowed in the
game and you start making carveouts.
Sometimes you carve out too far.
Sometimes you remove too many boundaries
and things go poorly, right? And and
that is that is a potential downside of
this and I think we'd be remiss if we
didn't mention it. Um yeah, and one of
the advantages again of a computer game
on this is if you do that in a pen and
paper game, it's hard to patch, right?
In the same way that you get something
like League that every two or three
weeks puts out a patch, you're like,
"Oh, here's our current state. We we do
balance every single patch because we
have so many characters and so many
items, etc., and the meta shifts that we
need to be in a constant state of making
sure that the game feels right. Yeah,
exactly. Uh, Magic is sort of notorious
for not being able to go back on this,
right? The Power
Nunch breaks so many rules. So, the
power nine, for those unfamiliar, are
nine cards from the original um alpha
beta unlimited versions of Magic, which
are hideously completely unbalanced.
They include one mana, draw three cards,
recall. It's also a recall. Let's see if
I can name them as you go. Uh, take an
extra turn for two mana. Time walk. Uh,
an extra turn. A whole extra turn,
right? You you get to untap and upkeep
and draw and do all the and have a
second combat and do all the things. Um
generate uh three additional mana for
the cost of playing an artifact and
sacrificing it. Well, zero cost
artifact. Zero cost artifact. Black
Lotus. The five uh I can get one
colorless mana every or one color of
mana every turn as a zero drop artifact
that makes me break the one land per
rule ability. So the five Moxes, right?
Okay. So I've got Moxes, Timewalk. Oh,
and uh I'm missing Twister, which is
Yeah, Time Twister. Yeah, I uh you know
how I I it's late in the game and I've
put all of my cards in the graveyard and
I don't have anything left in my deck.
What if I just shuffled it all back
together and drew seven cards? Yeah.
Notice that pretty much all those were
the were either artifacts or blue
colored cards because blue was their I
manipulate things. Yeah. Um and counter
or Yeah. magic manipulation, right? And
turns out balancing magic manipulation
was a little harder than they thought.
Yeah. And so they're stuck with it,
right? They're stuck. There is an entire
format. There's one complete format
where you can play the Power N. And it's
vintage. That's it. The only place. It
used to be called unlimited. It's now
called vintage. Yeah. It's it's called
vintage. Um and and that's it. That's
the only place. Uh because in every
other format they're banned because
they're too powerful. Right. And if you
are playing in vintage and you don't
have those, you are at a severe
disadvantage. Correct. The the other the
other uh asterisk note is that um
instead of buying a complete set of
genuine power nine to put in your
vintage deck, uh you can buy a house.
I'm not kidding. In some places, yeah,
in in some places you can just buy a
house instead of buying the power n.
It's a little ridiculous. Um, and that,
by the way, is because the cards are so
old and they were printed in a limited
quantity because they stopped printing
these, right, 30 years ago,
ago, or roughly. Yeah. Um, the other one
that Magic has uh failed to live down is
fetchlands. Turns out the um I need to
put lands in my deck part of Magic is
important and fetchlands let you break
that. And Fetchlands also let you break
the I can only have one land enter the
battlefield per turn thing. And they
also break the I need to have lands that
generate I need to have a suite of lands
that generate the correct colors of mana
to cast my spells thing because
fetchlands go oh this land is all of the
cards I could possibly need it to be at
any given time so I always have the best
one when I play
it. Hideous design mistake. Uh and
modern is run by fetch lands um because
they they can't walk it back right and
those put a land tax on those. Yeah. Um,
that's sort of a big example is that
right there is a fine line here and
there's one more I'll talk about one
more magic card then we'll move on to
others that that sort of does that. It's
called Corey Steel Cutter and if you've
played Magic recently you you've played
against it. It's a two-minute artifact
and every time you play your second
spell every turn you get a free monk
token that gets bigger for every spell
non-creature spell you play. Mhm.
And the amount of free value that you
get might be a little rule break, right?
The the little rule break is I just get
free tokens for playing things, right?
Normally you have to do an effect that
causes a token to happen. Incidental
free tokens are usually pretty rare.
Um, and it might be super broken, but it
might not be. I'm glad they took this
shot, but it looks like it's too
powerful and is probably going to get
banned in at least one format. And so
that's kind of that is sort of the um
the get key points or any other fun
thing. No. Uh no, you don't. No, you
just get it. Tokens don't get tokens
that. Oh god. Well, thank you. No, thank
goodness. No, it's hard enough to track
prowess on a growing They have an
ability called prowess. You have to
track how many spells have been cast
while each token exists. It's a
nightmare for tracking. Yeah, because
you get a increasingly large army of
tokens and the horrible part is you can
have multiple Corey steel cutters out
that came out in different parts of the
turn. So like it's a nightmare to get a
whole little like go board or something
to lay out and just start tracking.
Correct. And so it it is it can become
difficult to see when you break these
conventions if you're too far outside
your guidelines. Right. Magic I think
has it almost the hardest of anybody. It
does because unlike League where it's
like we can put out a champion every 3
or 4 months and it's good, Magic or
their business model needs to put out a
new set at this point every 3 or 4
months with hundreds of cards in it.
Yeah. That they have to balance against
not just their current set but almost
every set that has been released in the
past. Correct. And and the other
additional problem that Magic is running
into is that the new set will be played
more during pre-release weekends. It's
right before the pre-release for Final
Fantasy. More Final Fantasy Magic the
Gathering will be played this coming
weekend than was played during all of
the play testing when they were
designing the set. Right. It we're
running into the the the rule of 10. My
rule of 10. Yeah. Right. Exactly.
Which by the way, for having been a game
designer that worked on very large MMOs
and other things, one of the things that
I discovered very early on and gave a
slang name to ingest that stuck was the
rule of 10 testing rule, which is if you
have 10 players in, they're going to
find a certain amount of things that
your team did. And every time you add a
zero that a whole new set of things get
found. When you move to a 100 players,
suddenly they find things that nobody in
your group of 10 players found. Same
with a thousand, 10,000, 100,000, a
million. Just that many people playing
your game, if it's a game with a lot of
possibility space, will find things
nobody ever thought of in the previous
cohort. And it's just it is surprisingly
true. And it's one of the reasons that
it's really hard to test games like
Magic or some other things is because
they go even say they could do a big
stress test internally. Say they could
get a thousand people to come test it.
That's a lot of people. Watsi doesn't
have a thousand people sitting around to
test. But even if they could, when it
goes out to 10,000, 100,000, a million,
10 million people playing it, new things
are going to get discovered that nobody
could, even in that super large test
group of a thousand.
Yeah. And that's one of the reasons you
see a lot of online games during beta
beta test weekends where they'll come in
and try and cram as many people as they
can. One thing they're trying to do is
stress test. Do our servers, networking
code, etc. stand up to this? The other
thing they're testing is what are the
players finding and breaking that nobody
before them thought of? Right. Is there
because Okay. Because can we fix it
before we release? Yeah. like the um I
guess and and this sort of brings up
like the the idea that you broke the
rules in too many places too close to
each other and they accidentally overlap
and that's where like you get into like
major problems with um with particularly
competitive games, right? You're like,
"Oh, we didn't think about the
interaction between those two." Oops.
Mhm. Right. And that's where it becomes
that's another place where big player
test and the rule of tens comes into
play and to help you crank back the yeah
amount of fraction. And that's one of
the reasons that especially for online
competitive games they are so aggressive
about patching even like midcycle like I
have seen league plenty of times do a
you log on like that's weird they
patched two days ago. Why is there
another small patch? And you'll see a
little notes like the interaction
between so and so and so and so proved
to be a little stronger than we thought.
We've scaled this back or even once we
have disabled this champion while we
decide what to do like Yep. And you just
have to do that because players in
online games are competitive and if
there is a thing that obviously works
better than other things, people are
going to do it.
Yeah. They just they're going to even if
the game game designers don't get to go
that's not how the game was designed. If
it's in the game and players can do it,
they're going to do it. Right. Exactly.
Um so we've talked about a lot of places
where this does happen. Let's talk about
the places that it's less likely to
happen and why real quick. Oh, real
quick. Um, one more 4X games pretty like
Civilization and others like that
because again like MOBAs, sorry, like
rogikes and other things, they expect
you to play a whole bunch of times and
they want to feel a little different.
Like civilization will give you both a
leader and a civilization
um that both have benefits and the
combination of the two and I say leader
and civilization because for example, as
they start putting out more leaders, you
might have three leaders from Rome. So
there'd be the here's the Rome bonus,
here's the Caesar bonus versus the so
and so, you know, bonus. But and they're
fairly good at saying this civilization
leader combo breaks the rules in a
little bit to make, you know, Rome feel
different than the Greeks, than the
Babylonians, than the Americans,
right? And that's again that's fun. And
again, those go through a lot of those
are easier in some cases to balance
because they're not looking at 150
league champions. And the way they tend
to break it is lower. Not always. Yeah.
Like there's a um there's a group
there's a civ in Civ 6 that starts out
without a city or a settler to make a
city. They start in the ocean. They um
Yeah. And basically they go land and
found, but they don't start on land like
near a good spot. They're in the ocean.
That's really cool. That like And I
think that that moment, right? That
moment that I just went through is the
point of designing in this way and why
it's so cool, right? Because you're
like, wait, you can't. But they did. And
it's it's interesting and weird. I trust
Thunder to know the the Mauy. Okay,
that's really cool. Yeah, that's really
neat. That's a really interesting way to
break a rule, right? Every civilization
for as long as I've played Civilization
started with a settler and to not do
that is really interesting, right? Or
like um the um
Hold on. Who did Hannibal invade
against? Uh the theian the
Carthaginians. Carthaginians. The
Carthaginians in Civ was from Anyway,
don't worry. I mean, sorry. Um
yeah, there. Thank you. um can relocate
their
capital where every other civilization
usually when the city you found is
almost always your capital. Yeah. Like
they can be mid game like hey we're
moving it. Yeah. Like finding things
like that again are interesting.
Actually will I have my cat doing a
weird thing. Give me a second. I will I
will take this opportunity to answer a
question. Uh is civ roguish? No. We went
through a very long discussion when I
started the Rogue Review years ago about
what was and was not roguish. There are
specific carveouts for 4X games and
battle royale that they explicitly are
not rogues despite the fact that they
share many commonalities with other
roguish
games. Chat, what's your favorite way
that uh rules get broken? And if you're
watching this on the YouTube bot, what's
your what's your favorite weird design
break in any game you've played, right?
Whether it's a character in a moa, a
card in a card game, um you know, your
favorite Overwatch hero, a map, a
scenario, a D and D character. What's
your favorite way that something breaks?
Um I would be very interested to hear
about those cuz we've been talking about
this idea for a while, Jeff and I, like
behind the scenes. Uh, and I'm very
interested to hear what what you all
what you all think about that. Um, okay
cool Jeff, we have settled we have
settled an age-old discussion. Civ is
not roguish. What is sorry what is not
what civilization not a rog like
we carved out for when when I started
doing rogue review um we carved we made
carveouts specifically for battle royals
and 4X games because they were large
enough groups of things that shared
common elements with roguish games but
were different enough to not warrant
being part of the same group.
Yeah. If I was in my old classification
days, I would say a lot of Forex's have
elements of rogue games in the same way
that a lot of other games, like you
could say, have RPG elements. Yep. Oh, I
love I love this one. I'm I'm all about
this. Um uh Bob says, "I love when roles
get broken. For example, here that it
heals through doing damage."
14 has one of those. It's called Sage.
It zaps people with lasers, and zapping
people with lasers heals somebody. It's
great.
Um, my old necromancer that I designed
in EverQuest was a con I designed them
as a conduit. It's like they had spells
that would damage themselves, including
as a mage that thing that no other mage
got the ability to heal another
character by damaging themsel, but they
also had a lot of life tappy kind of
spells. Yeah. So, they would be like
sucking damaging an opponent, sucking
life into themsel, passing it along to
somebody else and kind of moving life
force back and forth, which was fun.
Yeah. But even like back in my old thing
for that,
like the way we did class design was we
tried to find certain things that were
unique to classes and other things that
the class did better but weren't unique.
Yes. Like our clerics had the most mana
efficient healing or a straight heal,
but that didn't mean other classes
couldn't heal or heal better in
different ways, right? Right? Like our
druids and shamans had better hots,
heals over time, like regeneration
effects that were more efficient but
didn't heal you as quickly. So you start
doing the trade-offs. MMO balance in
that regard is so fishly difficult. Um
so we've talked about two reasons to
break rules. One of them is to provide
identity and the other one is to provide
power, right? And balancing both of
those against other examples of things
that are like that but are not that is
so difficult, right? Uh it is like the
four healer. There are four healers in
Final Fantasy 14 and they all do
amazingly roughly the same amount of
damage and in uh any shield healer and
any pure healer and there are four valid
combinations of those um can accomplish
all of the healing needed to beat any
content in the game, which is a wild
balancing feat. And then you get into
the fact that there are 19 DPS jobs, 20
20 DPS, many DPS jobs, and that they all
uh exist in a spectrum of advantages and
disadvantages and rule breaking and
balancing so that you can make parties
that will clear content, right? And
actually, we should probably define here
what we're talking more about for this
is actually specialization versus rule
breaking. That's true. Yeah, there are
some games like hero shooters that are
like you can't normally walk on walls
unless you're this character. Like
that's a rule break where my healing is
more efficient and your dots are more
efficient is a specialization. Correct.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
Um we'll break basically it's kind of I
would say it's on a spectrum like the
highest part is breaking rule where a
lower part is specialized and most games
do specialization not many games do the
convention rule breaking. Yeah. There's
a which is a good transition into games
that just don't right. Yeah. And and
there are plenty of reasons not to
right. We've talked about some of them.
Right. There are chances that if you
screw this up, everything becomes
hideously unplayably broken. Um or
hideously unbalancedly broke unb broken,
right? Like those are those are real
possibilities that exist. Or destroy the
kind of game that you're looking to
make. Yes. Let me throw out a good
example. Sports games. When people go in
to play a sports game, say you're going
to go play Madden and you're like, I'm
going to pick the Raiders to play or I'm
going to pick the Chargers. You're not
expecting the Raiders to have a
game-breaking ability that is different
than the Chargers. You might have
players that are better, but you're not
expecting when you're going to play your
football game that one of the teams or
one of the players is going to have
equivalently something that breaks the
rules of how football works, right? Or
baseball or tennis or basketball or
archery or horseback. Like none of the
sports style things. The whole point of
a sports game is it is a level playing
field with a known set of rules and you
are then playing that with, you know,
your characters might have stats like in
some sports games or they might not like
in others, but you're playing according
to a base set of rules and everybody is
starting on a level playing field. Yes.
Yeah. And and even uh I'm thinking about
it a lot because I'm I've been thinking
about Mario Kart because the Switch 2
just released, right? Mario Kart
characters aren't generally rule
breakers, right? They have stats, they
have
specializations, but the weird broken
parts of Mario Kart are always in the
item boxes, right? Which is kind of the
interesting point of it. It isn't I want
to prince pick Princess Peach because
she always gets to do X. Correct. Yeah.
We're not talking about Double Dash,
chat. We're not We're not We're not
doing that. I could do an entire two
hours on Double I will get You keep this
up. I will go get my GameCube and we'll
play Double Dash someday. Um right. Um,
fighting games aren't really Oh, yeah.
Fighting games. Oh, not really known for
this. Again, hold on. Let's hold on.
Tournament style fighting games. This
isn't like Streets of Rage or Golden
Act. This is Street Fighter and Tekken
and Right. They don't stuff like that,
right? They have characters that are
specialized, but they all generally fall
into the same category or characters get
banned out, right? You can tell if a
character's broken a rule because they
generally get banned pretty fast because
the minor advantages that characters can
get from breaking a rule too hard really
add up in the hands of extremely skilled
fighting game players. Um so they're
they're generally not. There is one
exception uh which I wanted to bring up
because I think it's absolutely
fascinating. Mhm. The anime One Punch
Man, the core conceit of this is that
the hero Saitama Wait, wait. So they
have a fighting game for Yes, there's a
fighting game for One Punch Man. Tell me
more. Okay. Right. Okay. So, Saitama,
the whole conceit of the anime is that
he defeats everything in one blow. And
the way that they balance this
fascinating is that it's a three
character versus three character
um team battler fighting game. So, you
can swap characters in and out. If you
choose the One Punch Man, you don't
fight with three characters. You fight
with two. And your victory condition is
now no longer to knock out all three of
your opponent's characters. It's to
survive until One Punch Man shows up and
lets you win
instantly. So that is that is like that
deserves calling out because that's a
huge rule break. That's an absolutely
massive like shattering. They almost
have to for the IP they're working on,
right? Yeah. In the Street Fighter IP,
there is not a character who's like, I
am undefeable and if I hit you, you will
just fall. Correct. Yeah, it's um Yeah,
it is it is a uh and and Chad is
correctly pointing out that there's like
ludo narrative harmony here with this
that like uh his play matches the story
cuz Mo's arcs end the moment he shows
up. Correct. And he's disappointed about
it too cuz he really wants someone to
get in a good fight with. Right. And
it's but that is an example of how you
could break it in a fighting game in a
way that's interesting, right? Because
it becomes difficult to sort of lose a
battle of attrition slowly enough to win
that way,
right? Um so that's that's but by and
large not because it's the exception.
Yeah, it it's a big exception, but
mostly right uh Tekken, um the Street
Fighter, Soulcalibur, Guilty Gear, yeah,
all of those. They generally Yeah. the
the bounding box around what is
acceptable for a character to have and
do is pretty locked, right? It's not as
loosey goosey. The game is more about
punch counter, count, etc. It's not
about each of these 14 characters you
pick does a weird thing in the fighting
like that just isn't in the same way
that that isn't what the games are about
cuz I think the core fantasy of a
fighting game is in many ways follow me
down this rabbit hole chat the same as
the core fantasy of becoming an
excellent chess player especially if
you're playing on a tight clock
it is to outthink your opponent at
speed, right? It is to develop reflexes
and quick neural pathways that let you
genuinely be a better player with a
known tool set at speed than your
opponent. Right? It's not just about
winning because I have an I win button,
right? That's not interesting. That's
not demonstrating skill. I've never seen
a community that is more dedicated to
cultivating personal skill and like that
level of quick interaction than fighting
games. Right? You can watch any fighting
game documentary uh to to kind of see
what I'm talking about there. But I
think that that's that's that's why they
don't do it in those places, right? Just
like we you don't have a superpower when
you're playing the Miami Dolphins
in a sports game because then you're not
really playing the Miami Dolphins, are
you? Right? You're playing something
else. You're not getting to participate
in the fantasy of being the coach of the
Dolphins, which is what the what that's
about. And there are variants like I if
they made a Space Jam basketball game, I
guarantee you it would be about it would
involve rule breaking. Yes. Because
happier characters are Looney Tunes
characters and Looney Tunes characters
break all sorts of rules of physics and
other things purely by their IP. Yes. In
the same way that One Punch Man wins
fights by showing up. So it's not saying
like a sports game couldn't. It's just
most players fantasy of playing a sports
game. involves the involves things that
don't involve global rule breaking on a
per character or team basis. Absolutely.
Yeah. Mario Mario Sports and Madden
Sports, different sports.
Um I think this is a a good place.
That's a pretty good swing. Like, but
again, it was just playing getting into
Monster Train 2 and watching how much
they'd upped their mechanics of we're
going to break conventions cleanly and
make it feel good. And actually, not
just break them, build sets around them.
Dragons building sets around gold. The
angels building sets around basically
movement, right?
the the um the next clan, the one that
we didn't show, uh has um a moon
mechanic where every turn the moon is
either full or new. And there's a whole
additional even odd turn thing that you
need to care about and you manipulate
the moon phase to like do additional
things. That's a whole other mechanic
that only that group participates in.
Nobody else needs to care whether it's
an even turn or an odd turn. But the
Luna clan, they don't even get shown
unless you happen to have a moon unit
with you. Correct. The Luna clan really
cares about even in odd turns. Cares,
right? So yeah, I I think this is an
excellent place to wrap up our
discussion. So YouTube, the your your
assignment for the comments below. What
is your favorite way that a game has
broken its own conventions to make the
game better? Whether it's a Magic card
um its own conventions or genre
conventions. Yeah. In there, right? What
is it and why? Uh say more in the
comments below. uh chat, thank you so
much for joining us. Next week, we're
going to tell I think we're going to
tell them what we're going to talk about
next week. Oo, let's do it. Next week,
we're going to talk about the Switch 2
launch. We're going to talk about why uh
people are upset. We're going to talk
about the packaging failures cuz it's it
hasn't even been out for a whole day and
I'm already hearing about the packaging
failures. Um we're going to talk about
how it went, what our initial thoughts
of the Switch 2 are. I'll have one in my
hands when we do it. So, that is our
topic for next week. So, please join us
for that. Until then, please take care
of yourselves. Please take care of each
other. And we'll see you all next time.
Say bye to the people, Jeff. Bye to the
people, Jeff. See you
[Music]
everybody. But it was all a lie because
we were back. Haha. And better than
ever. Yeah, I thought that was good.
Yeah, there's a lot to get through.
There's that's one of those ones where
we could theoretically ramble for 15
hours. Yeah, correct. Or for 20 minutes.
Like I was can go broad wide. I was I I
had I was like burning my eyes into my
uh recording clock to be like, "All
right, like an hour and a half, like 90
minutes is probably long enough."
Um Oopsie wants us to do a double dash
design club. Listen, we're gonna I don't
know. Like there there are only God,
it's so weird because like I'm gonna
upset some people. There are like four
real Mario Karts. There are a bunch of
spin-off Mario Karts that were like
there are real Mario Karts, but there
are four major Mario Karts. 64, Double
Dash, um, uh, eight, and now World,
right? And it's so weird because I
guarantee you I could find someone to
defend to the death that any individual
one of those is the best and
authoritative Mario Kart and all others
are imitators based solely on the things
about that Mario Kart that they liked.
It's it is it is one of the most
fascinating franchises for that. Right.
Yeah. See, exactly. There we go. Thunder
64 is the best. Right. And now someone
will arise and say Double Dash is the
best. Uh DS and Wii fans would like to
know my location. Uh that's classified
uh because they're wrong.
Um it will as long as we're telling
secret things since well I guess next
week's topic isn't really a secret.
Yeah, next week's topic isn't really a
secret, but we are definitely going to
um we I kind of want to tease that we're
going to tell them about something
later.
Oh, I I was just going to tell them that
we're going to do a thing at some point
soon. Yeah, it's at some point. This is
probably a different thing than you're
thinking of. Okay. What are you
thinking? Art. Yeah. No, I was thinking
of art. I was thinking Okay. So,
it's mentioning to you because of course
you're our best friends and nobody here
is going to say anything. And even if
you do, it's okay. We did a Kickstarter
last year. We did a Kickstarter for our
history calendar. It did pretty well. We
moved a lot of calendars. We had a lot
of people that were pretty happy and we
had a good time doing it and we're doing
it again this year. It's not announced
yet, but it's also not a big secret that
hey, we might do another history
calendar Kickstarter. Like, right. Yeah.
Yeah. Yeah. That's not going to break
anybody's brain that we're doing that.
Last year, Will found a really, really
cool thing that we could give him a
picture and he could have it broken up
to become a puzzle. And there was an app
where through your browser you could go
and we could collaborate jointly on
putting a puzzle together and he then
basically could put do a time lapse of
it.
the time lapses when we put them on like
in the Kickstarter like updates page
were so
popular that this year I think for um
Twitch and YouTube actually we can do
both right this time yeah we we can do
both cuz it's just a link right so so
Janet you'll be able to join in so for
Twitch and YouTube before we even launch
the Kickstarter we're going to show a
couple of art pieces here for the first
time and we're going to do puzzles of
them or Actually, we'll start a puzzle
and reveal the picture through puzzle.
Correct. And we'll then use those time
lapses of us doing the puzzle to help
promote the calendar when we do it
because they just look cool. Yeah. And
also, it's kind of fun to show off what
we've been working on for the past four
months of art. Yeah. Of some of these
pieces. Some of these new pieces are um
really good. Yeah. Absolutely. Well, I
I'm going to I'm going to tell you about
things that I'm not going to tell you
about cuz Jeff told you about something
and actually told you. I'm gonna tell
you about stuff that you're not going to
tell you about and then we're gonna be
done for today. So, the first thing that
I'm not going to tell you about is that
next Friday or Saturday, we don't know
which one yet. Oh, yeah. This is a good
one, right? And I'm I'm going to do this
in the broadest way possible. Matt and I
are going to do an
interview of a couple of people about
something really cool that you're not
going to want to miss. That's all you
aren't going to see coming. Yeah, you
won't see it coming. It's completely out
of left field. Uh we have not mentioned
anything about this anywhere. It's a
total surprise. Even the mods don't know
exactly what it is. Um so please look
forward to it. That'll be a thing. Uh in
addition, in a couple of weeks, we're
going to have some very special guests
that you might be familiar with on for
breakfast and design club to do some
really cool um work uh that you actually
we can say where they're from, too. Like
this one I don't think has to be
surprised. Um we're going to we're going
to have some friends from CSM Children's
Hospital on. We've done um work with
them in the past. Uh and we're going to
need your help to help design on a
brainstorming project. Yeah, it's it's
going to be great. So it will help sick
kids. Yeah, it's it's going to be great.
Yes, that's right. Sean totally got it.
That's 100% it. Sean, you're a genius.
How could How could you possibly have
guessed that Will and Matt would
interview Hatsune Miku? That's it.
Game's over. Everybody go home. Sean got
it. We're interviewing Hatsune Miku. I
hope you now know that that's going to
be the joke forever. I hope you now know
that I that's my favorite way to respond
to that. So now anytime we're doing
something secret, it's going to be So
Matt and I have to interview Hatsune
Miku next week, just so you know. And
you all can blame Sean every time it
happens. So, uh, that's going to do it
for our our stream today.
Um, yes, Richard. Uh, Janet, we will be
back on Monday. Please join us for
breakfast on Monday. Matt and I are
fingers, toes, everything all crossed,
both getting Switch twos in the next 24
to 48 hours. That is the goal. And we
will hopefully be able to give you our
first thoughts, talk a bit about the
launch from like a news perspective
rather than like a design perspective.
We're going to talk about that on
breakfast. Uh so please join us for
that. Tomorrow here on the channel,
there will be a free play day. Chat is
currently voting in the Discord on what
I play. Currently, Final Fantasy 14 is
winning, but it could be anything. So
please join us for that. And Janet, we
will see you all Monday. Everybody say
bye Janet.