And now we're live on YouTube. Hi
YouTube. Hey. Yeah, we found new ways
for me to possibly break things. Uh I
mean, as one does. Listen, listen.
Are you really living if you're not just
like trying to break the technology of
multi-million billion dollar companies
on the regular just by doing your job? I
submit that you are not. Uh listen, you
just I would concur, right? You just got
to you just got to roll with it, right?
Uh hello everybody. So uh a small piece
of business for those on the YouTube
side. Uh I I promised you Monday that I
would get you all more emotes. We've now
filled all of the emote slots for
members over on YouTube with uh hi and
pog. I don't know if YouTube pogs.
YouTube tell me in the comments if you
pog. Uh cuz if you tell me what a pog
is. Pog is short for play of the game.
Uh it's also uh sort of a um it's become
a expression of joy and celebration. Um
so we have we have a matt a Matt Pog um
face. Uh I will bring it up here on
screen as Odin here so graciously. This
is Pog. Nice. Uh and it is very much a
Twitch culture thing and I don't know uh
I I don't know. It's a YouTube culture
thing. Yeah. If it's a YouTube culture
thing. By the way, Eddie, I love how the
sun has conspired against us that as we
go live, it's just like, "Oh, hey, were
you trying to do a thing?" Not too bad.
Get wrecked. Luckily, I do have a
blackout screen, so I can solve that
real quick. I don't It's kind of like
It's throwing minor god rays down, it
really is. It's for cam camera flare.
Yeah. Oh, that is really cool. I might
need to get something like that. I
hadn't considered like something that
attaches to the window.
Oh, yeah. No, it's well it's supposed to
attach, but Mhm. Yeah. It's just
basically it's like just a black kind of
uh thing with a silver backside and has
little suction cups just pop in there.
Uh yeah. Well, so uh Cox, you're quite
right correct. Like most memes, Pog has
descended from its original derivation,
right, to like what it is now, right? So
like GG used to be good game and now GG
is like its own thing, right? It kind of
still means good game, but it's also
drifted linguistically away. I swear I'm
not making any of this up. You could do
a like a PhD level paper on linguistic
drift in meme analysis in online
subcultures. Like there is so much here
that so many people don't really take
the time to think about. Oh, it's very
interesting. Anyway, you could do a
separate collar or excuse me, a separate
par no, not even parallel. Um, a
separate one Uhhuh. that just took um
how
basically groups on the right pick a
popular phrase and appropriate it to
make it lose all of its original
meaning. Yes, that is well and that's
actually a part of linguistic drift,
right? Like Yeah, but that that's
intentional sabotage of a word versus
the linguistic drift that happens as a
niche term broadens out and then gets
more popular usage and Yeah.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
It's funny like it's not just online
cultures because um uh uh in America um
the word Jay originally just meant
someone who uh walks across the street.
Um but then it became something they
wanted to criminalize. So uh government
started using Jay as a pjorative and
that's where jaywalking comes from
specifically is because they tried to
make make a pjorative out of a word that
didn't mean that at all. Right. Yeah.
And and the really funny part about that
is that the reason that they tried to do
that and we could oh Jeff this is a
short this could be a short, right? Is
the move from streets being shared
pedestrian spaces to space being solely
occupied by automobiles, right? That the
street was originally for people in
carriages and to do business and to meet
and to whatever and then it eventually
just became a thing for cars, right? And
now it's bad to be a person in the
street when before the street was just
part of the town, right? Yeah. Yeah. I
could I could get um Jason over from Not
Just Bikes to talk about it. Hey, that'd
be really cool. That would be really
cool. So, uh chat, uh we are today
gathered here with our friend Eddie.
Eddie's going to introduce himself when
we actually start the recording. Don't
worry. Um Eddie's great. He's written
for credits in the past. He's been on
Design Club in the past. We love when
Eddie's here. It's going to be awesome.
Um multi-published RPG author, right?
And author of one of my favorite EC
episodes that we did a couple years ago,
which was the latigious history of
Dungeons and Dragons, which Eddie with
his D and D back D and D amongst other
background was the one who did the
research and writing for that episode.
Yeah. And then Matt just threw in all
the bad time travel jokes. Yeah. Right.
Um Matt's job is to take a script and to
um
jazz it up like that and to put it into
his word or into his tone and to add in
little quippy things that help make it
fun along the way. Um that is actually
part of his job. Yeah. Uh so today we're
going to be talking about clap hands
instead of jazz hand. Or was that juice
hands?
Hands.
Uh the uh that sounds dirty when you say
it. Uh the the plan for today is we're
going to talk about tariffs and how
they're affecting the tabletop industry
with an expert in the tabletop industry.
So uh that's the plan for today. Um
we're going to go for a little while.
After that, if you're so inclined, I'll
let you all know that Matt and I will be
playing the Oblivion remaster here on
Twitch when we're done. Uh and tomorrow,
if you are familiar at all with Claire
Obscure, it is a uh expedition 33. It is
a game released by a French studio that
is currently trending on
Twitch above
Oblivion. The Oblivion remaster came out
and an original IP game by a French
studio that is a turnbased RPG is
trending above it on Twitch, which is
wild, right? That's that's just wild.
So, we're going to be playing it
tomorrow. I'm super excited for that.
So, that's the rest of this week. That's
what's coming up right after this.
That's what we're doing today. Jents, am
I missing anything?
Um Um I I have one minor tangent which
is a literature recommendation before
that. Sure. Because I've been enjoying
it and I will save the results of our
last well was last week or two weeks ago
that we talked about alikart game
development.
Two last week was the backpack battles.
Oh that's right. Time is a soup. By the
way, my memory sale not Steam Unity sale
happened and um I I can tell you how
much I spent. Yeah, it's it's Oh, Eddie
to catch you up. Um so I've been getting
the itch to start building something
again, but I'm not up for starting yet
another game studio. So I'm reteing
myself Unity because I have not actually
got my hands dirty in Unity for a long
time. And one of the cool things about
the Unity shop now is how much you can
buy. Um you just put in like 40 bucks a
save system will save to Steam, iOS,
everywhere in the cloud backs up
everything. So like it's done. 40 bucks
you plug it in. You know that's three
weeks of engineer time. Like click turn
insert. So Will and I did an episode
where basically we just walked through
the Unity store looking at the kinds of
things you could buy. Oh wow. And like
Steam, Unity every once in a while does
a sale. They're running a whole bunch of
stuff at 50% off. And I ended up with a
first time coupon code of 25% off my
entire purchase. Oh,
no. It's effective. I I'll just Well,
should I save it for on air or just
finish now? No, we we we can we can talk
about it later. I I did want I did want
to put in before I forget it. That
should be your studio name. Yags. Yet
another game studio.
Yags. Nice. I think I actually have a
awful See, I can do a funny name as a
game studio, right? Yeah. No, I mean
that's never happens. Yeah, it's never
happened. Not even
once. Definitely never.
But um Yeah. Okay, cool. So, we're going
to we're going to go to black. Nobody
panic. We will be right back with the
beginning of the episode proper. Oh,
wait. Quick book recommendation. Yes.
Um, currently I believe it is trending
as one of the number one Audible books,
which blows my mind. I'm listening to my
first um, lit RPG style basically real
person gets put into a dungeon with game
rules book called Dungeon Crawler Carl.
And it is way, way, way, way better than
it has any right to be in any
conceivable universe. Sure. feels a
little bit like a John Scholsey's
brother for some reason started writing
about this and it's fun and I believe it
is currently one of the number one
ranked Audible books.
Wow. Full stop. That's awesome. And it's
a series. So, as a recommendation for
something I never thought I would
actually like but in enjoying
tremendously and of course it helps that
the narrator is topnotch because that
always helps. Um Sean out here asking
the real questions. If there's not
treasure behind a waterfall, it's not a
real open world adventure. We have um
they have hit so many RPG tropes in here
and just made them like the people are
aware they're in a game dungeon. Like
there ends up being a real interesting
reason for this and are like playing
against expected tropes andor other
things. It's fairly amazing. Anyway, so
all right, two thumbs up so far. 2/ird
of the way through the first book. All
right. Okay. Excellent. Uh we're going
to black. We're going to start the
episode. Uh be right back.
[Music]
Good time zone, internet. Hello and
welcome to Design Club, the only game
design talk show on the internet that
this week features a very special guest,
Eddie Webb. Welcome on in, Eddie. I I
like citation for that proclamation.
Yeah. Okay. Well, hold on. You can
answer. You're our citation, Eddie. You
on any other design shows this week?
If the answer is yes, I'll retract
design. Okay. Yeah, I'll last week I was
on different design show, but not this
week. Not yesterday. you are exclusive
to us. So, welcome everybody to Design
Club live. This is I am Jeff Zetkin. I
am the studio director of Extra Credits.
Over here as always is Will, voice of
the people and our Twitch and now
YouTube overlord for all of our live
streaming. And we are joined by longtime
friend of the show, longtime friend and
successful RPG writer, designer, etc.
Eddie Webb. Eddie, could you introduce
yourself for a moment? Yeah. Um, uh, I
have been working in the tabletop RPG
industry for, just doing some quick
math, 22, no, 24 years. Wow. Um, it adds
up. Yeah, next year 25th, but it does
add up. Um, uh, I've worked on over 200,
uh, books. Um, some big ones are, uh,
Vampire the Masquerade. I've worked on,
um, Pugmire, which is my creator owns
game. Um, I've worked on the WWE
tabletop role playing games. So, I mean,
just all over the map in terms of of the
kinds of things I've worked on.
So, you are what we would call a veteran
game designer. Yes, I think that's safe
to say. Yeah. Right. When I figure once
you're past your first hundred, you
know, right? I I was going to say no
100, you're good. I was going to say
once you're older than a significant
portion of your intended player base, I
feel like you've reached veteran status
or once you've been doing it longer than
you know. Right. So, that's that's kind
of cool. Career can drive easily. Yes.
Yeah. Exactly. Yeah. That's it. drink
and drive.
Not at the same time. Don't do that. Um,
so today, uh, we've gathered everybody
here today to talk about everyone's
least favorite favorite topic to talk
about, uh, which is currently tariffs.
So, it's no secret that tariffs, um,
have been, uh, something in the news
recently. It's been something that's
been going around on socials. It's been
going around everywhere. And there's
been a lot
of what I would call sound bites um from
a lot of people about it. No one in
particular, but just like that's been
the trend, right? People are trying to
compress their thoughts into a minute
long short or a 300 character blue sky
post or whatever. And so we thought we'd
take this opportunity to bring Eddie on
and say more rather than less because
this is a big complicated issue that a
bunch of different people in the
tabletop space and in the video gaming
space are all going to be affected by.
So we wanted to take a second or not
even going to are already affected by.
That's true. Yeah. Are already being
affected. Yeah. Um, as a quick note,
Eddie was also the one who wrote our
episode a couple years ago called
Extinction Level Event on Extra Credits.
They talked about how the pandemic was
specifically slamming the tabletop game
industry just because of all of the
increase in shipment rates and delays
and everything that was happening during
then. Um, and this is almost part two of
that in some ways
kind of. But we we we and we I
originally I remember um I had like for
like a half second pitched idea maybe I
could do a sequel as a 7-inute you know
uh video but then things have been
moving so fast and there are so much
more complicated then yeah something
like this is the only way you can really
meaningfully talk about it because it's
it's it makes what happened in 2020 look
like a dotle and I think it's also
really important to note that if you're
uh uh watching this on on YouTube for
the first time or you're not familiar
with design club That's one of the
reasons that we do this format is that
it takes a really long time to get a
script out and get animation done, but I
can get Eddie and Jeff in a call for,
you know, an hour and a half to two
hours and we can sit down and talk about
it and that will be faster and more
accurate and we can say more because the
news cycle won't have changed uh by the
time the the thing is released. So,
unless you're saying Nintendo launching
the Switch, too. I mean, yeah. Oh, poor
Nintendo. Uh, by the way, if you it's it
is the morning of April 24th. If you
manage to get your pre-order,
congratulations. I'm so happy for you.
So happy for you. You and your
pre-orders. Anyway, I'm not worried
about it. It'll be fine. I'll get it
eventually. So, so actually as part of
the not even ground rules, but
background for this conversation,
I think it's fair to say there's a lot
about tariffs
themselves and government policy that we
won't be getting into. Correct. Like
tariffs can fill books. And there are
ways, actually, I'm going to lay this
out and you guys can disagree if you
want. There are ways to use tariffs to
help do things like onshore production
and other things. Yes, sure. But most of
those
require long-term
planning to allow people to start acting
to do what the tariff is intending to
do. Yes. And so and we can talk about
why we might or might want to do that
but just setting up there are worlds in
which proper implementation of tariffs
can do can enact government policy.
Yeah. Right. I think it's fair to say
for for this conversation how this
particular set of tariffs rolled out in
this particular environment why it is so
catastrophic. We're not saying that
tariffs blanketly are a problem or what
not, but this specific situation is a
problem. Yeah. So, what we're
specifically coming down to is this is
talking about how the tariffs have been
implemented and are therefore currently
affecting the game industry in the same
way that pandemic, you know, when it
came in and started affecting the
industry, we weren't talking about other
ones. It was this specific one that we
are dealing with right now. Yeah. So,
just kind of framing for anybody
watching Mhm. that we are talking about
the current way that things are have
been implemented and what that is doing
to our muchbeloved industry. Yeah.
Although tied to to the pandemic thing
that does mean the logical correlary is
that not all pandemics are a problem
that you know some pandemics are well no
but but the impact the impact of that
pandemic was unique in it right all
tariffs would impact the industry this
impact is unique um so that wasn't
trying to up or downplay the last
pandemic like last pandemic was horrific
you know a lot of people died yeah we're
talking about the we're we're in the in
the magical world where all we're
looking at is the economic impact which
is uh a terrible world to live in but
unfortunately a necessary one if we're
going to get any analysis on the impact
done I think so yeah just kind of
setting that because just for people
watching I wanted to get that out at the
beginning that that's a good point we're
not going to go into a hundredyear
history of tariffs or back to McKinley
or you know any of the other things
around it it's what's going on right
now. Right. Okay. So, in order to
understand what's going on right now, we
need to talk about uh to lay another
piece of groundwork which I think is
really important, which is
how does a
tabletop we we'll use an RPG. We we use
an RPG starter box because that that
changes things a little bit. How does an
RPG starter box for a brand new RPG?
We're gonna we're going to make the
Hecnommancer tabletop RPG. How does real
brief, how does that happen from a we
we're done with the designing of the
game, right? We have a finished design.
We know what we want to be in the box.
Mhm. We're going past all of the let's
design a game, right? Into the we have
designed the game and designed what we
want to be phys the physical part of the
game. Yes. Now what? Right. Yeah.
Because now what is a big next step?
That is a huge next step, right? Uh so
Eddie fill us fill us in as someone
who's done this uh far more than us.
Well, I mean it's it's it's it's a good
point because um we're also setting
aside for the moment things like um uh
PDF versions of games or or print on
demand versions of games because they're
also not quite the same thing. So, a box
set is actually a really good example.
Um, because you don't call up the box
set publisher and say, "Hey, I want a
box set of the thing." And they go,
"Cool." You push a button and then boxes
happen. It's it's nothing like that. Um,
let's assume a Hecnommancer has uh uh a
rule book, character sheets, dice, and
cardboard standies. That's a pretty
simple, straightforward. Yeah. Cool.
Wait, no. And I want a I want a Matt Lam
uh I want a battle map put in there.
Fair enough. M two and a map. Um uh so
odds are pretty good. Uh you're going to
get your dice manufactured one place.
You're going to get uh your box maybe
your cardboard standes done a different
place. Your laminate map a third place
and your book a fourth place. Okay. Um
uh and they're all because the the dice
manufacturers have no clue how to make a
book. The people making books don't know
how to make cardboard into a box. They
know how to make it into a book. They
have very specialized machines as a
general rule. Okay. Um and then uh once
you find and source all those different
uh we'll say printer as a collective
term, manufacturers, whatever. Um you
find those different printers, uh you
negotiate with them all the rates to
make sure that it's something that adds
up to a number that you can sell. Um uh
you want to the the general
um industry wisdom is you want the cost
to be about a fifth of what you
eventually want it to sell for. Um so if
you want that starter set to sell for uh
$50, the cost of everything including uh
shipping and whatnot should not exceed
$10 per unit. And really quick in for
people who aren't familiar in because
this is that $10 may seem like wow
you're making 80 you know or you're
making a 5x off your one but this is
also to account for all the time it took
to design the game and build the game.
And this is also when a retailer buys
the game they want to buy it for say 30
bucks and sell it or 25 bucks and sell
it for 50. Yeah. Well, actually, um,
usually how it works, correct me for a
moment. Um, usually a distributor will
buy that lot for, we'll call it, uh, 12,
$13 a unit. Um, and then the individual
game store will buy it at another markup
on top of that. That's somewhere around
$20 a unit. Uh, and I'm I'm making
numbers up here, but but the point is is
like um uh shipping uh goes to
distributor. Uh it goes to um the the
game store and then the game store sells
it. Uh and they have to have enough room
not only make a profit but also to
occasionally uh put on sale um and still
make at least some money. Uh because
another piece is as as I mentioned, you
get all these different manufacturers,
printers going. Then they all send that
stuff to the distributor who then
usually by hands assembles each of
those. Uh so they usually get a line
where it's like put one take the box,
put one book in, put one bag of dice in,
put a set of dandies in, put the map in,
close it up, shrink wrap it, put it
down, then just go through the next one.
And that also costs money to get all
those manufact
and that is part of why the distributor
takes as much of a cut as they do.
Right. Right. Right. U because they they
they are literally manually assembling
it. Um and that can't start until all of
those pieces come in. They can't like do
it halfway. They they've got to do it
all at once. Um, so if uh the dice are
sitting in port while the other pieces
are there, nothing's getting sold,
nothing's moving. And on top of it, the
distributor has warehousing costs. So if
it's sitting there, you're paying for
warehousing on top of that. Um, so these
costs do add up. So I mean, yes, uh, uh,
when I say um, you want to do 5x off of
your uh, manufacturing cost for price.
Um, I mean, it's not uncommon for
something like that to make maybe two to
three bucks a profit per unit, right?
Okay. So that means that if you are
lucky enough to sell say work for two
years and then sell a 100,000 copies of
your game, you're making two to
$300,000 for the multiple years of
effort for everybody involved in putting
it together. Yeah. And if that ends up
being five or six people, that drops
down pretty quickly, right? Because it
gets it gets spread around. Even if it's
not spread evenly, it still gets spread
around. Yeah. Okay. So that's that's
sort of how uh the the the the it's a
great brief highle overview, right? We
don't need to go into like dice tooling
or anything like that. So right, though
we will in a moment because this is
going to get to the interesting part,
right? Okay. So the interesting part is
that
um the
biggest h Okay, let me back up because
all of the the core cost the core cost
to print dictates your MSRP manufacturer
suggested retail price. the base cost of
goods sold
um runs through this multiplier to make
sure that everyone along the way gets
part of the cut, right? That the
distributor gets the cut, that the game
store gets the cut, that it can still go
on sale, which is sort of a theoretical
cut, right? You still need to have a
segment that can be taken away and sort
of given to the consumer, if that makes
sense. um as part of it. Um which means
that if the base cost of the goods
sold goes
up, it carries through this whole
process. Yep. And increases not only the
MSRP, but at the same Yeah, you're back.
The streams are having a time.
Oh,
okay. Now we're where we should be.
Okay. as a very brief internet hiccup.
Uh yeah. Uh okay, cool. Great. We're
we're back where we should be. Apologies
to everyone. That was live television is
an unavoidable part of doing it live.
All right, let's continue. So, as many
of you know, last year we ran a
Kickstarter, our very first one for
Extra History, and we sold history
calendars, which Oh, I should have. Mine
is sitting behind my green screen. Yeah,
they were really cool. like and we're
probably going to do another one again
this year because the last one was
great. We did a lot of planning and for
our calendar, we had our calendar. We
also had a deluxe package on the
Kickstarter that in addition to the
calendar had digital art of the
calendar, had phone wallpapers, had
physical postcards, and had an exclusive
pin that you could only get in that
actually here, which was wallp sitting
on a pen with it long enough that we
could actually use it as a wall tack to
hang the calendar. Mhm. Which was pretty
cool. And so what that meant was as we
were sourcing this to figure out how
much do we ask for on the Kickstarter,
we had to know how much would each
calendar cost and for the deluxe pack in
addition to the digital goods, how much
would the postcards cost and the pin
cost? Something about production was,
you know, I'm looking at a huge
spreadsheet here. The costs
weren't flat. For example, if we
ordered 500 calendars, our cost was X.
If we could get it up to 1,500
calendars, the cost was literally half
X. And if we could get But from 1500,
the price point again wasn't linear
linear. If we got it from 1500 to 2,000,
it actually dropped by 4
cents. Where if we could do you know why
you get those price breaks? Um, hit me.
Um I I actually looked into this a while
back. Um uh particularly with printers,
uh the big reason is because it costs
the printer just as much money to turn
on a machine as to turn off. So if they
could turn on a machine and let it run,
uh them doing 500 or 2,000 is a
negligible difference to them.
Interesting. Turning that off again and
resetting it for another thing costs a
lot of money for them, right? because
you have to. So that's why they're
willing to give you more of a benefit
for more units because it it they get
more money actually for less work.
Actually, I'm looking here at a,000 it
would c going,
to,500 it cost
us after that huge price break where it
dropped. We saved 11 from 1,500 to 2,000
we saved 4 cents. From 2,000 to 2500, we
actually then saved 7 cents. like they
it was just it was hitting that
threshold. But even the four and the
seven, etc., if you're selling thousands
of a thing, it starts getting in. There
were different thresholds for the
postcards, getting them printed and
different thresholds for the pins. Yep.
So from I had a huge spreadsheet because
we were looking at if we can, you know,
sell this many deluxe packages, here's
the profit we make. But if we can sell
this many, we actually make like it
wasn't a linear amount. Yeah. So people
putting these together are also thinking
of their print run sizes for things like
the dice and the standies and the maps
and the books etc. Because you might
actually find a situation where ordering
an extra 500 of them cost you
equivalently the cost of ordering 30
more of them. And then suddenly you have
an extra 470 of them that are like
there's weird math that goes into
finding these price breaks and lining
them all up with each piece of physical
goods. Yep. But also when we ordered our
calendars and we got the first one sent
to us, the group who sent it to us
realized they'd given us a misquote and
basically it was for a less quality
calendar than we'd asked for and refused
to honor the actual quote they'd given
us. And one of our procurement people
over at Nebula, our streamer service,
who also does some merch, found us a new
one who could do the actual thing for
the price, but it was no longer in the
US. Cuz we had initially chosen a
US-based manufacturer for our
calendar. And instead, they were going
to jack the price up like 60% to hit
what we actually wanted. We found the
original price that's therefore the 60%
less from China because the Chinese
group was set up to do that where none
of the American ones were. Yeah. And
this is because we started trying to go
all on shore for this just to avoid
weird shipping things. And it was
cheaper to go to China and actually have
them airship it over to us than it was
to order from somewhere 30 miles away.
Yep. And that like the problem was we'd
started the Kickstarter.
Like we couldn't go jack up the price in
the middle of this. The Kickstarter was
going if the calendar suddenly cost 60%
more. Our profit of this to help fund
the studio is going to go down to that.
So this wasn't a thing we're like, "Oh,
we're going to go over to China." This
was, "Holy crap, we found a stu a
printer that will save our Kickstarter
because the initial group we did gave us
a bum order and then refused to honor
the terms that they did it on." Right.
So, some of these are weird
circumstances, but like I wanted to
bring that up as a thing that affected
our studio. Yeah. So, so let's let's
pull this apart a bit. Right.
So obviously the reason that we're
talking about this is that bit that
things are being made outside the US and
Jeff you correctly alluded that things
are made less expensively outside the US
and I think in some places. Yeah in in
some places not every good or service is
cheaper outside the US. We should be
clear about that. The reason that we're
talking about this actually alludes to
something that Eddie said, which is that
the facilities and machinery and
expertise to make many of the things
that are involved in tabletop gaming are
not to be found readily at the price
that the uh the companies are used to
paying or even close to it, 60% more
here in the US, right? It was a market
like that was I I'll let you go a step
further. Um uh we get into board games
specifically there are certain
manufacturing needs that board games
have that do not exist at all in the
United States at any price. Okay. So so
we so it exists in this spectrum. So all
of these things are happening elsewhere
in places where there is uh machinery
expertise uh and labor right that is all
um unique right either at the price that
it is or merely its existence right and
so that's it sounds like that's really
common for this industry right that um
that the majority in fact I think every
Kickstarter I've ever backed has
has said this will be manufactured in
China and here is the lead time and you
know it's become somewhat of a
Kickstarter tradition even um and I'm
only using Kickstarter here because
Kickstarter uh involves additional
transparency with customers with
purchasers right I don't see this for a
thing that ends up at the shelf at my
local game store I see it for a thing I
Kickstarted because the Kickstarter will
update me right um if you go buy
Candyland from Target you don't know
where the pieces in Candyland or risk
score, Monopoly, etc. came from where on
a Kickstarter, they will usually list
it, right? And the Kickstarter will
often tell you, all right, everything's
done at the the manufacturer. It's on
the boat, right? The on the boat posts
on Kickstarter are like a tradition now,
right? And then like everyone celebrates
when it makes it to customs and everyone
grumbles when it sits in customs, right?
And then it makes it to a distributor
here in the US and they distribute it to
or in its final port, right? Um,
sometimes it all comes to the US and
then goes elsewhere. Sometimes it goes
straight from China to all of the
different international distributors. It
depends on how they have it set up. And
as a quick note, historically, China is
currently the country that has set up
the manufacturing infrastructure. But it
has changed. There was a long time when
everything used to say for electronics,
for example, made in Taiwan. That's a
very good point. Yeah. You know,
there's one of the Yeah. made in Japan.
One of the parts of a global of the
globalization push was to basically
instead of having every country doing
duplicate things to basically start
pushing specialties to certain
countries, you couple countries do
manufacturing. You couple countries do
you know mineral extraction. You couple
countries do you know tech and software
development. Like if you're talking
about software development, there's a
couple countries that you go to for
software development. Like there all of
these things have
become specialized. Yes. Because it was
deemed inefficient for every country to
do everything. Y fast forward 60 70 80
years of that and it has led to these
kind of situations
where you suddenly no longer have for
example certain manufacturing
capabilities in the US. But this would
be true if you were a Chinese excuse me
a Canadian company or a Brazilian
company or anything else. They also
wouldn't have those expertise correct
and machinery and tooling because again
the world has kind of and the way
capitalism works has pushed it off to
make it into specific areas that do it
very well. Correct. And while this isn't
the thrust of argument, this does also
apply to the other parts of gaming,
right? Um to to the video games
industry, right? It's it is April 24th.
Switch pre-orders have have done their
thing. Uh there is there are very
clearly not enough Switch twos for all
of the people who want them for a
plethora of reasons. And the it suffers
the same problem. People are like, why
couldn't you just make the Switch 2 in
the US? Well, to start with, not all the
raw materials that are needed to make a
switch to exist in the US. So, that's a
problem to start with, right? And this
this problem goes um across many
industries. We're here going to focus on
tabletop gaming because that's what we
have expertise in. And because I think
it's a very good
um small like microcosm. Yeah.
Microcosm, right? They are uh tabletop
games are relatively simple products to
manufacture. Obviously, the design is
complex and play testing and all of
that, but the manufacturing is a it's
not an iPhone BMW. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
Yeah. Exactly. But it has the same
problems as many of them in the sense
that iPhone is made a lot of the parts
of the iPhone are made all over the
world then combined in one place before
they're actually shipped out. The board
game has the same logistical problems in
a much more easily understood scale. So,
by the way, some of that parts made in
other places are by design. So for
example, a lot of US defense contractors
that assemble complex things like say a
missile system or a airplane will have
pieces of it built in as many states as
they can so that when they need funding
they can ask their state
representatives. They're like, "Hey,
well, if this funding gets stopped, you
lose manufacturing in your state."
They've purposefully spread it around.
Yeah. So that when the procurement
system comes time comes again, they have
all of the state senators saying, "Well,
I don't want to lose these, you know,
manufacturing jobs in my state or and in
some cases the same for things like
iPhone." The fact that they can say,
"Oh, you know, pieces of this were made
in 40 different countries let them also
say, you know, pieces of this were made
in your country." Yes. Right. Yes.
Exactly.
It's And that has backfired in some
ways, but it was also for a long time a
good selling point. Yeah. Yeah. Um
anyway, so I kind of interrupted no I
sidetracked this but for explanation but
um I think design club what this is this
is a good setup right okay so we've
established that uh how games are made
that they are made in places around the
world because currently in the way that
the world works and is set up they need
to be in order for that to be up until
this point until the tariffs rolled in a
economically viable way to bring a
product to consumers in a sustainable
fashion for the companies making them.
Is that all a fair assessment? Yeah.
Yeah, I think so. So far, I think we're
on page. So, so then, yeah, I want to
ask Eddie a quick question going on
this. Eddie, as a longtime maker of
games,
how much does, actually, how much does
Pugmire cost? If I was just going to go
buy the source book roughly,
uh, right now, I believe we're selling
it for $60. Something like that. Yeah.
Do you think if tomorrow you told
people, "Hey, I'm sorry. This now this
book is now
$120 as many people would buy the game."
God, no. Okay. So, there is a price
sensitivity. There is a certain amount
that people expect to pay for a certain
kind of product. There's a little what's
called elastic elasticity around it. You
can stretch it a little bit, but for
example, you couldn't come in and double
it and sell as many. Well, I mean it you
can't even really increase it. Like um
uh price increases are are are
notoriously hard to do in the tabletop
sphere, but to use a more common
example, people lost their minds when
Nintendo announced that Switch games are
going to go up in price. And it was it
was like what 20 bucks more, you know? I
mean, it wasn't a huge increase, but
people lost their ever loving minds over
it. Correct. Um because that is a common
reaction. Um, there's a reason why Steam
sales are so popular is because, you
know, people want to feel like they're
getting one over on the greedy
corporations. Even though, you know,
even though, and we have to remind
people of this all the time, it only
counts as saving money if you play the
game you bought. Right. Right. Chat,
looking at you, it only counts as saving
money if you actually play it. And don't
just put it in the backlog pile. If you
hadn't been able to come on this week,
Will and I are the topic we've been
planning was actually talking about the
anchoring effect and the switch to
exactly so you're validating probably
next week or the week after we'll be
talking specifically about that. But
that is a good fair enough. No, that
that's a good lead analogy, right? Yeah,
because um lost mind when it went up.
Well, certain people we like when when
when you know we talked about when I did
the video for the 2020 uh problems um
the the game industry had a similar
conversation because to reduce that
video down very very much. Go watch the
video. I I'm very proud of it. Um uh the
c the cost of paper and cardboard
primarily went up because it became
scarce. Um and so therefore the bail the
ability to make a physical book went up
and so a lot of publishers had to go we
have to charge more for books. And when
that
happens eventually people get used to
that. Um and so some people feel like
okay the answer is well then after
that's passed you bring the price back
down. A that doesn't happen. Uh but b
it's not just because of greed. It's
also because you don't know when the
next thing like that is going to happen.
Um, and also a lot of times when the
paper prices and car prices went up,
they also didn't really come back down.
So like the only people who are winning
are the people who own the core
resources really, you know. Um, oil
often goes to these problems too. Um, so
I mean like
it's when you it's always a push to get
that price up and it's usually uh I
think it's fair to say a year to 18
months before people become normalized
to new price point. Sure.
Um but even then it's got to be in
increments. Um uh and a good example
actually is um uh I have been reading
about the uh UK comic of Sonic the
Hedgehog. I swear this is on topic. I
promise you. I'm willing to go for the
ride regardless. All right, let's go. Um
so the UK had their own week or
bi-weekly uh Sonic the Comic uh Sonic
the Hedgehog comic called Sonic the
Comic. Um, and
uh, uh, one of the things that's nice
about them is that because they're out
of print and no one has read, no one
knows entirely where the rights are. Um,
uh, it's it's it's lots of scans of the
original magazine from the '90s are
available pretty easily online,
including, uh, the front matter where
they usually have an editor talking
about, you know, you know, fun kids, hey
kids, the book, whatnot. Um, but they do
occasionally talk about had to increase
the cover cost. It's like, you know,
cost of price, you know, paper's gone
up, whatever. So, we had to increase the
cover cost. Um, and every time they did
that, they always shipped the first
issue or two with a free gift as a way
to kind of make people feel like they
were getting something extra for that
price point, but then the free gift
stop, but the price point stays the
same. That was their way to handle we
need to get people used to price
increase. Yeah. Right. So, we have to do
the same thing, right? that what value
can we give to people while increasing
the cost that don't impact our uh
ability to make money? Right. Right. Um
and that we that conversation was happen
in the industry 5 years ago in 2020 and
now this is a much harder one because
you're right
like if you increase the cost you lose
customers always. It just always
happens. But if you there's as you said
there's weird math. If enough pe if you
lose only a less people than you keep
who will stay at the normal new price
point you can offset that loss right so
if I if I increase the price by
15% but 10% of my purchasing audience
leaves I still have the potential to
wind up ahead right exactly depending
upon material cost but yeah like if your
actual cost went up by 10% like yeah
there's yeah there's weird math around
it but yes And that isn't just on like
people doing price points for any
product do that math, you know. It's
like if we sold this for three bucks,
how many people would buy it? Well, if
we sold it for four bucks, you know,
would a third less people buy it? You
know, if it's So, you get this kind of
math going on all the time as people try
and figure out what to sell anything
for. Yeah. Right. A and I know um a
version of this happens when uh uh back
when the uh iPhone app store first
launched, there was a race to the bottom
for a long time of everything, you know,
as cheap as possible. And there was a
climb for other uh uh app creators to
go, we need to sell us a certain amount
to actually make money. We have to
convince people that a premium dollar
amount is worth that. Um and now it's
muddied for different reasons. But the
point is is that it took a long time for
people to realize, oh, just because I
get this game for 99 cents, this other
game that's worth $10 is actually better
and therefore worth more my time. It
took a long time to get people even
remotely used to that. It's still not
entirely a one battle. Um, part of that
was
actually Apple wanted to sell everything
for 99 cents because that's how much
long sold for and there's a whole story
there. Sorry, go ahead. Go ahead. But
but I was bringing up because like
there's a boil the frog thing. It's like
you slowly get people increasing and
they'll they'll accept smaller increases
over time, but yeah, like you said, like
if I if I double my price, if if I have
to sell this book now for $120, um I
there's no way I'm offsetting that with
the amount of people I'm losing, right?
I'm I'm selling probably next to no
books, right? Because people do not
think a 256 page fullcolor book is worth
$120, right? Okay. So, let's let's let's
talk about this. So, the margins are
small, right? We're talking a couple of
dollars to the original creator per unit
sold. We're talking about a long period
of revup necessary to increase the cost.
We're talking or increase the price,
excuse me. The cost is dramatically
increasing uh very shortly, right? Uh
over a very short period of time, right?
I I suppose it could be
instic terms, it was essentially
instantly. It instantly went from zero
to
154% right now. Nonsensically high. And
some people have 254% which is even
weirder. Yeah. Right. Um, how does that
work? Uh, there's apparently I I I I
didn't do the research on this part, I
admit, because I know that board games
and books are exempt from this, but some
areas of production have an additional
100% tariff on top of that. um based
based on which I I think I think it's
cars and electronics or something like
that. I mean, so it's it's I didn't look
too deeply into it, but yeah, some
places have even more. It's ridiculous,
right? Okay. So, if all of that is true,
what are the recourse like where what
now? Right. Okay. So, we we have we have
hectomancer. We have we have begun. Oh,
let me show one extra thing in here just
to make it a tiny bit more complicated.
Do you remember the um that Kickstarter
I talked about that we did the
calendars? We sold out of them and had
to order another batch to get to bring
into the store because the store we put
them in, we'd asked them to hold x
amount back for everybody who pledged on
Kickstarter. They didn't. So, we ended
up with a tiny amount of people that
hadn't gotten their calendar and
couldn't because we were out. So, we had
to do a reorder. So, we did a reorder
and we ordered some more cuz like, hey,
we'll sell them. So we ordered them from
the original printer. They got put on
the boat and then the tariffs came in.
So we had already ordered these, paid
for them, they were shipping. So the
escalating cost of the
tariff literally was an instant thing.
Like they were on the boat coming over.
It wasn't like we could be like,
"Hey, you know, let's reconsider this."
They'd already been printed. We already
had the invoice. There was going to be
the tariffing fee as soon as they came
in, right? So, so let's let's So, this
the just saying those tariffs weren't
doing what if the theoretical thing was
we should onshore more manufacturing,
right? The instant version of that
basically left no time for it. like it
was something else entirely. Let's real
quick just dive into the mechanics real
of this because I think it's important.
So tariffs in this case are not paid by
the um tariffs are not paid in the
country of origination, right? They're
not paid in China. You don't pay the
printer more in China for the good. It's
paid as a customs duty when it enters
the United States. Which is why being on
the boat matters because there's no
money due except to the people like the
the the uh freight cost, right, is paid
when you load it and it goes to the
place and then when it gets there,
that's when customs and uh import fees
and tariffs and duties and all of that
is due in the country where it's
landing. Yeah. So, and and and to be
clear, um I if that happens, um if it
lands and uh the uh person who ordered
that stuff goes, I'm not paying that
money, it doesn't get shipped back
because that's another cost. Someone it
gets pulled. It gets destroyed. Yeah,
that's correct. So, uh because no one
wants to hold it because again,
warehousing fees, right? All of all of
this is money moving around. So, so
basically it is pay it or lose it.
Correct. Yeah. Right.
So what now? Right. What what are so so
let's for us we paid the fees so we
could put the thing in the count in our
store and fulfill our obligations to our
people. And luckily
there was enough margin on that that we
didn't come in at like 150. We came in
at like something lower that we will at
least not lose money on it. Okay. So so
so the options are are as follows. I I
think I think so uh American companies
wanting to sell games to an American
audience of tabletop gamers have
the following options and we can we can
sort of go through them. One they could
do what it is theoretically being
encouraged to do with the tariffs and
onshore production. We've discussed that
that's not really viable in the near or
even uh significant. My guess is if
somebody was interested, you could maybe
even get a venture fund to back you. You
could go stand up facilities and in
somewhere between two to three years, y
have a facility up and running that
could do the kind of manufacturing or
board games in the United States, but
that's one facility, right? So like yes
you you could do that by way multiple
people could do this but my guess is it
is a 2 to three year setup time to put
it together find the facility get all of
the equipment get it all in installed
and then train up the people on how to
use it and even like beforehand figuring
out what you need to buy the right stuff
andor make the right stuff bring it in
like the setup time for that isn't like
oh let's go set it up it is a multi-year
process process involving significant
amounts of capital before you ever see
any sort of return and hiring the right
talent to do it. And let's pretend for a
moment that we could freeze the
industry. That we could say that every
board gamer was cool with not buying any
of the game that not participating in
their hobby monetarily for 2 to 3 years
and would all immediately return to that
hobby in two or three years when
manufacturing gets on to the US. This is
a completely counterfactual hypothetical
by the way. There's no way in the world
that would happen. But it's a best case.
right through a best case and every
studio could pause and not have to pay
their employees for 2 to 3 years while
we waited. Also counterfactual, the
price would still go up. Y the price
would still be higher in 2 to 3 years
than people left it, right? Uh of
necessity because of the cost of goods
sold and the multiplier and all of those
things and inflation in two to three
years. Who knows what that's going to
be? Um right. So the the cost would
still go up and people would still you
would still lose people even if they
were frozen, excuse me, with no other
influences for those two to three years
because the cost was going up. Right.
Right. Yeah. And that would also
assume, okay, this is going to be we're
going to get slightly into the politics
here, a
consistent and long-term plan. Correct?
Because if if somebody had come and
said, "Hey, three years from now, we're
going to be putting 100% tariffs on all
of these things. You have three years to
get your house in order and onshore more
things." That would be enough. And said,
"And we will not back down." You know,
that would be enough time to for
entrepreneurial people go get things set
up. And companies would start planning
against what those groups were going to
charge. They'd weigh it against the, you
know, 100% tariff coming in. They do the
math and they would plan out their
budgets and their operating costs around
that.
If that got said and then two months
later they're like, "Oh, it's going to
be 150%." And then two months later
like, "Oh, it's actually only going to
be 50." All the people trying to do the
planning of should we go build these
things and invest in this also have a
chance to get effed over because if
there's no stability, you can't go take
something that's going to take years to
set up and say this is what it's worth
investing my time and money in. Yes. So
the instability in the in the landscape
of international trade right now is part
of the problem and is working against
people actually doing the setup of
things like somebody who could do these
kinds of books or these kinds of dice or
these kind of sies or these kinds of
maps y in other places. Okay. So so
let's let's pull this apart a little
further too. So, let's assume that
companies are going to try and play
ball, that they are going to try and
manufacture in the way that they have
always done and find a way through
spreadsheet wizardry to make the math
work. They're gonna try and make all of
the math work in such a way that they
can make enough profit to keep their
company sustainable, that they can uh
still sell the product at a price the
consumers will buy and the consumer
won't be bucked by a sudden doubling of
price,
right? Where in the spreadsheet math
does the money for, we're going to keep
the numbers really simple. We're gonna
say 100% tariff, right? That's that is
it's easy math. It's easy math. It's for
the sake of argument. The numbers are
fluctuating and will probably be
different when you're watching this if
it's not April 24th. Okay. Um Right.
Where is there flex to do this? Right.
Or is there flex to do this? Right.
That's that's sort of what do you mean
by flex? Where is there uh room in the
budgeting in this magical spreadsheet
wizardry to accommodate 100% tariff?
get on on the initial good making it
into the United States. Let's talk about
that then. So, say Eddie's planning to
sell his pack for $60
and that's everything involved in it.
So, that means we know that it can't
cost more than
$12 tops. Mhm. So, if we're and let's
say he's come in under that, he's
managed to do it for 10. I'm just
throwing out some pretty reasonable.
Yeah. Um, so, okay, the 100% tariff
isn't on the $60 thing. It's on the
actual cost of what he's manufacturing.
So, what he would be looking at is
saying the $10 is going to go up to 20.
And I need it to be at 12 or under to
fit the rest of these. And if he can't
do that, that either mean, so we know,
so say he was making the $3 profit at
$12 and if it he could do it for 10,
that means he's making $5 profit instead
of $3 profit on a per book he sells
basis. Mhm. If that cost goes from 10 to
20, he's now losing
$8 for every book he sells, assuming
that they can't raise the final price of
the books enough to stretch it out that
the distributor and then the retailers,
we each also need to do a multiple on
top of that. Like there might be
something where the distributor is like,
well, you know, I'm willing to buy this
instead of for 12 for 15. We could eat
up to $3 on this to keep continuing. I'm
giving an example. Right. Right. Cool.
Now he's only losing $5 per and like you
know or maybe they can convince the
stores to instead of buying it for 25
and going to 50 to buy it for 30 and go
to 50. And so that might let the
distributor move their five up. So
theoretically at 100% if the store made
less money, the distributor made less
money, and Eddie was willing to make
like a dollar per book that the math
might shift up enough if you could get
all of those people to agree. Right.
And they probably won't. Right. Right.
And so so like Jeff, Jeff Jeff's case is
a good one, right? Um actually Eddie,
did I do roughly the math right on how
that would have to work? That's I mean
yeah but made up for made up numbers yet
that that works about right. I mean you
know but that's also I think we're kind
of where where uh Will's going here is
that um that's assuming that everything
else is also static which is not going
to be true either because the
distributor is probably going to have
increased costs because they have to you
know they also have resources they need
to acquire some of which is going to be
overseas so that's also going to get
tariffed. The game stores are going to
have to get some resources that may have
to come from overseas so that might get
tariffed. So, like everyone's costs are
going to increase on top of all of this
stuff. Um, so yeah, I mean like if if
they can make if they can fudge their
numbers to make less money, that's
that's a nice thing to have, but they're
probably not for perfectly mundane
reasons that aren't just like, well, no,
screw you. It's it's no, I I just can't
I can't make that work, right? Yeah.
Okay. So that leaves
uh sort of this and and uh we should
also clarify one of the reasons that
none of the
um that that flex room that we're
talking about doesn't really exist is
that none of this exists in a vacuum,
right? None of this exists in a uh in a
vacuum of uh people are only buying
board games and are
otherwise you know everything else is
the same. Right? One of the problems is
that uh the reason that no one is
willing to eat those cost decreases is
that volume of board games sold will due
to external factors that are not
directly the tariffs on board games go
down. Right. Right. because the money
that I whether you just spend on a board
game now has to go for food or rents or
correct and and this is because let's
let's talk about this part of it um
which I think is a very salient point
there is there have been suggestions and
again this is largely in the soundbite
social media crowd right um that uh well
why not just make the
consumer pay the full amount of the
tariff at the at at the end of the chain
right that if people and and this is
this is the idea Right. Um and so let's
let's examine that world just ever so
briefly. Uh that gets in the face of the
um that gets in the face of the cost
elasticity problem that we were talking
about, right? That gets in the face of
um oh the the multiplier math, right,
for the MSRP. Actually, the big one that
puts the entire burden of the collection
on the retailer. Yes.
In other words, you're telling the game
store and you'd have to charge the 60
plus the extra 10 cost, but what that
means is it's the board game store
respon or the, you know, game store
responsible for all of that and anything
they don't sell or anything that happens
along the way, they're stuck with that
inventory plus the $10 cost on top. It's
basically making them take all of the
risk, which is something that most mom
and pop or even broad, you know, more
national stores. They also don't have
that in their budget. Right here, here's
the other one. By the way, this is this
is this is where that this gets a little
weird.
Um, if
you there's the problem with tax on tax.
There's sort of a problem with tariff on
tariffs as well. I'm going to keep the
cat from meowing on air. Yeah. Uh,
that's um that's part of this equation,
right? That there is there's also a
world where because you're charging it
at the point of sale, you need to charge
more to cover the tariffs on the value
that you're charging the consumer. that
gets a little esoteric. Just know that
if you do it that way, it will be more
than the the listed tariff as an
increase. Right. Right. But but but I
mean I think there there's a
psychological thing that you're talking
about here which is valid is that um so
I for those for people who don't know
watching the stream, I'm actually living
in the UK now despite what I sound like.
Um
and uh so we do have tax on items here.
It's called that but it's rolled into
the cost of the item most times. Um, so
if I if something's listed for4 pound, I
pay4 pound. I may actually be buying it
for £350 with 50 50 p of that, but I see
four pounds, I'm paying4 pound, so I
don't think I'm paying tax. Right? In
the US, sales tax is by state, so it
gets added on after the cost. If you're
adding a tariff on top of that, what the
consumer is going is, oh, this book says
it's $60. I have $60 in my pocket. I'm
going to go pay for that. No, actually
have to pay 85.
and they're and and they're going to
blame the store owner for not accurately
their product. But if you put a sticker
on that saying this is actually cost 85,
not 60, the customer is not going to
pick it up because like why am I paying
more for the thing? The book says $60.
Why am I paying 85 for it? Yeah. And by
the way, this is so common that they've
had to make regulation against it. Like
if you go look at air like there was one
for airline pricing like this is a $400
ticket and then you know you put it in
your card and it's like here's the fuel
search charge, here's the tax, here's
the so- and so, here's the so and so and
your $400 ticket is now
$542 and you're like where did all that
come from? Like it's the surprise people
hate surprise costs. Like the Expedia
travel website, one of their selling
points is when you look at a hotel on
Expedia, they will list the entire cost,
the tax, the city charge, the you know
resort fee, whatever it is, is the price
you're seeing is the actual price you
will pay. Like it's become that that's
actually a selling point. We can tell
you what your actual cost is so you
won't be surprised. Like, yeah, that's
the world we're living in is that that
has become a selling point of knowing
what the actual price is, right? Here's
another one. And this one, uh, thank
you. Thank you so much to Demon Works,
uh, over in in Twitch chat. I'll put it
I'll put it on screen because I think
this is an absolutely incredible point.
Um, so, so let's let's go to your local
game store. Let's go to your local game
store and think about the number of
games on the wall.
Most most of them. We'll go with most of
them are made in China because China is
a place that specializes in this kind of
manufacturing and that's where it's
made. Not all of them. Nope. So now
there's an additional thing that has to
get covered which is they need to know
how much tax to charge based on country
of origin
for each product in the store. And this
is on top of the work that uh local game
store employees are already expected to
do. Think about your local game store.
Think about all the things your local
game store employee already has to do.
Think about them also having to worry
about country of origin for every game.
Think about when they mess it up and the
store owner then has to actually balance
their books against it. Correct. Right.
it becomes
uh there's I actually get you a a real
world example of that because again I I
I I live in the UK um and so if you want
a example how this works we could talk
about Brexit right um there are websites
that are like you know European websites
that going because of the Brexit tariffs
we just won't ship to the UK anymore
sorry UK customers we can't sell to you
because of Brexit um and that is already
happening in a lot of places where a lot
of non US companies are just going we're
just not selling to the US anymore.
That's just it. It is no longer worth
our time. Correct. Right. Because and
and theam again the Brexit examples and
ones that you give are we we don't have
the overhead to handle the paperwork and
it's purely paperwork for a lot of the
stuff. It's like it's not a huge cost
change. It's just there's additional
paperwork that they don't have the
overhead for. So yeah, I mean it's it's
it's it's not even a financial cost.
It's a logistics cost on top of
everything else. And again, it's all
going to be at the point of sale. Now, I
will quickly mention since we're in this
very topic, um that uh Backer Kit just
uh yesterday, today, double checking
real quick uh last week. Okay, so a few
days um they have rolled out a tariff
manager. Um so for crowdfunding
campaigns, if you're using backer kit,
you can tell people, okay, we're ready
to ship to you. So we can we can manage
tariff by country because yeah everyone
has to put their country for shipping
address. So you can say cool everyone
who's going to the
US add this percentage on and give them
this notification as to why they're at
having to pay this and it's listed as a
separate item when they check out this
is how much pay for tariffs. So already
got a tool for that. I've actually heard
of a couple of companies setting up so
that they now have fulfillment centers
in the US and out of the US so that the
fulfillment centers out of the US can
have things shipped to them. Like if
something going to Canada, you can put a
fulfillment center in Canada and
therefore doesn't get the tariff from
the US because it never came into the
US, right? This of course involves you
setting up an entirely new fulfillment
center just which is additional cost
just to get around. But it's like it is
crazy the workarounds we're already
seeing people well but again like Brexit
has shown an example of how this has
already happened right because uh in
Ireland Ireland's uh a lot of Ireland
that I'm going to really reduce here and
I apologize to all my Irish friends. I'm
going to be very reductive to a very
complicated situation. I apologize but
Northern Ireland and the Republic of
Ireland's the Republic of Ireland is in
the EU. Northern Ireland is in the UK
and Brexit. There
is not a hard trade wall between those
two part two countries for very
complicated reasons. Um very so right.
But um the point is is like what what
you could do is if you lived in Republic
of Ireland, if you order from the UK um
you would there would be additional
search charge and usually paperwork
involved with that. um even if you
ordered from Belfast, you're driving
down the road, right, as it were. Um but
uh you know, there's still a charge. So
in Ireland, when I lived there, they
actually have an entire set of websites
that do virtual addresses where
literally um you go my house is in
Belfast. The Amazon in the UK sends it
to Belfast and then this this this
company then drives it over the border
effectively. Um and it gives you a very
small charge. It's less than the amount
you would have pay otherwise. I suspect
some kind of virtual address is probably
going to start happening. People are
going, "No, no, I totally we we're
shipping from Canada, you know, and so
we, you know, we got on a boat, shipped
it across, you know, nets in Canada now,
so officially we're shipping from
Canada. We're not shipping from the US,
so there's no tariff here." You know, I
expect that kind of stuff's going to
start happening once people get the
logistics in place, right? Okay. So, and
and um actually, quick question.
Oh, I'm clicking the wrong thing. Isn't
that smuggling?
Great question. Technically, I am not a
lawyer. Next question.
Right. Right. I mean, the fact
Yeah. Right. Yeah. Yes. I mean, the fact
I was able to use this myself uh in 2017
and was perfectly legal. Seems like they
had found a way around it. But again,
the part of the reason why I was able to
do it is because that situation is so
complicated. Most people are just like,
I guess. You know, it was the I'm not
touching this with a 10ft pole. Yeah.
The um Yes. Uh correct. So, all right.
So, we're talking about a lot of um
things pain and suffering that people
are going through, right? Backer kit has
a new thing where you can pass the cost
on to backers if you need to or if you
decide that that's the route you want to
go. Jeff's talking about the, you know,
the the the paperwork. We've talked
about some of the paperwork.
So, if you're not getting the money
from, and we should also address,
there's also this belief um that is
largely brought on by political rhetoric
that the tariffs are paid by someone in
the country of origin of the goods and
not the person receiving them. Right?
That's also not the case. We can go
deeper into the reason some other time
if we need to. Even if it was if the
manufacturer was like, "Hey, we're going
to charge you $5 per calendar." And then
this comes on, they're going to say,
"Oh, I'm sorry. We are now charging you
because of this $10 per calendar." It's
not like they're going to eat the cost.
Correct. Because they have no reason to,
right? So even in that case, ultimately
the consumer will still end up and the
and the manu uh the the commissioner,
right, of the work, right? The company
that is commissioning the the product to
be made and the consumer ultimately end
up bearing the weight of those tariffs
regardless of who is officially paying
them. Just so we're all on the same
page. So if they don't do all these
things, then they go out. Well, let's
talk about what's happened from this.
Yeah, let's talk about this. So let me
start with one I know that the softball
tee it up to hand it over to Eddie to
take a big swing. Yeah. So, one of my
buddies that I was on an advisory board
with a couple years ago for a fun
startup, his job, check this out, for a
cool job. He runs a company that if you
want to sell something on Amazon, they
are an advertising marketing specialist
company. You can bring your product in
and they will optimize it for the Amazon
store. They will help you get your
shots, your product shots. They will
help you to how to do the right listing.
They will basically make it so that
you're you can sell well on Amazon. It's
like having somebody walk you in and say
this is how you do a Kickstarter or this
is how you do anything or that's what he
does. he or his whole agency and he has
a lot of small companies that basically
have found a cool
thing and get it manufactured in China,
bring it in and this guy helps them
optimize their store to sell, you know,
their backyard croquet sets or, you
know, any anything that they're doing. I
was chatting with him yesterday. He said
in the past 30 days he has had three
clients, excuse me, in the past week or
two he's had three clients give 30-day
notice that they are going out of
business. That it isn't worth thinking
to trim down. It is three clients have
told him 30-day notice because that's in
our contact contract. We are officially
going out of business because of the new
costs. So this isn't a theoretical that
is talking to my buddy three of his own
clients are now going out of business
specifically because of this right um
Ricardo the um president over at Hit
Point Press who we were working with for
their Humblewood um Kickstarter which is
going on right now
um was quoted in Polygon and we were
chatting with him because their
Kickstarter went live like two or three
weeks ago. go and they were trying to
figure out what they needed and like
they couldn't delay it. They had
everything else moving. They've been
hired publicity for it, everything. They
were trying to figure out what their
books were going to
cost because they needed to be able to
set a Kickstarter price so that people
could pledge and get a package. And like
they were just having to guess and
they're making their best guess. And if
things go poorly, like that's a small
publisher of cool things that might get
completely effed over because they
didn't guess high enough. But if they of
course put it too high, nobody's going
to pledge to their Kickstarter. Yep. A
and and and I really dislike in a world
of uh analytics and pricing models and
data tracking and trend tracking, right?
There's all of we we have what more than
a dozen years of Kickstarter history. We
have all this data about board game
trends and and board game purchasing
habits and board game geek and all of
this stuff. And some of the best minds
in the business who run some of the most
reputable small studios are resorting to
I guess we'll just guess. Yeah. It which
is it. Yeah. Which is its own cause.
Right. So uh Eddie, you you brought us a
couple of stories about the the what if
they can't keep up. Yeah. A few a few.
Right. I'm underelling it.
Yeah. So, so behind the scenes, um the I
got a Google document a couple days ago
and it's like here's five or six points
things we talk about and I dumped like a
page and a half of links. Yeah. No, it's
good. And and I read I read pretty much
everything you you you sent us to so
that to help us catch up because Eddie
Eddie's the expert here and knows like I
didn't know that some of these websites
existed uh when I was looking into this.
So, it was very helpful. Nice. Um um so
I mean like yeah, so like uh like uh we
said is some companies are dead. Um,
Borlandia, company maybe not many people
know about, Borlandia has shuttered
themselves. Um, a company more people
are probably familiar with, Greater Than
Games, who make Sentinels of the
Multiverse. They're done. They're all
unemployed. Uh, so that's not a um, oh,
we're declaring bankruptcy and
restructuring. No, they're they're just
done, right? Um, one thing we haven't
talked about uh much is in the midst of
all of this before the tariff stop
happened, Diamond Distributor, who owns
Alliance, who handles most of the
tabletop distribution in the US. Oh,
that's right. I declare bankruptcy in
November, December,
and they went through bankruptcy courts
and now there's a lawsuit going on about
who's legally labeled allowed to buy
them. So, that's a whole another problem
that has nothing to do with tariffs.
that's also making US distribution
difficult. Um but uh I mean there are
some options.
Uh one is uh uh the uh Cormare cosmir. I
never get it right. Cosmir role playing
game. Brand Brandon Sanderson's is that
Brandon Sanderson making it. He licensed
it to the company. Brotherwise Games
printing for Yeah. Yeah. Uh because IP
law. Um uh so um they did a really nice
breakdown of what they're planning to
do. Um which again with Will said a
certain amount of we're just guessing
here, right? And they're being open
about that. Um but they they have a plan
like we're going to do our digital stuff
is fine because digital is exempt from
tariffs. Um uh we're going to look into
our fulfillment plans so that way uh we
can try to get as much fulfillment done
intern you outside the US for
international backers. That way, um, non
US backers are getting fulfilled from a
non- US distribution area. Um, and that
should happen on time. Uh, the US
fulfillment is just going to have to
wait until, uh, we figure this out and
we're to keep making it. That's and
that's their plan. Um, which, uh, it's a
very nice document. It's very out. Has
lots of good points, but ultimately
comes down to, um, everyone else outside
the US, we're pivoting a little bit. the
US
actually as as we were having this
conversation I learned uh thanks big
thanks to to YouTube chat uh cool mini
or not is doing a huge restructure and
layoff like that's that's now that that
that was like uh five hours ago right so
four hours before we started this
conversation right yeah I'm not
surprised I've been hearing rumors in
the back channel about us not
necessarily been in the best shape since
the pandemic and let's let's talk about
that real
Part of the other problem is this is not
again none of these things are happening
in isolation and we would be while we're
trying to focus on tariffs as a cause of
this uh problem right and analyze the
way the tariffs are caused part of the
underlying problem is that the industry
was already unstable the indust let me
talk about war chess for a moment
so as the studio director of extra
credits and extra history one of the
things that I try and do and I've done
this for every company I've ever run
because this is just best practice is
you try and have a certain amount in the
bank. A lot of game studios like I call
it a war chest because like when I first
was working for Sony and then for
Monolith that's what they called it. So
that's how I learned right like Monolith
is actually a good example. Monolith
Productions, which I was working at back
in the early to mid
2000s. Um, I was on a DC game. They were
making Matrix Online. They were making
Fear and Condemned. They were basically
they would save up off of the game they
made. And that was how much money they
had, which was how long they could pay
people to make their next game before
they had to go shop for a publisher to
give them the rest of the money to make
the game. And then the money they made
off of that would give them enough
runway to go make the next one. They
called it building up the war chest. How
much money do we have in the bank that
can pay people before we're screwed? Um,
and whether any company you work at has
that. They don't generally tell their
employees that because sometimes it's a
very scary number when you're like,
"Wait, you guys have two months worth of
money in the bank and if we don't get a
new thing, we're all out of business."
Like that is way more common than
anybody knows. Yeah. So yeah, one of the
things that you try and do as a studio
head is you try and make sure you have
the biggest war chest you can in the
bank so that if something
catastrophically bad happens, like say
Rob, our lead writer for history, got
sick and we couldn't for some reason
contract with any of our backup writers.
We have backup writers just for this
reason and Rob stopped writing scripts
for a month. Well, without scripts, we
can't do voice over. Without voice over,
we can't do animation. Without all of
that, we can't put out a video. Like, we
might stop. Again, we have backups for
this, but just giving that as an
example. That's what you have a war
chest for to make sure you don't just
have to say, "Hey everybody, sorry.
We're done. Go find a new job." The
pandemic for the board game industry
wrecked everybody's war chests. Just
straight up. very responsible companies
that had been very tight on their
budgeting to build up the war chest so
that they would have that
runway spent a lot of it during the
pandemic trying to go as long as
possible without firing employees.
Those, by the way, those companies that
were the ones that were extremely
studious and financially responsible and
saved up big war chests are the ones
that survived as companies through the
pandemic, right?
The
alternative and we're out of business
because no one is gathering in places,
no one is going shopping for luxury
goods recreationally right now, etc.,
etc., etc. A and really quick um slight
pivot, but you will notice that from
2021 till now, the huge uptick in
IPbased tabletop games that are going
through Kickstarter because all those
companies like we need to get fast wins
to build that war chest back up. So
yeah, we're gonna do the cash in baby.
Yeah. Yeah. We're gonna do um you know
the the Avatar tabletop role playing
game. We're gonna do uh Dark Souls
tabletop game. You know, because that
that nostalgia of the people love those
properties will back them. They'll want
to get an increase in thing increase in
in results of that. Um they can use that
money to then invest in the games maybe
they want to make or to keep things
afloat. And then this comes along just
as they probably start building that
back up. Mhm. And and so related to
that,
we go to uh Stone Meer Games. Uh they do
Wingspan, probably the game that most
people will recognize. Um they're
getting a class action lawsuit together
against the president. Um uh they uh
announced it on the 21st. Um and by the
time we're recording this, uh the they
said anybody else who wants to join this
lawsuit can. Um 3 days later, it's like
our law firm has said, "We have enough
people. We don't can't take anymore.
Thank you for your time." That's how big
of a response they've gotten. Uh but in
their notes, uh they marked that uh of
all the stuff they've already printed,
nothing new, but just all the stuff
that's already like uh uh already in the
process of being printed or ready to
ship out, one a half million in tariff
costs for them. That that's that that's
a huge there's no there's no war chest
that covers a one and a half million
hit, right? For a tabletop board game
group. Yeah.
No studio even look at that and go wait
a minute what you know right and so it's
not merely this event right it is it is
as with all things this event in this
time in this fashion right especially
because one of the things that um if
this were a one-time thing if this were
a one-time we know this is the end of it
we know it's going to be stable after
this one event, there is a possibility
that additional venture capital,
additional backing, maybe you go take a
loan out from the bank against your
house mortgage or something, which is,
by the way, sounds super scary and is
way more common than I think any of us
would like it to be. Um, oh yeah, the
um the and this is where the instability
comes back into play. No one is going to
give them money because this is so
unstable because this industry right is
having this instability due to factors
that they don't control right there's no
way that uh I can't see a venture
capital firm being like quick note if
you lend somebody money you want to make
it back plus some that is generally
that's how it works right because if you
don't by the way then you don't have
money to lend to other people right like
right so so there's no way that I think
any reasonable venture capital firm
thinks that
cool mini or not or you know Orlando or
any of these other companies that have
been experiencing this financial trouble
and have gone have exhausted all of
their other options right the reason
that they've exhausted all their other
options is because the people who have
money won't lend it here because it's
not a sound investment because of the
instability right not because those
companies did anything wrong to be clear
the good money right now is in going and
saying do we think it is worth building
the infrastructure that all these people
will have to use at another time. Yeah.
Mhm. And like uh again this was things
that we had a solution previously um
because before the pandemic uh as moday
was being very aggressive buying up
board game companies because they're
trying to do exactly this. It's like
let's get a whole bunch of board game
companies under one umbrella. We can
share distribution sources. We can share
uh production resources. We can make
those games uh uh more cheaply at a
large scale and then therefore each
studio makes more money. Um and then the
pandemic hit and because Aset was so big
and had done that they were able to
absorb a lot of that but but over the
past several years As been starting to
bleed off some of the studios they
picked up. Um and so because they got
saddled with all the debt from the VC
firm that owned Asmoday but well there's
that too right. Right. I mean there are
other factors too of reasons but yes uh
um but but so you know uh as mod if it
had if it hadn't had that 2020 hit and
that other VC hit might have been in the
position to do exactly that we could buy
up uh greater than games we could buy up
cool mini or not and then get them
through but they can't now because
they're also struggling you know cool
mini or not also did some of this too
right so like it's it's turtles all the
way down you know on some level yeah so
so that's sort of turtles that's a shell
game, Eddie. Oh boy. Uh, we needed that.
Yeah. Um, so, okay. So, I think we've
covered most of the uh the analytical
basis of what is currently happening,
right? That is how tariffs work, why
tariffs are such a problem for the board
game industry, all of the ways that
people have tried to get through the
tariffs. I'm going to now open it up for
a little bit of uh forecasting,
okay, which is kind of, you know, is a
little dark. Where do we think this goes
from here? Right. Do what do we think
happens to the industry? So, one thing
we've actually had a good example of
this. Was it
um which was the one a couple years ago
that during the pandas was it darkest
dungeon board game? What was the one
that basically from the Kickstarter?
They're like they had a big one but then
all the costs rose cuz like it doubled
because they asked all the backers to
pay more. Yeah. And they basically came
back to their backers and said we are
going to go out of business if we cannot
get you to pay more. And they didn't say
it as well as they could have, but their
basic line was we know you we promised
to sell this to you for X. It's now X
plus Y% on top of that because otherwise
we're out of business. Nobody gets
anything. And that was not terribly
wellreceived. I mean, it was true from
their part. like they were in a really
awful situation where they'd collected
the money for knowing things were going
to cost X and suddenly things cost Y and
they looked at that and said, "Oh, if we
pay that, we're out of business." Like,
uh, similarly, uh, the robot board game
um, also uh, funded around I think they
put it either right before right in
2020. Um, same thing. the cost that they
handled it, I'll just say not as well as
they could have. Um, and they don't
exist anymore, right? They're done. Um,
they they did not survive that. Uh, and
that was like we've been saying like,
you know, that was one set of factors.
Now, those set of factors on top of this
set of factors, you know, that there's
we're going to lose more companies. I
mean, that's just straight up. I mean, I
don't want to doomsay too much, but it's
just going to happen. Um right now uh uh
Sephilopair who do Gloom Haven um they
they just did an interview the CEO did
an interview uh where it is they h they
have a bunch of stuff for Gloom Haven
too that's just sitting in a warehouse
in China. Uh luckily they they weren't
on the boat yet when this happened. Um
so the the is not actually shipping
right now. Uh but like it's the we
either we can sit on that we can afford
the cost for that for a while. we can't
afford the again 1 million I believe or
800,000 something like that a very large
number of just the tariffs so like
they're just sitting in in China waiting
right
um big enough that they could probably
do that for a little while but not too
long or they're going to concentrate on
selling it to everywhere except the US
well that's another part right um it
might just be that they're like over
time they will just try and keep selling
it to Europe and Canada and you know
other people who like that property here
here's sort of Yeah, go ahead. I was I
was say like so that's way my next
forecast like I think uh Euro gaming is
going to skyrocket again um because uh
uh Europeans are going to start selling
games to Europeans in other parts of the
world um and that's going to really take
off um and sadly uh American game design
is going to get a bit more isolated. Um
I do think uh there's going to be an
increase in uh digital and print on
demands production because one of the
nice things about POD is that uh
particularly uh Lightning Source which
is one of the bigger uh print on demand
companies um they have printers all over
the world. So if I get a POD book here
in London um it's getting printed
somewhere in the UK. It's not getting
printed in the US. So I don't have to
worry about that. People in the US can
have there are printers in the US. They
can get a POD book shipped within the
US. So POD is going to be a big way
around that. But you know, some people
don't like the quality of of print on
demand. So that's going to be another
challenging point. And that will also
apply, by the way, to miniatures. Um
I've recently found a studio that's done
that's licensed out their print on
demand files for um miniatures for
fantasy miniatures because I wanted to
paint some fantasy minis and I was
looking around to see what was around
and they make really cool uh Was it Hero
Forge or somewhere else? Oh, somewhere
else. Uh, it's a I forget the name of
the company, but I found a printer in my
state that makes them, right? That makes
them and it's, you know, a day of
shipping plus print time. So, that may
also be a thing. Um, weirdly, all these
options, by the way, are more expensive
than people are used to paying. Correct.
Um, weirdly, by the way, one of the
companies that might come out looking
good or ahead, uh, is Games Workshop. Um
because Games Workshop minis are all
made in Nottingham uh in the UK. They're
not made in China. So they they may
weirdly end up being sort of a stable
factor in tabletop cuz we haven't talked
about war games, right? We're just
talking about board games. War games are
sort of a weird fusion hybrid under
tabletop RPGs and board games in that
they include most of the components of
both of those for I bet they still get
their books printed in China even if
they make their minis in. up. That's a
really great point, Jeff. And no one's
really sure where they get them printed.
Uh uh yeah, I don't know if Hang on.
I can go behind the green screen and
pull I have my I have my combat patrol
thing here, so I can check to see where
they get it printed at. Um manufactured
in Nottingham, actually. Oh, great.
They've got a printer in Nottingham.
Okay. So So they they might be a company
that comes out. Okay. But others won't.
I think War Games Factory tried to move
to the US.
uh at one point, but the the minis
industry uh is going to be a thing. And
then the other one, right? Uh and um
we've been bringing it up a couple of
times is and this is sort of the
unavoidable truth. One of the other
pains that this industry is going to be
going through is because tariffs don't
just apply to board games, the
purchasing power available to consumers
will decrease because cost of everything
will go up. Right. So, uh I think less
discretionary spending means correct.
And so what I think we're also going to
see because people have uh less
discretionary um spending is we're going
to see a rise
in
very compact, very high quality focused
games that don't do the big Kickstarter
box with 10 million miniatures anymore.
We're going to see a lot more stuff
where the they expect to sell a lot at a
lower unit cost. because that is a way
that you can um accommodate some of
this, right? Because people generally
don't think of cost and percentages,
they think of it in absolute terms. So,
if you make a very small micro game or
some other smaller kind of game that can
absorb the tariffs, people might pick
that up, right? When they're My forecast
going actually off of that is more large
print run games. I think we're going to
lose a lot of the small ones like you'll
still be able to go to Target and find
Clue. Yes. Because Clue is a stack like
Monopoly is actually a little harder but
not that much. I'm just like thinking of
pieces in their risk. You know, we're
going to find these big games that they
can go print a couple of million copies
at a time to get their remember at the
beginning we were talking about how
costs go down the more you print. games
that can afford to print, you know,
Mattel and Hasbro games that they can
afford to print millions of these at a
time and basically bring in and pay the
tariff fee because their cost was so low
to begin with because of the quantity
that they were producing. And they're
already doing equivalently a very high
markup for what's actually in the box.
And so I suspect we're going to see a
lot more of those. But we're going to
lose. People are willing to bet on a
thing they know more to pay for a thing
they know more about than to experiment
on a risky thing when money is tighter.
Yes. Right. Um one uh one one thing I do
when I think about uh tips role playing
games, I always try to keep an eye on
the comic book industry because there's
a lot of overlap. Uh they both require
specialized printing. Uh they they they
largely sell to a fairly niche audience.
Um, and so, uh, in partic also for
personal reasons, uh, I've been keeping
an eye on the recent, uh, Skybound
Transformers Kickstarter. Um, they are
reprinting all of the original Marvel
comics run, both the US and UK comics,
um, and beautiful big books. Um, they
they announced it, uh,
Januaryish. Um, so right before I think
the terrorists were announced. And so I
have been keeping an eye on what those
price points are actually going to be.
And they launched with about the same as
they did last year with their G.I. Joe
comic Kickstarter. Um, which it was a
bit of a surprise to me. Um, uh, but I
think because it's Skybounds and
ultimately, you know, on some level
they're also image two relatively large
companies. I think you're right. It's
the we
can print a whole bunch of these and
just eat the eat the difference and not
lose money. Um, and that Kickstarter is
about I think right now close to $3
million. Um, so I mean they gambled on
this is going to be pretty big. So,
we're just going to leave the costs as
they are and just see what happens
because we can do that volume and and we
can get there and be fine. Um, I don't
think I don't think Skybound sourced a
non-Chinese printer. I mean, like most
comic books are printed either in China
or the US. And most of the specialty
books, the leather bounds, the um uh the
the pages that have the metallic edging,
the sewn in uh bookmarks, all that stuff
generally is done in China. Um, so if
and these are beautiful leatherbound
books, so that's probably where it's
getting done. Um, so I mean you're
right, like the bigger companies are
going to be able to just accept the
difference um and and get that huge
backstock of of content in and just
they're they're trading the uh pair for
warehousing costs, but for them long
term that'll make sense. They'll ride it
out. But yeah, anybody below that major
corporation level who have huge
warehouses who can order millions of
units, they're going to struggle. Um,
and they're going to have to to pivot
to, like you said, selling outside the
US. Um,
and while I mean Europe, Europe is a
strong market. Um, uh, Japan and Korea
are all strong markets. Collectively
together, they're roughly about the same
as the US. So like you can't offset the
US market that much, right? And a couple
years from now, this may be different.
You know, maybe this does cause people
to go build the actual facility,
manufacturing facilities here that allow
for these to be printed because right
now we're talking in a scenario where
they literally do not exist in the
United States. So it is not an option
for people to say, "Yes, I will do so."
And if so, what we might end up is a
winter of a couple years where it's just
trash for those kind of people. And
eventually, if those facilities stand
up, you might see somewhat of a
resurgence. But if that happens, we're
going to see a lot of companies go out
of business because they're not going to
have the funds to last to that point.
There's also, and I um I think that the
the scenario you're suggesting does
exist. I also think there's kind of an
oraoros problem where if I'm forecasting
two or three years out to stand up this
facility, I also have to predict will
there be demand for that facility in two
or three years. And if the whole
industry is crumbling because they can't
make products for 2 or 3 years. It may
simply be that people don't believe that
the demand for the facilities will be
there so they won't begin at all. And
that I don't know what the analysis on
that is. Oh, and as a quick aside to
that, if these facilities do get stood
up, they're going to be looked to done
in the way that is the most long-term
profitable, which means you're not going
to be bringing in 50 people to run a
print shop. It's going to be three and
the rest is going to be automated. It's
all going to be done with robots and
software. You're not bringing jobs in.
Oh, yeah. This kind of thing. Yeah.
Because people are looking for how do I
make this sustainable long term for the
investment that I'm doing? And that in
this day and age is automation,
robotics, and software. Yeah. Mhm. It is
no longer people going and manually
print setting things in the way you
might think. Yeah. Yeah. And I mean, if
you want another example of what this
could look like, I mean, let's look back
to uh the writer strike um the WGBA
writer strike. um
because there was like about 6 months
they were on strike um which nothing was
getting done and then they had to ramp
back up after that. Um and we're just
now kind of getting out of that drought
of of media. Um that was a six-month
hit. You know, we're looking at possibly
much longer time period for that. Um so,
uh you
know, theoretically for companies that
are confident they can survive it, yeah,
you know, they can continue to make
stuff. Uh um like I said, Brandon
Sanderson is not going anywhere. So, of
course, they could they're pretty
confident they can keep making uh the
games they're working on because even
though they're working through a
different company, there's going to be a
demand there and we'll get through that.
So, we can keep we keep our developers
working and keep making stuff. There's a
lot of other people are going to be
like, I don't know if I want to keep
doing this. And a lot of them are just
be like, even if they could survive it,
I could just go get a job at a bank, you
know? Um, so I mean we're gonna we're
going to have a huge hit in creative
talent as a result of that just because
of the the anxiety and stress of trying
to survive all of this and the anxiety
stress of the people that you want to
sell it to giving you crap online
because you're not doing it as fast
enough or you're not doing it in the
right country or you're not doing it at
the right price point. Um, that that's
going to wear away people. So there's
going to be a psychological cost to all
of us too. Again, we saw in 2020 I
talked about in that video in 2020 we're
going to have another round of that
again. And some people who survived the
first one may not survive the second one
just so I was a bad choice because
people actually died in the pandemic um
and are still dying um but more to say
that as a company they won't last
through as a result is because they just
won too many hits. So I mean
right but but I I say all of that
because I don't think the industry is
going to die right um for a lot of
reasons. one, uh, it's it's easier than
ever to make your own game. Like, you
know, uh, a few hours on computer,
tossed up on it.io, you have a a
customer base. I mean, it's really
trivially easy to make a game of any
kind. And I think that will always
persist and continue. And I think those
small indie games will probably rise in
popularity to a certain degree because
they're much more accessible. Um, also
when people are stressed and troubled,
uh, board games and video games and
tabletop games are all they're a luxury,
but they're a good value for money
luxury. Um, so short term they'll take a
huge hit, but long term they'll recover
faster because it's the yes, it's $100,
but $100 that like gives me months of
entertainment versus $100 is maybe a
night out and that's it, right? Yeah, I
I buy all I buy all the D and D books
and now I have me and three friends and
you know me and four friends and have a
campaign and that is that is $100 thing
versus like an expensive dinner out.
Yeah. And you're like, "Yep, maybe one
less expensive dinner out and or
whatever the thing is." And also because
these games are are meant to be socially
played and collaboratively played, um
it's not uncommon for people to go,
"Okay, you know what? we chip in 25
bucks to get this $100 game that we're
all going to play. Um, so value for
money, these things do provide more
entertainments than a movie or a night
out or whatever. So they do recover
faster. Um, so I I I don't think it's
going to be like the industry is doomed.
Uh, but specific companies are going to
go away. Certain products are going to
go away. A lot of talent's going to be
lost. Um, so it's going to be a hard
road. But there were some things avoid
like people are going to go for less
risky things because it's harder to do.
Yeah. Yes. Um uh a friend of mine told
me recently about a psychological thing
called uh expand and exploit. Um is that
when we're feeling comfortable and
confident and uh uh we feel like
everything's going okay, we as human
beings like to expand our horizons. We
like to try new things. We like to go
out and check out that restaurant we've
been meaning to. movie later, pick up
that book that's maybe really
challenging, see some challenging media.
When we're stressed out, uh we exploit.
We f we we take go to things that we
know comfort us and mind that. We watch
The Office yet again on Netflix. We uh
read a book that we remembered from
childhood. We buy that game that reminds
us of a thing that we loved 20 years
ago. So what's going to happen is uh so
I say exploits in this very context
because the game industry will move to
exploit mode not in the exploiting the
customer but rather exploiting
known reactions. We know this will do
well. We know a reprint of the
Transformers comic will do well. We know
that a board game based on a very good
selling video game franchise will do
well. We're not gonna do necessarily
uh small woodland animals trying to
explore their environment in a tactical
game. You know, that kind of game
wouldn't necessarily fly now. Yeah.
Yeah. Well, that I think is a good place
for us to to end our discussion. Eddie,
thank you so much for lending your
expertise to this. Uh Jeff, as always,
thank you. And to you, our viewer, thank
you so much for for tuning in. If you
have um I I've been I've been telling
the breakfast crew this normally YouTube
comments are pathy oneliners. I invite
you to say more. If you want to engage
in good faith with this whole topic,
talk about the future of the board game
industry. Express how you think this is
going to come out. I invite you to use
the comment section to say more to have
a conversation uh in good faith about
this topic because I think this is a big
thing that's going to affect all of us
uh in the coming uh months and years.
Uh, thank you so much for joining us as
always. Uh, and we will see you all next
week. Not sure for what, but we'll be
here. Uh, all right everybody, you will
see Eddie around because Eddie is Eddie
is part of the extended crew. Eddie will
be back
for all right. Uh, until then, please
take care of yourselves. Please take
care of each other. We'll see you next
time. Say bye to the people, Jeff. Bye
to the people, Jeff.
[Music]
But we didn't leave. Haha. Haha.
Secrets. All these like Yeah. flashy
intro and outro things. We We built that
a bit ago because we wanted to actually
It makes it specifically for like where
we clip, like where the show starts and
ends. It gives a very clean start and
end that's easy to find as we're kind of
putting this up for production. Yeah,
just go to the black screen. Cut there.
Boom. Yep. Exactly. And it's already
cut. I I'm just going to remix it later
and throw it up. Um, yeah. Thanks, chat.
I This is, by the way, this is probably
one of the more difficult conversations
to have and uh both chats engaged in
really good faith in talking about this.
So, yeah, very good job um to everybody.
Yeah, thank you. This is I mean, this is
tough, right? Yeah. I need suggestions.
By the way, I haven't yet made a
thumbnail for this. I've been trying to
think of a like I with the text I'm okay
with, but the picture that we put on to
basically help sell this idea. I want
Okay. Okay. Hear me out. Hear me out
before you judge this. All right. I want
a picture from a muppet's Christmas
carol, right? Of the ghost of Christmas
yet to come, right? Doing the long
finger point at the grave and the the
ghost of Christmas yet has to come. You
know how it has the blank face? It's
just tariffs and then the picture is
it's pointing at the thing and it just
says tabletop games and it just has it
at the gravestone. That's what I want.
It's not a good one. One change. No, one
change that the gravestone is in the
shape of a mele. Oh yeah, it's good.
Yeah. Yeah. Right. Right. Yeah. Yeah.
Yeah. That's it. Yeah. That's 100%.
Okay. Hold on. I have to look
up
Christmas. Ghost of Christmas future yet
to come. Yeah. Yes.
Oh, okay. Big, close, scary. Darker than
I remember. Oh, yeah. No, Muppets.
Muppets Christmas Carol. Okay, reminder.
A Christmas Carol is like barely a story
that's appropriate for kids. And in my
opinion, and the opinion of many others
who have excellent taste. A Muppets's
Christmas Carol is the authoritative
on-screen version of A Christmas Carol.
Like, there just aren't any others.
That's true. Right. Yeah. Okay, great.
Awesome. So, okay. I I have a picture.
Yeah. Let me see what I can do on this.
Yeah, that's a challenge. Yeah, it is.
Um, this is the point where we're going
to say goodbye to Janet. A reminder,
Matt and I are going to be playing
Oblivion here in a little bit on the uh
Twitch channel. Um, so if you'd like to
join us for that, come on over.
Otherwise, we will see you all, Janet,
Monday for breakfast. Matt and I are
going to have a lot to talk about. We're
going to talk about how poorly the
Switch 2 pre-orders went. Uh, not in so
much as we're going to talk about the
Switch 2, but we're going to talk about
why pre-ordering games in the US sucks.
Um, that's a whole problem. Uh, so we're
going to talk about that. We're talk
about a bunch of other stuff. So, please
join us for breakfast on Monday. Uh,
everybody say bye, Janet.
My dad.