*intro plays*
All right, so this week
We're back to the subject of exposition.
like we said before most of you probably learned a lot of this stuff in high school,
But we're going to put it in the context of games
because writing for games often presents us with some pretty unique challenges
We're going to focus this episode specifically on word choice
And simple literary techniques that will help us get the most out of our
Exposition because games generally lend us a very limited amount of space to deliver dialogue first
Let's talk about characterization. characterization is probably the easiest thing to understand in a broad sense
But the hardest to give specific tips on. perhaps a good example is the difference between portal and quantum conundrum
Sure, quantum conundrum had some issues with its physics puzzles and such, but when it comes down to it the reason that that game will
Never get the love that portal does is because fitz
Quadrangle is no glados and this all comes down to an understanding of the character and the way that understanding is translated into the words
They say. both of these characters are experienced primarily through dialogue
They are almost entirely presented to us through the words they say. so, how come one resonates so much more than the other?
well, very few of Fitz's Lines serve to do anything other than to deliver information
Fitz says Lines like, "that cylinder in an IDS battery and it powers
dimensional shifts. toss it into the large receptacle mounted on the wall over there on the second story.
now, glados is often giving you instructions, too
but her lines simultaneously give you a sense of the world you've found yourself in
as well as an understanding of her own schadenfreude (or pleasure derived by someone from another person's misfortune)
and insanity.
" any contact with the chamber floor will result in an unsatisfactory mark on your official testing record,
...followed by death"
as a writer, the difference is in how well you know the character
And how will you know what needs to be conveyed.
Ezio Auditore saying
"Requiescat in Pace"
after every kill, or even Coltrane's
"WOOOO"
Helps the player to understand those characters just a little bit better. who they are, what's important to them.
That's what gets us invested in them.
It's what makes us like them.
But try not to limit yourself to catchphrases and accents. that alone will still leave you with props - generic animated Mannequins rather than human beings
Instead, think about why your character would pick up such affectations in the first place, and what that means about them as a person.
As a whole. Figure out exactly who your character is. what their quirks are what makes them unique.
Then, rather than wasting more words to convey that information, put it in the tone of your dialogue, conveying personality through verbiage
How a character phrases things will tell us more than all the weepy backstory exposition in the world. Backstory can't live without character,
but characters can be vibrant without a ton of backstory.
After all, investment in the characters is the only reason we care about the backstory in the first place
So prioritize character, and then figure out how much backstory you actually need.
all right
So know your characters, know their quirks,
and make sure their personalities clearly convey through their dialogue
even if they're simply delivering the player instructions
Enough on that, moving on.
the second thing we want to talk about, this idea of word choice, is perhaps easier to give concrete
Suggestions about, but harder to talk about as a generalized whole, but we'll try.
Even if two sets of words might seem on the surface to have the same meaning in a literal dictionary sense,
There's so much conveyed in the relation of words.
Their meaning in relation to your sentences as a whole, that two seemingly identical
Phrases can have a radically different impact on your viewer.
for example, "To be or not to be, that is the question"
has a very different impact on the listener than  "Ayo dog I was thinking about whether I should off myself"
these phrases might mean the same thing on the simplest mechanical level,
But the viewer is going to perceive them very differently.
so what do we need to think about regarding word choice for our games?
More than just beauty or lyrical quality, word choice allows us to kick the viewer in the brain; to say to our player,
"This is important. Listen. care." There are a number of minor techniques
we can use to make a sentence stand out. draw the player out of simply passively playing and instead make their brain actively engage with
A narrative. perhaps the simplest of these techniques is repetition. it sounds silly,
But simply by repeating a word or phrase, we can highlight its importance and have it be the part that sticks in the players mind
The part that we force them to think about. It works for the choruses of songs and it works for games
Remember that famous fallout line - "War never changes" the actual phrase from the game is
"war - war never changes"
In that intro sequence they say the word 'war' seven times and repeat the phrase war never changes
Again about halfway through as a transition, as their tie between talking about the past and talking about the game world future.
Or how about Andrew Ryan's, "a man chooses. a slave obeys"
He says that phrase four times in the two minutes
You're talking to him. throwing in the words man
And slave another half dozen times on top of that. this sort of kick to the brain is vital as it clues the player in
That this isn't just dressed up exposition nor is it some moving the story forward plot device
but something that really needs to be thought about this is doubly important as we, the gaming audience haven't yet been
Acclimatized to the idea that one should be watching reading or listening as closely to a game as one might a film or a book
But the writer has to be careful because poor use of repetition
Can easily feel stayed in clumsy or worse still sound like a bad translation?
Make sure you use your key phrases
judiciously repeating them for impact the best way to tell if you're doing this correctly is just a test get some people together read the
Lines to them see how they feel remember like the rest of game development writing should also be a process of testing and iterating
Don't let people change your vision, but let them help you know when that vision is not coming through
But let's talk about another technique
bookending when you begin and end with something whether it be a
Location or a phrase it forces the audience to reflect because of all the context gained in the intervening time it makes us
Reconsider the phrase image or scene that we started off with the final fantasy series likes to do this a lot look at the return
To [zanarkand] and final fantasy tens opening sequence you see it before the story begins and then again when you reach that scene chronologically
It's not at the end of the game of course
But it still achieves the [bookending] effect or we could talk about silent hill 2's letter reading one of the most famous examples of book
Ending in games if you want to get a player to think about the transformed meaning of something
This is an excellent technique
Next I want to talk about dissonant
Juxtaposition when you place two things side by side they provide context for each other when that context appears to be contradictory
[it] creates a mental dissonance that the audience has to resolve it forces us to stop and think phrases like a clockwork orange
or
Rippling Walls serve this purpose [the] bastion actually has a number of good examples of word choice if you're looking for examples
So long as meaning in here is in this juxtaposition
It'll not only give you a cool phrase
but also force the player to pause and process what you're trying to say we could go four episodes listing off techniques like this we've
only described the tiniest fraction of writing techniques games can employ
But hopefully this gives you a springboard to start digging even further
- how to save more with your games and how to get your players to notice if I have one final suggestion to offer
It's this read your lines aloud with a friend
I have seen far too many
Professional developers who never play act through their scenes never read their lines aloud never see how they flow live before it's time to record
Them with voice actors don't make that mistake
Live your characters get into their heads take on their personas and try to act like them
What would they really say in this situation? What would they [say] to this specific person?
They're talking to grabbing some people and acting these things out will help you immensely
You'll be able to feel at the moment something rings on true. I hope that helps [I'll] see you next week