I think it's important we get Janet in
here. I think it's important we get
Janet in here, too. Uh because it's not
a breakfast stream without a Janet. So,
yeah. I feel like if this was an episode
of Seinfeld, uh Brad, us and Brad would
be Jerry and Elaine talking in the
apartment, right? And then all of a
sudden, you'd hear,
right? And then Janet Kramer would just
come smashing through the door, right?
And say something along the lines of
like, "Tariff's, Jerry." And then like,
and then we just go from there. I think
that's kind of right. Did I Did I get
the vibe of the show? No, I I feel like
that's correct. I I feel like that is uh
the best part of waking up is showing
Janet your invisible cup. That's You
know, that's
correct. Uh oh dear. That's great. Who
said that? Bob. Of course. Of course.
Why do I even ask? All right, I gotta
change. Good morning, everybody. I gota
change some stuff. This is This is not a
This ain't Oh, boy. Oh, boy. Do we have
a show to show you a show in
Today's good. Today's a good smattering.
I'm gonna I'm gonna need you to say the
thing you said right before this show is
good cuz you started saying it and I
smell burned toast and then like I just
checked out for a second. So
I wonder what's going on with
Newman. Is this a show about nothing?
Oh boy. Oh boy. Oh boy. Uh okay. Let me
let me
Hey, nice. Welcome to Welcome to being
on Janet. Yeah. Uh this time around.
Yeah. Okay. Cool. Cool. Cool. Cool.
Cool. Cool. Cool. That's good. Now, once
I do all that, I need to click this and
then
hopefully Okay, that's
what's happening, Will. What's going on?
Uh I am changing a thing pro. It's fine.
Don't worry about it. I've changed a
thing.
Every time someone says don't worry
about it, that instantly spikes a level
of worry. Okay, so remember how I said
that I was working on a new way to show
chat to chat when I'm streaming?
Unfortunately, on my end, that screwed
up my view of the dashboard.
I see. So that didn't it was more
difficult to do the this thing than it
needed to be. So, I was undoing the
thing that I did so that now I can do
this thing because I don't need this
thing to look like the thing that it
looks like when it's just me to look
like the thing that it looks like now.
Copy that.
Understood. This makes all the sense.
Is there a hype train going on? I didn't
even look. Yeah, of course there is. Of
course there is. I I like I like this
that coffee clone got an ad for an ad
blocker.
This is the tool of our enemy. We do not
use it.
You're going to put that in the actual
show and it's going to make no sense for
Rocky. I don't know what. No, cuz I'll
do a fiveminute diet tribe about how we
did it on the pre-show. That'll be how
it go. That's fair. It's valid. That the
pre the the the the talking about it is
going to the going to the thing. So, uh,
Snowy, I want to make this very clear.
It's excellent that you're
cross-pollinating here, watching on
YouTube while chatting on Twitch. Look
at this. All of the options. And and in
fact, that is probably, I would argue,
the best of the options, weirdly, is to
like just pop out Twitch chat and then
YouTube has a higher has a higher bit
rate, right? Uh YouTube has Yes. to the
viewer. Yes. Um but also they have
better VOD controls, right? Um than
Twitch does, uh which is, you know,
weird that don't need that. Yeah. Well,
uh I think I think that the is Oh, it's
1 minute 47 seconds before I can have my
coffee and we can start the show. Should
no one else uh be generous on Twitch. I
feel like that is the that is the the
move.
Matt, did you have a good Easter
weekend? I did. I went to the park, hung
out with some friends, played with llo.
It's good. Nah, nah. Unfortunately, God,
you spoke it into existence. You spoke
it into existence. Look, we're always
very torn, right? Because your
generosity is what helps keep this show
going and we very much appreciate it.
And we set up this weird sisophician
task of us both complaining about and
yeah, no coffee for me. Thank you. Thank
you very much. most also uh Lurker
demonstrating one of the new emotes here
on on Twitch. We have we have a series
of new emotes here on on Twitch. We have
That's so fun. Cheer
old high five left and right.
Yeah, excellent new emotes uh by Nick
Dit. Yeah, there we go. Yeah. No, no, I
got them all. You just pull them up
there. I have my coffee right here. It's
weird though cuz here High-5 doesn't
like look like they touch, but they do.
They do touch. They do. They can also on
the YouTube side of things. Uh we are
working on trying to get more emotes
over there. That b that's based on what
memberships will. Is that the deal? That
is number of members. I can let me see
if I can pull that up real quick. The
only Yeah. Like if memberships get high
enough then we can add more emotes I
guess is like one of the draws. And we
have a bunch over on Twitch we can move
over whenever that happens. Um yeah but
then see here's the problem. Is there an
equivalent on YouTube? Actually, this
might be great for me. That is the
equivalent of a hype train that would
stop me in the morning on Mondays from
drinking my coffee by people being kind
and
generous. I don't know if there is. I
don't I don't know that there is. Uh,
okay. All
right. So, we can
get in four members. Four four more
members. We can get
more emoji.
How many more emoji? I don't know how
many we have right now. Oh, we have
five. We get two more. No, sorry. I can
count. We have six. We get one more when
we get four more members. And
interesting. So, it's really a 25% of
the work. I need to pick two more uh
emotes to upload on on
um on YouTube already and I will take
care of that probably tomorrow.
Honestly, today is very is very busy.
Yeah.
Bob, why you do this? Why you make it
work for me? Bob, Bob, why you doing
this? Thank you so much for joining the
extra fans.
Uh
it's only three now. Can it be done in
an hour and a half or two hours or
however long this show is? For me as a
viewer, if you have if you watch ads or
if you have premium. Oh, question for
Matt. Does the channel get more money?
Oh, uh, premium. Weirdly enough,
premium. Uh, if you're talking strictly
YouTube, I don't know. Ooh, I need to
ask our our partner manager about this.
I don't know what the difference is for
a live
stream. Do you know what I mean? I know
what like I know that it is more it is
beneficial for a premium member to watch
your show ad free on YouTube than
through ads because it's it's showing
it's showing what people who are
spending money that way are watching and
therefore it elevates it further. Um I
don't know though for streaming that's a
that's an for a live stuff. Yeah.
Um look thank you so much for becoming a
member over on YouTube.
appreciate you. Yes, this is true. Cause
Tripurble on Purpose is uh actually the
joint mods like right if you're
wondering how someone got to be a mod
here, it's very simple. I picked all the
people who were causing the most
problems on purpose and then I gave them
all swords and
said play with this mostly responsibly.
Right. Right. Okay. All right. Don't say
that. God, I was so close to you were
Nova pushed it over and Nova was
like just No, Nova did the the cat
thing, right, where it was already at
the edge of the table and Nova just
went,
"Yep, there it is."
Oh, that's that's a very good point.
That is a very good point. Uh Darkwolf
says, "With premium, I can listen with
my screen off. That's why they're
there." That's the thing. Okay, so I
also have signed up for fun fact, you
don't get it for free when you make
YouTube stuff. Uh I personally out of my
own pocket pay for premium and that is
my legit selling point for it is you can
listen to videos with the screen off.
And it's so funny that that's the I want
to experience less of what's going on on
YouTube for more money, but it's
actually like when you're walking or on
the subway. I don't know. It just it
actually is very very helpful especially
for shows like this where listen this
this and this is a bonus right um we
think
sometimes
they keep wanting to turn us into
VTubers so you know maybe they don't
actually want to see that maybe they
don't yeah I just I can smell it and
it's
really why do I make up these awful
rules I No one's enforcing this but me.
No. Oh, uh, quote also says screen
models works better with smart TVs. Oh,
does it? Yeah. Huh, that makes sense.
I can also imagine that having ads on a
smart TV is like wretched.
But that's also the entire business
model of smart TVs. Yeah, that's why I
want a dumb TV that I hook my computer
up to because I don't want the TV to be
smart.
the pro. Yeah, that's the thing, right?
Like you actually can't buy an
affordable nonsmart television anymore.
Yeah, you can buy cheap computer
monitors,
but everything else is we are the
product, right? Like that's why you can
get the Vizio whatever. Side note,
that's not me poo pooing on Vizio as a
company. I don't mind Visio. They've
made some fine televisions for me in the
past. Uh but they're also scraping every
sense of data. I like how the brain cell
has
transcended platform lines. So momentary
moments apart we have Sigman's comment,
I want my technology to be Himmos. And
that's over here on Twitch. Uhhuh. And
then on YouTube, moments later, like not
fast enough they could have seen it and
then reposted it. I have Nova. I hate
smart TVs. I want my TV dumb as a rock.
I want my TV to be a Hmbo. So, you know,
it's good to know that the entire extra
family has one brain cell. Keep it keep
it going. One one singular brain cell.
Lovely. Yeah. Lovely thing to see. Yeah.
All right. All right. All right. Truly,
here's the thing. I know this might seem
like I'm busking. I'm legitimately not.
I do not think we will in two minutes
get to a level five hype train. I do
think it's good that you use the word
busking, right? Cuz when people ask like
how Twitch and like live streaming
works, I'm like, "Oh, I'm a digital
street performer." Oh, yeah. If I could
juggle. Side note, Jamie's learning to
juggle. She's getting really good at it.
Um Um But like this is essentially
juggling right now. Yeah.
Oh, but look. Hey, listen. It seems like
how close are we now to that extra emote
sometime later? Um hold
on. Uh hold on.
holding.
Oh, that's so bright. Why? Why you do
this?
Yeah. Oh, actually, no. But this is
exactly what I was saying. If you want a
giant TV for cheap and this is a smart
TV, look for display monitors. The ones
put in stores. It'd be a total of 10. I
don't I don't know how many we have
right now because it doesn't update in
real time. Uh, okay. So, we'll find out
soon. It's a total of 10. And if we
wanted to reach par with YouTube, we
would
need more than we're gonna get right
now. So, we're not going to talk about
it. Um, oh, no, not just parody, just to
get that one emote. That's what I'm
talking about. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
Uh, I think I think we're almost there.
I think we're almost there. Thank you
all. Um, your YouTube memberships uh do
help keep the lights on here and pay for
the gratuitous amount of internet that I
drink through a Bendy straw. We will be
thanking everybody who's given as soon
as the hype train dies over on Twitch.
Yeah, because we've found that a
riveting pre-show tradition if we try
and keep up with it. It's
futile and we just do it all at the
end. Um I do really want I I I would
love them to just sell a television that
doesn't connect to anything that you can
connect whatever you want like
physically to it, just not the internet.
Yes. All right. Hype train over. The
hype train is dead. Long live the hype
train. Uh, second part, not so much. Uh,
what? Hold on. We got to find out what
emote we got. Oh, we got down bad. Look
at the Look at the Hold on. Someone I
got to use this. I got to Hold on. I'm
going to use this and then I'm going to
go over here and put it on screen so you
all can see this stupid emote that
Twitch did.
Where is this? I got you. Look it. It's
doing this. It's It's down bad. It's
like a little It's I don't know. I don't
know. Anyway, all right. Uh let's thank
everybody. Let's go over and thank
YouTube first. We got to thank Arab
Boros, Nerdy 234, Book Dragon 999, and
Bobberation for joining the Extra Fans
over on YouTube. Thank you so much for
that support. We are uh approaching our
next emote, and I will be figuring out
what emotes are most crucial to be
spammed on YouTube and putting them in
uh probably tomorrow morning. Uh, and
then over on the Twitch side of things,
I've got to thank a great many people.
And they go like
this. Hippie, thank you so much for 33
months at tier three. Whimsy Weaver for
uh 48 months, tier one. Nyio for 43
months with Prime. Book Dragon for 60
months with uh at tier one. Doride for
18 months at tier one. THC for 58
months. Zip for the gift sub. Mystic for
the prime. Ramy for gifts sub toe
sparkle. Thank you to various
incendentary people including copper
chef for bits. Smaz for 61 months.
Lurker for the prime and a gajillion
emotes. Hippie for five community gift
subs. Ruda for prime. Valindana for
bits. A mentor for 50 months. Lil for
giving my personal account that I never
use anymore. A subscription to the
channel. Why? Um Musty Line for 44
months. Uh Valandana for more bitties.
Novafier for bitties and pushing us over
into level three. Dad Panda for prime.
Generic blues for prime. CSMO for 54
months. The hype train got to level
four. Book for the community gift sub.
Hippie for bitties and lurker for
bitties. Thank you so much for that
continued support. It means the world.
Thank you.
[Music]
It's called a train, Jerry. But where is
it going?
Well, it's delivering hype.
Um,
anyway, I Oh, we can start the show now.
Yeah, we can actually start the show
now. All right, cool. Great. Awesome.
Uh, if you're new here, we're going to
go to black for a quick second so we can
begin the recording for Rocky over on
Nebula. Worry not, this is on purpose.
It is intentional. Everything is fine.
Nothing is broken. Do not panic.
[Applause]
[Music]
No. Did you think that was the start?
It's not. We didn't load it into the
RAM, but now it's loaded into the RAM.
And now it won't hiccup for when we do
the record. And now it's perfect.
[Applause]
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
Good morning, Matt. Ah, good morning,
Will. Good morning to all of you.
Welcome to Games for Breakfast, the only
internet talk show we talk about this
week's gaming and tech news. But that
also in the pre-show, we use this sound
effect too
much. That's just what happened. Uh, but
welcome on in. Hello. Uh, greetings to
Rocky over on Nebula. Welcome to a
phenomenal show. We uh man, we are well,
dare I say, we are skinning the
proverbial show in many different ways.
Here we have a Wait, how many? Wait,
hold on. I need to read that. Pre-show,
Fox show, Fox show 2, Fox Electric
Booaloo, and finally the show. I believe
those are the official names of all of
the different elements of this show. I
mean, faux show. Faux Show. That was
better. I like that a lot. Will, how are
you, my friend? I'm well. I am well. I
am
uh energized by the gremliness uh that
has surrounded us this morning here on
on the stream. We have gremlins to the
left of us, gremlins to the right of us,
and here we are. Gremlins to the four of
us. Anyway, stuck in the middle with
Brad, Janet, and Rocky. That's right.
Anyway, I don't know why I went into the
charge of the light brigade there, but I
did. And we're, you know, we're here.
We're having a good time. Why not? Why?
Why not indeed? Uh I've been waiting.
I've been waiting and now it is time. I
will put it here and I will push this
down just easier if I don't if I don't
do this on this holding it up. Yeah,
that makes sense. Uh well, happy uh
happy Monday. Happy Yeah, happy Monday.
Uh we've had
um restful weekend in various and
sunundry forms to all who celebrated one
of the plurality of holidays this
weekend. Whether you were celebrating
Easter or celebrating Wrestlemania,
whatever you did to relax this weekend,
we hope you had a wonderful one. Um, we
have an excellent show for you today,
uh, with a plethora of stories from all
over the web. Um, but first, we have to
not really break a promise, but like
bend a promise ever so slightly. Oo,
which prom? That's my favorite kind of
thing to do to a promise. What are we
doing? What are we walking back? We
promised ever so slightly. We promised
we wouldn't talk about the Switch 2.
Except now we have a reason to talk
about the Switch 2, which is very
important, which is uh we do now have a
US pre-order date for the Switch 2. Uh
and that date is April the 24th. And
with that, we also have some news about
the prices. Um which is I think what
most people are worried about. So the
console itself, sure, is not changing in
price at all. Console itself will remain
$450 for the base model or $500 for the
bundle with Mario Kart World,
which I think is probably the better
deal. I'm going to say if you're going
to play Mario Kart, you should probably
just get the bundle. Um and then
unfortunately
the accessories the mall of this this
new system have gone up in price um
rather significantly. So uh here here
here's the list. Uh this is what IGN has
and I believe this is um these pre-order
listings are uh up around the world. Um,
so,
uh, the Nintendo Switch 2 Pro
controller,
$85. A pair of Joy Con 2 will set you
back a
clean 95
US. The charging grip for the Joy-Con 2
is 40 US. A singular strap for your
Joycon 2, should you snap it out of
frustration, 14. the wheel that lets you
hold it like my mom did. I I love my mom
so much. My mom learned to play Mario
Kart on the Wii. No, on the N64 and was
originally trying to drive it like Oh,
yeah. Everyone tries that in the
beginning. Okay. Which meant that when
we got the Wii version and you actually
drove like that, she kicked all our
butts. Um, the camera is
$55. The dock set is
$120. The carrying case and screen
protectors 40. The all-in-one carrying
case, I have no idea what that means, is
85. And the AC
adapter, an extra AC adapter for the
Switch 2 is $35. Yikes. Okay, so let's
back up here for a second. The
all-in-one carrying case is literally to
carry the entire thing, the dock,
whatever. It's like in a cube. Uh, it's
fine. Whatever. Um, I am of two minds of
all of this stuff. There's there's
there's something interesting here, too.
90% of the stuff here you could still
use from the Switch One. They did
announce that the old Pro Controller
works. They did announce that any webcam
will work. They did announce that the
old Joy-Cons, while you can't slide them
into the Switch 2, you can pair with the
Switch 2. So, there's a lot of like you
already have a lot of this stuff to
remember if you are a Switch One person.
Um,
also I think the prices are exorbitant.
There's no question.
I'm glad that they do have this
peacemeal system. I wish it was cheaper,
but for instance, over in Sony Town, uh,
for all of us Sony ponies out there, for
the PSVR 2, you still can't buy
replacement controllers. Correct. You
can only get the full package with the
headset. So, look, I I'm not defending
the prices here. I do like that even
though it is exorbitant, if you are in
need of one of these things, it is
available for purchase. Should it be
cheaper?
Yes. Everything is going up and we will
live through that uh for all of the
reasons we won't talk about because
there's no politics on this show. None.
Definitely not later when we talk a
little bit more about tariffs. Of of
course, right? Tariffs totally
apolitical.
Um anyway, Will, do you have thoughts on
this? Brad, Janet, what what's going on
here? What do we think about all the Is
it just like, "Oh, great. Yep. Hit me
again with the ruler." No, had a really
good take on this uh earlier, which I
think is right. Um keeping the price of
the console the same and raising the
price of peripherals is clever. People
won't notice a price increase there as
much. I think that's true. I I think for
a great many people, the price of the
Switch 2 didn't change.
the total price, which is to say for a
great many people, and again a reminder,
we're not average or way more invested
than the average gamer. Um, emotionally
and monetarily usually, um, they're just
going to buy the console. They're going
to buy the console. Uh, does the console
come with the dock? Yes. Then yeah, then
they're going to buy the console and the
dock and be good. and they might buy a
Pro Controller if they don't already
have one. But given that the target
audience for the Switch 2 seems to be
people who bought the Switch
One, they're just going to use I might
say that this might It's funny. I think
a larger portion of this audience is
actually people maybe not larger,
another large portion. I think this
might be people's who are waiting on the
Switch. this would be the thing because
again with the ubiquity of like the the
Steam Deck and other handhelds that are
of this power now this thing has what
people are considering a comparable or a
a good enough amount of power behind it.
The people that were holding out because
of that I think now might also try
especially with some of our stories
we're going to be talking about later
with other companies outside Nintendo
kind of championing uh this console in
ways. So, I think this this is also uh a
move to get more people that aren't
already in the ecosystem into the
ecosystem. Yeah, I think that's that's
very true. Um I like most of Ghost
Cities. Um
uh their OLED S1 works great. Still
don't see the incentive upgrade yet. And
I think that's I think that's pretty
common. The again the main reason I
think that Matt and I are both sort of
raring to go is there's definitely a
world where we get a bunch of people
together on launch day and we all play
Mario Kart World together. Like the
second the second that I can guarantee
that Will and I have a a pre-order of
this, I will start nailing down every
contact I have in this industry to try
to see if we can get a day one 24 player
madness nonsense thing going.
Absolutely. It'll be it'll be I I will
have to find new ways to represent who
on screen is talking. It will be
absolute nonsense. We also have the
additional that is to say we also have
the additional incentive and
consideration of this being content,
right? So like while the average
consumer might not need one, we kind of
do or we're behind. So uh which is un
which is an unfortunate truth, right?
And it is it is somewhat uh Ricky
Bobbyes-esque. If you're not first,
you're last, right? Like and Damon has
it here, too. Like it's right offable.
Um and that's not for everybody. We
understand that. Yep. Yep. Yep. Yep.
Yep. Yep. Yep. Uh okay. Uh next up,
speaking of things that have be that are
old becoming new
again. Yes, this was a late ad uh
because I realized when we were putting
the show together, I think 5 minutes
beforehand that we weren't talking about
this and this was a thing that came up
in my feed quite a bit. Um so apparently
an Oblivion remaster has been leaked. It
it it I I'm having a hard time keeping
up with all of the um actual factual
bits of this leak, but apparently
screenshots of this were were leaked and
people are thinking it's coming out
sometime in late April, like almost like
a shadow launch.
Most people believe it will either be
today or tomorrow.
Okay.
Tuesday feels like the day for some
reason. Why is that? Tuesday. Well,
because Tuesday generally is the day. Is
that traditional? Well, cuz DVDs come
out on Tuesday. Um Oh, man. Remember
when that mattered? DVD Tuesday. Yeah,
man. World
um some stuff does come out on Thursday.
For instance, uh Clare Obscure comes out
on Thursday. Uh I know this because
we're playing it on Friday. I I think
this is a good window to get it in,
right? Because they don't want to
compete with Night Rain, I don't think.
Um, although this is probably one of the
very few things that could go toe-to-toe
with Night Rain in terms of being like a
fantasy RPG-esque thing. I think they're
completely different spaces. Truly, I
think I think that the I think that the
the Night Rain is banking on being named
Elden Ring and that's going to be what
takes the oxygen out of the room. Not
that they're directly competing, but
like it's a thing that's like Elden
Ring. Everybody go play it. Maybe. I
don't know. I feel like a Bethesda
RPG and even Elen Ringh like core Elder
Ring. I don't know. I just feel like a
re a remaster of this game which again I
enjoyed but did not finish Oblivion. Um
this the the scaling is what got me I
think we did an episode on this on uh on
enemy scaling and how Oblivion uh just
bodied you no matter how no matter how
high of a level you got, it just raised
the like so a mud crab was killing you
at at crazy levels.
Um, I don't know. I I would be
interested in checking this out. I feel
like this is sort of Bethesda's kind of
like uh, you know, Elder Scrolls 6 is
not going to be ready for a thousand
years, so we made this. Enjoy. Uh,
there's also rumors that a Fallout 3
remaster is going to be happening. Yep.
Oh, and yeah, I there's a great point. I
wanted to bring this up. Uh, Karma,
thank you for reminding me. So, uh, they
did talk to the modder who was doing the
fan remake, and I believe I don't have
the direct quote in front of me, but the
the tone was, "No, this is great. Like,
I'm going to keep doing my thing. This
is awesome that they're doing this
thing, you know, great, great all
around." Like, and that's the real
modders sort of creed. And I liked that.
the the the remaking question is called
or the the modern question is called Sky
Oblivion and it is a port of the
entirety of Oblivion into the Skyrim
engine. Yes. Which would make it highly
compatible with the mod catalog for
Skyrim. So you could replace Chiogarath
with any number of things of Macho Man
Randy Savages. Oh yeah. Oh yeah. Cream
of the crop.
Yeah. Um anyway, well I by the time this
uh stream is over and maybe by the time
this is on
Nebula, this could be out and maybe
you're already enjoying uh going back
and and fighting the the DRI princes. I
believe it was Dri Princes. I don't
remember who the enemies were. I
remember they were
demons. Um but yeah, I mean generally
the DRI princes are probably somewhere
to something. Uh okay, excellent. Uh,
next up, uh, a piece of news that is of
interest to Matt and actually to me as
like a theoretical, not not as a
practical, but as a theoretical. 2X KO
got some recent news. Uh, two pieces,
one of which is near and dear to my
heart, and the other, uh, I think
everyone will be happy about. Number
one, this is the Riot fighting game, by
the way, based on League of Legends.
Yes. Um, they need a better name. They
do. They do, but Riot stinks at naming
things. So
um
the big the the first big piece of news
uh brought to us by V B VG247 is that
there will be a version of 2X KO that
has everything unlocked ahead of time
that is exclusively for use in
tournaments. So, um, this is, uh, this
is a thing that people may not know
as I've toed other stuff. So, like the
struggle of to get everything together
to run an event is near and dear to my
heart. Tournament organizers. Tournament
organizers. Um, it turns out that if you
don't have this, you need to have copies
of the games with all the fighters
unlocked, which is either expensive or
timeconuming, or both. Think about a uh,
think about a Smash tournament. How many
switches with how many copies of the
season pass and all the fighters
unlocked do you need to have in order to
run a a a local tournament a local first
match? Yeah. Too many, right? Unless
everyone brings their own, but then now
you've got people like you're trying to
track consoles and that's a hu no too
much. So having an offline mode uh and a
version of this that just comes with all
the characters unlocked is going to
support the tournament scene. There is a
weird hitch which is they have not
clarified and no one is sure how the
offline mode will interact with Vanguard
because Vanguard will also be on 2x KO
which is one of the reasons that a lot
of people won't be playing it. Um,
Megard is rides a colonel level antiche
that activates on boot up and uh, at
least to common understanding tries to
call home. So, if it's an offline mode,
but the antiche for it is trying to call
home constantly. No one really knows
what that's going to be. I imagine
they've thought of this, but it is still
a concern that they haven't addressed.
This sounds like a different build
that's not going to be available for
everybody, but if you're a tournament
organizer, you can download this build.
Side note, how does that kernel level
stuff work on I mean actually does Riot
have console games?
No. So, is this going to be a console
game? Are they trying to get this on
console? Know that they've confirmed
that it will be on console. If they
don't put a fighting game of this
caliber on console, that seems kind of
strange. It's one of the last places
people will sit like and play like that
can like play together in Wild Rift,
right, is out on console. Yeah, there's
a version of League for console. So,
sure this is going to be PS5 and Xbox
One. Okay, cool. So, so I want So, yeah,
I I think my guess truly is there'll
either be a downloadable client that you
can do on PC that is this version for
tournament organizers or that only has
local and doesn't even touch the
internet. Uh or they'll do the versions
of that on the PlayStation and Xbox,
etc. and and it wouldn't be the first
time companies have given special uh
programs for tournament organizers. So,
um most wargaming companies do this. Um
not Games Workshop, but Privateier
Press, Weird, um uh Infinity from
Corvvis Belly, a couple others all have
uh independent volunteer programs that
you apply through and get like they they
check you out and then you get access to
special tools to help you run
tournaments. It's conceivable that this
works in the same way that you apply
through Riot and they like vet your
league account and make sure you haven't
been banned for toxicity and then
they're like, "All right, you could be a
to now. Here's your special TO0 stuff."
So, that's definitely one way it could
be done. I think uh I don't know. I
think this is a a good move. I I I want
more fighters in the scene. I know
there's a bunch, but the the big three
are obviously Street Fighter, Mortal
Kombat, and Tekken. You could get Guilty
Gear in there. um, Virtual Fighter back
in the day, Soulcalibur,
um, oh, I'm forgetting one, Dead or
Alive, but like a lot the the Mortal
Kombat, Tekken, and Street Fighter, the
ones that keep releasing games on the
regular. Um, although Guilty Gear might
I I I got to be honest, I've fallen off
the Guilty Gear train. Not for any
reason, just uh I I I can only keep up
with so much. Yeah. Um, I really do want
this to do well. Another thing uh that
uh kind of came up in the story is uh
about their roster and apparently a lot
of people are bummed with the character
with the the what Riot has said the
launch roster for this game will be will
be 10 characters. I think we've talked
about this briefly before on this show.
Um but they have now heard this and
they're going to try to get more up
before launch is what it sounds like.
Um, but that is also gonna mean that a
bunch of people in the character design
team are crunching to Kingdom Come.
Yeah, I don't love that. Like
I It all depends on their pricing model.
Like if this is going to be a
free-to-play
fighter, which do we know yet? I can't
remember. It's It's all there so much.
My my belief and understanding is that
it will be free to play with cosmetics
and unlocking additional characters in
the same way that you do for League.
Right. League.
Yeah. Feels very much like the formula
to do it with. I feel like that's why
even they have been able to take the
swing for as long as they have is cuz
the monetization model does kind of fit.
Um I don't think 10 fighters that are
polished incredibly well at launch is a
bad roster. Like maybe I I
I don't know. Like especially for a
free-to-play game that's going to be
built on like that. Like I wouldn't want
a $60 Mortal Kombat to have 10 fighters
at this point in the game. Like that
makes zero sense to me. But like I don't
know. I I I was a little bit worried
when I heard that they're going to try
to get out more of them before they
launch it because a it might not be as
smooth and as polished. B developers are
going to crunch and this is still a
relatively small team even though it is
Riot. Um, I don't know. Uh, they were
saying that 24 feels like the best
option, but they're not like
guaranteeing that. Basically, 14 more
than No. Again, that's what they they
said we they'd love, but they don't know
if they can hit it. They said we're not
close to that now, so we're going to
work quickly to get to that point. They
were going to keep going. Yeah. I was
going to say like if you're not going to
do 10 12.
Yeah. And then you pointed original
Smash. You say 12 and you pointed
original Smash and you're like it was
good enough for Smash, it's good enough
for us. We're launching more. OG Smash
launched with 12 and you played with 12
forever. So, right. Tom Cannon continues
said, uh, he goes, "There's a reason why
I'm being a little cy about this stuff
is because we're honestly still getting
better at it. This is new, uh, new
fighting game team. Even though we've
been through this for a little while,
we're not on like version five of the
franchise, right? We're building this
team as we're going and learning how to
do things. You're seeing the game get
better and better, look better visually,
and the character kits keep getting more
dialed in, frankly, as we are getting
more familiar with the game and better
at our jobs." like and that
I love that. I love that mentality for
what is
essentially probably Riots's like real
only like new IP. Well, I got that MMO
thing.
Yeah, this seems for I don't know. It it
I don't know. I just like when someone's
like, "Hey, we love this. We're not
perfect. We're getting better. We're
trying." Yeah. Um, and it does. It's
been looking good so far. So, I don't
know. I hope they're not rushing too
much. I think you could you could,
again, I don't know the methodology or
the the how much money they need to
bring in to keep this thing going. Uh,
however, or like player count or
whatever. I can't imagine this flopping.
No, no, not at all. I I think this is
going to I have a theory
where this game I think will actually
help revitalize the fighting game scene
in general. Not that the se like the
deep scene is still there and embedded
in the bedrock of gaming and not going
anywhere, but I'm talking like the more
casual player scene because what this is
going to do is take everybody, not
everybody, many people who play League
who love these characters and want to
try out this thing and it's going to
catch some people. And when you have
that bucket of however many millions of
people play League, even if you knock
that down 10% and then another 5% of
people that stick, that's a huge number
of influx into the fighting game scene.
Yep, agreed. Uh, also breaking
newsop just put a post on social media
teasing the Oblivion remake announcement
tomorrow. Boom. This is what I wanted. I
wanted us to at least say the words
before. Did Did we get it in actually
beforehand? That's what I need to know,
Brad and Janet, right now. Is is that
posted date before or after we said it?
Yeah. I just want to know. Yeah. Uh,
okay. Jimmy Jimmy thinks so by a few
minutes. And I I think the um
the 2x is not especially new user
friendly.
League isn't New user friendly either.
Like they've almost on purpose, right?
Jeeoff and I talked about this when I
was trying to like understand League
better last year, right? It is a thing
that you will have to become good at
over a long period of time. And that
feels like a thing
that it shares with 2x KO, right? Like
if you're already infranchised into the
lore and the world and you want to try
something different,
then I feel like that hurdle is not
insurmountable for the target audience.
Also, there
is
okay halfbaked idea in my head right
now. So, this very well could be wrong.
I'm still getting better at my job.
Um, a fighting games buyin, no matter
how complex the the meta or the way that
the fighting
works, is still much much easier to get
on board with for a new player than a
MOA.
Though they share a couple of things,
right? They do, but like I and the
reason I say and and again I I'm happy
to be proven wrong by many comments, but
intrinsically the goal of a fighting
game is pretty simple. Knock the other
person down and get their life bar to
zero. Y a MOA has a few more things
involved than that. The methodology is
more
um execution complex I would say in a
fighting game, right? And the goal is
simpler. Well, technically in a mobile
it's knock down that big building thing
and reduce its life part to zero. So,
but it's not as simple as one screen
sort of like, you know, and I will say
this, you can button mash your way to a
victory in a fighting game. You can't do
that in a mobile. You can't do that in a
mobile. So, anyway, I I I've heard mixed
things about the complexity and the new
player experience. I have still not
played this game and I'm dying to. Um
I there there there was talk that
they're going to be trying and utilizing
a sort of simpler system. Allah Street
Fighter 6's um new fighting, new like
button layout stuff to make it easier to
do. Um I don't know how far along they
are with that or what they're what
they're doing. I'm waiting for the
official 2X KO license tip
boxes because there got to this got to
be a thing, right? Anyway. Yeah. Um,
cool. Speaking of freeto-play games and
the ways they
monetize, let's talk about Rivals real
quick. What a strange what a strange
circumstance we're in, Will. Yeah. So,
Rivals is having a a weekend a week uh
regarding skins. So, uh there's three
parts to this and we will address them
all independently and then sort of talk
a little bit about it as a whole. Uh the
thing the
first below you see a skin for Doctor
Strange. The skin retails for $25
based on the hit Marvel property Doctor
Strange in the Multiverse of Madness
where spoiler alert Doctor Strange gets
all undead and creepy. Correct. Also, we
know you're all obviously familiar with
The Multiverse of Madness because it's
such a key part of the Anyway, um uh
listen, I I I I don't love the movie. I
liked it enough at the time and it did
make a bunch of money. That's true. Like
a lot of people did. It also feels like
it was one of the ones that sort of like
was a brief candle and then out, right?
Versus like I don't know. We're going to
talk about it later. I'm I'm sure Black
Panther where I'm like I could watch
Black Panther again. I've never once
thought I could watch the Multiverse of
Madness again. I've once thought I want
to watch the Multiverse of Madness again
and I started it and then I stopped it.
Uh right now Multiverse of Madness is
creeping up on a billion dollars. So
Okay. Anyway, um so uh you you will see
on the left here Doctor Strange in the
promotional shots for this skin where he
is surrounded by hands of zombies. They
form sort of like the the beginnings of
the cloak of levitation, right? His his
fancy thing. So he's got hands around
the back of his head and like hands
around like on his shoulders and he's
got hands coming out from behind his
hands and hands everywhere. A cool
looking skin. A cool looking skin. And
yet too expensive. A cool looking skin,
right? Whether or not it's worth $25 to
you is up to you. It's not to me and
it's not to a lot of people at, you
know, $25. Um because I could buy an
entire game for that. So yeah, no. Also,
Deistic, speaking of fighting games, you
right. Although it was kind of fun. It
was kind of um the problem the problem
with this skin is that the way it looks
in game is actually the one on the
right. And you may note a distinct lack
of hands. That is because in game those
hands do not appear except during very
specific moves. Um they don't they don't
show up on the character model at all.
And the additional problem is that
there's no way to know that unless you
buy it or unless you look it up on
YouTube ahead of time. Yeah. So, it's
really deceptive advertising here. I
don't really know that there's a way to
like give them any leniency on that. The
skin as represented is not the skin in
game. And that's a problem, especially
for what's supposed to be. It's on the
landing. It's on their store landing
page right now. It's one of the big
promo items for this part of the season
and it's not what it appears to be. So,
that's a problem. Um, yeah. Also,
there's a couple other different things,
too. Uh, like the gash on, it's hard to
see in this image, but if you look it up
and it's in the show notes, the gash on
Doctor Strange's like he looks like a
zombie in the skin and he actually
doesn't look like that from what I hear
in the skin. It's almost is more like a
goth. Yeah. Uh, thing. There's been a
couple ideas as to why this is.
Um, one of them is the hitbox or like
not the hitbox, but the like the the
silhouette of the character changing too
much. But then at the same time, uh,
what was the other one? The the new Thor
skin that they just released for season
two or whatever, uh, as a giant puff of
fur sticking way farther out than
normal. So, like I don't think it's
that, right? Um I was trying to think if
there was and this doesn't I don't think
strikes too hard into this, but like if
it was the undead of it all. Do you know
what I mean there? Um so important to
note that the ways that the undead are
portrayed culturally in China are very
different than the ways that the undead
specifically are portrayed in Western
media. Um, yeah, the zombies and blood
as they appear. It would not surprise me
at all to learn that the skin is
advertised as the skin on the right in
China and that the skin is only
advertised as the skin on the left in
Oh, that's so interesting. Yeah, I
wonder if that might be the case. Blood
and decaying bodies are both uh far more
taboo in Chinese media than they are in
um Western media. I'm not saying that
that's 100% for sure. I'm just saying
that that's my best guess. Um I think uh
that that may be a cause here. That
being said, it doesn't excuse them
advertising it differently than it
appears because I think if they if they
had advertised it as the thing on the
right, fewer people would have bought
it, but more people who bought it would
have been happier about it. We wouldn't
be doing the story. Yeah. I mean, this
is uh sorry uh skeleton model in China.
I wanted to get Aram here too. Uh even
if they had a decent reason for it to
look the way it does, the advertising
reflect that in the actual product.
Absolutely. Uh there's also not a reason
if you want and and listen if we know
anything about any kind of company is
they want all the money. You could I'm
just saying make it two different skins
in two different
regions. You don't have to do that. You
could have the whole thing going one way
and not have it in another. I'm sure
there's some other issue in that regard,
but like it's there's ways around this.
Yep. Uh the simplest of which just
putting a disclaimer somewhere on the
store page being like, "Hey, this only
happens during this move and this move
or whatever and blah blah blah blah
blah."
Uh similarly uh there is an increasing
amount of
um consternation confusion over the
introduction introduc introd I think
introduction introduction
of of unstable molecules a new currency
to rivals unstable molecules Jerry they
exchange one to one with
units units which are the premium
premium the pre the with the premium
currency they exchange one to one um
credits units units I don't remember the
gold one the little gold one you buy
with real dollars anyway they exchange
one to one yeah essentially money um you
need 600 which is six bucks mercifully
there's like a reasonable one one there
so you need to exchange them one and
unstable molecules are used to recolor
costumes and that's it they introduced a
whole new currency for that instead of
having it be other things. My thinking
is that it will likely be possible to
earn some amount of unstable molecules
through a different system in
game that they don't want to end up
giving directly premium currency for for
whatever reason. And this is the soft
launch introduction and it's being done
poorly. Who knows?
Um people are complaining about $6 skin
recolors as they should. Okay, okay,
okay,
okay. I am of two very battling minds of
this subject. Marvel Rivals is another
free-to-play game. They're not charging
you at the start, and therefore, you are
the product. Everyone should understand
that. And you can vote with your dollars
by if you don't want a $25 Doctor
Strange skin, hopefully enough people
don't buy that Doctor Strange skin.
[Music]
Um, I hate the idea of paying for a
recoloring of a
skin on
principle, but if they are looking for
different ways to get this game paid for
to continue running as a free-to-play
experiment, this feels like a lowhanging
fruit to do. Like, I would I would be
much more viciously attacking this
decision if this was in a standardized,
you know, $40 to $60 pricing package of
a game. Like this would be abhorrent and
the idea of strip like stripping a game
for parts as we're slowly buying less
and less of our game because they're
just making stuff like this. Is this a
gateway to that in other places? Sure,
because you could normalize it in this
scenario and then a new game that does
cost an actual amount of money could try
to pull this stuff and blah blah blah
blah blah. But
um look, I think Marvel rivals still
being free,
uh to
play is I keeping it that way is going
to cause a lot of stuff like this to pop
up. They're going to just keep thinking
of things like this. Will, you bring up
a great point. This is also probably a
soft launch to de to increase the value
of the game's real currency and start
giving out more of this and less of that
other currency for things because now
yeah because now they can give this and
this it has parody but I I imagine you
can't exchange actually someone who
plays marbles or rivals right now let me
know you probably can't exchange
unstable molecules for the currency one
way.
Which means that I would not be shocked
if season 3 replaced a good number of
the premium currency nodes with unstable
molecules. Right? That's my thought
because this is another way to keep you
from rolling the battle pass too hard,
which is a thing that players want and
companies don't. Right? Players want the
battle pass to pay for itself in premium
currency so that if you complete the
battle pass, you can get the next one.
And that's an understandable desire from
the players because you're putting in
time and effort and you feel like you
don't want to spend money and time and
effort to get rewards and that makes
sense. Companies don't want that because
it means that players don't spend money
on their
game right after the first infusion of
cash. So I would imagine that this is
going to this is ends up being battle
pass bait but we'll see. something
interesting that turn brings up uh
greatly gravely overpriced but it feels
like it's only it's only crime created
the other monetization out there trying
to manipulate you into consuming that
that's something else interesting too
could you imagine
I I I'm trying to think of how this
works and credit charges credit cards
take based on the amount that you pay
can be different based on the the
processing fees and things like that
like every company's making money off
your money right so imagine if re if
recoloring a skin was
99. If I was a Marvel Rivals
player, would more people engage with
that to make up the difference? I'm sure
they did the math to figure out what the
$6 spot like was the sweet spot as to
why they do have like a $4 intro pack
that they did a little while ago. That
is probably their test for how many
people will buy the it's got orange
venom, so a skin recolor and a token in
it for one skin. Um, and it feels like
that's their like, hey, it won't hurt to
put your information. Yeah. Yeah. I
mean, here's the thing. Uh, n like this
is just Richard's example, but like I'd
recolor one skin per week. So, like it's
almost like do they do they think that
this is something that people would do
consistently enough or like do they
think this is like a one-time purchase
or something like and also if they made
it 99 cents and they were trying to
change the
currency like that it weirdly feels like
it would make more monetary sense for me
in parody because if they were cheaper
to do you would do it more and you'd
spend your earned unstable molecules
more, but eventually you would run out
of skins that you have to recolor cuz
you'd find your favorite, so you'd have
to buy more skins. Where at $6 a pop,
unless they're just doing completely
high
spenders, it doesn't
feel like it's it's parody. Like, it's
funny cuz like the Doctor Strange skin,
like we're going to talk about sort of
three I'll use the word sins. It's not
that hard. uh are not that bad. Uh but
that we're going to be talking about
three different
um types of monetization for games like
this. One is the uh exorbitant super
special skin, right? We've seen it even
in like Hearthstone has like a $50
nonsense Ragnaros garbage thing. Uh and
so like when you you have that uppriced
skin that's just supposed to be the most
premium of premium. two, you have these
sort of mid-tier things that should be
cheaper, even though they're treated
like they're a little bit more. That is
literally just a pallet swap. It is it's
there is a design cost ever so slightly
to make sure it doesn't look like hot
garbage, but uh it is vastly cheaper
than designing a new skin. And uh not to
go back to full Macho Man Randy Savage
Bone Saw territory, but number
three is 3 minutes of play time. uh is
our next bit of the story which is just
being sexy. Um that's the third uh skit
skitting skdding sin of these types of
games. So, um, I don't know if all y'all
are as old as my dusty, dusty, dusty
skeleton is, but Marvel, I think 25, 30
years ago, something like that, put out
uh the Marvel swimsuit edition comic
book,
which you get it. Um, this time they're
releasing another one this year and it's
called Marvel Swimsuit uh edition. What
do you got? Go on. I have I have a
question. Friends, foes, and
rivals. Um, will you I'm curious what
you I have questions. My first question,
what does the thing wear to the beach? I
desire to know mostly for curiosity
reasons. Okay. Have you seen Borat?
Oh, it's just that. Yeah. Okay. Sure.
It's the man keiny. I mean, look, the
thing tradition many times has worn
different costumes that were full body
and you can
listen, will sometimes you just have to
get your rocks off. Do you know what I
mean?
Um, my point
is now this there's an article that we
were we're linking to in the show notes
here uh from Marvel Rivals.gg GG which
talks about this in particular and its
link to
um to the game Marvel Rivals. However,
in this article and actually uh Brad and
Janet, if you find something else other
than this that actually or if someone
has said statist or like that this is
actually happening, yeah, then please
let us know. But uh at least as far as
as long when this was published uh on
April 20th, uh they're saying Netis
hasn't officially announced uh when
these swimsuits will actually be
released in the game. So, no one quite
knows, but they're but they're feeling
like um sometime this will also be a
tiein. And I'm sure these will have a
premium price tag. But I mean,
everyone's done the Overwatch had its
summer thing. I think League has done
stuff like that. Like this is kind of
part for the course in this. And
weirdly, they've they've sort of done
something for everyone. Uh the season
two is a masquerade theme. It's a party
theme. And so lots of the costumes are
much more like elaborate highbrow like
doneup costumes. So they they've they've
done like the more like classy sparkly
ones and then also you can have thing in
a bikini. Um and that's like you know
all your quadrants. Yeah. Yeah. Right.
Like I I am doomed because I'm a cloak
and dagger man and the the final skin
unlock for the battle pass is a cloak
and dagger like um Marty Gro masquerade
style skin and it's gorgeous, right? And
I'm like, "All right, fine. I guess I'm
playing this season, whatever." Right.
Um
yeah, it's the Hellfire Dallas
specifically. Yes. Yeah. And I guess the
plot of the comic book is uh Janet
Vanine, the Wasp, who is a fashion
designer, I believe, sets up a fashion
shoot after finding out that The Rocks
on Comic uh put out an unauthorized
swimsuit magazine. That is the plot.
Um again, I don't know why Spider-Man
doesn't have his mask on here, that we
are past the the the Brand New Day
timeline. Who knows? Yeah. Um, also the
what was I gonna say? Like I'm curious.
So like Hellfire Club did just happen in
Rivals as well. Uh, with with Emma Frost
being here and that that whole
um I feel like that look is the other
side. It's the pendulum swing of the
third edition. Yep.
Uh, so we'll see. We'll see how it goes.
We'll see. I'm curious what the pricing
model is.
and they're going to make a ton of
money. Yeah.
[Music]
Uh, okay. Uh, the ads are coming up in
20ish seconds. So, we're gonna we're
going to be here. Spider-Man, one more
day on the beach.
Amazing. Amazing.
Just Yeah. Where's Mesto's uh like
thong? Like that's really what we're
what we need, I think. Yep. It's just
it's the beaches of of hell.
Yeah. Yeah. All right, it's ad time.
We're gonna do ads here for things you
can't buy while you see ads for things
you can. If you're new here over on the
YouTube side of things, we do ads uh for
fake madeup things because we need to
run ads to keep pre-rolls off over on
Twitch so the people coming in can just
jump right in the conversation. So,
we're going to sell you things. Matt,
would you like to begin?
Yeah. I'm going to turn this down a
little bit. Hi, Matt from Extra Credits
here. Who's actually not going to be the
person selling you something right now
because now he's back and he has you for
3 minutes. 3 minutes of play time that
he's selling you. That's right. These
ads will go for 3 minutes and then I'm
going to keep talking like Macho Man
Randy Savage Brother. And then we're
going to find out that it's the cream of
the crop and that I forget the other
taglines that he used to say. But that's
all right because he just sort of
rambled into it talking about Hulk Hogan
and then doing raps. Do you remember how
Macho Man wrapped and made fun of Hulk
Hogan back in the day? Look where Hulk
Hogan is now. I think Macho Man was
right. Yeah.
Uh yeah, that's it. Uh I like I like I
like Matt getting possessed by the
spirit of Macho Man all of a sudden. I
have Macho Man glasses behind my green
screen and I was like in my head I was
racking my brain like how do I get them
cleanly and I just couldn't. Yep. Man
was right. All my homies hate Hulk
Hogan. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That was one of
the I you know what I have to do? I have
to get a sound clip of that for this
show. I have to find I I'll hunt that
down of a be a man Hogan. Like that was
like the call and response uh bit of
that song. Okay. All right. You ready?
Yep. Here we go. Hi there, friends. With
summer approaching, you're going to see
a lot of games doing things like this,
trying to sell you swimsuit editions to
to get your eyeballs on the game. Well,
let me convince you that you should buy
Extra Breakfast Swimsuit Edition. Now,
before you turn off the channel, this is
how this is going to work. Matt and I
are going to get those old school like
elbow to knee blue and white striped
like you know uh 18 late 1800s style uh
long sleeve shirt with suspenders,
right? Yeah. Yeah. And they come with
suspenders and the and the hats, right?
We're going to straw hats and that's the
costumes that we're going to wear in our
swimsuit edition. So that's what you
should be buying, right? That's that's
what everyone wants this summer. Just
just
I I saw the panic. I saw I was like, "Go
with me. Go with me on this. It's okay.
It's fine." Um,
yeah.
Uh, I I think listen listen what I've
always said is if we make it big enough
that we're doing like a hot tub stream
kind of thing, that's what we're going
to do. We're going to get like the the,
you know, up to your collar bone down to
your elbows and your knees. And the
straw hats are mandatory, obvious. We'll
have to have we'll have to ship Toasty
back and we'll get one a swimsuit for
Toasty McBoat Face, our the the Wayward
Toaster. I feel like having a swimsuit
for a toaster might be a touch dark for
our audience.
Yeah, it's not He's not plugged in.
Okay. All right. Yeah. Uh Ye Olden Hot
Tub. That's correct. Um can't wait for
Armored Core Swimsuit Edition. Amazing.
Yes, 100%. Yeah. Hey everybody in
chat, what's the best swimsuit edition?
Wrong answers only. Yeah, right. Love
this. Love this a lot. Armored core
swimsuit edition
is pretty clutch. Yeah. Uh I liked I
liked Goldie's comment from over on uh
YouTube. A bathing suit emphasis on suit
on suit. Ju just like a three-piece. Of
course. It's just a three-piece that you
wear into the pool.
Um, Call of Cthulu swimsuit edition. I
like I like Warhammer 40k swimsuit
edition. These are good. These are good.
These are good. Um, uh, uh, uh, Carrion.
Yeah. Also, is it coming in too hot, too
fast for me to catch? Portal. Only the
turrets. I like only turrets. Yeah. Um,
this is great. Uh, okay. So, uh, we're
going to keep moving because we are
running a touch behind because chat
decided they were going to hype for an
extra long period of time this morning.
So, we're gonna we're going to keep
moving. Darkest Dungeon Swimsuit
Edition. Amazing.
The sun beats down onto your burnt skin.
A you made me sad. All right. Sorry,
buddy.
Uh, okay. Uh, next up real quick. Um,
we've talked a lot about Game Pass and
the impact that Game Pass has had on the
industry. Um, one of the one of the
questions that's been asked is by giving
the game away for free for a period of
time at launch, are you hurting your
sales? Um, and there's been a lot of
speculation and a lot of people have
like sort of armchair analysted a lot of
this. Um, but we haven't had a real
developer point of view that's been
particularly strong before until now.
And the Atomfall devs uh are actually
have actually uh taken the time to speak
uh to um uh reporters about
the way that launching on Game Pass has
had uh an impact on their sales and on
the profitability of Atom Fall. Adam
Fall's been relatively popular. Um and
so it's been kind of an interesting uh
thing to see. Um it it's not it is
pretty much as we had sort of expected.
Ow. That's my Can I get dark mode on
this page? Yeah, you you just lit up
like the freaking sun. That hurt. Um the
uh it it hasn't hurt as much as one
might think. It also did they did
confirm though not exact numbers that uh
Microsoft does guarantee a rather
substantial sum of money for being on
Game Pass kind of like Epic does.
Everyone's in this game of trying to get
people onto their service. So, Microsoft
is willing to pay developers a
guaranteed amount of money to get them
on the service so that more people will
get on the service, right? This is user
acquisition cost. Um, and if the user
acquisition cost is paying for 100,000
copies of Atomfall, then that is
probably worth it to Microsoft, right?
Yeah. I mean, the the thing that this
this article uh over on GameSpot sort of
talks about is like companies doing the
math of like,
well, do we want to guarantee a payday
for the people who work here or roll the
dice is kind of what it is. And there's
there's other interesting things too,
like if a game is on Game Pass and
enough people like it on Game Pass,
there are people that don't use Game
Pass that will talk to people and
friends that use Game Pass who like the
game and hopefully if the game is good,
they'll get good word of mouth and then
people who aren't on Game Pass will buy
the game not on Game Pass, right? Like
there there's a weird trickle down
scenario there that might actually work.
But no one really knows to like it's
hard. How do you quantify this in a way
that like you would be able to actually
guarantee it, right? Because you need to
AB test and that's impossible.
I want to make it very clear that uh
chat both Brad and Janet has not moved
on from the swimsuit ask and it is just
going continually right now on both
sides. War Thunder swimsuit edition.
Nothing in the game is just leaked
designer swimsuit plans for the upcoming
season. Y um I I also liked uh Five
Nights at Freddy's swimsuit edition and
5D multiversal chess with time travel
swimsuit edition. Like like these like
like these a lot. Um oh
uh Game Pass. Uh I think I' I I might
hold the record now for the person who
said the word Game Pass the most that
doesn't use Game Pass. Yeah. Um, so this
is just kind of an interesting
perspective to have. I wanted to bring
it up because this has been a topic of
conversation before and now we have devs
speaking about their experience and
that's good. Um, yeah, speaking is I
like this story because there's no right
or wrong or good or bad. It's like, hey,
here's a business model. Everyone's
trying to figure it out. We went with
this because of this.
Oh, it's just loot boxes. Unopened loot
boxes. Pinups of loot boxes. I like it.
I like it. Maybe one of them is slightly
open
suggestively. All
right, next up, uh, Deolver has released
a whole bunch of sales numbers, um, on
their investor call, uh, for 2024, and
it's, if you are into the business side
of of gaming or wondering how stuff like
how the sausage gets
made, fantastically interesting um,
piece over on PC Gamer about
um, the about some analysis that's been
done on Blue guide about what the
numbers
mean.
Basically, the
uh if you thought that Devolver was
making money off of other games besides
Cult of the Lamb, you'd be correct. But
cult of the lamb is so far in number one
that it's it's sort of by a mile which
is a very interesting thing because as
much as we
um talk about people wanting new games
and people wanting uh novelty and you
know more complete experiences. Uh, a
bunch of that money was from
DLC for Cult of the Lamb, right? And
specifically the idea that DLC does more
than just sell DLC. DLC keeps your game
in the news cycle and therefore sells
your game. Uh, game of the year
editions, getting people involved
because other people are talking about
it again, can give your core game Second
Life, even if people aren't buying that
DLC specifically. Um and they were just
talking about how
um called the lamb I believe it hit uh
let's see 90 million earned
um over the course of its lifetime and
then 80 million is Astanineir
uh with lifetime revenue. So, uh, the
figures coming in Hotline Miami, uh, I
think was a little under 30
mil and some serious Sam games
altogether were like 45 mil. But the the
the way that like it's it's interesting
is
like you can have even new IP start
feeling like an
institution if you support it
continually out the gate like Cult of
the Lamb did. It also helps that Cult of
the Lamb, Cult of the Lamb is an
excellent game. It also helps that Cult
of the Lamb uh had such strong Twitch
support, right? Even though there's a
lot of things it had going for it. Um
but it's interesting to see sort of uh
companies and Deolver is always on top
of this stuff, but like sort of being
like, yeah, like this is a this is a
valid methodology for keeping your game
in the news cycle and therefore
continuing its sales. Yeah. like the DLC
value goes beyond DLC. Absolutely. Uh I
I think that's pretty that's pretty
cool.
Yeah.
Um in other game biz news that's kind of
interesting and kind of uh amusing to me
at least, Tempest Rising launched early
on accident and they just kind of went
with it. So, in a world where launches
are so carefully coordinated, where
things are planned out down to the day
and the everything, having this happen
is kind of interesting. So, Tempest
Rising's premium edition had early
playtime as part of the deal. You would
get to play early, uh, I think a week
early, um, if you bought the, you know,
the premium edition and supported the
game and all that jazz.
And then they goofed because instead of
enabling early access for the premium
edition, they enabled early access for
everyone who had pre-ordered.
Oops. And they couldn't. They felt like
it would be a bad move to take it back
to say, "No, you're not supposed to have
it yet." Right. Cuz remember it would.
Yeah. I I believe another game attempted
to do something like that and it ended
poorly. Um, and so they just like ran
with it. And now the really interesting
thing is what started out as a goof is
ending up to be very positive for them
because it's ending up in the news cycle
as a cool goof and then they followed
through and did the right thing which
was letting everyone keep the game early
and further compensating premium DLC
members with something down the line
they're working on something because
they don't have it planned obviously and
that's good. I'm sure some it's
interesting I the early different types
of games and the early bird like buying
the deluxe edition to play it early has
different value props for different
kinds of games. This is what basically a
base building RTS. Yeah,
I would
imagine the player base probably isn't
terribly upsetty spaghetti about it
because this means that they'll have
more people to play with when the game
launches. Like, yeah, I maybe I mean,
someone uh if someone actually
pre-ordered this and was like upset
about the thing happening and not
getting the thing, please let us know.
But I I feel like this is overall a good
thing, even though it is a mistake.
Yeah, I I I like this. Uh this the
launch equivalent of tripping, falling,
and sliding into a break dance. Correct.
Yeah, sure. Correct. It is taking full
advantage of the mistake and then
capitalizing on it in a good way. Yeah.
Dark says they might not get to level up
before the others though. Is this a
level up kind of game?
That that's what I don't know. Like I
could understand like the value prop
even though I don't agree with it of
like an MMO letting people get on early
to do the things. Uh that has value I
guess to to some people. Yeah. But I'm
not sure about uh it is a classic style
RTS set on Earth after a nuclear war
developed by Slipgate Ironworks and
published by 3D Realms at Nights Peak. I
don't see I mean it's it's very much
like I'm sure it has rankings like a
like um the only thing that this is
missing by the way is Tim Curry saying
that he's going to the one place that
hasn't been corrupted by capitalism like
that's the level of RTS that we're
talking about um space
space right and like I I don't foresee
this being in any way negative.
Yeah. All right. Good little story.
Yeah, good good little story. All right,
next up, um a a brief update on a thing
that a lot of people probably guessed,
but we now know for sure. Turns out, um
Assassin's Creed sells games. Wow. After
all of that complaining that people did
about Assassin's Creed
being whatever it was this time, still
sold a bunch of games. It's now the
number two selling game in the US after
Monster Hunter Rise. Not Rise, Wilds.
Wilds. World Wild Rise. Rising World
Wilds. That's right. Yeah. Mr. 305, Mr.
World Wilds. That's right. Exactly. Um I
think this is good. I think uh everyone
I've seen playing the new Assassin's
Creed has enjoyed it. Um and I've
I've tempted me to pick it up and I'm
not I'll get it eventually. Yeah. I'm
not an Assassin's Creed kind of person
normally, but I think this is
um it's a gorgeous gorgeous game. And
they also included the photo mode, which
is great because it's definitely like
shiny bait, right? Where you're like,
"This is a cool moment. Oh, I'm gonna
take a picture. Oh, it's cool. I'm gonna
take a picture." And I'm going post on
social media and everyone's going to see
how gorgeous the game is. Everyone's
going to buy the game. And it worked.
Yeah. All of my Reddits that are talking
about PS5 Pros and everything are like
showing off all the nonsense and looks
pretty. No, I'm glad. Glad it's doing
well. Yep. Uh, absolutely. Okay, I
believe we're almost back on track
timewise, which means we have time for
Matt to talk about Sinners. Yo. Okay, so
we're gonna we're veering a little away
from games and going into film here, but
what we've been talking about even in
this episode and kind of what's in the
DNA of this show in general. Uh we've
talked about in this episode, we've
talked about freeto play and like if you
don't own the game, then you're the
product. We've talked about in the past
uh physical ownership. We've talked
about how like do you own your games,
that sort of thing. Um and and and IP
law and all that jazz. So, if you're not
familiar, Sinners is a Ryan Cougler film
um that released this weekend. First and
foremost, let me just tell you, it is
exquisite. If you are looking for a
kick-ass, deep and uh film that is
actually saying something while also
being an R-rated horror
flick, you cannot do better right now.
And I believe it was shot in IMAX. I did
not have the privilege of seeing it in
IMAX. I might go back again to do that.
Um it is Yeah, actually Mindless just
asked that and I didn't see I I believe
it was shot in it, so I'm curious to see
the aspect ratio change. Um, but the
reason I want to bring up sinners is not
just because it is excellent. Um, it's
it's opened up a conversation over the
weekend and today in a really
interesting and weird way and that is
based around the reporting of its
success. Um, a couple different places,
you can find it in the show notes. Um
but basically
um the I believe in Vulture uh and and
Variety and a couple other places were
posting about like man it made $61
million in its opening weekend but it
still has a long way to go or it's not
going to be profitable and d and it had
a real negative bend to what essentially
is a really positive story about a new
R-rated film in this climate pulling 61
million in its first weekend. Yeah. And
um uh there's a lot to sort of unpack as
to why the what the thing that uh that
kind of knocked me onto this was Ben
Stiller actually just uh retweeted this.
He said, "In what universe does a $60
million opening for an original studio
movie warrant this headline?" He's
referencing a variety headline that
basically lays out what I just said. And
the reason behind this, I promise
there's a point to this. I just need all
this preamble is it's because of people
are guessing a couple different reasons
why this is being read as like why it's
being portrayed as a negative. One, the
first and easiest one is negativity and
headline cells. If you can make it seem
like there's something wrong or it still
needs to do it thing, then maybe that's
going to get more people to click on
this thing. two, there's um obviously uh
the a possible racism throughout etched
throughout the entire thing. While I
think that is sort of the background um
reasoning in this, I don't think that is
actually the core here. Um though it,
you know, it can permeate everything. Uh
the the the interesting thing here that
some people are positing is it's
actually because of the of the unique
deal that Ryan Cougler got for this
film. Yeah, and you can read up in the
show notes on the articles the very very
specifics, but this movie was shopped
around for a while. Also, Ryan Cougler
is just a hitmaker. This is the man
behind Black Panther and a bunch of
other films. And uh so he has the cache
to do this. And when I believe Warner
Brothers um yeah uh finally uh won this
movie, there were there were
three three reasons. There's a lot of
threes here. There were three things
that uh Ryan Cougler got out of this
deal. One, he gets final cut. Um two was
uh he makes money off the film be some
percentage before the movie recoups its
costs and three um he owns the film
after a period of 25 years.
the the rights of sinners goes back to
Ryan Cougler or goes to Ryan Cougler
because right now Warner Brothers owns I
believe also the I mean the reason he
can pull this off is he has incredible
cache in the film making industry and I
believe he put up a couple mill like 20
mil or something like that of his own
money for this movie which I believe
before marketing cost $90 million.
Okay. And people in a lot of these
articles are saying like, "Well, this
will collapse the studio system because
then people will start thinking about
who owns the movies and how will studios
make deals and and all of these things
cuz everyone will want this deal and D
and it's
like I I don't get why we're trying to
talk about this like it's a like it's a
bad thing that a a proven
director, like beyond
proven, can
actually request a better deal than
people normally get in the film industry
and the film industry will pay it. Like
the I get that like the the studio
system relies on back catalog stuff.
Most studios do, right?
Um, but when you have something like
like a sort of like hitmaker like this
that that then they agree to do this and
then it's being sort of marketed as like
well man I just I don't know like it
there's something odd about the
reporting of it like this should be a
triumph especially in a struggling film
industry outside of like giant IP grabs
and the fact that there are a lot of
people talking negatively about this is
odd and it really got me thinking about
sort of ownership
of honestly like ownership of the games
we own. Uh developers owning the games
that they make, filmmakers owning the
movies that they make. And it's
interesting that studio systems
uh some again all of the the quotes and
things from people upsetti about this
are also kind of uh nameless and were
protected behind different things. But
like it seems like a lot of like trying
to poo poo on the success of this movie
for a generalized fear that more people
will ask for deals like this where in my
opinion two poss two two things are
true. One, yeah, people should ask for
deals like this. They absolutely should.
But the other thing is too, no studio
system is in danger from this because
you have to be a proven factor for a
studio to agree to a deal like this. It
also feels like a lot of pearl clutching
a bit because it's a Ryan Cougler is
relatively new even though he's grand
slammed it repeatedly. Um, no question
that his track record is indisputably
proven, right? Even Even if his track
record was just and it's not just Even
if his track record was just Black
Panther and Wakanda forever, sure, fine.
Let him do whatever he wants, right?
Like that that feels like enough to let
him do whatever. Um, but Quentyn
Tarantino also has a deal like this.
Well, Quent, it's interesting. Quent
Tarantino had a deal that's
grandfathered in due to his time at
Miramax. Uh, and it rolled in. Um Mel
Gibson uh for all of his nonsense had a
deal like this for passion, but he paid
for Passion. Um and I believe
uh I think Quent Tarantino gets Once
Upon a Time in Mexico. No, not Once Upon
a Time. Wow. Uh Once Upon a Time in
Hollywood um back in 30 years or
something. Yeah. But
like you're looking at you're looking at
like
um I don't know. This dude just makes
hit after hit after hit.
Everything is is I'm looking back
through the stuff like uh Fruit Bell
Station uh
Creed. This guy just makes winners,
right? And he makes winners with Michael
B. Jordan, by the way. With Michael B.
Jordan, right? Yeah. And and and Michael
B. Jordan plays twins in this movie. He
does excellently. And here's something I
don't want to spoil this movie because
truly you should see it. Um, but the
other thing that I don't see a lot of
people talking about in the space that I
promise we'll move back to games is the
plot of this movie is deeply tied to
um cultural origins and usages of
art and how those things can be taken,
misconstrued,
uh, twisted around by different other
groups. And it does it so smartly that
to have this conversation be about this
movie is just quadruply
both feeling like um inevitable but also
extremely odd. It's just something weird
that's going on in the space and it has
to do with ownership of art. Yep. Um so
thank you for letting me go off on my
diet tribe. I will be doing a podcast
episode about it uh next week. It'll be
available by the time next breakfast
comes. But the movie is excellent.
Please go see it on the biggest screen
you can. Yeah. Great.
Excellent. Bringing us back to games.
Matt, the wars are over. What? The
console wars. Go home. The console wars
are over. Everyone go home. Jamie.
Jamie, I'm coming home.
Um yeah, chat. Uh Phil Jamie told me the
war is not over. No, that's a Yeah. Um
Phil Spencer uh has gone on the record
as part of a larger conversation um that
he had with Variety
um a as a result of the Minecraft movie
having a good weekend and a bunch of
other stuff about a good weekend. The
Minecraft movie.
Oh, Britain money. Yeah.
um
[Music]
the about supporting the switch too and
about his sort of view
on how that works. And I'm going to we
we uh we've got the entire variety
article linked and you can read the
whole thing if you want. Um but we've
also got the cut down from Kroaku that
talks a little bit more about the um
that specific thing. Uh Spencer said,
"Nintendent has been a great partner. We
think it's a unique way for us to reach
players who aren't PC players, who
aren't players on Xbox. It lets us
continue to grow our community of people
that care about the franchises that we
have, and that's really important for us
to make sure we continue to invest in
our
games." Spencer further explained he's a
big believer in Nintendo's place in the
game industry and in supporting the
company. It's about flipping time. It's
all good. I I want to make it very
clear, especially like this image that
that I crafted is not a dig. This is a
compliment. Yeah. Um this is supposed to
be like
Phil Spencer is good at seeing the
writing on the wall. Yes. And he has
proven he can adapt and move on to
different things. I know I still do
believe that Xbox will have its next
thing be a portable. I know they're
doing their like intermediate portable
as well, but I think um getting uh Xbox
properties on the Switch 2 is just a
smart move at this point. Um you get to
get a whole bunch of data about use
cases and users that you didn't have
before. And if you want to enter your
toe into that, you can.
Um I I don't know. I think
that I could see very
easily Halo popping up on this thing. I
could very quickly because uh Spencer
goes on to say, I think
um Variety asked if Spencer was antsy uh
to reveal to announce an nextG Xbox
after Nintendo's big switch to reveal
earlier this month and he said no. I
think all of us in this industry should
focus on our communities and the player
base that we're building. I get inspired
by a lot of uh different creators, what
different creators do and other platform
holders, but I believe in the plans that
we have. And I think that that like it
goes exactly to what Matt's saying about
like we should port Halo, port Game
Pass, we should port well probably not
Game Pass. Nintendo's probably not big
on that because Nintendo Switch Plus
expansion pass and Game Pass sound way
too much alike and there'll be even
further brand delution there. But um
yeah, I don't know if we'll see Game
Pass on the Switch, too. I could
honestly if it's if it's all
cloud-based. Yeah, you could do it. Yep.
The I think that this
is a thing that we've wanted for a
really long time to be more explicitly
said, right? that like exclusivity is
cool, but it's not working anymore.
Well, I disagree with
that. I think too many companies trying
to be exclusive or have exclusives
doesn't work anymore. I think money is
tightening for various reasons that we
wouldn't talk about ever on this show.
And um I think
that not to tie it back to movies, but
there's a reason why I think that every
other franchise tried to do the the the
either multiverse or big uh big tie-in
movies to make a cinematic universe and
they all kind of failed outside of
Marvel. I think there's only enough air
in the zeitgeist's room for one of those
things at a time. I feel like there's
only enough time, money, and interest in
so many exclusives and so many companies
before you start splintering uh the
gaming space into too small of pies. And
I think when we were in peak Xbox,
PlayStation, Switch, and when and truly
when PC, which never went away, but with
the advent of the Steam Deck and sort of
bringing it more into the console space,
or when Xbox started leaning more
closely to PC, I think the writing on
the wall there was like, oh, exclusives
are doing less and less for us with so
many players in the ring, and there's
other ways to win. Exclusives are not
the only way to win and in a stretched
environment they're winning less. I
think we like truly whether I I like it
or not and I don't like it all the time.
Nintendo and Sony having like real
hardcore exclusives are what kind of
keep them
afloat. Um, but Xbox and with its sort
of Microsoft pedigree,
uh, does have the ability to pivot and
try to find different ways to win than
fighting that same war that they had
been? Yeah. So, the the way I'm thinking
about this is would Xbox rather
have no money from people who can't
afford or don't want to spend money on
an
Xbox or some money from the people who
already have a Switch and are willing to
buy an Xbox game on Switch? Yeah. Right.
Because the just get an Xbox is becoming
less and less and less of an option.
That's really I think the big thing,
right? Because if if if exclusivity
sells consoles, and we have every reason
to believe that it does, that still is
contingent on people being willing to
buy the console, and that's becoming
less of a thing. I'm certainly not
buying a PlayStation right now, right?
Because like and and it's worked fine
for you. You have so many games and you
play the exclusives like a year, a year
and a half later, right? Yeah. I could
get I could download um the last
PlayStation exclusive that I really
wanted to play. I could download on
Steam right now and that's God of War um
Ragnarok, right? I still haven't played
it and I still want to but like that was
the last big exclusive I was like yes
yes exclusives were more fun when they
were animated mascot characters. Yeah.
Yeah.
Oh,
dark one day maybe.
Um yeah, I I think this is a smart move.
I think it is um it's trying to win the
game differently. It's in in your civ
game, it is trying to go for the
religious win or some other version
that's not just total domination. Like I
don't know. I feel like there's a lot of
ways that everyone kind of got stuck in
the exclusives uh battle that didn't
really need to be. I think some
companies do need to be. I think to be
perfectly honest, part of Nintendo's
brand is
exclusivity. Um, I I do not see them
being
as successful if they were to pull what
Xbox is pulling, but that doesn't mean
that Xbox can't be successful doing what
they're doing. Yeah. I I I do want to uh
just address the point that I'm making.
Uh, Coffee correctly brings up that I
have a highspec PC. Yes, I have uh for
those who are unaware my gaming PC is
named Ozamandius aka look on my works ye
mighty and despair. Um but but truly
Steam Deck correct it would have the
same exact thing. It is true that I can
play a lot of games but my gaming rig is
a standin for being infranchised in an
existing platform. Right? I'm
infranchised as a PC gamer. You might be
infranchised as an Xbox gamer or a Steam
Deck gamer or a Switch gamer or a mobile
gamer or
whatever. You're less likely than ever
to switch. I have the money. I could buy
a PlayStation 5 if I wanted
to, but I don't want to because the
value proposition is not there. Yeah.
Like if I were starting from the
beginning, yes, it might be there, but
because I'm infranchised already, it's
not. Does that make sense?
Yeah. So, I mean, I don't know.
I I'm I I'm
I'm more curious about Xbox's future
than I weirdly am about Nintendos and
Sony's. Like I feel like they're at
least for the next few years kind of
entrenched in what they are doing. I
don't think there's going to be a big
surprise
um from any of them. And it feels like
whatever Xbox does next will be the most
interesting to talk about. even if I am
not in that ecosystem.
Yeah, I agree.
So, anyway, it's a good article. Check
that out. Yep, absolutely. All right.
And then we have a piece of dessert.
Speaking of hardware, Matt, you love
World of Warcraft Once Upon a Time. I
did. I did. Once Upon a Time in Azeroth.
Um Once Upon a Time in Azeroth. I get my
rights back to my character in in 2036,
right? Yeah. Exactly. Um, so you you
know that like people form long-term
emotional attachments to the games that
they play in the worlds that they live
in. Um, you've got this is this is
Matt's character.
I don't know what you're talking about.
Right. Yeah. Yeah. Okay. Demetri is
asleep in his Pandarian farmhouse.
Right. Exactly.
Um, so
now the the folks over at Zenamax are
are offering people who spent time in
ESO the chance to get a piece of Elder
Scrolls Online in that it's a piece of
the servers that ran Elder Scrolls
Online. This
is we Okay. Is this an expensive silly
thing? Yes, absolutely. 100%. Is it a
really cool expensive silly thing? Also,
yes, 100%. I think this is one of the
the really cool things because we've
talked about this before in a lot of
places. MMOs are spaces as much as they
are games, right? An MMO is a place that
you exist and play a game more than a
game that you play that you happen to
make friends during. Um, and uh I think
it's really cool that they're that
they're selling off uh parts of the old
servers as sort of like momentos and
ways that you can uh take home part of
the world that you lived in. Um we've
got the we've got the thing linked in
the uh in the show notes should you want
to go buy one. It is a RAM stick. It's
$110. Um and it's it's a piece of the
server architecture. It's it's it's it
ran the game. WoW did this I think in
2019 as well. It's it's funny. I um we
are doing an episode over on extra
history uh about the history or the uh
hysterosity not not a word is a word I
don't know um about the holy grail and
we in it we talk about religious relics
and meaning
behind religious relics and where where
in organizations or personal or whatever
like what what their importance and
purpose is and one read is it doesn't
matter like if a relic is real or not.
It's the spiritual connection you have
to the relic. And I'm not I'm not
connecting this with the deep sort of
level as as something in someone's
religion, but MMOs are an interesting
space where you have real emotional tie.
And even though it makes no sense that
you might value a piece of the computer
that helped maybe your information could
have briefly glimpsed across, but that
at least brought the world to life that
you had actual experience in it. It
takes on that sort of um Yeah. So, the
real grail was inside us all along. The
real grail was actually on the uh Elder
Scrolls Online server. Um but no, like
do you get what I'm saying? Like like
you can
ascribe deep meaning to something like
this if you were tied in that world and
it would have meaning even though it is
a dead piece of a server. Right? I'm
stretching credul here a bit, right?
This is like owning a prop, right? Or
owning a film cell, right? And you can
you can tie that like in this is even a
little bit more or or again not more I
can see the value prop in another way
being this is a piece of the thing that
I actually played. Yeah. Like that I was
a part of a movie. You watch it and you
can have deep emotional ties to it but
you didn't you didn't you know interact
with that movie. You watched that movie
you know. Yeah. Um I don't know. I'm not
saying like I wasn't into Elder Scrolls.
Hell, I was into WoW and I wouldn't get
this myself. But I can see the value,
right, of something like this for people
who are deeply involved in it. Yeah. And
I think that there's there's a dividing
chat between people who are like, "Why
would you get this?" and other people
who are like, "Oh my god, I can't get
this." And then there's like a third
faction, people who are like, "Wait, ESO
just turned 10. I'm dust." Um, and that
third faction, I hear you 100%. Um, I I
think this is specifically for the
people who see it and are like, "Oh,
yeah, that's really cool. Of course, I
want that." Right? And if you don't see
the value in it, that's okay because
this is not a um intellectual value
proposition. It's an emotional value
proposition. Yeah. Right. This is this
is just a momento, a keepsake, a thing
that you keep on the wall and tell
stories about because people are like,
"Oh, you must be really into ESO." And
then you get to tell them the story of
like all of the cool things that you did
with your friends, right? And I'm I'm
kind of bummed because I love Elder
Scrolls Online. It's the MMO I would
play if I had more time, right? Because
I kind of I I I have to pick one and I'm
deeply infranchised in Final Fantasy 14
right now. And so if I had more time, I
would play it. But I don't I feel like I
might be I might be making stuff up,
Will, but if if Final Fantasy 14 ever
went down and they did something like
this with a tasteful plaque or
something, I feel like you this would be
in a heartbeat for you. Yeah. Yeah.
Yeah. 100%. Uh Ramstick swimsuit
edition. That's right.
Um anyway, anyway, we've got a couple of
questions and comments from uh the last
episode and one from an episode before
last. What that we wanted to get to. So,
um we'll we'll we'll dive into those
real quick. Uh from Lazarus Complex
official. Hey Will, what's your group
tomb to Tom tom foolery to teamwork
ratio in repo? Great question. Great
timing. Um because I get to pitch a
thing. Uh tonight over on front of the
channel Zumi Zumi stream I will be
playing Repo. So you get to see me and
Alchemy and Zumi and a bunch of other
people all playing repo together. Um
we're doing it uh for Zumi's stream
anniversary. So come join us for that.
Um my I am always teamwork. Uh because
someone has to be teamwork and I am
usually the dedicated support player in
every game I play and repo is no
different. I am the dedicated survivor.
I am pushing the cart. I am grabbing
people's heads and putting them in the
cart and like all of that. That's that's
my job. Um, so that's that's sort of my
split. Uh, I know there are other people
who like push people into pits and stuff
and that's not me. It's not that's not
my deal. There you go. All right. Next
comes from Sir Stoke. I believe I'm
pronouncing that right. And it uh they
wrote, "Uh, after cooling down and
listening to the rest of the section on
the crew lawsuit, my fix would be as
follows. First, at point of sale, the
seller, the game company, guarantees to
provide services to the game till a
clearly defined date, not hidden in
small print. Second, uh, put the final
decision to keep the service running or
not on the community in the community's
hands. Kickstarters, etc., already do
this all the time and would do this as
follows. And then goes into like a
breakdown of like how they believe that
would function. They go on to say,
"Gamers get a chance to keep their loved
games going and are incentivized to get
their mates playing it again. And if it
gets shut down a little money uh shuts
down, then they get a little money back
almost, but not quite like a refund.
Then it's very in a real sense, it's
when a game servers go down, we the
gamers will only have ourselves to
blame. So um we this is in in talking
about the the episode last week and go
listen to it with the crew. Um which is
basically uh Ubisoft removing the
ability to use a game that people
purchase. You can go listen to that. I I
like the um
the optimism. Well, not the optimism,
although yes, I do like the optimism. I
like the optimism and I like I like
where the heart of this comment is at.
Yeah. Uh it is the way I I wish the
world worked. Yeah. Um sadly, I think
that there's a lot of reasons why
companies don't do this and it's not
only costs, but it's complications, etc.
because you need to keep paying the
people to keep those moving. I I think I
think sir sir's comment there's like
pieces that I think companies should
glean onto and kind of look at and and
maybe try to take one or two things out
of it that they could do. Namely, uh the
clearly defined date like would be
lovely. Uh especially for just online
play. I know that's also hard, but like
you have a projection like just make
sure it's on there. Um, I don't know. I
appreciate the the indepth the in-depth
sort of uh thought going into this
comment because I think there are
elements of it where people could learn
from. I do think that
sadly people companies aren't going to
take something like that whole cloth and
just run with it because it's just too
complicated and too expensive for them
to do, right? Especially when uh again,
one of the problems is that a large part
of the community, a large part of the
consumer base doesn't care, right? They
will just toddle along and play the game
until it stops and then they'll be sad,
but they'll just kind of move on. Yeah.
Or they will have already moved on and
be part of the reason that the game
stops, right? Most of us don't get
deeply emotionally attached to a
game. Sometimes you do, and you know
which game I'm talking about when I say
deeply emotionally attached to a game,
right? But that's not as usual, right?
people just move on to the next Call of
Duty, the next Madden, the next FIFA,
the next whatever. Um, next up from Aiel
Vado, um, yeah, Brad and Janet evolved.
There was no Rocky Horror Picture Show
comments. I fret for the future of our
species. I saw I saw that, uh, Janet
comments already got you. Yes, it is a
Rocky Horror thing. Um, we started out
with Brad over in Twitch chat and then
Janet decided that their name was Janet.
Uh and then uh after that we sort of
named Nebula because they don't have
comments as Rocky because they're the
silent partner. So yes. Um does anyone
remember uh and the rest of the comic
goes does anyone remember back when all
these games released digitally and uh
we're going to make so things so much
cheaper for consumers because they
didn't have all the infrastructure
production costs. Now everything costs
more. There are 11 tiers of pre-order,
battle passes, optional cosmetics. The
games are all a service that we don't
own and can't play any longer than
companies want. it's not even get
started on the increasingly broken state
they're released in. So, if you wait if
you wait until released and don't have
early access or a pre-order bonus,
you're going to wait months before the
game is even
playable. I agree for a subset of games,
but here's the thing that I think often
gets lost in this conversation when we
talk about games like The Crew and other
stuff. These trends are true of AAA
games.
There is a unbelievably and I I I want
to I want to draw people's attention
back to this because I am in fact
unabashed indie trash. The indie scene
is thriving and suffers from almost none
of these problems. Um the indie scene is
20 bucks, 30 bucks, 40 bucks for a game.
Get a game. Do a thing. I've been
playing South of Midnight, which isn't
really indie, but is kind of double A.
It's been great. I played it essentially
on release. Haven't had any problems.
It's a complete game with no pre-order
and no DLC and no battle. It's just a
story, right? I'm finishing it later
today. Those games do exist. I I just
want to um I want to take this
opportunity to say yes, you're right.
Those things do happen, but we focus on
them to the exclusion of the places that
don't. Um and I think that that's that
uh your comment sort of made me think
about all the games that don't do those
things that I've been playing and
enjoying. And I think that while what
you're saying is true, there's more to
it than that, right?
Um, okay. And then last, we wanted to go
to dive back a week and engage with uh a
comment about tariffs,
time travel.
Um, we talked a little bit about
tariffs. The tariff situation continues
to evolve, but uh we want aka the number
just keeps going up, keeps going. So,
one of the key problems I think that
some people
are running into
is what tariffs are for. So, we have a
comment from uh Soldier from from uh two
episodes back and um they have they're
presenting their view of what the
tariffs are for and I wanted to read
that comment, engage with good fa in
good faith with it and respond with like
one of the problems that I think is
going on um with this whole discussion
and and maybe we can get into that for
like Yeah. Yeah. Um okay. So, uh soldier
says, "Well, the plan of the
administration is to uh shrink the
government to the point where we either
pay little in taxes or subsist solely on
tariff." Another part of the tariffs is
to make the USA more competitive. For
example, would you rather pay for
toothpaste made in the USA? Made in the
US for $16, buy from China at $20. And
the final point is that frankly at the
end of the day, you have to look after
your community. And China is not their
community. They're people that need jobs
here. And if we can make it here, it
will be made better and cleaner both for
the consumer and the planet than
anywhere else. If it's not, you actually
uh sue the company doing it.
Okay. I understand where that comment is
coming from. And I think this is a
commonly held understanding of tariffs
by people who are pro
tariff because at one point that was
true. Yes. And it's not anymore. And the
problem is uh that we're running into
specifically as pertains to the contents
of this show is that Yeah. Let's we keep
it. Yeah. Yeah. That's the only way we
can cover in the last bit of this.
And and this is this is why I think it's
really important.
You can't. It's not a switch made in
Vietnam that costs $450 or a switch made
in the US that costs
300. It's a switch made in Vietnam
because that's the only place that makes
them. It can't be bought anywhere else.
It's not computer components that are
made here or somewhere else. They're all
made somewhere else. We are existing in
a globalized economy, particularly when
it comes to electronics and the goods
that we care about to do our jobs,
computer parts, hard drives,
semiconductors, all of that. That
doesn't work anymore, right? And like I
understand the point that people are
coming from because it did used to work
that way, but the time scale and the
investment to set up shop in the US to
avoid these tariffs is prohibitive. It's
not going to happen. Uh there's Yeah.
And it's also the imple imple Wow, I
can't even talk anymore. the uh
implementation of and I will use the
term plan very loosely um it's concept
of a plan where
basically we just started putting
incredible tariffs on things that as of
so so sort of two different categories
things that that cannot be made here
which will go a little bit outside of uh
the scope of the show but like coffee
right like it's just we're not outside
of Hawaii not really grown that much
coffee in the United States. Something
that we run on very very a lot as
illustrated. Um but also as far
as even the components and materials to
make the things, rare metals, other
things. There's a reason why all other
geopolitical things are going on that
we're not going to get into. It's
because we don't have all of the things
here.
we need to buy them from from other
people. Now the and that's like to make
the things where if we even had the
long-term
uh wherewithal or thought process of
building factories to manufacture things
like switches, you need years for that.
You need to prepare for that. You need
to make sure that the supply chain and
the relationships of the countries that
you're going to buy the things to build
those fac to build those factories to
then have those factories make those
things that give Americans jobs. You
need to make sure that those things are
all in place or you have a plan to move
them forward before kneecapping the
entirety of the system that's built.
like I understand the want for uh more
uh the changing job market sort of in
the United States.
Um but the truth is in my
opinion the way that this is being done
is so hamfisted that even if and I this
is my personal bias. I want to make it
very clear uh that
even even if like the goal was to make
tariffs replace
uh taxes or something like
that. I think we know, okay, let's put
it this way. We've all said on this show
a lot of times that a business all it
wants to do is most businesses is not
just make some of the money but all of
the money. We now have uh an
administration that really wants to run
the government like a business. It
shouldn't be, but that's what they're
doing. I don't believe that even if
tariffs were breaking in tons of money
that taxes will go down for the middle
to lower class. I just don't see it
happening based on precedent. But let's
say that that is the goal. Let's say
that that's what they're shooting for.
The problem is when you do things in my
opinion this hamfisted with no plan, no
insight, no no grand scheme here truly
when you move this
fast, countries aren't
like no one's going to pay the tariffs
because people aren't going to be buying
the things, right? So that money doesn't
come in. It's the console problem,
right? It's exactly the console problem.
If you make a console cost
more, it's not going to make me buy the
console at that price. I'm just not
going to and I'm going to use the one
that I already have or I'm going to find
a cheaper alternative that isn't a
console, right? I'm going to do
something else. Yeah. I want to make it
very clear, Will and I are not
economists. Uh we are sitting in an
animated kitchenet. Uh we are literally
consumers of goods in this case. And uh
I'm not saying that I understand the
true ins and outs of a global economy,
but I do know that 6 months ago there
were problems in in trade and global
economy and stuff like this, but the
markets were not as crazy and and we
would not like even the conversation
alone on the Switch 2 is sort of like a
tiny little nugget of literally
everything. Also, I mean, tariffs are
going to cause jobs in trucking and
shipping. I mean, there are already
ports and boats that are now just docked
because there's no there's no order for
these things. It's killing a bunch of
jobs outside of the government. Uh
people are getting I know many people
that are either getting furoughed from
jobs that deal with um things that they
need to get things from other countries
or having their pay slashed or a bunch
of stuff
like and and again I see the sort of
good faith argument I feel like Soldier
is is trying to make here. And in a
world in a world that was based more in
in the past and before honestly before
electronics were sort of a large part of
this conversation and also in a world
where there was a decent amount of
planning and and discussion of what the
American people like kind of actually
want like
there's every every time I see someone
talking about this online it's like oh
we're bringing manufacturing jobs back
it's going to be human beings uh
Americans screwing in those little
screws on the iPhone. I mean, no, it's
not there. It's going to be it's going
to be literally automation and those
jobs aren't going to go back to actual
human beings because as
Soldier correctly points out, there are
more laws here like that would it makes
it it's it's uh I'm getting way too
complicated, but it would be less
legally hard for a robot to do it. Yeah.
At least currently. That could change.
Yep. Um, we veered off hard. However, I
do really appreciate Soldier's comment
and I appreciate sort of talking about
it from uh and I think another angle and
and this is I I I also want to hold this
up as a great example of we can disagree
in good faith about these things and
like have a good conversation. And this
is this is like one of the great
examples of and all of these are um all
the comments today uh were great
examples of say more, right? And so, uh,
I like this. I like this conversation.
And again, we're continuing to have
these over in the Discord. If you're a
YouTube member, a subscriber here on
Twitch, a patron, um, you can join the
Discord and hop into those
conversations, uh, whenever. Um, they
frequently spring up at about 2 a.m. I
don't know
why. And that they want to get us before
they wake up. That's right. And that,
dear friends, brings us to the close of
our show. Meaning that all that remains
to us today is for Matt to do his
signature sign off. The same one that he
does every time. Will, it's not my
signature sign off. It's all of our
signature signoffs. Will, you do it with
me every time. That's true. Brad and
Janet and Rocky, I hope you're all doing
it with me at the same time because we
all know it. We all know it and love it.
It brings us together as a community and
I feel like it's the kind of thing we
need right now to launch us into our
week after talking about a lovely two
hours of gaming and and uh culture news.
So without further ado, we're going to
get it started right
now. Three minutes, Jerry. Three minutes
for tariffs. Oh, cream of the crop. Oh
yeah.
[Applause]
[Music]
I was going to be so disappointed if
that wasn't the ending. I was like, it
has to be it has to be the mashup. It
can't be anything else. It has to be the
mashup. God, we've been doing this show
so long that I'm like, I know what
Matt's going to do for the ending. We we
never talk about that. By the way, the
ending is always based on what's
happened during the stream. Um, we never
have time to talk about it. And it's
gotten to the point that I know what
Matt's going to do.
Okay, cool. Thanks everybody for for
joining us. Yeah, thank you. Yeah. Uh
the
uh we've got stuff for the rest of the
day. Matt's got to get to meetings. Yep.
So, we're going to say uh goodbye to
Janet. Janet, we will see you all
Thursday for a design club. Not sure
what the topic's going to be, but we'll
let you know as soon as we know. So, uh,
have a good day