Hi everyone, it's me Tim. Today I want
to talk about the Arcanum experience
point system, the design behind it, and
how it's kind of contentious. It was to
the dev team back in the day and players
today still talk about it. So, let's
dive into it. This actually comes from a
question from blah blah blah vlah
who asked, "Can you talk about the
experience system in Arcanum? I'm not
sure there's another game with similar
displacement of XP being mostly on a per
hit basis with a pretty minor emphasis
on the per kill point. This makes most
solo builds very strong, but politician
characters that collect a lot of
followers or mages that specialize in
summoning get very little experience.
What was your design philosophy here?
It's a good question. Let me start by
saying the source of XP in role playing
games has always been contentious and
still is. There's a lot of discussion
about where XP should come from in a
game. I talked about it that in general,
I had a video called experience points
and level progression. I'll link it
below. And um
just so you know, the decision I've come
up with. So I I I'll tell you now how
I'll finish up the video. I've decided
that that quest completion, giving
experience points is the answer. And
that's how I like to give experience
points. There's a video on that.
Combat,
giving experience points for combat
always makes me go, what about the
non-combat characters like OP asked? And
if you want to give XP for skill use,
that causes a whole bunch of issues. I
do not want to rehash them. I made a
video specifically on skill-based XP. It
just leads to issues and you have to
solve them. You if if you think it's a
solution and you don't solve those other
problems that that solution just
introduced, I think you're doing a major
disservice to your design. Anyway, watch
those videos. I'm not going to rehash
them here. What I'm going to talk about
is Arcanum, why why it was that way, and
maybe what I do in the future.
So when we were making Arcanum,
I chose quests as a major source of
XP. In fact, quests were supposed to be
the major source of experience points,
items, reputation change, everything
like that. But there were a lot of
people on the team who wanted combat to
give experience points. Despite my
arguments that we supported a lot of
builds that were non-combat oriented and
how were they supposed to get experience
points, the arguments that they tended
to give were,
first of all, there were some builds
that couldn't get a lot of the quests.
Either their intelligence was really low
or they had a bad reputation, so the
quest just weren't available for them.
Only the main story quests were
guaranteed for everyone.
They also pointed out that combat was
frequently unavoidable. Random
encounters in the wilderness, the way
some dungeons were set up, there was no
path through the dungeon where you
didn't have to fight something.
Although I always thought you could
sneak by him, but they would say, "No,
that's not always possible." Okay. Also,
um,
since the player could get companions,
they could still avoid combat by just
having the companions do the fighting.
So, that was already something that was
possible. And then they argued for a
source of XP that did not come from
quests. Uh either for just grinding,
like, you know, you're close to going up
a level, let me go grind some XP just so
I can go up, or they still wanted to be
able to advance when they finished all
the non-story quests. Notice that this
is an option. If you finish all the
story quests, Arcanum is over. Arcanum
is over when you finish the last story
quest. But if you did all the non-story
quests, that meant there was no XP
available anymore unless you did the
story quests and therefore ended the
game. They wanted a source of XP that
wasn't
quests.
So, we talked about it and I thought
about it and what I ended up adding was
two more sources of XP. one every time
you scored a hit. And there's XP
relative to the amount of damage you
did. Or you could view it as XP relative
to the amount of,
you know, hit points you took away from
the monster. Same thing. And XP for
landing the killing blow, saying whoever
killed them got a it was like 20% of the
entire combat XP pool was awarded to the
killing blow.
So, this meant that players who made
their companions do all the fighting,
they didn't get the combat XP. If the
companions did all the hits and the
killing blow, they didn't get any combat
XP. This was identical to a stealth
character who may have avoided fighting
alltogether by sneaking around that
combat encounter because both of these
are just ways of avoiding fighting.
Whether you avoided combat alltogether
or you had your companions do it all,
you avoided fighting.
And this meant the result of this was
the pure fighter with no companions
wrote would rise and level the fastest
because they'd get all the quest XP and
they got all the combat XP.
Well, the other team developers argued
to me that this made sense because
stealth and magic and companions all
made the game easier. So that companion
companionist pure fighter was already
kind of playing on hard mode. So he got
to rise a little faster.
So, I did it. That's what I did. I added
it. Um, I frequently let developers
convince me to change features. I talk
about the Fallout ending all the time.
It wasn't my idea. It was Leonard
Barski's and it was a good one and it
made the game better. I've had lots of
other examples of ways people convince
me to change a game feature and the game
got better. It's a team game made. It's
a teammade game after all. And while I
don't like design by committee, I don't
like design dictators either. I think
there's a happy middle where you you
listen to other people for their ideas,
but ultimately you chose and I chose.
Um,
by the way, that doesn't mean I always
like new features that people add. And
especially in Arcanum, I talk about the
one point system where everything costs
a point, a character point. I did not
like it. I have a whole video about
this. I thought it was a bad change that
I was convinced to make. This quest,
this combat XP, kind of similar. I I
although I can't say back then. Back
then I'm like, "Okay, let's do that."
Now, no. Um, moving on past Arcanum,
when I make games now, I like the quest
to be the only source of XP. It means
the game is very agnostic about how you
solve quests. Did you sneak through it?
Did you talk your way through it? Did
you, you know,
did you fight everything? Did you, did
you completely avoid that area all
together? The game doesn't care if you
got the quest done. Here's your XP. They
don't care what you did. Also, because
most of my games don't have post end
content, the game is over when the story
ends. I didn't have to worry about
having that extra source of grind XP.
Because of this, let me just say that
don't there's a bigger meta
uh lesson here. Don't let people
convince you that to be a good designer,
you have to get all your philosophy set
in stone and then do everything like
that going forward. You will change your
mind. You will evolve your philosophy.
My philosophy changed over 45 years of
game design. Only closed-minded people
don't change their minds. Don't be one
of those people. So, this Arcanum
experience point system is a good
example of
I really wanted it to be XP. I was
convinced not to. And I really was
convinced. I thought it was a good idea.
This if I were to remake Arcanum now or
an Arcanum like game, I'd go back to a
experience only from quests. Anyway, I
hope that answered your question.