Hi everyone, it's me Tim. Today I want
to talk about leaving some mystery in
your games. I almost called this
building a mystery and then I was going
to have a guitar and an ank necklace and
I was going to do that Sarah McLaclin
song I know you're thinking of. But
let's just say that it didn't test well
with the focus group and it would leave
me open to copyright disputes. So,
you're getting leaving a mystery. And
what do I mean by that? This is
something that's come up in a lot of my
videos, and it came up recently in
um my Fallout non-expository Fallout
lore, I'll link below, and the Arcanum
one, which I'll link below. But what I
mean by that is don't feel like you need
to address every question the player
might have. In Fallout, we didn't
address what Herold was. We didn't need
to. Wasn't important to the story. Isn't
important to the setting. It's a fun
mystery. We didn't address it. Maybe we
will later. Maybe we never will.
Maybe Harold doesn't know himself.
Actually, for sure Harold doesn't know
himself. In the Arcanum one, everybody
wants to know what happened on Half Ogre
Island, how that got resolved, which I
always say, A, not my quest, b not the
worst thing that got discussed about
things to that happened in the Arcanum
world, but also having that quest
unfinished
was kind of a lesson from the Arcanum
world itself, which is guess what? The
people who have money and power don't
answer to you. They don't answer to
anybody. It's kind of a theme in a lot
of my games. There's a video about my
games theme, common theme. But
what I think most is important if you're
making a game is
leaving some mystery in your game, which
of course means
that there's no exposition anywhere in
your game by an NPC or a cinematic or
there's not a book lying around or a
computer log entry that explains it. The
team may know the answer, but it's not
addressing the game. The reason the team
knows is you want to make sure they
don't put anything contradictory. You
don't end up with because you never
talked about it. One person has an NPC
say one thing and another person has an
NPC say another, and then obviously one
of them is wrong, maybe both of them are
wrong, but maybe you just don't want to
address it. Maybe it's something you
just don't directly want to have your
game go into.
If there's content in the game that's
made assuming an answer, then that's
what I mean by a non-expository lore. So
that can be a mystery that all there's a
lot of evidence in the game that will
let the player believe they know what
happened, but you never directly tell
them. That's one kind of mystery you can
do, and it's a mystery I like, and
that's why I made videos about all the
non-expository lore in Fallout and
Arcanum. But there's another way to do
it too, which is just not develop the
lore. It's completely undeveloped. The
team doesn't know. The game never
mentions it, and the players will never
be able to find out in this game. And
this could be anything from, hey, this
weird creature, where did it come from?
It It hasn't always been around. Where
has it come from? Not going to address
it. At least not in this game.
An NPC sends you out for an item. Why do
they want the item? Don't worry about
it. They're going to pay you. Don't
worry about why they want the item.
Maybe it'll be important in a sequel.
Maybe it won't.
Maybe you're going to go up against a
villain and one option is you
tell the villain, look, instead of
killing me, instead of me killing you,
just leave. Maybe it's a maybe it's a
combat intimidation thing. Maybe it's a
dialogue thing. Doesn't doesn't matter.
So, the villain leaves. Where' they go?
game's not going to follow follow up on
that. Maybe that'll be important in a
sequel. Maybe the villain goes one
country over and starts the reign of
terror all over again. Maybe you never
find out.
That brings me to the map. The your map
can you can have a big open world in
your game or or not. But your game will
focus on the map. What are in all the
adjoining countries? You don't have to
get into that.
Are there any other continents? You
don't have to get into that. And by the
way, even on the map you have, it's okay
to leave some blank areas in there.
Maybe there's uh a bunch of mountains
and the player can't get past it, even
though on the map it shows maybe there's
a river over there. It's okay to have
blank spots on your map that you can
address later. In fact, the whole point
of making these mysteries, and that's
why I made a video called Planning for a
Sequel,
the reason you want to put mysteries in
your base game is so that you can
address them in later expansions and DLC
and in sequels.
The whole point of having unexplored
lore
is so that you can explore it later.
It's it's
it's the reason you you literally want
to tell some of your narrative
designers, pull back on that. leave that
open and it's okay. Some people won't
want to do that. They're like, "No, I
want to wrap this up and need as a pin."
But
the problem here is you need other areas
of the game to be explored.
So,
leaving open some areas to explore later
on in a in a later game is a good thing.
And also when I mentioned sequels,
I didn't mean that as literally because
you could make a sequel that
comes before. I guess everyone would
call that a prequel. But if you want to
make a a a the second game be here's
what was going on in this country before
the player came, before the war started,
before the dragons ravaged it, whatever.
That might be a fun sequel. You might
also want to make a contempor
contemporaneous
game where like, oh, we explored
everything that was going on in this
country because of the war or the
dragons or that necromancer who was
ravaging it. Guess what was happening
over here in this other country nearby
at the same time. Now, the first game
may have mentioned caravans going to
that country or there may have been NPCs
who fled from that country because
something was going on there. That's
okay. You don't you can keep that vague.
And then when you make the sequel that's
set in that country, you can suddenly
talk about, oh well, they were having
like a magapopolis magic apocalypse or
magic was going crazy or something was
happening over there. It doesn't
contradict anything. You know, the
caravan people said it's really rough
running caravans through that country
and the people fleeing were like, "I'm a
refugee. Things were crazy there." As
long as what you you keep it relatively
vague, you can have all kinds of fun
stuff happen in the sequel in that other
country.
What I just said about countries could
be true for factions. You could make
another game about a faction that either
wasn't well-developed or only mentioned
in passing in your fa first game and
then you're like, I'm going to dive into
that faction more. Or you could make a
game set in a completely different
biome. So now you're like, okay, we had
a deserty
um area in the first game. Let's do
forests. Let's do snow. Let's do
mountains. because it's fun. Let you
introduce a whole bunch of new kinds of
creatures. Let you put a whole kind of
new, you know, towns and villages with
new architectures and stuff. That's fun
to explore. Leave that kind of stuff
open. You don't have to have every biome
and every faction and everything all in
your base game. Some of them can just be
referred to. Like this is wine from the
snow country, but you don't have the
snow country in your game.
I guess the thing I'm trying to say here
is games should be fun and mysteries are
fun.
Don't go crazy. You do need to solve
some mysteries that come up in your game
and you need to solve them completely.
If you don't, you will frustrate
players, but you can also solve most of
a mystery and leave like a loose end.
You know, where did the villain go? What
was that item for? you you wrapped up
everything that was going on, but
there's a loose end like that that the
game's never going to clearly
explain to you. And just remember this,
if you tell everything, players will
want nothing. So, if you're making your
game, it's okay to leave some mystery in
it for later exploration or even not for
exploration at all. Just leave a little
leave a little mystery in there. It'll
be good for you. people will like it.
And that's all I want to say.