Hi everyone, it's me Tim. Today I want
to talk about lessons from old games.
I've never talked about this. Comes from
a good question from you Hasty 6779 and
I hope I pronounced your name right. Who
asks, "Hi Tim, a question that hopefully
hasn't been asked already. What do you
think can be learned from old games? Is
there any lost wisdom out there?"
Yes, there is. Good question.
Particularly good question because it's
clear and short and to the point. So, I
really like that question.
I'm not going to say I thought I had
talked about this, but I do have a lot
of other lessons from videos. I'll link
them all below. It ranges from lessons
from school, lessons from by company,
lessons from failures, which I think is
particularly good one because I've
learned the most from my games that
didn't work out.
But this is a good question about what
can we learn from older games that were
released. And in particular, I'm going
to narrow this down and talk about
lessons that you can learn from 80s
games. That's games from the 1980s.
because a I was there. I was present. Um
it was my teen years, but I had a game
industry job. I was making games for set
top box console boxes. I was making PC
games. So, I know what I'm talking about
and I can speak from experience, not
from oh, I heard. But this is what
happened. This is what we did. And let
me just sum up for you what the 80s were
like. Our hardware was not powerful. It
was I mean my my smartphone is smarter
than is more powerful than any computer
I worked on in the 80s in terms of speed
in terms of memory just in every
possible way. There were no hardware
standards and you guys really have to
understand what this means. Games were
being made for PC, for Apple, for Atari,
for Commodore, for all wild assortment
of consoles. you know, Atari, Nintendo,
and television, Odyssey,
there were there was nothing you
standardized across any of those. In
fact, if you made any game for a standup
arcade game, it often on unique hardware
made just for that machine. There were
no software standards. Sometimes we
worked in C. Sometimes we worked in
basic.
Sometimes we worked directly in assembly
because that's the only way you could
get the speed. There were no design
standards. There were no pillars. There
were no documents about pacing and
economy. None of this stuff. In fact,
there wasn't even specialization in the
industry. You basically had programmers
and sometimes artists, but sometimes the
programmers did the art and that's it.
You didn't have narrative designers. You
didn't have rigging specialists. You you
certainly didn't have anybody who
specialized so
so narrowly that they didn't do most of
the other tasks that were on the game.
So these games were really focused
because they had to be. And what I want
to talk about today, the lessons you can
learn from that is you can learn a lot
from from games that were required to be
focused because I think that's kind of
an overriding
possible issue with today's games is
they don't really know what they want to
be. They try to be everything to
everyone. uh designed by committee,
making a publisher happy, trying to
guess what the largest demographic
wants. So, let's talk about 80s games
and what we can learn. And I'm going to
start with something I've already
mentioned, which was hyperefficient
code. You didn't have a lot of memory.
You didn't have fast processors. You
needed to be efficient. You It's not
that you wanted to be efficient or
wouldn't it be cool if we were
efficient. It was you write efficient
code or your game doesn't work on the
Atari console. Just doing graphics
required timing. You didn't say I want a
pixel done drawn here. You measured how
many milliseconds it was and then you
said turn on and it would turn on and
turn off and there you had a pixel at
that spot in the screen. That was
remarkably tightly controlled. You have
no idea. And it wasn't like you could go
look it up anywhere. There were no
documents for any of these things. You
just had to figure it out or learn from
someone who knew or weighed your your
way through really technical hardware
specs to try to figure out what to do.
What memory locations needed to have
values written to them to change the
hardware into a different video mode or
to get the location of a mouse cursor or
if a key was pressed.
Super efficient. Second thing I want to
talk about is tight game loops. I have a
video on core game loops. I don't want
to repeat all that here, but I define
the core game loop as what most players
spend most of their time doing. That's
the core game loop.
In ' 80s games, that game loop was
tight. It was here's the game, play
doing it. You're doing it now. You're
immediately dropped in. You're doing it.
Have fun.
And these game loops were small and
tight because they had to be. We
couldn't make giant sprawling games with
tons of different things like I think
I'll go craft now. I think I go explore
now. I go think I do this puzzle now. I
go think I do combat now. I go think I
talk to all these NPCs now. You couldn't
do all that. You had to pick what what
section what segment of all that
gameplay do I want to represent? And
then you did that. There was no, you
know,
the idea that you could have a core game
loop that was [snorts]
a huge variety of actions just pretty
much did not exist. Which brings me to
my next thing about '8s games is you
were always playing. You can think of
that as the AB
P of games. Always be playing.
You didn't spend your time in front of
this console or this arcade standup or
your or your computer watching the game
show you things. If it did, it was super
brief. It was like a villain pop. Haha.
I have the ring now. Haha. And then
you're like right in there and you're
shooting, you know, all of his minions
and stuff and I'm going to get you
villain. You were always playing. There
were no fiveminute cut scenes. There
were no in-game camera changing. There
was no long conversations because they
there couldn't be that was unsupported.
So you were always playing those games.
You would always be playing.
Brings me to the next thing which was
'8s games had very very focused stories.
You could describe the story probably in
a sentence or two because of course they
had to be short. Usually the goals were
really simple. Find this ancient
artifact, rescue someone, kill a
villain. maybe two of those, rarely
three of those, not much more than that.
And if the game was wrapped around a
villain, it was usually, okay, I'm gonna
go get this villain. So, first I'm going
to kill a lot of henchmen or a lot of,
you know, trash mobs, and then they get
harder, and I may encounter his
lieutenant, and then finally, I'm up
against the villain, and it's the what
the whole game has built towards. And
that's it. That's it. Um, you might even
play a game where it doesn't even have
that. It doesn't even have a story. It's
just go into this dungeon and collect
treasure. That's the entirety of
Gauntlet. Um, you just you're playing to
get stuff and that's it. Or sometimes
you're just playing to live. That's the
entirety of uh Berserk and Antic, the
sequel to Berserk. You're just playing
to live. How far can you live? Like like
Pac-Man, how far how long can you go on
a quarter? That's the entirety of the
story. Um, which brings me to the
related thing, which is settings. All
these games have very simple settings
that can be described.
Like remember when movie trailers used
to always start in a world? You could do
that for 80s games and you would say one
sentence and that would be the entire
setting. Aliens have invaded. Uh
necromancer is running a muck and
killing people and then bringing them
back as zombies. Or the robots have
rebelled. You need to stop it. And
that's it. That's the story. Uh, now you
could there could be some complexity for
the player to look for. There might be
books for them to read, popups that they
can, you know, they click on something
and a popup happens, but you didn't have
to do it. And there weren't nearly as
many of those as there are in today's
games because you just didn't have the
memory to store all that. And yeah, I'm
talking text. We didn't have the memory
to store all that text. We didn't have
much memory.
I always like to point to the Lord of
the Rings at this point because I love
Lord of the Rings. You can view this the
the
setting of the Lord of the Rings as, you
know, here's uh an older here's a
fantasy world and then the story line is
basically uh the bad guy lost an
artifact. If he gets it, this whole
world is destroyed. So, let's go destroy
it ourselves. That's it. That's the
entire thing. There's a lot of
complexity that you can dive down into
if you want, but you don't need it. And
since earlier games couldn't provide it,
they just gave you that barebones
setting. Hey, you live in a fantasy
world. Hey, there's a bad guy. Go
destroy his ring. Boom.
Okay. So, what does all this mean? What
lessons can you learn from all this?
Old games couldn't do very much. So,
they avoided a problem of modern games
that I see as becoming indulgent.
They add too many things thinking those
those more of those things make the game
better when really what they do is they
dilute the game. I I frequently because
I'm always talking about food. I'm
thinking about food, talking about food,
eating food. Think of a fancy
restaurant. If you've ever been to
really high-end restaurants, sometimes
the most delicious dinners you've ever
had have a very small set of
ingredients. It's here's this sea bass
and here's a little bit of salt and
maybe one or two
seasonings and some butter. And what
what's amazing about it is how it was
prepared and that the ingredients are
the absolute freshest, best,
nicest things you could possibly get.
you maybe you wouldn't even know where
to buy some, you know, a a fish or a cut
of steak of this quality. And you might
not be able to. Some of the really high
cuts of beef are sold to restaurants
first, and you're lucky to be able to
find them. You'd have to go to a butcher
to find them. You're not going to find
them in your grocery store. What I'm
saying here, there weren't a lot of
extras, so it had to be done right. So,
those early games were kind of like
fancy restaurants. You kind of had to do
it right or you really couldn't do it.
And I'm saying there were a lot I'm not
saying there weren't a lot of bad games.
By bad games, I mean not good for you.
But when you play a lot of games back
then, you encountered your bad ones, the
ones that ran slow or crashed or just
didn't work right or didn't you didn't
like.
But most games back then,
the barrier to entry was so high by the
time you made a game, it at least was
efficient and tight because it had to
be. And the question now is, can you do
this today? You can. The problem is, you
don't have to. So I see it a lot in in
in indie games more often because indie
games since the it's usually done by one
person or a very small team. They don't
have a lot of people to do a lot of
things. So they focus on a very tight
core game loop. You can do this too. But
the difficulty is when you start making
a game it's easy to go I want to add
this and I like this and I just played a
game that had this so I want to pull it
in. You need to be simple. You need to
stay focused and whatever you do has to
be extremely well executed. And then
you'll be like that fancy restaurant.
You don't got a lot of ingredients in
that meal, but that meal was delicious.
And I will throw out, I know
discoverability is an issue. I got a
whole video about it. I'll link it
below. But everybody faces that. The big
pubs face it. The small indies face it.
The big pubs deal with it by having a
big marketing budget. The indies can try
to overcome it by if you're small,
simple, easy to describe, and super good
at what you do.
It's like a friend always says, cream
rises to the top. Good luck. And also,
uh, you and Hasty 6779. Good question.