Hi everyone, it's me Tim. Today I want
to talk about skill trees. This is a
question from every Nova, not any Nova,
every Nova, who asked, "Can you please
record a video about RPG skill trees?
I'm interested specifically in the skill
tree as a model for acquiring skills,
different types of skill trees,
different point allocation models, even
different shapes of skill trees as a
different way to force the player into
specific choices." sometimes fourth was
in quotes. You know me, I'm all about
player agency. This is an interesting
question. I have talked about skill
design in RPGs and there's a video
linked below in general, but this is a
different question and it's very
specific to how you arrange the skills.
I will start off by saying that most of
my games feature very linear skill
trees. Here's a set of skills. As you go
up in level, you get points, you spend
them, and the skill gets just better and
better with occasional things like you
could acquire ranks
in in Arcanum or you could get skill
unlocks in Outer Worlds. In fact, Outer
Worlds restricted you early on and only
putting points in the skill category and
then when there were enough points, you
could then spend them in the subsklls.
For example, dialogue. You could only
spend points in dialogue. And
then later, I think once you had spent
50 points, it opened up persuasion,
persuade, lie, and intimidate. Very
specific dialogue skills that could be
used in particular places in the game.
And then you could spend points directly
in that. So, those could be considered
very short skill trees, maybe skill
bushes. See what I did there? But I
don't know if people are talking about
that. Many games have very very very
complicated skill trees. Path of Exiles,
I'm looking at
you. Most games, however, use a tree or
maybe a graph or a matrix. All of these
are ways to constrain player choices in
some way because the player will pick a
skill and then the next skill they can
pick is kind of based on their previous
choice. For some of them it is the these
skills are prerequisite. So you have to
have bought this skill before you can
put any points in this one. Some of them
you have to put so many points in a
particular skill or a set of skills
before the next thing in the tree or
graph or matrix opens up.
This is an interesting way of
constraining
um skill choice. It's very natural, by
the way, to show it's a natural way to
show prerex. If you have a skill that
points to another skill and that other
skill is grayed out, when you hover over
it, it says like you have to spend, you
know, two or three points in the
previous skill. People get it. Uh, if I
were to remake Fallout, I probably at
the very minimum would let players look
at all the perks because in that game,
the perks had prerequisites, but you
couldn't see perks until they were
offered to you. So, I'd let people just
look through all the perks they ever
wanted to see. And something a little
easier than that skill deck. Something
that you could like show a bunch of
skills on the screen. You could look at
a skill and see all or perk and see all
the prerequisite perks or links to
skills or whatever it is that that it
required you to have just because people
like to plan their their builds for the
entire game, especially after they
played the game a few
times. Sidebar, I think shapes are
something that people understand really
well, which is why skill trees and skill
graphs work. People naturally get
shapes. I've wanted to make a shapebased
attribute system for years. I never
figured out how to do it. I'm not giving
up because it took me years to figure
out how to put flaws in a game that
occurred after you began the game. So,
you know, games like Gersps have flaws
that you buy at the beginning and it
gives you more points to spend on your
your build right there. Took me a while
to figure out how to introduce flaws
later in the game that would make people
even want to take them. So, I haven't
given up shapes and attributes, but
shapes for skill trees is very much a
thing and many games do it. In fact, I
kind of want to talk about the one time
I really thought of a relatively complex
skill graph, which was for the post-apoc
game that Troa was working on called
Epic. There's a video about it and you
can watch it in the link below.
I was planning to make a skill ability
matrix and I took some notes on how it
worked. Now keep in mind this was
something that I designed
in
2004. So
it's 20 years old, 21 years old. It's
old. So the ability matrix is what I was
calling it was actually kind of a grid.
It contained four primary categories.
Social, thieving, combat, and magic.
Each primary category contained a deep
linear list of abilities that were very
specific to that
category. So it would start off with a
base ability and then each additional
ability stayed very specific to that
category but gave you an increase either
in power or variety
um what you could do it on or how often
you could do it or something like that.
As an example for the thieving category,
the base ability might just be pick
simple lock. Pick a simple mechanical
lock. And then the next one might be
move stealthily. And then the next one
might be pickpocket. And then you might
get a pick a more complicated lock.
Maybe a a magical lock or a complex um
something a little more complicated than
a simple tumbler. And then it would go
all the way up to disappear from view,
which is your ability to basically
disappear from sight because you're so
good at thieving
abilities. But the reason these were
done as these columns of abilities is
each primary category had an adjacent
crossover category which contain
abilities that kind of utilized elements
from both of the primaries. So, for
example, the thieving combat crossover
category would have abilities like sneak
attack, where the thieving social
crossover would have abilities like
bluffing and
disguise. Note that combat social
doesn't directly overlap, and neither
does thieving and magic. But there are
ways that those skills would be
available to someone who wanted them. If
you were in thieving and you wanted
magic skills, there are ways to get them
and I'll talk about that. The game had
multiple starting backgrounds, birth,
childhood, and adolescence. And your
birth and adolescence backgrounds
affected your
starting skill category. So I think for
example, I looked it up. Um, if you were
a barbarian by birth and you in your
adolescence you ran with a street gang,
you would be presented with thieving in
combat as your base skill ability
columns. So, you could
buy those two abilities
uh the first two abilities in those
categories, but you could also
um pick any of the intermediate the
things that were between it. So example,
the examples here would be you could
choose pick simple lock from thieving or
thrust uh with melee thrust with from
combat or you could pick from the social
thieving crossover which is bluffing or
the thieving combat crossover which was
sneak attack or the combat magic
crossover which was a spell called cloud
mind which basically made your opponents
a little slower, a little more sluggish
to attack or notice things. So you it
was really useful for it could be really
useful for thieves, but that's not what
it was made for. So basically the player
was given a choice of their starting
skill categories or they can pick from
the crossover categories between them.
Each time the player leveled up, they
were given the option to choose a new
ability off these skill columns. They
were offered ones based on what their
previous choices were made. So they
could progress down a category, you
know, each row
sequentially, but they could also
include abilities from the crossover
categories. And if you wanted to, you
could go back. So if you crossed over
into a category, you could go back down.
For example, let's say the thief combat
character wanted to get to
magic because they wanted that
[Music]
um they could select cloud mind which is
the crossover between combat and
magic. Then at the next level they go
into magic completely because they have
something in the adjoining category. So
they can go from cloud mind over into a
pure combat
uh or pure magic ability which would be
a spell and then from then on they could
buy spells in the magic system.
Similarly if they wanted to go social
they could pick the thief social ability
of bluffing and then from there from
bluffing at the next level go into the
social category purely. It's not, it may
not be the most efficient use of their
skills, but some people may want to buy
all of the
low-level abilities and be a generalist,
whether it's, you know, social,
thieving, combat, or magic, or some
people want to deep dive and become a
specialist. Uh, Epic was going to
support both of
those. So, I hope by talking about the
shapes and also by giving you an
example, you can see what I'm talking
about of how the shape helps constrain
the kind of player you can make. And I
hope this answered your question.