Hi everyone, it's me Tim. Today I want
to talk about why people
quit. I recently did a video called
eating your own dog food
about if you make a product in
particular a game you should use it. You
should play it. You should eat your own
dog food. In the comment section, a lot
of people were
asking about people who don't eat their
own dog food and more particularly why
those people would even be in the
industry or stay in the game industry if
they didn't play
games. And I thought I'd address that in
this video, like drill down on it,
because I've been in the industry. In
just a couple months, it will be 44
years. So, in a couple months, I enter
my 45th year of working in the game
industry. And in that entire time, I've
only been an employee at five companies.
I've done some consulting and contract
contract work, but I've only been an
employee at five companies in 44
years. What's interesting is I've only
quit twice. the there were two
companies, Cybron, the one that made
Grand Slam Bridge, and my own company,
Troa, that closed. So, I technically
didn't quit. There was no company to be
at anymore. And then
Obsidian, I've been working for Obsidian
now for 14 years. Uh employee, a mix of
employee and contracting. By the way,
that's twice as long as any other
company I've ever worked at, including
my own. which right there should tell
you something about Obsidian, 14 years
and
counting. And I mentioned I've quit
twice in my career. And if you want to
know more about that, I've got videos
about it. I quit once from exhaustion
from Interplay. I'll link the video
below. It's when I quit Fallout 2. And
then once from frustration from Carbine
when I was working on Wildstar, and I'll
link that video below. So, I'm not going
to rehash that, but I just want to point
out that in, you know, five companies
quit twice, two of them went under, one
I'm still
at. However, this question about why
people quit has been asked of me for a
long time. In fact, I'm going to tell
you a story now that happened in the
'9s, and it was at Interplay. This would
be about 1995. I'd been there since 91.
91 as a contractor and then full-time
employee starting in '92. I
was just starting up Fallout. Fallout
had started in
'94. Interplay had been really stable in
the sense of nobody had ever really
quit. Not not a large number. Some
people had been fired, but nobody had
ever really quit except a few rare
instances and it was very obvious why.
like maybe their spouse was moving or
just or they were leaving the game
industry
altogether. But suddenly in in the n in
1995 more and more people were quitting
and they weren't leaving the game
industry and I think it was freaking out
upper management because I was asked to
come in by one of the upper management
to get my opinion on why this was
happening. And at the time I was
wondering why they asked me, but later
on I found out it was I was a manager,
but I was still kind of in the trenches.
You know, I spent most of my day
programming and designing. Plus, I did a
lot of stuff after hours. You know, I I
played board games with people and video
games. We went to parties. We went to
dinner all the time. So basically the
person who asked me said they thought I
really had my finger on the pulse of
Interplay which I never thought
of but he I didn't know why he wanted
why he wanted me in his office but he
basically said why do you think people
are quitting all of a
sudden and I thought about it for a
second and I said you know I think a
better question something that would be
more informative is to ask why people
don't quit.
And he said, "Okay, why don't people
quit?" And I said, "That's simpler." I
said, "It's the three
eyes,
ignorance,
inertia, and
apathy." And maybe like you're doing
right now, yelling at the screen, he
kind of yelled at me, "Apathy doesn't
start with I." And I just went, "I don't
care."
And after a bit of a laugh and also
being reminded that insufferable also
begins with I, he said, "Could you
explain that in detail, please?" And I
said,
"Okay, let's dive into it." And this is
what I said. You got to remember this
was back in the
'9s. So, the first thing I said is a big
reason people stay here that I can tell
is ignorance. They literally don't know
they're being underpaid.
They don't know they're being
underutilized. They don't know about
other jobs there. It It's hard to find a
game company, much less open positions
at game companies, much less open
positions at other game companies that
you qualify for. So, ignorance was a big
chunk of employee retention in the 80s
and 90s. If you got a job at a game
company, you, you know, counted your
lucky stars and where were you going to
go? But that was changing. Game
companies were becoming hot. There were
more and more springing up, especially
in California, especially in Southern
California. So, suddenly there were
options, and people weren't quite so
ignorant about those options
anymore. The second reason I said was
inertia. That's different than
ignorance. Inertia folks knew maybe
there were other things they could be
doing, but they were just very happy
with the status quo. These were people
who were, for lack of a better word,
working or phrase, working for the
weekend. And I had somebody actually
tell me that he he had a job with very
little responsibilities and it paid
okay. It didn't pay that well, but he
pointed out to me, he said he lived in a
a place he shared with three other
people. He what he liked doing on the
weekend was four-wheeling in the desert,
you know, Joshua Tree. He liked going up
to Anzabago or out in the salt and sea.
And so he liked not having a lot of
responsibilities and he was being paid
enough that as a young 20some he could
do what he wanted every weekend and he
was happy with that. That was a status
quo. He he didn't leave to get another
job because he didn't even look for
another job. He was happy with the way
things were. So that was the inertia. So
that finally brings us to the apathy,
which I think is is a different thing
than inertia. The apathy is quite
frankly the I don't care people. They
weren't looking for anything else
because this was just a job to them.
They showed up, did their work, got
paid, went home. I talk about that in my
jobs, callings, and career video. I'll
link that
below. That's what they did. That's all
they did. that that's what they were
happy
about. Um I shouldn't say
happy. They they didn't care. Work
didn't annoy them or if it did, it
didn't annoy them enough to make any
kind of changes. They were just like, I
don't care. I don't care about this
game. I don't care about this work, but
I'm making money. And it's it's subtly
different than the inertia folks. The
inertia folks were
happy with where they were. The apathy
folks weren't, but they also didn't care
enough to go anywhere else. And I said,
"Apathy, I think, has kept a lot of
people here. I know a lot of apathetic
folks." And keep in mind, this is the
'9s. I hear people saying this all the
time in the 2020s like, "This is brand
new. It isn't." We talked about this at
length in depth, and it ended with him
going, "I don't agree with anything you
said." And I'm like, "Okay."
Um, but interplay kept losing people.
And I think that those three eyes played
a big part
because each group, the ignorant group
was getting smaller, the inertia group
was getting smaller, especially as
people got older, and the apathy group
was pretty much the only group that was
remaining. But you you can't run a game
company on apathy. I still think that
these three reasons that people don't
quit, I think that still applies today.
The proportions may have changed on what
percentage of of people who just stick
with their job is ignorance versus
inertia versus apathy, but I think
that's the three primary reasons people
don't quit their jobs. So, I'm curious
what you guys think. I wanted to tell
those stories and see what you think.
Why do you think people quit? Or more
importantly, why do you think people
don't quit?