Hi everyone, it's me Tim. Today I want
to talk about why TRAA games were so
buggy.
I get asked this a lot and there are a
lot of articles and videos talking about
how TRA games
were just so incredibly buggy.
And I do have a video on why RPGs in
general are so buggy. And I'll link it
in the description. And I will remind
you, Troka only made RPGs. We made three
RPGs. It's not why we were called Troa.
Um, but the short answer is
we had a lot of feature ideas. We did
not edit ourselves very much at all and
we were a small team and that just
combined to make very, very buggy RPGs.
So, not only give me I'll give you the
longer answer because
as you know sometimes the the tales are
what matter. So,
every single time Troa went to go make a
game whether it was Arcanum or Temple of
Elemental Evil or Bloodlines, there were
just so many things we wanted to do. We
had so many ideas and we're like in this
game we're going to do them and we're
going to get them right and it's going
to be new and different and people are
going to like it. and we tended to make
those features quickly. Even worse, we
made the tools to put in the content for
those features very quickly. So, both
the features themselves and the tools to
put in the content with those features
were both very buggy. And then when you
throw on top of that the fact that
having a lot of features in a game tends
to cause an additional kind of bugs
because of the interactions. So, you may
have the ability to pick locks and the
ability to steal things, but now that
you can combine those and open a chest
and get into it or pick something out of
someone's pocket, you start to get all
these interactions of of bugs that would
not have happened if you'd only had one
of those or the other, but not both.
So, we have all this content we're
trying to make, and we're trying to make
it very quickly because we're trying to
add a lot of content to our games. Like
I said, we didn't edit ourselves much
back then. We were all in our um I think
everybody was in their late 20s and
early 30s and we just wanted to
basically get a bunch of stuff in there.
So, we'd make this content as quickly as
possible to try to fit it into the
schedule we made. And the schedule was
what it was because I wasn't a very good
businessman and our budgets weren't very
big. So, we usually had to do things on
a very compressed schedule. So, we're
now we're putting lots of content in.
It's buggy. And then there's the issue
of using the wrong tools.
Now, you may think it's bad to ask
someone to say, "Cut a piece of lumber
and you give them a screwdriver." They
might be able to do it. They might be
able to hack at that 2x4 and get it
broken in two, but that's not going to
be a very good cut. Even worse though is
when you give someone a full tool chest
and there's a saw in there and they use
the screwdriver anyway. And then
sometimes they look at you and go, "You
didn't tell me there was a saw. You
didn't teach me how to use the saw." And
so we had those issues too where
sometimes content was thrown together in
just the wrong way. Like there was a
there was maybe a script command that
could have done it, but somebody did it
themselves individually with individual
script commands. And now maybe the
action wasn't atomic or didn't have all
the checks built into it that the script
command would have had. If they had
called the script man command to
transfer the item, it would have checked
a lot of things. But instead, they
removed the item and then placed it in
the new place rather than call transfer
and then bugs got introduced because you
should have used transfer and not take
and put
that was a problem. Now, on top of that,
if you, you know, not not that
necessarily blame the people who are
doing that the scripting with that, if
you combine the fact that all those
tools were dull and prone to break
anyway, then yeah, you can see that
there's just going to be a lot of
trouble cutting that lumber and the
things you make with that lumber are
going to be very janky. That's what
happened. Oh, but on top of that, I
should say sort of and finally,
us making so much content,
tons of content means tons of bugs. The
more stuff you have, the more features,
the more NPCs doing dialogues, the more
things you can do in those dialogues,
the more scripts you write, the more
spells you have, the more creatures you
have, the more bugs you're going to
have. And then because of our compressed
schedule and just how we made things,
none of those bugs were found. And
at Troy, we we wanted a lot of features
and content. And there wasn't a lot of
us to make it. And
that small budget and the fact that we
didn't edit ourselves and we put on all
those features anyway, that's a recipe
for just making a really buggy game. And
that's what we did. And we didn't do it
just once. We did it three times. And
you'd think we would have learned, but
every time I think we learned the wrong
lesson. And so we made Arcanum and we're
like, "Okay, that that game was just too
expansive, too openw world for us to
make." So then we made Temple, which was
much more condensed, and it's basically
a couple towns and a dungeon, and you
think be able to get it right. But then
we do Vampire, and we're like, we're
going to make 3D, and we're going to
have real time combat and stuff. We just
weren't wasn't really in our wheelhouse,
and we did it anyway. And that game had
a lot of bugs and we used a brand new
engine for that which we didn't fully
understand and wasn't completed and it
was buggy. So
short of us deciding we're going to hold
out for a bigger budget. We're going to
do far fewer features. Even if the
publisher asks for more features, we're
going to cut them down. Even if we want
more features, we're going to edit
ourselves down. We just didn't want to
do any of that. And so we never did. So
it was our fault. the the games were
buggy. But you know what? If you think
about it, we weren't the only ones who
were shipping uh buggy games, especially
buggy RPGs. I'm sure if you think about
it, you can think of a few other
companies that were making buggy RPGs as
well. Personally, I think RPGs are just
prone to be more buggy than an a typical
game. Watch my video on why RPGs are
buggy. But anyway, I think that's as
short as an explanation as I can make on
why Tria games were so buggy. And again,
this is an explanation. Many of you are
going to be thinking, "Oh, that's an
excuse because you just you you you have
to view explanations as excuses." I'm
not making an excuse. I tried to give an
explanation on why our games are so
buggy. We were a small team trying to
make a really overly featured, huge
amount of content game for a team that
size. And those were all choices we made
and went with. And the result was some
very, very buggy games, or as people
called them, flawed masterpieces, which
I think sounds a lot better than really
buggy game. Anyway, I hope that answers
your question.