Here are five of the most simple and
effective ways to structure a game trailer,

especially if you're a first time editor.

But to be honest, I've seen trailers
for big budget games...

which don't even have this much structure.

Hi, my name is Derek Lieu and this
is Video Game Trailer Academy,

a series of videos to help
you make better game trailers.

Creating the basic structure of a game
trailer can be daunting...

especially if you've never done any video editing,

so I'm going to share five basic
outlines to help you get started.

But before that, my first tip is to think
of your trailer like a stand up comedy act.

A comic needs to open with one of their best
jokes to earn good will with the audience,

and they need to finish with their best material
to leave them with a good feeling at the end.

So don't start with your most vanilla footage,

start with one or two really exciting ones,
then reset and build back up to a big finish.

First trailer structure you might
try is what I'm going to call

Tell, show, repeat.

For this format you use title cards
and/or narration...

which describe a thing, and then show the thing.

For example:

I sometimes call these bullet point trailers
because they start from a list of bullet points,

call them out and then show them.

If you choose this format I recommend
calling out the things...

you DO in the game, or the GOALS of the game like:

Don't call out raw features like how
many levels or boss battles there are,

because those are pretty boring selling
features and won't differentiate your game.

Don't forget to sandwich this bullet point
section between an exciting opening and closing.

Next up is to make a Music Video Montage

This is simply taking fun gameplay, and
cutting it to the beat of the music.

This format is best used for games which
are very simple to understand from watching,

like games with running and jumping,
shooting, or physical violence.

If you can also sequence the gameplay so the
simplest to understand shots are at the beginning,

and the most complex are at the end,

this will make it much easier for
the audience to watch and understand.

Again, sandwich this between
an exciting opening and ending.

Next is to simply make your
trailer in Chronological Order

Simply capture footage from your game, keep
everything in the order they appear in the game,

and cut them in an exciting way
while maintaining that order,

just without the boring bits.

A lot of games are structured somewhat
like level 1-1 in Super Mario Bros.

in that they introduce ideas,
make some twists on that idea,

and then test the player's
ability to understand them.

This format for games is essentially
what a lot of game trailers do,

so it stands to reason keeping this
sequence of events...

in that same order might work for a trailer!

I'm often surprised to see game trailers which
don't do this considering

how hard game designers work to create this sort of arc in their games.

The excellent trailers for Papers,
Please and Astroneer's Release Trailer

follow this chronological format.

Number four is Just Explain the Game

Some games are really difficult
to understand at a glance.

Maybe the game uses a lot of abstract
symbols which have no analog in real life,

or maybe there are multiple steps which
the audience will just not understand

until they’ve played the game.

This spec trailer by Ashley Ruhl for the
Zachtronics game Spacechem is a good example.

It uses title cards to explain
the game in a linear fashion,

and it uses good editing and
music to make it entertaining.

Some other examples are this amazing trailer
for Heat Signature narrated by Alex Ashby.

NARRATOR: You play a contractor living on a remote nebula...

NARRATOR: Taking on missions to break into space ships.

NARRATOR: Breaking into space ships is a ridiculous job...

NARRATOR: that will certainly get you killed.

NARRATOR: But luckily there are EASY missions you can choose...

NARRATOR: Well, that one is labeled MISTAKE,
so you might not want to...

NARRATOR: Okay fine, we're doing the one
 literally labeled MISTAKE.

And also this trailer made by Kert Gartner
for the VR version of Fantastic Contraption.

NARRATOR: Fantastic Contraption is about
building and using your creativity.

NARRATOR: The challenege of the game is simple.

NARRATOR: You have to get the pink ball
to the pink goal.

NARRATOR: And to do that, you have to build
a Fantastic Contraption!

Again, this approach mostly works for
games where the visuals...

are difficult to read in a fast cut trailer.

If you try to explain something
which is easily understood,

you're probably going to bore the
audience or insult their intelligence...

explaining how a double jump
or dialogue selection UI works.

Last but not least is the infamous In a world...

No seriously.

For a story trailer this is about
as dead simple as you can get.

Story trailers are probably the most
difficult to execute of the formats in this list.

but an "in a world..." style voiceover 
can be a crutch to lean on.

The voiceover simply needs to say in this order:

1. This is the world or the premise

NARRATOR: In the year 2004
time travel is a reality.

2. This is the person in that world

How are you doing, partner?

EX-partner.

Let me go, Max.
I'm not hurting anybody.

I've got to take you back.

3. This is the problem that person faces

NARRATOR: One man...

You ever hear the name Aaron McComb?

NARRATOR: Is about to take the ultimate power trip.

He's gonna be president!

4. This is what they're going to do to confront it

NARRATOR: One man is determined to stop him.

If I cannot go back to save her...

this scumbag is not going back to steal money.

5. These are the obstacles they're going to face

Stay here Walker.
In my future you're dead.

I think you planned too far ahead

This is what nearly all story trailers do!

Some of them skip over the
world and start with characters.

And a lot of teasers stop at what
problem the character is faced with,

because the premise is often interesting
enough to tease the audience.

My last tip is to make sure
the gameplay capture is CLEAR.

That can mean having no HUD or UI elements
or just composing shots to limit the number

of things on screen at any given time.

Retention of knowledge is far more
important than quantity of content.

And remember, start with an
exciting and hooky intro...

whether it's via the art, animation, music,
voiceover, game mechanics or something else.

Given how hard it is to gain
and hold someone's attention,

the first few seconds can't waste
any time hooking the audience.

These trailer structures are all very
simple, but that doesn't make them bad.

I still cut trailers using a mix of these formats!

The only "advanced" thing I think I do now
is play with the pacing and mix the formats.

A logical order is often best because it
makes the information easy to consume.

If you've ever watched a trailer with little to
no rhyme or reason to the order of the clips...

especially with dialogue...

it can become an incoherent mess.

So good luck and have fun!

By the way, I send out game trailer making tips
like this every Sunday via my mailing list,

which you can subscribe to 
at GameTrailerTips.com

As always, thank you to my top Patreon supporters
who help me make more videos like this!

Links to all the trailers in
this video are down below.


