Do you think you can guess the review count of a random game on Steam? I wrote a Chrome plugin that hides the real review count of a game and instead you see this right here. You get a multiple choice question with six possible answers and you have to guess how many reviews does this game have? How many reviews a game has is a very direct proxy for how successful a game is. So this game is kind of can you just from looking at a game can you guess how successful the game was? Let's play this one for example. So we're not allowed to look at the real review count. We have to guess how many reviews does it have. You're of course allowed to check out the price. It's free. It came out in 2025. Let's see if it has a trailer. [music] Okay, this could already be a positive outlier. So, they're not If you go to a random game on game on Steam, usually they'll have very very little reviews. This one looks competently made. It's horror. So I will give this one 540 maybe. No, it has 146. So I was wrong with my guess there. So now you get the idea of the game. And I also implemented this button here. Steam usually does not have this button. This next game button brings you to a completely random game on Steam. Let's see where it takes us. Sphere game. Epic. This alone is already interesting. just the option to get to a random game on Steam. It really shows you how many, sorry to say it, trash games there are on Steam. And I have to give us a little asterisk here. Um, this is a bit of a harsher video. I I don't know how how else to frame this. Like, we'll I'm not looking to shame any other developers or anything off the source. I'll just be very very extremely honest. Right. So, obviously you have like a ball rolling game here, something like this, releasing that in 2021. I don't think it's going to do very well. I'm going to guess this has eight reviews, and that is indeed correct. So, this is this is not me hating on the developers. This is me just um trying to guess the correct number. For example, for this one, I don't really even have to look at it too closely. I think this has zero reviews, and that is also correct. I'm sorry. It hurts me. It hurts. It really hurts me. And also just to be clear, I practice practiced this game a little bit. Oh, look. This is interesting. This could be a positive outlier. So the positive outliers are the real challenge because you can guess a lot of games right. But just by clicking the lowest one. Most of the time it's just the lowest one. But the real challenge is can you spot the positive outliers? I have a feeling this could be a positive outlier. Let's check out the trailer. By the way, in case the audio is muted anywhere in this video, that means I got copyright strike and I removed the audio. So, if there's audio missing anywhere, don't worry. [music] So, the trailer does not have sound effects, which is a bit suspicious. Let's check out the price. It's early access and it's 13 bucks. It came out in 2023. All right. So, I'm pretty sure it's not four reviews. It might be 72, but I don't think so cuz it looks very competently done and it has a publisher. It has two publishers. So, I think this one has probably 750 reviews or more. Storyrich shooting game. Let's check out the other trailer. It's quite pretty. H I'm almost tempted to give it 6,000. By the way, you are of can of course try to guess along. I think I will lock in. I think I'm going to go with 750. [snorts] Who is the greatest? Rob. This is one, I think. Lock in your guess. It is indeed one. All right, next one. Blade funky. This is the lowest one. This is seven. I could of course make the game more difficult by making the numbers closer together, but like the the idea of the game is not that you have to guess if it's like 500 or 400 reviews. That would be way harder, but that's kind of not the point. I want to see if I can guess how successful a game is. And so guessing if it has 300 or 400 reviews, that's that's kind of not the point. Let's see. Let's see. Let's see. This one pretty sure is zero. Yep. Okay, we got them. Interesting one. This one is a bit more difficult. It looks better at first glance. It has trailers. It came out in 2022. It's 15 bucks. Let's check out the trailer. It's a twin stick shooter. Yeah. Yeah. I think if you're lucky, if you're very lucky, you got 71. I'mma be mean. I'mma guess seven. Block in your answer. It is seven. It is It is really heartbreaking cuz you can see how much effort went into this game and then you get like seven reviews. But it's surprisingly it's like the subtle differences a lot of the time. Like it's really strange. I feel like after looking at a couple of games in like this weird Steam game mode, I really feel like I can just tell when something didn't sell too well. Casino Poker. [snorts] This one's only three bucks. And but the first screenshot we see looks absolutely garbage. So, I'm going to save five, I think. Yeah. Next one. Amazing tower defense. This looks nice. >> [music] >> trailer doesn't have sound effects. Visually it's nice, but we can't hear the sound effects. Um, yeah, in close-up it doesn't hold up as well anymore. It's free to play, though. It's free to play and it published in 2021. So, the fact that it's free to play makes me think that it's not zero. I think it's uh 68. Sorry, I'm going kind of too fast for you to to guess along. I hope you're still having fun here. Let's like this is like Geogessa but for game developers. I really like it. Like I I played this for 4 hours yesterday in the evening and I was so addicted. It's so interesting to see all of these games. It's really really interesting. So here we have special games special agent from 2024. It has a demo and it's two bucks. Let's check out the game play how juicy it is. I think for 2024, the level of juiciness is just not enough. See, this is one I was unsure about cuz I feel like if it was more polished, if it was juicier, it could have way way more um could have way more reviews, but I think the juiciness level that I'm seeing here gives me um zero reviews vibes. And I'm indeed correct. Let's check out the next one. Cosmic, a journey among shadows. Like this one looks a lot more polished. Really nice neon graphic art style, but the fact that it looks great on screenshots doesn't necessarily mean that it looks great in motion. So, we also have to check it out in motion. The trailer even has sound effects. H. What do we make of this? It's It's 1650. That's quite expensive. And it's came out in 2025. I feel like platformers in 2025 is like very difficult. This could be a positive outlier potentially. So, I want to be careful with my guess here. Let's watch more of the trailer. Here's the thing, right? If you wanted to play something like this in 2025, there would already be better options available. There are like two AI games. There's like Hollow Night. I don't think this one did do super well. Not because it's bad, but just because it doesn't meet the standards you need in this genre to make it. So, I'm thinking I'm thinking 78. And if they got very very lucky, maybe it's 500, but I'm locking in the 78. Oh, it's 18. Yikes. That's brutal. See, it's it's a very interesting, but also very painful, uh, game to play it. Like, um, I'm sure some of you will find it disheartening, but at the same time, you can also see that there are a lot of games like this on Steam that you're not really competing with. Like if you really try, you can do something that looks better than this. Let's be real. This one has five reviews. Oh, it has 36. I mean, this a bit of a distinction without a distinction. Let's check out what I missed here. I mean, it's nine bucks. Oh, and it's very old. Corridor 7 1994. So, it's a um it's a bit of a classic apparently or something like that. Very old game. And it has a publisher. The fact that it has a publisher should always tell you that it's probably not zero or not close to zero because most publishers would be a bit embarrassed to like publish a game that has only gets like five reviews. So if you have a publisher and everybody at the publishing team gives the game a review, then you should already be at at least at something like 10. So if I had taken my time here, then I could have guessed this correctly. This was 100% my fault. Let's see what we get next. And you can also see that not all games are available in my region. And because the button brings me to a completely random game on Steam, occasionally it'll bring me just to a game that's not available in Germany. Here we have Banker. It's an adventure action. It's not a horror game, is it? It is. It is a horror game. It's one. It does not have a publisher. It came out in 2024. Let's check out the trailer. No, I don't think I need to see too much more. I would be surprised if it's 45. I'm going to go with five. Yeah, I'm sorry. I'm very, very sorry. Dumb ass survivors. So, this must have been after Vampire Survivors, and indeed it came out in 2025. It's two bucks. It doesn't look too bad. Let's see how juicy it is. Juiciness is what I'm really trying to look at. No, no, no, no, no. The the sounds are the sounds are like the the gun sounded like a peashooter. This unfortunately I think has six reviews. 46 if they got lucky, but it's indeed six. Let's check out the next one. Row row. Okay, let's be careful. It's only one buck, so it the price does make a difference. If it's cheaper, it usually sells quite a bit more, especially if it's like very cheap. Let's see how juicy it is. It looks too alien. You don't really understand what's going on and that's why I'm giving it 14 and I am correct. Moving on to the next one. The next the oneheim. This one is a platformer in 2024. You cannot release a platformer with this style in 2024 and expect it to do super well. So, it's definitely not above 51. I think it's actually I mean it's two bucks. It's two bucks. Could be 51. Let's check out the trailer. No, it's not 51. It's zero. Guacamle Gold Edition. Another platformer. See how many platformers there are. I understand all of the people warning of making a platformer now. There are a lot of platformers. Very nice art. See, they put so much effort into the art. It does have a publisher. It's 15 usually. It's 75% off. Let's check out the trailer. [music] So, gold edition kind of tells me that there's been a different edition before. Why would you make a gold edition if the previous edition didn't do it? The trailer's wellm made. What was that? What was that? That's a random feature list scrolling through the screen. Um, maybe I should make it so that this is also hidden cuz this is obviously quite a quite a heavy clue. So, I should not be able to see this. I might fix this in one of the next versions of the plug-in. But that was obviously quite a strong hint that this was at least critically wellreceived. So, I think my intuition was right here that this is a positive outlier. It could be it's either 730 or it's 3,000. I'm having a bit of a hard time seeing the 3,000. I think I'm locking in the 700. It is the 3,000. Not bad. Not bad. Nice. Nice. Nice. Next one. Quit McMortis. I I don't know what this is. It's 9 bucks for a game that looks like this. This has 15. Yeah. Cat Warfare. It's free. It's free to play and check out the trailer. H does not have a publisher formax and it came out in 2020. Unfortunately, I hope I'm wrong. I'm just going to click the five. It's 252. That is There's way more than I expected. And to be fair, this game is a lot better than other games we had a look at so far. It also looks a lot more fun in terms of game play. So, I I think I it would have been possible to guess that one correctly. I am just not skilled enough at review guesser yet. But I'm sure I'll get there. I I'll become a review guesser pro. I'm telling you. I'm a I'm a grind this review guesser game till I'm a pro review guesser. I I find it really educational. It's quite quite interesting. Counterterrorist Agency. Counterterrorist Agency lets you fight international terrorism and prevent attacks all over the world. It does have two publishers. It's 15 bucks. Suspect on the run. I repeat, >> it's a strategy simulator game. >> Has an expensive opening. Slightly more effort uh opening cinematic. >> Suspect arrested. >> Mission success. Cool music, cool maps. Quite a lot of systems here. Quite a lot of depth. Skill tree. This is This is three digits. I think this is three digits. Oh, who's the greatest review guesser? [laughter] Next one. Next one. Next one. I'm so addicted to this game. This one has three. Next one. Wanderer's Shade. Isn't this so interesting? Um, I think all of the screenshots look very same. And this came out in 2024. Uh, it's early access. It hasn't been updated for 18 months. This has This is one. Yeah, I'm so sorry. Lewis Charles in the Lou Explorer Museum's spooky attic after hours as the ghost of the little I don't know. I'm bad at reading. It's a exploration puzzle rog like with extremely noisy graphics. It's not not that they are super bad. They're just very they feel very cluttery, very saturated noise all over the place. I think this is zero. Yeah, unfortunately. Unfortunately, I'm right. Galactic Protection Squad episode 1. It's a VR game. That is an important hint cuz surprisingly the baseline for VR games seems to be a lot higher. It's two developers. 2020. The capsule art is a bit crap. So, there's a very big red flag here, and that is laggy trailer footage. Games with laggy trailer footage, in my experience, always do really poorly. This is I'm locking in the five. Mhm. Zodiac Glanding. For some reason, I don't feel like I have to look at it too much more. I think this is probably one, but just to be sure, let's have a quick look at the trailer. It looks boring. It's one. It is correct. Next one. Maru Expedition. Can we can fly this one? Let's check out the trailer. It does have a publisher, so it's not zero. It can't have zero reviews. Otherwise, that would be so embarrassing for the publisher. Wait, does this one actually have zero despite having a publisher? It's free to play. It does definitely not have zero. It does have 140. Indeed, it does. Indeed, it does. Evil awaits version 1.3 update. New game plus. So, the fact that it got updates means that it didn't do super poorly. Came out in 2024. It's a cinematic action horror game for 15 bucks. It has cool monsters. The trailer starts with action immediately. You wouldn't believe how rare this is. Like for 90% of the games we just had a look at, the trailer does not start with action. It starts with some BS and I have to skip ahead here. I don't have to skip ahead. That's that's a win. >> Combat looks satisfying. It has voice acting. I think this has 700 700 33. Oops. Oops. Oops. Oops. I think it's the price. I think this would have done much better with a lower price. I think I could have guessed this one correctly. It would have been possible to guess this one. Monstercon. No, don't mention the existential dread. It's a funky art style. It's I think it's appealing, but what it's what is it about? It's a visual novel. LGBTQ+ dating sim. >> Nice catchy music. But what is it? Can you find love at the nerdiest convention ever? Monstercon goes back to the multiplayer drafting zim formula. I think um I think this game has a lot of good things going for it. The thing that is a bit problematic is that it's difficult to see what it is exactly. find it difficult to see what it is exactly at first glance. And it's 15 bucks. That's quite expensive. So, I'm I could be completely wrong about this one, but I'll give it 50. It has 1,500. Let's see if there's some clues I overlooked that could have made me guess one correctly. And you can see that spotting these positive outliers is extremely difficult cuz your brain gets so trained on just guessing low cuz most games are low. So that when you see a positive outlier, it's very very hard. Yeah, I mean it's very solid art. It's extremely solid art and the trailer is wellmade. It starts with action. it. Ah, yeah, it does. It does have like a cinematic animation opening. That is typically something that points to having more than 100 reviews. Yeah, maybe maybe 50 is just a bit was just a bit low for this one, I guess. Yeah, Hyperbody does have a publisher. It's VR and it's free. It looks not like it has a lot of reviews. I'm going to give it 10. Yeah. Yep. Yep. Yep. Yep. Yep. Okay. This one look once again looks solid. Solid art style. Constant pixel size. Colors that don't immediately hurt your eyes. Let's check out the trailer. How juicy is it? Unfortunately, the trailer did not convince me this is that people are going to buy this for 9 bucks in 2024. I It's one, isn't it? It is. It is. It is a place far away. These are very difficult cuz I don't play these kind of games. So, the ones that I don't play as often, I'm more often wrong about. This came out in 2025, though. I don't feel like this looks just right for a 25 game. Maybe the nostalgia factor, but it's 10 bucks also. H. Let's see the trailer. Does it start with something interesting? Not really. It's one. Unfortunately, I'm right. Gun Quest. This one is for In the Other Waters. This looks like it could be a positive outlier. It has a publisher. It won some kind of indie game award. Like, we can't get rid of that. If it's in the trailer, then it's in the trailer. Okay. So, this is obviously this makes me believe it did quite quite a quite a couple of numbers, right? if it got endorsed by like awards and It got covered by Rock Paper Shotgun. Has a really good art style. It's really wellm made. Sound design is good. It does have really good audio. Okay. What it's What is it about? Play as an artificial intelligence guiding a standard through a beautiful mysterious alien ocean. A nonviolent sci-fi story. Enter a world of wonder. Fear and vulnerability. Actually, I think this one goes on my wish list. This looks interesting. I like exploration games. Is it already out? It came out in 2020 for 15. That's a bit bit expensive but also like a confident price. Um I I will say that I spotted positive outlier here and armor lock in 1,900 and that is indeed correct. Wow. Hey. Wow. We got a positive outlier, right? I feel like these if you guess the positive outliers right that should be worth more points cuz anyone can get these. You're right. This is probably 11. Especially for 10 bucks. Sorry, this is not this is not going to work. Goblin defense steel and wood. It came out in 2013. So for 2013 graphics, this it's not bad. It's three bucks. Let's see if it's juicy. How juicy are you? Oh, you don't have sound. Oh, you don't have a smooth trailer. Oh. Oh, what did I tell you about trailers that don't at least run at 30 fps? Extremely extremely red flag. Unfortunately, it sold 60. I guess three. Fair enough. I mean graphics graphics are good. Night solitire could be a mobile port. It does like the aspect ratio makes me think it's a mobile port. It's five bucks. This is a freaking mobile port. I don't think it's going to work. I think it's 18. It is. Yeah. So, you kind of get the idea. Unfortunately, I got to go. I just wanted to get in a quick round and show you this. I will release the Chrome plug-in in the hopefully near future after I've worked on it a little bit more. I have some cool ideas of what I want to do with it and there will probably be more episodes of this. Let me know if you like this format, if we should do more. I think it's extremely fun to play at least. Hopefully, it's fun to watch and I think it's extremely educational. Like even though it's very painful to see how poorly a lot of these games do, I think it's extremely extremely extremely educational for game developers. Um, I find it super interesting. Let me know what you think in the comments and I will see you in the next one.