As you can see, we're here to play another round of review guessa. I made it much more difficult. I updated it. And most importantly, the reason why I'm making another review guesser video so quickly is because I released it. I released it on GitHub. It's also like kind of open sourc. So, if you want to modify it, turn it into your own thing, please go ahead. For all of you who are asking, are you going to add this? Are you gonna add that? Just do it yourself. To my fellow gamedev YouTubers and so on, you don't just have the permission to try this. you have like this is like an invitation, an open invitation to try this. Please make content about this. I think it'd be fun to see more people try out this uh Steam review guesser game. I think it's a lot of fun and I think it's very insightful. But for this video specifically, I just want to play a couple more rounds with the new game mode because as you can see here, we have two buttons at the top here. Now we have next draw, which is the same as before. It brings us to a completely random page on Steam. And we have next balanced, which makes it so that all of these buttons here will be true about about the same amount of time. So, this game mode, it turns out, is a lot more difficult. It's a lot a lot more difficult because usually you get to something like this and then you can just click whatever is the lowest one and you'll probably be correct. However, with the new game mode, next balanced, it'll be a lot more difficult. It's a lot more difficult. This, for example, brought me to your Hero Forever. This, funnily enough, is one I played recently with a friend. So, that's funny. But you can see that it's much more likely to pick higher quality games. So, we're going to play on this new mode for a bit now. It's in my library. I know. I know. So, but I guess I don't entirely know how many reviews it has, but you can see it's very wellmade. They have like multiple installments in this series. I'm going to guess this is probably 14K reviews, and that is correct. I got my first one correct. You get the idea. Let's Let's guess a couple more. So, we got to a random horror game. Once again, this looks well made, but don't don't make the mistake of thinking it's always going to be a high number. Now, it could it could be the 20. We have no clue. It's like everything's about equally as likely here. Let's check out the trailer. It's >> pretty well made since doesn't seem to be available in it is available in English, but the full audio is only available in Chinese. H these kind of games, they're obviously very difficult for me to guess. Uh very outside of the bubble of things I usually play. As you can see, the publishers also hidden now. A bunch of other things that used to be here are hidden. Uh, I can also safely scroll down now because this is now also hidden. So, let's see. Let's see. Let's see. The capsule is a bit mid. So, what I've started to notice, there are a couple of very important things you should always pay attention to. One is the release date. Like some of you suggested removing the release date. I think that's uh that's [ __ ] Yeah, you don't have a chance of guessing correctly without the release date. And you also don't really have a chance of guessing correctly without the price because the price has such a big impact on how many copies it sells. Like if a game is 50 bucks, the amount of reviews will be a lot lower than for something that's like €1 or something like that. So price and release date is something you should always look at. Then you should also look at how much content there is. Is it a very contentrich game? Does it have a cool fantasy? That's something I look at. And the third one I think I need to look at is the level of polish here. Everything, all three seem to be high. Good amount of content, good amount of polish, cool fantasy, people like horror games, and then a couple of I guess mistakes in quotation marks on the Steam page here, but they're they're not that bad. Like the capsule could be better, but also this is originally not a English game, so maybe just the the English capsule. Maybe it's just worse than the original one. Things like that, you know. So, I think this could be quite high. But it's mostly aimed at Chinese markets. So, I'm thinking thinking 13,000. It's the 2,000. That's That was the other one I was wondering about, but I I gave it a bit more. Checked all of the boxes that I was looking for, but that's close enough. That's I guess I'm quite happy with. Let's move on to the next one. It is a platformer. Interesting. It is a very well-made platformer. So, this is like not like the zero review platformers [music] we've seen in the last episode. This this this does not have zero reviews. If this has zero reviews, I'll going to eat I'm going to eat a broomstick or something. Even though we do have zero as an option here. I also fixed one one more thing I changed is I made these number suggestions a lot better because some of you pointed out that previously it was possible to just um always guess the zero if there's a zero. Now there's just sometimes randomly a zero mixed into the choices to throw you off. And also the numbers are a lot closer together. So we don't have an option of like 600,000 here or something like that. So we have more realistic numbers that are a bit closer together. So that also makes it a bit more difficult. Yeah. What do we make of this? What What do we make of this? It has co-op. It's a rogue like. So once again, what what are the boxes? It came out in 2023. It's 20 bucks. That's expensive. It does have an update. So polish level is very good. Very high level of polish. What What's the amount of content? Good amount of content is I think what the screenshots here tell me. Features multiple characters with fully distinct play style. So that is a lot of content. Fresh set of levels, rog like cell progression, level editor, local and online multiplayer. That's a lot of big features. It does have Steam achievements. It's available in 11 languages. It does have a soundtrack and uh the DLC. I I'm think I should not hover over these. This might show some information I'm not supposed to see. Now, we can once again start arguing about what should I hide here. But I've already hidden so so much from the Steam page. Like I've I've already hidden like the Metacritic review. I have already hidden the the announcements. Like so so much is already hidden. Um I guess we could hide more. I I guess I guess so. But this I think this is quite a fun way to play the way it is now. So I have my own benchmark to compare it to because I also made a platformer game. It's like my platformer game is called Will You Snail and my platformer game is sitting at around 2,000 reviews. So the question I have here is do I think this sold better than will you snail about as well as William Snail or worse than William Snail? It came out after William Snail. It's a very difficult question. Let's check out more trailer. Oh animated trailer. I mean full online co-op. But William Snail does not have that. I mean, if logic holds true, then this should have sold a bit better than Will you Snail, and that means we would land at 11,000. Oh, okay. It has sold about as well as Will You Snail. That is interesting. Did not expect that, but it came out a bit later, so fair enough. Obsidio, it's a horror game. One to four player online co-op psychological horror. I don't know this one. It's early access. Hasn't been updated for 14 months, 10 bucks. But like even this, the fact that it hasn't been updated for so and so long. This is a heavy clue. But it it has all also already led me into a trap a couple of times because sometimes I saw this and was like, "Oh, this doesn't have any reviews." And then it still had like over 10,000 reviews. So this doesn't necessarily mean too too much. like some developers just never bother to go out of early access. Okay, online co-op. So, once again, we're checking the key data. It's 2021. It's 10 bucks. How polished is it? And how much content does it have? >> You're all set up. >> Polish is about mid >> to leave. >> Not bad, but not great. >> Collect evidence on the entities. The amount of content is more on the low side because otherwise the trailer wouldn't just show like two rooms. There's an outside area. My assumption is that it's all all in one house and it has like a little garden outside area. That's what it looks like. Different locations. Okay. We explore different locations experiencing paranormal events in an attempt to figure out what ghost they're dealing with. Okay. So it's like fasmophobia rem like knockoff kind of thing. So you need to differentiate the ghost. How many you have 15 different ghosts? How many locations do you have? Talk to the ghost with your real voice through the microphone and they will completely understand almost everything you say along with deciding exactly how they want to reply to that. Seriously. So it has some built-in AI stuff. How's How's that not a headline feature in the short description and in the trailer? That's weird. The cap the capsule is a bit mid. I think this is going to be mid-range. From all I can see, this is going to be mid-ranged kind of game. The question is, what does mid-ranged exactly mean in this scenario? Maybe 3,000 or 700. I think because there's already a better version of this game out there, I'll be a bit more pessimistic. Could be 700. Maybe it's even 150. Oh, it's 700. Oh my god, I'm a genius. I'm a genius. I'm a genius. It feels very satisfying to get these right. Balanced mode is so much more difficult. I have to take way more time thinking about each guess, but that also makes it all the more satisfying when you get it right. Tiny. I don't know this game either. It's 2022. It has an animated trailer. Good capsule art. It's 24 bucks. It's a 3D platformer. Cute. Cartoony. 3D platformer. Cute and cartoony are not necessarily the bestselling texts on Steam, but it can work. >> [music] >> So, this is this is a heavy clue. There's no way I can remove this from like this little guessing game. The only way I could get rid of this um would be to not watch the trailers or to hide the trailers, but I I don't think that's that's a good idea. I think the trailers are very important for for guessing the correct review count. And for most games that have something like this, I would not have guessed low anyway. Like this is already not a game I would have guessed low on. So this the question here is not is it successful. The question is just how successful is it. [music] By the way, I I think I got to say this again. If there's any muted audio in this video, that's just because I got copyright strike. I like some games use licensed music in their trailers and stuff. Let's hope that doesn't happen though. What do we have here? So, level of polish is very high. amount of content does also look high. We have four completely different screenshots in the beginning here. This and this could be the same location. I guess it looks like there's a lot of content and there's some bundles. There's some there's a DLC. Even obviously knowing that there's DLC is is a heavy hint. Once again, don't hover over these. I'm afraid they might show a DLC review count or something. challenge update an outfit. So, you catch these little creatures and they follow you around. Or what exactly is the What do 3D artists even do? Oh, you can go into the guitar. That's cool. 2022 10 bucks. I mean 3D platformers. I think it's Did this sell better than Thronefall or did this sell worse than Thronefall? Cuz it's rough. No, it's not the same price range. It's twice as expensive. H I think this sold about as well as or I think this did as much revenue roughly as Thronefalls. I think the 12K would maybe be a reasonable guess. It's the 2K. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I mean 3D platformer. Okay. Difficult. Difficult. Fair enough. Mature content. I I will um I will skip this if it's not YouTube friendly. Ah, this looks okay. This looks okay so far. Multiplayer party game with cute enemy girls. It's free to play. I'm going quickly sneak into the trailer here. This is not the type of game I play typically, so these are hard for me to guess. I don't think it's super high. It's more on the low side. I often get tricked into thinking these more not safe for work games have higher review counts, but even big boobies don't necessarily make your game sell better. This what I found so far. So, they're doing some collab here. It's free to play also. 700 or 150. Oh, don't go to that screenshot. I have to always click back so it doesn't go to that one. Um 150. Oh, I see. I was completely wrong about this one. Completely wrong. And I'm happy to admit it, right? I'm not editing out my failures here. Even if I have some very embarrassing guessing failures, that's uh that's part of the authentic journey here that you also get to see my incorrect guesses. I'll I'll leave them all in. No worries. No worries. So, what do we have here? When did this come out? 2005. Yeah, I guess this is a very 2005ish look. So, kind of old school. Six bucks. Science fiction firstperson shooter content looks a bit sy. Not sure about the amount of content, but let's see the polish level. [music] [music] The problem also is I'm not sure I don't think this shows the release date doesn't show when it released on Steam. It shows when it initially released. That makes it a bit more difficult to guess the review count. Obviously, I don't think it's been on Steam since 2005. That I don't think that's the case. When did it come to Steam? That's a good question. I don't know that. I think this probably sold well at the time or Okay. I think there's still some retro charm to it even now. I think I'd be happy giving it like 500 or 118 I guess was the other thing I was thinking about but I say wrong is wrong is wrong. I was wrong the way. Oh, this looks awesome. But it's once again a platformer. Journey to another planet and discover its secrets in order to bring your loved one back to life. Experience an adventure inspired by old school classics like Another World. Oh, cool monster. Okay. Mhm. It's polished. It is polished. It's very polished except for sound effects. Is it a Metroid Vania or what is it? puzzle platformer but with action like a mixed genre type of game. Story rich, difficult. It is a puzzle game. Mindbending puzzles. Unique alien planet to explore. Reach for star. I mean, it's a puzzle game, but I clearly it's also execution based, right? We can see some execution challenges here. You got to time your jumps and stuff. Okay. And then we have like some mirror puzzles and stuff like that. The art is really nice. Capsule art is also good. And this came out in 2016. But it's a puzzle game. That's the thing that makes it difficult. Did it? How expensive? 15. Did this better or worse than Will Snail? The fact that it's been out for long. It could be 4,000 or it could be 800. Which one is it? It's 800. It's a puzzle game. Yeah. Yeah. Who is the greatest? Who is the greatest? I got one right finally. One thing I have to say, keep in mind, I just started playing this. I just started practicing this new game mode. I haven't practiced this at all. I think I can get a lot better at this if I practice it more. And I will practice it more. So, please don't roast me in the comments if my guesses aren't that great. I promise I'll practice more and then I'll come back and redeem myself. But we'll do it truthfully. We We're not going to do any edited crap here. No, no, no. I I want to seriously want to get good at this. 2017 15 bucks. Let's check out polish. Oh, it looks juicy. It looks very juicy. >> This infernal place >> from the creators of doesn't mean anything at all. So many games do that. Even if they don't have any games where it makes sense to say that it's a Metroid Vania >> keep coming close to death, but this world is keeping me alive. >> Metroid Vania in 2017, I think is good time to release a Metroid Vania. I recommend if you want to release a Metroid Vania, go back to 2017, release it there. It's probably a good idea. very competently made, lots of variety. Metroid Vania also means probably good amount of content, worlds to explore, abilities to unlock. That's what Metroid Vania means, right? Key features, beautiful handrun, chaotic, epic boss fights. So, multiple boss fights, optional co-op for up to four players, hundreds of upgrades, a mix of handcrafted and procedure level, multiple multiple endings, and 15 hours of game play. So for a mitrid vania that's um maybe you could argue that's a little bit on the shorter side but it's completely okay. I would also say completely okay. Will you snail is like 2 hours. So h >> for this one I would guess that it sold more copies than will snail. So I would say either 3,000 or 19,000. H it's not the cheapest game necessarily. It's 20 bucks. Ah, maybe it's the Could be 800. When it's 800, I'll say, "Yeah, yeah, yeah, because it was expensive." Or it could be the 4,000. I'll pick I click the 4,000 and I am correct. Oh my god. Who is the greatest? Who is the greatest? Who is the greatest? Impossible Soccer. Uhhuh. He he early access€ 10 multiple languages 2020. How much polish? >> Yes, I'm ready. I am ready. Show the game play. Uh not that much polish actually. Not that much polish like completely static camera. The only polished satisfying thing about this is when you hit a goal. That looks cool. The capsule art is very good. The capsule art is very good. But I've been tricked by capsule art. So the capsule art is not the only thing you thing you should look at at all. Like three screenshots are almost like the exact same stadium. They're like two different colors for the stadiums. And there's not that much polish. So this I think this is pretty low. This I think is pretty low. Local multiplayer. Does this have online multiplayer? It does not have online multiplayer. It is completely local. This is low. This is very very low. This is um it's not four kind of low, is it? I think it's like 50 kind of low. It is four. See, you've got tricked by the the capsule again. I I for thought like surely this capsule is going to make someone buy this. But then again, people aren't stupid, right? Before they buy something, they they do go through the same thought process. They look at the screenshots and they're like, "Okay, this does not seem to be worth 10 bucks." Yeah, also should have considered the price here. Next one. But that was close enough. I'm happy with that one. World of Subways one. The Path. The Path. It's a subway simulation game from 2009 for 15 bucks. [sighs] Ah, he's really throwing the difficult stuff at me. I told you this mode is so much more difficult. So, how deep is the simulation exactly? What can you do? It looks like a mostly realistic subway simulator. It looks good. Very good amount of content. from what it looks like. Good simulation for the time. The question, the question that I have is once again, when did this come to Steam? Did this come to Steam in 2009? I don't think so. So then the question is, how much retro appeal does this have? Do people still buy this after the fact? Like this looks like something was like super successful on like the PlayStation or something like that. [snorts] How successful was it on Steam, though? Hm. I wonder I wonder I wonder. 15 feels a bit expensive. I'm thinking 100 to 500. That's the range I'm thinking about because it's a simulator. Simulators are popular. It looks well made. I'm clicking the 500 and I will probably regret it. Yeah, it's the 100. But, you know, my intuition was about right there. So, that's that's okay. That's okay. Humor Jack's ring. This is Is this a mobile part? This is a freaking This is a mobile part. What the hell are we looking at? What are we looking at? [music] >> Hey, we ended up in in the in that part of Steam. Okay. Okay. It's a clearly a narratively driven game. It's available in two languages. >> [laughter] >> The interface, the interface and the subtitles are only available in English, but the audio is only available in Hungarian. The interface is not available in Hungarian. Um, 51. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Challenge dream cat. This not this is not going to be very high. It's but it's very cheap. It's €1. Now here the thing I'm looking at is more like the meme potential. How streamable is it? Cuz if it has meme meme potential and is streamable, then this could still do well. But doesn't entirely feel like it. It's 2021. Would you buy this for €1 in 2021? Nah, nah. Nah, I don't I don't see it. Characteristic cute cat various traps and terrain save points. Larger and more beautiful map than expected. Larger and more beautiful map than expected. That's awesome, dude. Um h as the lowest one is 53. I think that sounds about right. Yeah. Yes, it is. Mafia 2. Okay. This is I know that name. I haven't played it, but at least it rings a bell. So this is something the higher range. So already just from knowing the name, I'm thinking it's 122 or 24 or at least four depending on the price. It's 30 bucks. Definitive Edition H. So, lots of content, story based shooter kind of game, action game, right? FSK18, crime, nudity, all of the good stuff. Can't even show you all of that, but we get the idea. This has a lot of reviews. This one has a lot of reviews. I will give it the max count of 122. It is 24. Interesting. cuz um like my game Thronefall also has like about 20,000 reviews. What the hell, man? Why does it have as many reviews as Thronefall? That doesn't make any freaking sense. Uh but that's where you see that price really is so so important. 30 BARinos in 2020. So maybe it came to Steam later. Doesn't fully look like a 2020 kind of game. Maybe it is. I'm not sure. So really a high price really really puts a limit on the review count you can get. I guess I've I've seen that over and over again now where where I think like oh clearly this has like a 100,000 reviews but then I forget to see that it's like 60 bucks and of if it's 60 bucks you're not going to get to 100k that easily. My god. So the lower ones are easier to guess than the higher ones. Like if you see one that's low typically relatively easy to detect. If you have one that's high where it's like medium range success or higher success, then it's often difficult to say how successful exactly. This one I can tell is is some kind of low. So 8 or 58. It doesn't even have a trailer. A man travels in a subway car alone. Where is he going? Will he or any of his fellow passengers arrive at their destination? Are there are they drawn together by pure coincidence or something more? This came out in 2020 and is free to play. The freeto play throws me off. If if it was hasn't been hadn't been for the freeto play, I would have said eight. The freeto play might upgrade it to 50. But in this specific case, I don't even think that it does. So, I'm going to go with the eight anyway. It the freeto play does upgrade it to 50. Okay. Okay. Noted. I I'm learning as I'm playing. I'm getting better at this by the minute. Fish Idol 2 underwater mystery. This you can't tell me this is not a mobile port. Is this looks looks so mobiley. This does not look This does look mobiley but someone at least they scaled the UI correctly. So this used to be a mobile game and when they ported it they at the very least were smart enough to change the size of the UI. But we can still see we can still see your gems, bro. We can see your gems. Don't hide them. We know they're there. 2024 as well. Man, if this has any meaningful amount of reviews, I'm going to be very, very pissed. It's free to play. Freaking free to play. It's 50. [ __ ] Son of a I mean, it's a dopamine kind of game. It's the second part of the series. 1,300 though. I would have never guessed that. This is just one of the games where I'm like, how how would I how could I have known? like it it has very vibrant colors and it is very dopamine optimized like the gameplay we can see here is like very clickeresque I guess it is polished I guess so it doesn't look polished at first glance but like the the dopamine the dopamine receptors are responding they are responding interesting interesting yeah we're learning together we're learning together. Fade. I I got to stop myself. Like I Let's do a couple more games. Then I really should take a break again. >> In the land of Balta, a long shadow has been cast. Tearing the residents from their homes. Awaken as the chosen. >> It's a soul like from 2020. >> Whisper. I think souls likes were already quite competitive at that time. But you can't argue with the fact that the polish is okay. It's it's good. >> Celeste solemn emulate the greatest nail before it's too late or all things >> amount of content like the screenshots are a bit sy. There's like green gray one indoor then the three green grays here. There are of course like there's the souls like thing of upgrading your stats and so on. There there's a boss fight. It's an early access. It's still in early access. It hasn't been updated for 13 months. It's only available in English. Do we have a feature list? Like the feature list surprisingly have turned out to be useful. Becca's now on Kickstarter. H have you made it doesn't look like it. So what I'm thinking is 1.5k or 300. Let's be generous. Oh my lord, it's 63. So the the rationalizing after the fact, obviously, like I'm not trying to make it sound like it it would have been an easy guess. This was not an easy guess. The rationalizing I do after the fact is to hopefully teach myself to spot this more easily like these kind of things more easily next time. And what I'm thinking here is there there are just better options available at in 2020. there are better options available in 2020. And also freak me for not looking at the price. I forgot to look at the price. It's 25 euro, especially for that price. There are just way better options available. I should have looked at the price. That would have been a great great clue. And I should have thought about what else was on the market at in like 2020. I'll do better next time. Huge chess doesn't The screenshots don't read very well. Um this is low. This is very low. Not not not that much polish, not that much content. 2021. This has one one. This has one review. Or has it? It has one. Yeah. Yeah, it has one. It does have one. I'm more trained on the on the lower ones. Final Fantasy 9. I have not played fin the Final Fantasy games, but obviously this is going not going to be a low number, right? Final Fantasy very popular franchise 2016 does have soundtrack, does got updates. Uh this is this just going to be a difficult guess. [music] >> Does have a render trailer. I guess we'll just try to judge it by like my normal standards. 20 bucks is more in the higher end. Does look like it has a lot a lot of content because the screenshots are very varied. It doesn't look like it came out in 2016 though. It looks like it came out earlier. So maybe the date it shows here is when it came to Steam. Honestly, I'm not sure. I'm not sure how that works entirely. >> I don't know. [sighs] I don't know. Let's use Thronefall as a reference point again. The test is more expensive than thrown for it's like uh it's like 11,000 or 55,000, right? One of the two. Final Fantasy comes to PC. So some these are sometimes just lower than you expect. That's freaking Final Fantasy though. Learn new abilities by equipping items. Also have mini games, achievements, auto save. Yeah. Yeah, that's standard. couple of different languages. H I will say that this is maybe not as high as we would expect on Steam. Like on Steam, I will give this 11K. Oh, incredible. Red Out 2 looks like a high quality racing game. High quality trailer. very pol. I mean, this is not the gameplay footage, though, is it? Yeah, it looks it look kind of looks like this. Okay, it looks very good. Very, very good. Very high amount of polish, decent amount of variety, I guess, from what we can see here, like the screenshots have different colors. There's a deluxe edition with sound soundtrack and season pass. And there's like different DLC that altogether cost like 50 bucks. And the game itself is 20 bucks. When did it come out? 2022. Lot of supported languages. Online PVP. Like if I wanted to play a racing game, would I consider buying this? Actually, I think I think I would. Like what other racing options do you have? Are they necessarily better? No. I think this is this looks like it's playing in the top tier of racing games on Steam. Question is just what do I think how many reviews does the top tier of racing driving games have in general? I don't think it's the the high like I don't think it's the best genre on Steam. 20 bucks although expensive I think assuming that this has like similar review count as Thronefall would probably be fair. I think I'm going to go with 25K. It is much much lower. It's 1K. So, the racing genre is not as popular as I thought. And also like all this trickery here with their season pass and so on. It's just made me think that there must be a reason why they're doing this. But apparently apparently the squeeze is still worth it at 1,000 reviews. So this freaking game, you're telling me this freaking game has less reviews than Will You Snail? How is that possible? It's a racing game, but Will Snail is a platformer game. Those are both B both of them are not the best genre, I guess. Yikes. Yikes. Okay. Racing. Don't make a racing game. Don't make a racing game. Got it. Got it. Call of Duty. Black Ops 3. I haven't played that one, but it must must be quite high. But this is one of the ones I might have guessed this one before. This is 60 freaking bucks. This is super expensive. So, not not everybody can afford this. That's why I don't see the 100,000 reviews. That's why I'm going to go with the 29. It Holy Jesus mother. They made a lot of money. Oh my god. They made a lot of money with this one. Icarus PvE survival. Does it have online co-op? Yes, it's online co-op. Survival 2021. Decent, decent quality, everything. The only thing I would say is that in 2021, there are already a lot of games like this. What what what's new about this? What does this bring to the table? >> Test. >> I know. I'm on to them. [clears throat] >> Okay, that looks that looks badass. I'm not going to lie. That syndrome looks very badass. That interior also looks nice. Nice. The screenshots are very high quality. More high quality than the trailer. Just a lot of depth. Skill tree means depth. Not not always what it mean what like it's not always the truth that it actually has a lot of depth, but that's what a screenshot of a skill tree communicates is that look we there's some depth. There's like a progression system and so on. And then for example, there's like crafting tree or whatever this is. We got another maybe more gameplayish trailer here. Aftermath of terraforming gone wrong. Cool setting also. This is difficult. This is difficult. There there are other options for this. You can pet sponges, but as we know now that like having DLC doesn't necessarily mean crap. Doesn't really mean anything. A lot of supported languages. It's €30. 3030. That seems expensive for for a game like this in 2021. Which one is it? I think it's,600. It's 40,000. Interesting. So just because this is the it's like the most popular genre, I guess people want more of it. So just making more of it. You don't necessarily have to bring anything super new to the table. You just have to make a competent version of it. And that still seems to work in 2021. Very interesting. Very interesting. See, we're all we're all learning together. So it's still you can still make like a open world survival craft game. And if you do it well, if you do it well, people will still play it. Even though there are lot of games like this already. That's interesting. But we have to finish strong. Try to get one or two more right at least so that I don't feel so bad about myself. But as mentioned, we're still practicing. I'll come back to this and I'll I'll get better and better at this over time, I'm sure. Image to pixel pixel art generator. Oh, this is not even a game. Oh, that's we're skipping it in that case. Deluvian Ultra single player firsterson shooter. Very cool art style. How much polish? How much juice? >> Cool retro aesthetic. How varied are the levels in the trailer? They didn't feel so varied, but they did a better job picking screenshots here. These two are sames kind of sym of course this looks like some kind of weapon upgrade system or something right you have mele combat you have ranged combat what what do you have in the bar down here so intentional retrol lock chapter one 10 bucks very difficult to guess this one so it's 2023 we already have things like doom and so on but yeah I I would like to give this maybe thinking if it's 100 or if it's 500 that's roughly the range I'm thinking about because it has good capsu art. And because I like being optimistic, I Let's just click the 500. Screw me for being optimistic. Buck snacks. Um, catch mysterious living snacks and feed them to your friends in this unusual island adventure. >> Get to it then. >> This was made with a lot of love. To whoever made this, I like it. I like it. Good job. Did the cell well. It's a 3D platformer most likely, right? Cute exploration. It doesn't even have the 3D platformer tag. Maybe because you don't do much platforming. >> Looks really cute, but like who's this for? Who would buy this? I'm like not the target audience for this. It's 20 bucks. It's VR as well. Standard NVR mode. Hyay. I'm thinking 300. 7,000. Ay. Okay. One more. One more. But you can see the this game mode is a lot a lot more difficult. It's a lot more hit and miss. I already gave it to Chris Sukowski and he told me even in this mode he has like a 60% hit rate so far. So maybe he's already a bit more skilled at this than I am. He's maybe looked at more store pages. I'm sure I'm sure I can catch up to 60% for sure. I think I can do better than that actually, but it will require some practice. Britannia Tortal Total War Saga. So this is a shall rule >> total war kind of game. I know the Total War games, of course. I just haven't played this one. Don't I don't think I've played any Total War games. >> Their settlement and attacked my neighbor. So, this leaves me with a choice. I could attack the army or I >> grand grand strategy turnbased grand strategy. We do also get the battles, right? We have like the over map and we do have more zoomed in battles as well. It's like a lot of content. lot of content obviously probably decent polish 2018 I wish we could see some actual gameplay in the trailer here like it's a lot of cinematic shots and so on doesn't really tell me that much h 40o 2018 thrown has 20,000 so if it has 11,000 reviews then then it made about the same amount of revenue as thrown did easily also be the 60,000 000 though. It's either 11,000 or 60,000, but the price point kind of makes me think it's more like the 11,000. Yeah. Yeah, I got another one, right? And I think that's a good time to call it quits. So, hope you have fun messing with it. Hope you have funy around with this. I like it's a bit like I'm handing it to you now. Like, here's the source code. I vibe coded most of it anyway, right? I was like, chat, make this plugin for me. I don't even know how to write JavaScript. I just uh used my basic coding knowledge to to infuse a little bit of logic into it and the rest was like vibe coded for the most part. Uh yeah, have have a go at it. Do with it whatever you want. Um go wild. Just