So, we made this basic version, threw together a Steam page, and that went great because we had like um a Twitter post that was kind of viral, and I think we had like 9,000 wish lists in the first week, and we're all like, "What the happening?" >> This is a conversation with Katran Ratka, co-founder and programmer at Spail Garden Games. They make wholesome, cozy games such as Sticky Business or Ritual of Raven. >> I got scammed into becoming a programmer, and we kind of ran out of money. We're like, hm, I don't know what should we do. Let's just make a game, I guess, because there's nothing else we can do. What we also did was make a Tik Tok video about it every day. >> This is very much reaching outside of my typical bubble of games. So, there were a lot of interesting nuggets in this for me. I hope you enjoyed. What do you think? Why do people play cozy games? >> It feels kind of new, only became very popular in like the last, I don't know, maybe 5 years or so. >> But even before, there were like cozy games, right? there was like Animal Crossing and and farming games, but like cozy games being super super popular is is only like a relatively new thing that I think like got a big boost with the pandemic as well. >> Um, and and there were lots of people who didn't really play games before. Like I have lots of friends, especially like uh women that never played games before, but during the pandemic started playing video games. And then I think cozy games is a a genre that appeals to to players that that are not very like into hardcore gaming because it's a lot easier to get into most of the time. Um, so not specifically only women, but like generally people who who are not like hardcore gamers or what probably wouldn't call themsel gamers. So, I think some of the reasons are definitely like it's an escape from reality to be like in a place like I don't want to think about like all of these crap things going on. So, I I just going to play a game and not think about it. >> Um, so I think that's that's a big appeal, right? There's not really like competition or like bad things happening in most cozy games, but it's more like chill and you can actually like relax. >> Interesting. Also, what you said with the pandemic, I haven't thought about that. That makes a lot of sense. So, so you think that genre kind of boomed on Steam at least, right, during during that time? That's interesting. >> Yeah. And then, and then the big curator with wholesome games also started around that time or started being more popular and that that was a thing that then gained some traction on social media and like content creators. >> Mhm. I I recently bought some data mind uh like data from Steam that compares like all of the texts how well different texts on Steam are doing. And like the the top performing texts are are things like war, blood, combat, and then somewhere somewhere at the very bottom we got like things like cartoony, linear, and so on. So I think it's fair to say that games are are probably quite a small niche on Steam. Did you feel that way or you noticed that or? >> So now making cozy games, I feel like it's not small at all because there's like so much more competition I think than there was like a few years ago. Um I think Wholesome Games the the Wholesome Snack um had like for like December had like a thousand people who wanted to be in the showcase and that is like so crazy to me that there's so many so many cozy games starting to like Yeah. Starting to be developed. Yeah, it I mean it probably is small, but like for me and I I don't really play a lot of like I don't know games that would have the tag war or violet or anything. That's not my type of game. So I feel like oh there's not so much >> Yeah. >> so many games like that. But >> well, yeah, probably there is. But like definitely it's it's it's more now than it was a few years ago. Do you think the the the cozy games is still on are still on the rise? Are there more new players coming in? Because you said a lot of new players came in during the pandemic, right? Do you think that trend still going to keep going? Is it like and that new audience is like bringing in new people now or like what's your gut feeling about this? Like obviously we don't know for sure, but like what what do you see in your bubble? >> Good question. If there are still like so many more people, I don't really know. I've I've seen like in the last few months I think that like some people are complaining that there's not now a lot of I don't know kind of sloppy games and also like the big corporations trying to like get into that niche as well right um so there's many more games and like a lot more for players to choose from but yeah I don't know if there's so many more people playing these types of games >> we can that's true we can only we can only guess then I guess what do you think what what makes for a good cozy game Like what do you said people mostly play these like for escapism and for like um basically for forgetting your worries a bit. What what makes for a game that's suitable for that in your opinion? >> I think that's very hard to answer because there's so many different kinds of cozy games. It it somehow is like the genre cozy game, but there's so many more like in there, right? there's like farming games and like simulation games and more like life sim games and like all sorts of different genres under the cozy umbrella that I think you can't really say oh to be like a good cozy game it has to be like this because also people enjoy different things right there's also more that more games that are more like >> um about like puzzle games or some that are more like story based so I don't know if you can say oh there's this one thing or like yeah if there's one thing that all cozy games have in common. But I mean there must be a thing because otherwise there wouldn't be an umbrella about it, right? So >> I think what they have in common is a certain type of wholesomeness, right? What but what what is wholesomeness? >> We have to define it. >> Yeah. >> I I think part of it is that often there is no real pressure or like no pun at least no big punishment if you get something wrong. Um, I think that might be a big part, but also there will probably be exceptions to that. >> More friendly tone maybe in the art and so on. >> Yeah. Like storytelling is more like about about stuff that doesn't have like super high stakes, I would say. >> Mhm. It's not about the end of the world usually. It's like >> Yeah. >> small things like run a bookshop, run a sticker shop, >> run a baker. >> And then there's a Yeah. Yeah. And then there's a certain aesthetic, right, that is kind of like cutesy, colorful often. >> Are cozy games u more targeted towards women or is that a cliche, do you think? >> I think often they are. So, it's definitely a target group that we keep in mind when when we make games. >> Got it. >> Yeah. Because I mean that's just the way it is like the target group for cozy games. Lots of women play these games. So, >> it is what it is. Um, for sticky business, did you start development during the pand that was before the pandemic, right? Or when was sticky business? >> No, sticky business came out in 2023 and we worked on it for only 5 months before it was released. >> Oh, wow. I didn't realize this was still such a recent release. That's crazy. >> Yeah. Yeah, it's not that long ago. It was so we started working on that um while we were waiting for a publishing deal for Richard of Raven. >> So we kind of like >> we started working on Ritual of Raven um and made a prototype and and started pitching and then it took forever to find the funding and we kind of ran out of money. We're like I don't know what should we do? Let's just make a game I guess because there's nothing else we can do. Um so that's when we started working on that. >> Wow. That's such a typical thing. You make a little in between project and it ends up being more successful than the main project. >> Yeah. >> Yeah. >> That's that's really funny. I didn't know that. What was like your studio history? How many people were you back then? >> Um, so we started with with four people. We are now five. and we we all used to work together at another indie game studio um before we started and there were some layoffs and then we were kind of like well got nothing to lose right now so we can just try and um we got um funding from the MFD and Ben written back >> so we could start um working on the prototype for Richard Raven. That was the first idea that we had and that we were working on. Um and right then we we made a prototype of that and started pitching. Um and eventually along the way realized that we kind of need another person for community management and social media because I was I was doing programming and social media as well and that was just too much for me to do. Um so we decided to get another person and then um that is the size we stayed and I think we will stay for a long time. It's enough people for the for the types of games that we make. Yeah. >> No ambitions to grow further. >> No, I'm very happy with with the size. >> Like how are the roles divided in your team? Like how many artists, how many programmers? >> Uh we have two programmers. Um me and and one other programmer. um a game designer, an artist, and then the social media manager. Yeah. >> And your artist did pump out all of the art for Ritual of the Raven. That's crazy. >> Yeah. >> Yeah. Wild. That's wild cuz it's Ritual of the Raven for me looks like a very contentrich game with like very quite an expensive and large world to be honest with with lots and lots of content, >> lots of assets to fill probably. >> Yeah. Yeah, definitely. Uh, I think it it's amazing how fast she can do this because it's Yeah, it's often like we're like, "Oh, it would be so cool if we had all of these cool things." And then she's like, "That's a lot." And we're like, "Yeah, so cool." And then two days she's like, "I'm done." Well, not quite, but like it this is what it feels like. >> Yeah. Okay. Okay. See, and also for for sticky business, you you guys were also quite fast. So like five months is is quite quite fast. So, how did that project come to be? You were like, "Okay, let's make a little game. We need maybe need some maybe this is a way to get some funding, right? While we wait for the funding from the publisher." Then did you did you >> still have different ideas or were like, "Nah, that's it. Let's go." >> We had kind of a lead for the the publishing contract, so it it wasn't like we weren't sure if we would get it, but it looked kind of good. We're like, "Okay, well, this might work, but like still we don't know and like we kind of need to do something or otherwise we'll just sit here and do nothing." So, it was just okay, let's do a small project two or 3 weeks just for fun and then we can just maybe release it or maybe not, but like at least we did something and maybe we will like learn something along the way and maybe try out what it would be like to just finish a game and publish it on Steam because that is something that like on our own we've never done it. always just like in a bigger company with a publisher and everything. So, what we did is we we have in our notion board um like all of the ideas that when someone has an idea, we just put it in there and like it's a lot of crap. >> Mostly it's crap, but like a few of them are like, "Oh, well actually that would be kind of fun to do." Um and so when we started working on sticky business, the first day we just like looked at the board and we're like, "Okay, this could be fun. This could be fun." And then we just decided on one of the things because we knew or like we thought it would be just a three-week thing and we're like, "Oh, it doesn't really matter. Let's just pick one and then we'll just do it." Um, and and I also uh what we also did was make a Tik Tok video about it every day. >> So, that was kind of fun because on the first day that we decided, I made a Tik Tok video about, hey, this is the thing we're going to do and the idea that we have and that and that was kind of cool and nice to like get feedback right away. >> Oh, okay. >> Yeah. And then then we actually did the the first the first version that was basically playable in those 3 weeks. The only thing that wasn't in there yet was like the customers and like the the stories, but everything else was basically there in a like Yeah. basic basic form. You could play through it. >> Mhm. I'm I'm I'm kind of very much wondering how do you even get good ideas for cozy games? Of course, when when I think about game ideas, I think about like I often think about mechanics. I think about appealing fantasies and like is is like the fantasy something you think you start with for cozy game ideas is like oh sticker shop would be fun or is it or is it like more more creative or mechanics driven or how do you get these ideas >> for sticky business and also for the game that we are working on now that is still unannounced. Um, both times it was more of a I'm I'm going to look online and try to figure out topics that are kind of popular right now or like things that people are generally interested in or like hobbies >> that people have. Um, and for sticky business, I at that time when we started working on that, I just love to like scroll Tik Tok and see these videos of where people print out stickers, pack them, and because I'm a big sucker for ASMR videos, that was kind of like >> a thing that I really enjoyed watching. Um, and I was like, oh, it would be so fun to have my own sticker shop. Might be something that I could do. And then that is where kind of the idea came from like okay so if I want to do it maybe there are other people too who would enjoy this this fantasy of like having their own sticker shop. Um and then thinking about okay but what would be mechanics that could make this feel rewarding as well >> was it I I think there is one very big brain thing going on in sticky business and that is the fact that the way you design the stickers is kind of also with stickers right so you get this you while designing yourself you also get this feeling of of placing stickers essentially so it's not so so it very very much delivers on like this this promise of sticker both in terms of you get to place your own stickers to make the stickers and you're also selling the stickers. So, it's very smart. Uh was was that planned or was it like a byproduct? >> Thank you. It was well I don't I don't really know if it was I don't think it was like oh there's this like big brain thing going on where I'm thinking about exactly what would feel good but it was more like huh so if you want to make a sticker shop you kind of have to make stickers and like we can't >> or like we didn't want to have people have to draw them themselves or or make it like very complicated. And I think this is this is where why people liked it so much because it's not difficult. Like everyone can can use these little stickers and make something that kind of looks cool. >> Um without like you don't have to be like a designer person or like very good at it, but you just throw it together and then it looks cool. Um and it that was something that we figured out in like the first two or three days that oh this is kind of fun. and we found ourselves just trying to make some stickers with the I don't know 10 elements that we had. We're like >> sending it to each other like oh look what I made. It's a worm with I don't know. >> So >> yeah. So I think this is while we were doing it was more like oh okay this is fun. So we this is something that maybe we need to improve and like work on more and put a focus on because this is like the fun bit. >> All right. So, so you started making it and then you realized that that's like quite fun and leaned into it even more. I see. >> Yeah. Yeah. And then lots of people now um have told us that it like helped them with their own creativity because I think sometimes being like restricted like that, not being able to do everything you want, but like you have these elements, you can only use them, that's it. Um, but it it makes you I don't know, maybe a little bit more relaxed about the process and not thinking like, oh, I need to make some great design, but more like, oh, I'm just going to use this sticker element because I think it looks fun, so there's less pressure. >> Yeah. >> It's a very it's a very low pressure way to to be creative. Yeah. >> Mhm. Yeah. >> I think everybody who's played with stickers in real life also understands the appeals. It's like also why why kids love stickers, right? Cuz it's like so simple. just >> Yeah, but you never used them. >> Like I I only ever collected them and never never used my stickers. >> We certainly use them. But yeah, as an as an adult also, you don't really get to play with stickers that much anymore. So, it's like >> maybe a way to to tap into that. Also, the the nostalgia cuz like most people had stickers when they were younger, right? Where did it go from there? You you say you were like almost done after 3 weeks. What was the rest of what do you use the rest of the time for then? >> So, in these first three weeks, we made um a Tik Tok video every day. >> And it's well, we cheated a bit because I didn't actually make one every day because we posted them a few days later. So, sometimes I made two on the same day about what we did like the two days before. But yeah, um we made like videos about the process and like some were like nobody saw them, but like there were some others that got some traction and people were excited and it was really fun because lots of people had like wanted to like yeah be part and like h had ideas about and were like, "Oh, I I want stickers like this or that." Um and that was really cool. Then at the end of the three weeks we published our steam page or I think after four weeks I think a long time ago. Um but yeah after that time >> we'll just say very fast. >> Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So we so we made this basic version. Then we like threw together a Steam page and and published that. And that was like went great because we had like um a Twitter post that was kind of viral and I think we had like 9,000 wish lists in the first week and we were all like what the  happening. >> And for something that we like were like oh maybe maybe if we're like very lucky we'll get back the money that we put in or like but then it was like oh okay so it seems people are kind of interested in this. So this is kind of cool. Yeah. And then we decided, okay, let's let's put in some more work. Like, yeah, we saw that some people were like actually interested in it. And then we kept working and added like the stories because that was something that wasn't in there in in that first version. And some more like polish because there was some like rough edges. Yeah. And then um I went to GDC and I've met someone from our publisher, Assemble. I wasn't pitching the game. It wasn't like I didn't have a presentation and showed it to people, but it was more like we were talking about it and then it was like, oh, we could work together because then we could make a port and make get some localization and make this a little bit bigger than it currently is because there was no we didn't have any money for something like that. Like there was no way we would have had localization in the game or um or something importing or some more quality assurance. Yeah. So we decided to do that and that was that was kind of cool in that moment and then we made a demo and then basically it was already done and then it was released and then so yeah it it all felt very fast like oh we're going to do this and then this and then it was done. So >> right >> there there are a couple of interesting things here that we can zoom into. The first one is the the Tik Tok videos. I have a couple more questions about that. Did you um do English or German Tik Tok videos? >> English. Yeah, >> English. And but you didn't post them with like a VPN or something. It was like just some one of you just posted them on your phone in Germany. >> Yeah, it was just we just posted it from Germany. Um >> Yeah. >> Yeah. because at that time we had already uh used Tik Tok a bit um and tried out different things and I think the consensus at the time was that it's not working if you just post it with a VPN because you would have to have >> uh an account from a different country. I really don't know what it's like now because we're just like uh it doesn't really matter. We'll just post them and we'll be fine. Um, but yeah, it it didn't seem worth it at the time to do to try something like that. >> Okay. Interesting. Yeah, I'm just asking cuz I I'm I'm always like I haven't really dipped my toes into Tik Tok yet. I'm not entirely sure how the algorithm works. I I've just heard that it's somehow strangely region locked. So that's what I'm asking. >> Yeah, it is it is true that for the first I don't know maybe thousand views or so they are usually like closer to you, right? M >> but then if that is interesting to people and they and the algorithm decides to show it to more people then it also goes to other countries as well. >> Yeah. And I mean there's some there's like some people say oh it's it's worse because if you post an English video in Germany people won't like it as much. >> Exactly. >> It's Yeah. But like to be honest is that true or is maybe your video just not that great? like because we also have videos that are not that great, you know. Um, and I think maybe well it might be e a little bit easier if you post it in an English-sp speakaking country, but I don't to be honest I think the the difference is not that big maybe. >> And how did those those three weeks of posting daily how how did those go? Like what were the numbers you were getting from that? Did did they drive wish lists in a meaningful way or >> uh so we didn't have a page back then, right? because the page only we made that the steam page was only made after and we also didn't have like looking back it would have been smart to have at least like an newsletter or something to tell people hey go here then you will be notified. So the numbers were >> like I think most videos had like I don't know maybe a few thousand views. >> Got it. >> Um and then some that had like tens of thousands or like hundreds of thousands. We didn't have a video like over a million or anything. It was like super crazy viral. Um, >> got it. But it was like a good source of feedback and ideas mostly basically then. >> Yeah. And it was still like for such a small game, it was still a lot, right? Because if you make a game in 5 months, it's not that expensive. So you don't need millions and millions of people actually. >> Sure. You said once you launched the Steam page, you got to like 9,000 wish lists relatively quickly, right? >> Mhm. >> Where did those wish lists come from? I think most of them came either from the from the Twitter post that we made or from the Steam algorithm. >> What was the Twitter post? Was it a trailer? >> Yeah, it was an announcement like announcing Sticky Business. This is what the game is and then a >> trailer. Yeah. >> With with a link to the store page. >> Yeah. I don't remember. I think the link was not in the post. I think it was maybe in the post below >> in the replies. Mhm. Yeah, cuz we had uh I think a relatively viralish post for islanders on Twitter as well back then and I I remember there was was quite useful for wish lists actually. Yeah, I don't know. I don't want to say any numbers if I don't remember was was pretty good as well. I'm I'm not sure how the X algorithm works nowadays if that kind of stuff is still still possible. Who knows? >> Yeah, it's it's sad, right? It would have been nice if it was still usable. I I mean every now and then I I see a post with like lots of likes, but >> yeah, it's >> but our our posts don't they there's nothing going on >> there for us anymore. >> Yeah, I don't know. It's a like very every platform is sort of very different, very different audience, very different algorithms. So different things work on different platforms. It's it's very difficult to master multiple platforms. I feel like it's like already hard enough to master one, mastering multiples like >> Yeah. I think it also really really depends on the game >> on what the game looks like because so when we did sticky business, >> our post usually were quite good. Like not not all of them were viral, but like >> um most of them had like a few thousand. And then once we went and did posts about Ritual of Raven, they didn't really work at all. Mhm. >> So, and I don't think that is because like the videos itself like the videos were worse or like we did Yeah. because of how well we made those videos, but more that it was way also way harder to show what this game is about. Right. With sticky business, you show one little clip of, oh, you make these stickers and then everyone's like, oh, okay, got it. That's you make stickers and you sell them. >> Um, but Richard Raven is okay. So, it's a farming game, but also it's not. And you have these constructs and then they do something and they do it because you put in these cards and also their story um and like different regions and here's what they look like and then like most of the people are already gone. So, >> yep. So, it's um like what you're saying is Ritual of the Raven is too complex to explain. It's like for for sticky business at first glance you see what it's about. For Ritual of the Raven, you need to sit down and read like at least like a couple of sentences or something to fully understand what it is. >> Yeah. Yeah. Maybe we Yeah. I don't know if if there would have been a a way to show all of that in like a 3se secondond video. >> Difficult. Yeah. Very difficult. >> So, and that is what like works on Tik Tok, right? To like capture attention in three seconds. Everyone's like, "Oh, okay. this is what this video is going to be about. >> Yeah. But to to be fair, that not only works on TikTok, that's kind of the that's like one of the things that's kind of true for every platform. If you have a game that is easier to understand, then it connects to people a lot faster. So, this is what I typically talk about when I when I say appeal, right? It's like you can make two games and one is just infinitely easier to market because just more appealing, people understand it faster. It's like for for all three of the games I made, it did always did relatively similar marketing, but the outcomes were very very different. Like similar experience to what you were saying is >> for one you tweet about it, nothing happens. For the other one, you tweet about it and >> yeah, >> it's it's not it's not like you're doing a different kind of tweet or whatever. It's just like the game's connecting better in a way. >> Yeah. Yeah, makes sense. >> Interesting observation. So what are you are you taking something from that for your next project or what what are your sort of learnings from that? >> So yeah actually it's it's kind of a bit what I just said that >> we we are trying to now make more games that you can understand in 3 seconds. >> Mhm. because I also think that that was kind of more fun to us fun for us making v videos like that that are easier to to explain and like generally smaller games who worked on Raven for four years and at the end we were like >> yes >> it's enough. Thank you. >> Yeah. >> Um and like that that very short sticky business 5 months that was just fun most of the time. Um, and our next game will not be just five months, but like a lot shorter than four years. >> Yeah. Yeah. And then we'll see how it goes with with social media. I don't really know yet. The the thing is I kind of like I really enjoyed making these videos from day one. That was kind of cool, but that wasn't really possible for the the next game that we're making because we were still working on Richard Faven as well. So, we didn't want to be like, "Hey, we haven't finished this game yet." but also do you want to look at the cool new thing we're working on even though it wasn't like right it's like something that that most game devs do like at the at the end of the project try and look into the new thing because you kind of have to like do the new stuff as well um and like put in some hours every week and and work on something new because >> to keep your sanity basically >> that as well yeah but also to have something to do once you're done and like I don't know sometimes you are going to have to like get funding again so you kind of have to have something next. >> Um, yeah. So, that was already not possible to do >> and then there was like, oh, it would be cool if we could announce it in a big showcase. So, now we can't talk about it because it has to be like a surprise. And I don't really know how I feel about not talking about the game. I wish I could just show everyone everything I'm doing all of the time, but this is kind of not how it works in a way. And I kind of have to wait a little bit longer until I can actually show this stuff. Um, but I'm really looking forward to being able to show more of everything >> everything is. There are different philosophies about this, right? There's the the very open development approach where you show everything from day one. And then there's also but also some people who say it's actually not so good for your vision to show it too early because all of the opinions you're going to get are going to water down your vision and it's basically going to become too washed out if you show it too early before you have a good idea of what you want to make. And then yeah what you said right if you want to keep it for showcases or announcement or something is also sometimes a factor of course. >> Yeah. So, we we'll see how this one goes and then maybe for the next one we'll do it differently again and show it from day one, but we'll see. >> But you're as a studio, you're plan to stick to cozy games or are you dipping your toes into other genres as well? >> Um, I mean, we'll see. So far, it looks like this will be more of like the type of games that we're going to make, but also it's just the five of us, right? So >> m >> maybe we'll change our mind next year and we can just do that because we're just like we will just talk about it and then figure out what we want to do. I think it does make sense because we have an audience now that might like the next game as well. So it is makes it easier to like bring over people to the next game and and find an audience for the next game. But like I know that some of my co-founders really like like horror games and stuff and they would really like to make a horror game, but I can't because then I won't sleep. So, I don't know if we're ever going to do it. Maybe >> uh maybe we have to split up or something. But yeah, we'll see. Like I can't say now if this is what we're going to do forever. I guess it also really depends on >> is there a market for this type of game? Maybe next year it doesn't work anymore and like nobody wants to buy cozy games because there's something else that is cooler or like more interesting to people, then we'll do that. I guess >> I think it's at least going to be a relatively stable niche. And I I think one thing that you also mentioned is that the compet one thing you can notice is that the competition is getting higher, right? There are more people making these kind of games. >> Usually that's that's a sign that more people are playing them. If more people get like if more developers get inspired to make these games that probably means more people are playing them then >> well yeah true and and I think there's also a good chance that or at least that's what I believe that the the cozy games niche is going to split up into more defined areas because it's such a broad topic and there's so many games that are not nothing like the other game, you know. Um so maybe it will split up into more genres. Yeah, there's there are already I think you can see some of them farming, right? There's also this for example this simulator niche that is really strong on Steam at the moment like these and all of these uh shop coffee shop car shop simulators and a lot of them are doing really well. So actually I'm not even sure if it's fair to call that a small niche anymore. I think some of them are really really big. >> Yeah. Yeah. But there's lots of people interested in that. So I guess there's no harm in having lots of them. >> Mhm. Yeah. Also weird things like Powerwash Simulator, right? It's like >> I love Powerwash Simulator. >> You know the game. >> Nice. >> Yeah. I I I thought it was really cool. Uh and like really relaxing and satisfying. >> What do you think is the difference between games and work then? Cuz if you look at it from the outside, Powerwash Simulator kind of looks like work, right? So So what's the difference between work and and games? Difficult question. Yeah, because there's there's so many games now that are like job simulators, right? Run a run a shop. Uh that would be work. Maybe it is because you don't actually have to do something. You don't actually have to physically move. I guess that is a part that you just want to sit on the couch and like see something satisfying happening, >> right? I mean that that is like how how dopamine works. like you do something that is effort and then in the end you see your result and then you get the dopamine from it. But if you can can like skip the effort part and just go right to the result without actually having to move, I guess that is like great for the brain. That's my guess. >> Okay. Okay. Okay. So it's like um these games are often like romanticized versions also where actually you don't have to power wash the same spot like 10 times till that pesky spot disappears. just like >> Yeah. And you also don't have to do the taxes and like handle all the annoying customer emails, >> right? So, you only get the nice parts of the business, just not the stuff that you don't really want to do, >> like talk to talk to your tax advisor and like stuff like that, >> right? So, also in in Sticky Business, there's um a part of the game where you just um pack the boxes, right? From a gameplay perspective, it seems so silly because all you do is you drag the stickers into the box and you close the box. >> Yeah. And there's there's also no reward for doing it properly. You can just throw it in and it can look ugly and nobody will complain. >> And that that was the thing that we talked about for a long while. Also, same with like creating the stickers. There's no algorithm that decides if your sticker looks good or not. And we were thinking like, is this like can we do it like that? Is it is this like a game if you're not even like getting a reward for doing it right? Um, but I'm I'm really happy that we did it in this way. Um, because for some reason the the fantasy for for most people is so strong that they want to make it right. So it's >> for some weird reason people care about the the customers in the game. Um and they don't want to disappoint them. So they they make it nice and that is maybe that is why it's why it's so nice for them because they want to do it and then they do it and the the reward is they get to look at it looking nice and feeling like oh I did did this for this person. So the motivation is more internal. >> That's true. In in the kind of games I make, you always have to be quite careful that people don't optimize the fun out of their own experience, right? If you have something like a high score or if you have health and then people very quickly get into this optimization mode where where they basically optimize everything to just get a better score or something. But if you don't really have a score, if you don't really have a loose state, then I think people are a lot more inclined to just follow their own fun probably, right? Yeah. So there is um a thing in Ritual of Raven where you can actually optimize it in a way that we didn't intend um and we only realized that towards the end of development we're like hm do we do something about it or should we just let them do it. Um and in the end we decided to just let them do it. Um and what you can do is so usually it's supposed to be like that. you you have these fields and then you put them on the ground and then the constructs walk over them and and work on all the different fields like 3x3 or 4x4. You don't actually have to do it. You can just let them work in the same place and like grow grow the the fruits. Um and it's it is a little bit faster. It's not that much faster, just a little. Um but you you need less space. You don't need these these fields. So it is a way to optimize and some people came into our desk and we're like hey is this can I actually do this is there going to be like am I going to be punished for this in some way is like are like the fruits worse or I don't know and we're like no you can you can just do it if you want to do it you can just do it. Um but most people don't because it looks ugly and they want to have a nice farm. So the reward is basically just it doesn't look ugly. >> Mhm. >> Yeah. So, and like it was a big discussion and like some of us were like, "No, this can't we can't let them do this because it's ugly." But in the end, like I'm I'm happy the way it is because people can just decide if they want to do it. >> But that's also because there's um there's no time pressure or nor no high score, no efficiency score or something, right? You can just if you want to have it pretty, you'll just maybe take a couple minutes longer and still get the same results more or less. So >> yeah, but I mean yeah, it's you get money from it, right? And then you can use it to buy different things. >> Uh yeah. Yeah, I get that. There there's some small incentives. But like for example, for like our first game, Islanders, this was a very big concern for us to make sure that people actually build nice cities. So we very carefully constructed the scoring rules so that if when people optimize for high scores, it actually makes for for nice cities, right? >> But is is is that game not kind of cozy? >> Yeah. Yeah, I would say so. Islanders is probably the most cozy game we made so far, but it's I I guess it's a different kind of cozy because it's very much like the more the puzzly feels. It's it's very much a puzzle and very optimization focused game. It's not not about building creatively even though there is a creative mode. >> It's a very >> very optimization driven for sure. >> Okay. But it like the the vibe and the the aesthetics kind of kind of feel. >> Yeah. Now now that you say I actually have never thought about Islanders as a cozy game, but I guess you're Yeah, I guess you're kind of right. Yeah, you could fit it into that niche probably. Yeah. Sometimes I wonder if it would have done better as like a pure sandbox game. Well, >> maybe I mean there there are a lot of very popular games like that where you just build a town but without high scores and puzzles. >> Do you know uh doing do you know a specific one? >> I I mean like townscaper for example. >> Yeah, sure. Town Yeah, townscapers also really Yeah. Yeah. Okay. Okay. I know the the types of games you're talking about now. So you mean these these toy toy- like games essentially almost where it's like building building Legos in a way. Yeah. >> Yeah. And if you had done that with Islanders, you would have been like very ahead of your time. Guess true. >> That was like when when did that came out? Been a while. >> I think it was Was it I'm not sure if it was before or after Townscaper? I think it was before, but I might be wrong. Yeah. I don't know. Let's get to Ritual of the Raven then, I guess. Um so this was the the game you originally planned to make first. Uh what was the initial idea or the initial pitch? Was it always meant to be a a programming farming game or did that sort of evolve during development? >> It was the the thing from the beginning. It um the original idea or like the the thought of wanting to do some programming game was inspired by Final Fantasy 12 actually. I don't know if you've ever played that. >> No. Um but what what you do there is you have your companions and they have um a system that's called gambit system and what you do is you give them instructions like for example it's like um if your health is below 50% use the healing magic. Um >> if you see an enemy attack it and like it has resistance to fire attack it with something else. Um and then you could make like pretty long lists of of what they should do. Me and my my husband, we we love playing that and we were like, "Oh, it would be so cool if to use that for a different kind of game." And we were like, "Oh, it would be cool if it could be like a maybe like a farming game where you can tell um like little creatures how to farm the Yeah, for example, like if it's ripe, harvest it, and if it's not ripe, water it, and stuff like that. Um, and we we played around with that idea for a little bit, and that was even before we started the company. when we started the company were thinking about so what what should we do like what would be a cool concept I was kind of like at that time I did a lot of workshops um like coding workshops for girls and I noticed that they were really they it was really cool for them because they hadn't had never done something like this before and we did very very easy things like bits or like twine and like a lot of them were like very into it not all of them some some thought like this is boring but like there were some that were also O having like great ideas on what kind of games to make and I really enjoyed that and I thought, "Oh, it would be so cool if when I when like I start and like work on my own thing um with the others, it would be cool to do something that maybe inspires someone to maybe look into programming because it was also something that I never like when I was in school, this was never a thing that I thought I could ever do because nobody told me." >> How did you get into programming then? I I studied mobile media and they advertised it as this is going to be a design course, >> but it wasn't. It was >> You got scammed. >> It was computer science. Yeah, I got scammed. I got scammed into into becoming a programmer. Um Yeah. And then it was a computer science course and I was like, "Oh, okay. This is kind of fun." >> Okay. >> Nice. >> Yeah. So, yeah, for me it was just coincidence actually. Yeah. So I kind of wanted something to do something like that. Um and then this is kind of like the the spark that >> made this idea. Um then then we sat together with everyone and we thought about okay what what could be a cool game that we could make. >> And as it is with designing a game like like this in in teams uh it it then expanded into oh let's maybe add a story. Oh, let's maybe add customizable gardens or >> Yeah. >> Did it sort of feature creep from from there or like >> what what was the process? >> Yeah, I think I mean I think it is it's not like this game has like so many different features that I would call it feature creep. Um it is it is a big game, but it it only I think it only feels so big because we only made it with five people and it took so long. Yeah. But developing the idea was more of like okay what can we do with this mechanic and then was like oh it would be cool if we had decorations and then also this is kind of like um industry standard for these types of games like life simulations you kind of want to have decorations as well and you kind of have to have villagers. Uh so guess we have to do that as well. And then the story bit the story bit was the part that was unclear for the longest time to be honest. We were like, "Oh, it would be cool to have some sort of story." And we thought about like, "Oh, there would be like a witch." Um, and we want this um grimoire that is empty and that you have to fill up again. Um, and that was inspired actually by Stardew Valley, the community center, because we thought it's so fun to collect all these things into the community center um and have like collections and have to finish it. So, that was the original idea behind the Grimmoire thing. And then it was like okay there will be like rituals and these have ingredients and you have to collect them. And that was like the basic idea that we had for the story. And then once we we actually started working like after after we signed the contract with the publisher and then we started working on it then it was like okay so now we kind of have to figure out the story because we don't really have anything. Um and then we worked together with a writer and then somehow this spiraled into this huge story that it is now. So yeah maybe this could have been smaller. I think the story is a little bit excessive for this for the size of the game. >> Yeah, I have to say for me like knowing what it takes it does look like a very like does look like a very big game also for your your team size. Lots and lots of arts, lots lots of content. So I guess what I'm saying is like um if you say let's make a programming game about farming, if you if you just do that, it would be a much smaller game probably, right? It would be maybe just one screen of of like a garden with like one creature walking around and that that would be the game, right? I wonder if like would you agree to my gut feeling that maybe you tried too many tried to combine too many things at once or are you in hindsight like no that was actually still an interesting combination and you're like grateful that you did that or what's your um hindsight way of thinking about that? >> Mhm. Yeah, I think so. So, in the end, I definitely think it was just way too big and I was like, "Oh, just it's just too much." >> And I think there would have been some ways to make it smaller, but since we had already signed the publishing contract and we had the milestones laid out, that point, there was no going back really. >> Um, so it kind of had to be the thing that we said it would be at the beginning of production. We're like, "Okay, well, this is what we're going to make." So, when when we started production, we were like, "Okay, maybe the story isn't necessary." And then we started working on the story and then we're like, "Oh, this is interesting." And like we we kind of liked how it turned out and like how it how it played out and how it made all the all the characters kind of like interesting. Um, and what I really like about it is that they kind of feel like all of them have some little story and are kind of interesting and have their own little personality and then they interact with each other as well. And this is what I really liked about it. And then we're like, "Okay, well, maybe then then let's do it because it's because we like it." And in the end, I I still think the story turned out really good. And I really like what it became. Um, but it was just so much work to build all of that, not only to write the story, but also implementing all of it. That took forever. So was it like you had this more or less kind of sandboxy game and then you built the story on top of that essentially >> or did you develop the two things alongside each other? Yeah, it was it was a long side. Um during production we were like, "Okay, so at first we need to figure out what the beginning and the end is and then we're going to build it step by step." >> Um because we also have the four different regions and then we built a region, figured out what's going to happen here. >> Got it. Well, like the the core structure of the story or also of the game play is always you you gather ingredients either through farming or maybe through exploring the world, right? And then >> um that helps you move on to the next section of the game or of the story. And >> yeah. Yeah. And figure something out about about the characters and like the the mystery that's that's happening. And in in the end, what you're trying to do is like save >> save your your mentor that disappeared through one of these portals. and also stabilize the portal so no nobody else comes through the portals anymore. >> Well, to be fair, hearing it like that, it does sound all does sound very compelling. Um, right. It's just took me a while to even fully understand the vision. As you said, it's not something that like comes to you that you understand immediately. But >> yeah, and it it definitely turned out to be difficult to explain all of this in a tutorial. I think the beginning part of the game is just way too slow. Looking back, I'm like, "Oh, this this mechanic should have worked like that." But that's not if if we did that and like continue to work on it, we still wouldn't be finished and we would work on it for two more years or three more years and then would never come out. So, I think at some point we had to say, "Okay, well, it is what it is." But yeah, looking back, it would have been better if the beginning was faster and the mechanics were a little bit different. >> Yeah, for for one of my games, Julio Snail, I have some strange regrets. I wonder if this is something you can relate to with Ritual of the Raven. It's kind of um I made a lot of stupid mistakes for Will you Snail and it kind of resulted in a game that was not super easy to market. Like I think I could have done a lot of things better better to make it more marketable in a way. But also, a lot of people really like the way it turned out. And every every time I talk about the mistakes I made with William Snail, they're like, "How dare you say that? I love the game. Stop saying it was a mistake." Um, so clearly there's like um I maybe maybe it's also okay to acknowledge that there's also value in games beyond marketability and how well it sells, right? There's also like maybe you as you mentioned maybe you made something really special for for someone who got into programming because of that. >> Yeah. And in the end the reviews are kind of good and like people enjoy playing it. So I guess it can't be that bad. >> Right. Right. So you're you're not having any big regrets. You're you're happy with how it turned out. >> No. Yeah. I Yeah. I'm Yeah. >> Got it. I kind of see that you can't say too much about your future projects, but maybe like for the the rough direction you said like shorter projects, right? >> Yes. >> Are you going in the simulatory direction or in the creative direction for our future projects was like the direction? >> So it so what we're trying to do is make something that people who like sticky business will like. >> So >> leaning into that a bit more. Yeah, that makes sense. >> Yeah. So this is like the direction it will. >> So both simulatory and creative potentially. >> Potentially. Yeah. >> How did you develop the art for Ritual of the Raven? Cuz honestly it's it looks looks very strong and I'm I'm very impressed that it was fully made by one person. It's really crazy. >> Thanks. Yeah. So it basically it's our artist made a concept and showed it to us. We were like, "Yeah, let's do it. That looks amazing." No, it's really not that complex. It It was really just like, "Okay, so we so we know we want to do like a farming gameish game." Um, so there there was the option of doing it like um just top down Stardew Valley like, but then it would have looked exactly like Stardw Valley and we didn't really want that. And I don't I don't really know actually um how Sophie came up with that. I thought maybe we're like, "Oh, it would be cool to have maybe like an isometric view." Um and then she she made something and we're like, "Yep." >> Mhm. >> And that is basically it it basically looked very similar to what it looks like now. Um the it was like a concept of the the first world with the grass and stuff. >> Okay. >> Yeah. Uh and then from that uh once we had that she made some more concepts for the other regions as well uh once we knew like what basically they would look like. Um but yeah what what was in the first concept was like this green world that is like kind of colorful but also has these uh neon signs like some some more like um really bright pink in there. And that I think that is something that she does in a lot of her her art actually. So it's I think it's just her art style what she likes. >> Got it. Are there any game design topics that keep you up at night or what what do you think about when when you think about making games? Like what are the the problems that occupy occupy your mind? Do you think about marketing or do you think about how to get funding? Like what's what's on your mind mostly? So for Richard of Raven, I was thinking a lot at night. It kept me awake um a lot and I think all of us at some point because it was I mean the idea kind of worked with the constructs and like doing the farming with them but there was some like pretty big issues that we couldn't figure out how to solve. That had mainly to do with with the pacing because it took a long while to grow the stuff, but there wasn't a lot of things for you to do obviously because it's automated. So, we kind of had to figure out how do we >> how do we do it so that it's still fun. Um, and we kept making it faster and faster. But in the end, we decided, okay, we need to give the constructs an ability to actually grow the stuff instantly because otherwise it's just not fun to to wait for a day because it in test in tests we found out that people would just go to bed at like 8:00 a.m. >> at no, they would go up at 8 and go to bed at 9:00 because they they were just waiting for the stuff to grow. Uh, and that is obviously not very fun. So yeah, that was something that like many nights I was laying in my bed like I don't know what to do about this. >> Um, and yeah, with with the knowledge that I had have now, I would definitely do a lot of this very differently and like maybe do something like the crops don't grow at night at all, but they only grow when the constructs do something to them or something. But yeah, at some point it's just too late to to change all of that. And like the the card that make made the stuff grow instantly was came very late in the in the development process like I don't know maybe two months before we were finished. We're like okay this we kind of have to solve this problem now. >> Yeah. >> So this was something that that yeah kept me awake a lot. But yeah now I think I just I don't want to be awake at night. I want to sleep. >> So I'm trying not to not to think about it too much. Right. And so now for for your next projects, like what are the things you're thinking about now is like how do we make a game that's more marketable or how do we make a game that appeals more to the sticky business fans or how do we do social media or what what what are you thinking about now? >> Mhm. So, I think right now it's more like specific mechanics because we're very much at the beginning and trying to figure out how everything works together, but it's less stressed and not like I need to figure out this right now. But like, okay, we're in the process of figuring out how this mechanic is going to work and if I won't figure it out today, I might figure it out tomorrow. Like to be honest, working on this new game and also working on Sticky Business felt a lot different than working on Retro Fraven because it's not as set. And also, I don't really know how to explain it, but for Sticky Business, once we had the idea and the basic things set up, it was like, okay, this all makes sense. This is how it's supposed to be. And I think that never really or like very rarely happened at Retro Raven where like okay this is this is the right solution to this. Um but now again it's happening sometimes and that makes me feel a lot more relaxed about it because like oh okay yeah this is how it's supposed to be and this is going to work and it makes me feel much more confident about all of this. And this happened a lot with sticky business where like it clicked into place like a almost like a puzzle piece like oh okay we need to figure out how this is going to work and then we thought about it and worked it out and then it worked and we're like yes this works. >> I know that feeling you're talking about. Do you but do you what do you how do you think how do you get that feeling? How do you make things click into place? >> I don't know. Right now I think it's maybe just really like the idea if the idea works it will work. >> Got it. kind of >> because th this is another thing that I've been thinking a bit about recently is h the more I talk to devs the more I feel like like this this process of locking yourself in either with with a publisher that gives you milestones or with funding that also locks you into a specific idea like for example there's prototype funding right where you get funding for your specific prototype it it kind of locks your idea in a bit too early right So >> Mhm. >> I wonder if if that's something you agree with. Would it would have been better for Ritual of the Raven if you had more freedom during the development process maybe. >> Yeah, definitely. But the thing is there was no money and we needed to pay rent, you know, like that's a nice nice thing to wish for. Like I wish it would be like this all the time and now we're in a position where we can give ourselves the time to just figure it out and like if it doesn't work, we're going to just going to do something else. But that's not the reality for most people, right? You kind of have to get funding and find a publisher because someone needs to pay the bills. >> Yeah, definite. Definitely. Also, with prototype funding, I guess the problem sometimes is that even to get prototype funding, you have to have like a very clear idea of what the game's going to be, even though you're going to make a prototype. So, you actually have no idea what >> game you're going to make. And then, yeah, you kind of feel like you need to make the game that at first you said you were going to make. >> Yeah. I'm just I guess I'm just wondering if maybe but because it's also in the best interest of publishers and also for the people who provide these uh this these kind of funding and so on that the game turns out to be successful, right? So I I wonder if they could maybe sometimes do a bit more to to open these kind of doors for the developers to change their mind later on cuz that typically or often times makes the games better. Yeah. >> Yeah. And I think there are publishers like that. >> Sure. who are more open and >> um like yeah for example when we worked on sticky business um even with a publisher it wasn't like that >> where where someone from the outside told us like you got to fix this right now because there's a milestone tomorrow but was like >> yeah and also I think you can kind of understand where publishers that do have these kind of schedules and so on where where they're coming from because there's obviously also there are also the developers who change their mind constantly and they don't get anywhere so >> yeah It's a lot of money, right? It's not like just a few thousand. But like sometimes it's a lot of money. >> Well, if I would give someone half a million, I would want to know what they're up to. >> Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. >> You don't want to have them change their mind constantly and so on. Yeah. Yeah. >> Yeah. >> I see that as well. >> Hm. There was another question that I wanted to ask. Yeah. Maybe next just what advice would you have for people who want to get into cozy games? cuz I think it's as you said it's a lot quite appealing for a lot of developers and also to just make something small to make something chill. What what advice would you have? Where do you start with that? What what you should should you pay attention to? >> I think it's not too different from like general advice on how to make a game, right? You you kind of find something that hopefully people are interested in and like I think generally it's a good idea to check first if there is anyone interested at all. Right. make make a little video or like a little prototype and and and check if this is going to be interesting. I think also what's what's helpful is to just see what's what's out there. I think maybe some sometimes people are afraid, oh, I don't want to don't just want to do whatever someone else has made, but like looking at the competition is really valuable, right? You want to know what what people bought. Sometimes there there are games that I look at and like play I'm like I don't like this. This is not fun. But it has like millions of people playing that. So clearly there is something about those games and like trying to figure out why people are interested in this I think is really helpful and then see how you can make your own spin on it to make it fun. Yeah. And I think a big part is also having having a team that that can then actually make whatever you want to make. Um, right. Because if if we decided now we should make a a 3D game, we don't have a 3D artist. Like, how would we do that? Right. >> Sure. >> Um, maybe that's an easy example, but like I don't know. I think like some kind of interest in this kind of genre and like knowing what's going on is really helpful. So, I guess >> yeah, I think those are maybe like the first few steps to take. >> How do you gauge interest? Let's say I have maybe an idea for a cozy game I could make. Should I just post on social media a bit about it a bit or how do I find out if people are interested? >> That's what I would do. Yeah, I think I would. Um, and that's what we what we we did with the new game. We posted a video on on Tik Tok, but on our main account, but we posted it on another account uh and told nobody about it, and now it's private again. Um, but to at least see like is is anybody going to be interested in that? And then we saw with this video, it wasn't like a crazy viral video, but it had like I don't know if a few tens of thousands of views. We're like, okay, at least there is some people who would like to play this and some and some comments and questions and stuff. But I guess it it really depends. Like I think with the type of game that we're making, Tik Tok works quite well. Um, Reddit, for example, doesn't work at all. Or maybe we're just not good enough at that. It might be a skill issue on our side, but I think for some people Reddit is like a great place to to get interest and like see if >> Reddit is like the the dark dark souls of uh game death marketing. >> Yes. >> Very very frustrating. >> Yes. And then you're going to b you're going to be banned forever just because you made a mistake. Yeah. It's just no. I'm so afraid to post anything on Reddit. So we just don't. We did it a few times and then stop. I think they just want to be left alone to be honest. But some de some developers may make it work, right? So >> yeah, >> fair enough. >> Yeah. So I guess if Reddit is a platform that you are on anyways and like you know how it works, >> then it might make sense to to make a post on Reddit as well. >> I think so. I think so. I think you need need to be a regular Reddit user to understand what you can get away with and what you can't get away with. >> Yeah. Yeah, definitely. >> Yeah. Yeah. Do you do any play testing for your games or how do you play test cozy games? Was it also like similar to other games? >> So, I guess it would be probably similar. But what we did for Rich of Raven was kind of interesting because there was a platform and we did we didn't really do that. It was the publisher who set it up. So, I don't even know the name of the platform to be honest. >> Um, but the platform it would also record video and make a a very bad AI overview of what people said. But I mean it was helpful for like first first impression and like grouped stuff together and yeah that's that was something that we did later on so while we were already in development and towards the towards the end when also we couldn't really change that much but like we did change a few things after that. Um, so I guess that would be something that I probably would have done a little bit earlier now. But yeah, also we did uh just our own tests with our own community on um Discord for Rich or Raven. We actually did a test where we would be in in a video call with people >> um and like watch them play. That was kind of cool. Um, but obviously that is not a thing that a lot of players want to do because it's kind of uncomfortable, I think, for a lot of people to give feedback to other people's faces and they wouldn't be kind of right. They wouldn't say mean things or like really want to say the things they didn't like. Um, it it was still helpful because you could actually you can see stuff in their faces, right? And when they are confused, you will see it. So, um, that was something that was kind of interesting. Yeah. What we're doing now is more of a like we just give people a build and let them play and just let them write stuff in the Discord channel to see if they like it or not. And we'll see how that goes. I'm I'm very curious to see how that goes because the game is in a state right now that is there's not a lot there. It looks terrible and >> but you're already testing. That's cool. >> Mhm. >> Yeah. Yeah, we should first we showed them a little trailer and asked for their opinions on that and we made some changes and now probably next week we're going to going to show a few people a little a little build and and see what they say >> test. >> But I kind of I kind of like it now to just have them in the Discord and just let them just write in there. >> So it's more of a discussion than a fill out this form. This is I I kind of like it right now. So we'll see how it goes but because it makes more of a like I can actually ask. So someone says, >> "I didn't like this thing." And I'm like, "Okay, what exactly is it that you don't like?" And like I have I'm going to change it like this. How do you like do you like this better? >> So, and this is kind of fun. Go back and forth actually and talk talk to real people about it. I >> I'm starting to get the feeling that different kinds of games probably require different kinds of play testing. H >> for example, one thing I imagine for cozy games or especially for creative games like I think it's a bit more difficult to be creative when somebody's watching over your shoulder for example, right? It's like you have like drawing on your own is kind of chill about drawing when somebody's watching over your shoulder and they're like >> what are you doing there? It's like not sure if that's such an accurate display of how I would normally play then. Yeah. But yeah, so this is the question is what are you testing for right? Are you testing for fun? Are you testing to find bugs? And then depending on what you're testing for different thing makes sense most of the time. >> Yeah, this is a very early test. So we only worked on this for like two months now and there's not a lot there. But it's kind of interesting to see like how people interact >> with the game so early on. >> Yeah. I guess the first thing you want to find out is is there something there or are we crazy? >> Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, exactly. >> Yeah, that's also where Paul and I are now with our next project. We think we think we have a banger game idea, but we we haven't tested we haven't verified if we're crazy or not yet. >> Yeah. >> Have you have you shown it anywhere or is it is it a secret as well? >> It's now we've literally started just a few days ago, so we haven't >> shown it almost to nobody. >> Exciting. Yeah, we'll see how it goes. I guess the next question if we go through the process would be how do you market cozy games? I have a sort of have the feeling the answer is once again going to be sort of similar to every game, right? >> Or do you think there are any >> I don't know. We we've tried a diff a few different things like I don't know we thought oh maybe Pinterest is a good idea because >> that is like more aesthetic maybe girly platform where maybe cozy games could work. Um, but I don't know. I guess Pinterest is also a platform for its own and you really have to like figure out how Pinterest works to make it work if we just don't like. >> So maybe it could have worked if we spent more time, but then again, >> not knowing if it would work, put that much effort in. I would have also thought that Instagram would be a platform where that works more, but I'm not so sure about that now. >> Yeah. Um, so I guess yeah, it's really because you kind of just want to reach players. >> Yeah. >> And and that works the same, right? And also I think one of the biggest thing is just Steam events and festivals stuff like that to to kick the Steam algorithm to work, right? So >> for sticky business, like after your initial viral tweet that you got, where do you feel that most of the marketing or traffic come from? Was it was it from Steam? Was it from YouTube? let's plays. What's your gut feeling? >> Um, I think it was a combination of a bit of our own social media, but also then content creators because as soon as we had the demo, this got picked up. Um, and I think part of the reason was that we had um a Twitch integration that was that was kind of cool and made made people want to play the game. So, I think that was a maybe a smart marketing move as well to have that because then there was like constantly someone on Twitch playing the game and I think that was probably a big thing that people a lot of people just saw it and then Steam events like we were very lucky actually with the timeline of events that happened once we announced I mean we announced without like any festival or just announce ourselves but after that can't quite remember what festivals there were but there was like basically lined up perfectly for the demo drop there was something and we got in. Then there was Wholesome Direct we got in. Then there was some other event like Games Germany right after that and then was the Steam Next Fest and it was just like one thing after the other and that was just that was just being lucky. >> Got the sticker festival then the business festival then the cozy festival. >> Yeah. Yeah. I don't think there was a sticker festival but yeah it was just like Yeah. >> Yeah. Yeah. Okay. Mhm. I see. >> Yeah. I think definitely these these Steam events played a big part. >> Yeah. Yeah. It's also my my theory is that you basically only have two ways to market your game anyway as an indiff. It's Steam and it's content creators. So you sounds like you got a fair share of both. It's great for you. >> Yeah. But I think that stuff like having your own social media and like the people who decide who gets into festivals seeing ah this game is kind of popular. >> Mhm. I think that makes a difference into like if you get in or not. >> Fair. Yeah. Fair. >> But I don't know. I've never been a jury on that. That's just what I think. >> Yeah. Yeah. And of course you you know you need some external traffic to kickstart the algorithm. So you need some some external sources to to draw some some initial wish lists, right? Makes sense. You reminded me of one thing that I definitely wanted to ask about and that is um the sticky business DLC's. >> How did how did those came to be? So, when we signed the the publishing contract, we had in there that we would make at least, I think, two or three updates. And I can't remember if it if the DLC was, but I think the idea of of making a DLC was around a lot longer because it was like, oh, it's kind of easy to add content to this game. That's like pretty cool about this. >> Um, and then we made the first few updates and people really liked that new stuff was coming. Then it's kind of like because the longer the game is going on now, the higher the the um sales percentage gets, so it gets cheaper. But if we add a DLC, people like actually like we can see it in the data that lots of people who buy the game just buy the DLC as well. So that kind of makes up for that. >> So the game doesn't get us get cheaper >> that fast. So, when when we did the first DLC and like people were like quite happy about it, we were like, "Okay, cool. That was cool." Um, but now we're working on the new thing. Let's go. And then our publisher was like, "Hey, do you want to make another DLC?" And we're like, "No." And like then they explained to us like the the thought behind that um that it like works with a with a price and stuff um and that it's I mean it's it's a marketing beat as well and like and a reason for Steam to give you featuring and so there's like lots of positives about it, but we were >> we were kind of scared that people would get mad and be like, "Oh, why do you like want more money from us? You're just greedy." And stuff like that. Um, and some people did, especially because we had um, achievements in the DLC and people got so bad about it. And I didn't even understand because I didn't really I didn't know that people are so crazy about achievements. I thought like it's a nice thing if you get an achievement, but like if you don't get an achievement, then like who cares? But people do care a lot. Um, and so having achievements in a DLC meant you cannot get 100% of the achievements without buying the DLC. And people accusing us like, "Oh, you do you did this on purpose. You are so greedy and you want us to buy the DLC so we can finish the game." And we're like, "No, actually we just start if we make new content, people will want new achievements, so we just added them because we thought we should." >> Yes. Um, but yeah, generally people didn't get mad about us making new content, but we were like, "Hey, this is really cool that there's a new DLC. There were new stories as well." Um, and people were very happy about it. So, uh, we decided to make another DLC. Um, and we actually didn't do that ourselves because as I told you before, we didn't want to grow. And so, the decision basically was we could hire more people because we needed to make the new game. So, we could hire new people um to help us make the DLC or we just outsource it, which we decided to do and we got another studio on board um to help us with that. And in the end, another studio, Digit Tales, um worked on the DLC on the two other DLCs and and >> um made them for us basically. And then we made us the second DLC that also had achievements because what we did then was we made like a poll in our Discord server and asked like, "Hey guys, we're really unsure like should we add achievements to the to the next DLC?" And everyone was like, "Yeah, we want achievements." So we did it again and then people were even like even more people like >> but we asked >> but like >> yeah I mean the the thing with completionist this is a lesson I've heard from multiple different developers also the uh Tukana people I talked with last week they had a story about this like completionists are crazy people they like >> they get very very mad if you have like also if >> crazy >> if you have some very unpleasant achievements and they're like, "Why do you make me go through this pain?" as if like you're forcing them to get the achievement. But that's like how it feels to them. >> But yeah. Yeah. I mean, it's Yeah. If it's like your hobby, I I guess I understand. So, the third DLC didn't have achievements >> and now this is >> also And then people came like, "Why is there no achievements in the new DLC? What the heck?" >> Like, >> of course. Yeah, that's how it goes. But I I guess I just wanted to ask if overall did were the DLC's worth it financially? >> Yeah, definitely. It was um yeah, even even outsourcing them, it was like the money came came back to us >> that we paid and I mean people were happy about it. They were asking about it. So we're like, yeah, it >> I guess it makes sense. Um >> and now >> yeah, there will probably be be another one. >> Cool. from a quick nerd question in case you know anything about this. How how is it setting up a DLC for your game with like is is it is it as annoying as I imagine in the Steam back end to get that to work or is it relatively easyish? >> I haven't done that in the in the back end. So I don't know actually. I think it's like I haven't heard someone complain that much. So I I guess it must be like >> okay >> okay enough. >> Okay. Okay. Okay. >> Yeah. But but also the way we do the DLCs is like kind of sneaky and everything is in the main game and it's just unlocked. Okay. >> If you buy it so it's not like you have to download. >> Okay. >> So I don't know if if how it would work if you had the stuff outside. >> Yeah. I guess >> and that was something I was I was afraid of because I I heard that people got mad about something like that for other games, but I guess our like our audience just didn't really care. I think what people get mad about is if you launch with a DLC and you have like content behind an extra pay wall at launch, but I think if you add DLC over time, then it doesn't really matter if it's in the game or if it's like actually downloaded. I think it's doesn't really make a difference, right? >> Yeah. I mean, I can understand why it's kind of annoying because you have to get an update and you download all of the stuff and you can't use it. Hence that people would be annoyed. >> Yeah, fair. But like in like in the case of sticky business is a couple of megabytes for new stickers, right? >> Yes. Yeah. It's not like it's 10 GB of download or anything. Yeah. >> Yeah. Interesting. So, do you think more indie developers should consider making DLC for their game? Can you imagine this working for more games or was it specifically for the case of Sticky Business that was just a good fit in that for that game? I think it's definitely not a bad idea and it's definitely something that that we're thinking about for the next game as well. I think it's more of a I don't know. So, for example, we never did early access and we won't do that. Uh, and people call us crazy because they're like, you're wasting a beat, you know? But I'm like, oh, we could just make a DLC and then that's the beat. >> That's a that's a good take actually. It's maybe even a better beat than cuz often times you see people think they get two launches but they often times they only end up getting one. >> Like the early access launch often times kind of is the launch and then the 1.0 launch sometimes nothing happens. Sometimes the 1.0 launch is really big. >> That also happens but this not not always. >> Yeah. And I and I think I'd rather make the main game a little bit cheaper thinking about okay but then we're going to add more content later on that you can buy or or you just don't you can decide that for yourself then doing early access because that is making me like thinking about that I I already feel anxious about it because like oh you're going to have a road map and then every two weeks you're going to make a build and if you if you don't add new things then people will be very mad and like oh >> I don't want this so I want I want to finish my game and then launch it and then if people are interested and they're going to ask for things and then I can be like cool I'm going to do that and like we're going to add the thing but we're going to add it and add it when it's done. >> Yeah, that makes sense. Although you want to get closure on your project at some point like early >> access as well. Yeah, I mean I guess it's okay with with the size of our games where it's not that big, but if I if I had to do early access on Retro Raven and work on it for another year, I think I would have gone completely crazy. >> Yeah. >> Yep. Yep. I can imagine that. I think the worst case scenario that can happen when you do early access is that the early access kind of doesn't go as well as you planned, but you already promised this big road map. So now you have to keep working on it even though it's not even really worth it to keep working on it. >> Some cases of that as well. So >> yeah. Or you have to abandon it and and and then I don't know. It doesn't look good. >> It's not a good look for the studio now. >> Yeah. >> Yeah. We can probably get away with it once, >> but if you do it again, I guess then then it's over. >> Did you do early access or did you did you release >> We did early access once for Thronefall. The other games were without early access. for Thronefall it worked out okay but we did not we did not make any one thing we were very strict about is we did not make a lot of promises at all we had we did not have a road map for example so we were just like >> oh I didn't know you could do that >> I don't think you need a road map you just need to fill out like the like Steam asks you >> this one question about um what do you plan to add during early access you have to fill that out but you can kind of fill it out a bit wishy-washy >> and you don't really have to make any promises to to players. But that being said, being in early access, um people do expect regular updates. That is something they expect whether you have a road map or not. So you >> if you take too long, they're going to say dead game. >> Yeah. But to be honest, I think the same happens if you if you do a full release, right? They will still >> think there's going to be more, right, in a lot of cases. So, but we had some some comments like that that would be like that were more like expect not like >> straight out expecting stuff to happen, but like saying it as if there's going to be more content and more stuff coming even though it's just a full release and we never said there's going to be more and it's like it is the story ended and like there is everything in the game. It is the game is finished. There's literally nothing where I would say, "Oh, I would really need to do an update or a DLC um to to make this game the way I envisioned it or like it's just like it's done." Um but there was I remember there was one buck report about that you can get stuck in some place. And then someone was like, "Yeah, I think like at least for the early access phase now, you should um add an unstuck button." And I think lots of people just assume that if a game comes out, it's early access. >> Yeah. >> Right. So this person was like, "Oh, this game is just new, so it's early access." >> There's kind of automatically this expectation that games will receive updates. It's kind of baked in nowadays. And I think you have to kind of give into that a little bit as a developer. So you can't be like publishing it and then immediately go offline for months. So, if you if you publish a game, then nowadays you're kind of obligated to do bug fixes and minor updates for at least a month or so. >> And some people expect more. >> Yeah. Yeah. I mean, bug fixes totally make sense, right? That you fix everything that's not working. >> Um, and maybe and maybe small improvements as what what we're doing now, improving some things that are like really confusing. >> But like other than that, there's not going to be content. And I'm like a little nervous about like what's going to happen in a few months when people realize there is no new content. What's going to happen? We'll see. I >> I don't know. You think you're not? >> Yeah. >> You didn't promise anything anywhere, so I'm not sure why what they would get mad about, but any game recommendations you would give to someone who is not so much into cozy games. Some interesting things we should check out. Oo, I mean there is like a lot of cozy games that are like super popular that I guess I would tell you to start with if you want to like learn about cozy games. There's stuff like Animal Crossing and Studio Valley which is like really like genre defining I guess right to understand like what's happening. >> But I mean Unpacking was a great game. I love that. What else? I think I really like games that are like a little bit more creative or also stuff like um a little to the left was great. But those are all like games that that I know and like liked because they are very similar to what we make and are like comparable. >> So I guess that's just the type of game that I personally enjoy. >> I think what's actually great about making cozy games is that they I think they play really well with small scopes in theory, right? You can you can probably make very tiny games that still work very well. >> Yeah. And and also it's a lot of these games are like really kind of new and there's not really something that you can really compare. So I think when we when we thought of sticky business and we're like okay so now we got to figure out what are like games that are very similar to this we're like well I mean I guess a little to the left is similar and then there is some some games that are like have a similar vibe but I think lots of cozy games are really really have some really new ideas that you haven't seen in other games and and now of course they're also copying everything right there's like a million clones of everything and like a million farming games as well but there's also some very cool new ideas that you haven't seen anywhere else before. >> It's also also we talked about this a bit earlier, but it's just interesting which themes or which fantasies you can get away with. There's also this game called um something with a bookshop. Tiny bookshop. >> Mhm. >> Tiny bookshop. I I also I think also met the deafs a while ago on some event and I was skeptical about their idea when they when I heard them talk about it back then, but it it turned out really well. I'm kind of surprised because it's >> it's also such a such a weird niche idea and it's just >> Yeah. >> Yeah. And I and I think you could kind of see that it appeals to a very specific sort of people, right? Because because it's it's very slow >> and you don't really do a lot. It's really like really relaxing, I think. >> Mhm. Um, and I I remember I played it I played the demo because I was on a jury for some award. Uh, and then I thought, "Oh, I know what the game is about." And then I played it after release now and there's like so much more things going on and like you can you can recommend books >> and this is it's just so fun. >> I really I really enjoy it. It's really really a good game. >> Should check it out. Looks interesting. Yeah. >> Yeah. Yeah, you really should. >> Cool. Anything else you think we should talk about? Otherwise, um, we'll just call it quits. >> Yeah, sounds good. I think we covered Yeah. a lot of things. >> Well, that was a lot of fun. Thanks a lot for for making time for me. Appreciate You.