Usually people get to me with their success stories and you're one of the first ones who comes to me with some regrets. >> Yes. First game was very successful uh commercially and our second game while it is doing all right has 90% positive reviews it it is far behind our first game commercially. >> This is a conversation with Julian Kulbus the CEO of Digitales Interactive. They make narratively driven detective games like Lacuna or Between Horizons. I would have more tried to find the essence like what is the core and what makes that core fun rather than thinking okay we have a working thing what could we how could we expand on that just focus on the thing that makes it good and people will appreciate that and you won't have to spend money on all the other stuff we talk about how to make successful indie games in particular narratively driven ones which I find a super fascinating topic does story even sell games nowadays we go into a lot of detail, a lot of the nitty-gritty. I found it quite interesting and I hope you do as well. Enjoy. Tell us more about those regrets. Which regrets do you have? >> Okay, so our first game was very successful and our second game, it is far behind our first game commercially. I basically have had a year to ponder why that was and recently wrote up a postmortem about it. Uh so what are my biggest regrets in a nutshell? I think a lot of factors were out of our control, but one of the things we definitely did wrong was making a game without marketability in mind where it's kind of hard to get the concept across easily. And that's something that was already in the concept stage and was kind of on us and not our publisher who was like handed this game and we were like, "Hey, market this." But I think having designed the game already, we put them in a tough situation because it was kind of like this weird hybrid that's hard to grasp. On your website, um I think it says that your entire studio is focused on making detective games where your choices matter. >> Mhm. >> So both your first game and your second game both fall into this category, right? >> Yes, exactly. And our third game may also do that. >> Got it. So that's quite interesting. So you're even though they're in the same genre, you say one was way more marketable than the other. So it's it's not the genre. Then what is it? >> Uh well, with our first game, we just went all in uh settingwise on something that kind of screams detective gameplay because we have this noir uh type setting and main character too. If you have a main character who's this like brooding, smoking, trench coatwearing uh dude, right? Uh then I think it's much easier to understand for the players what this character is going to do, right? It's like going to be some detective type. And our second game was much more like pure sci-fi and sci-fi isn't necessarily associated with detective gameplay. So, we had the especially with the artwork, we had very little clues as to what you would be doing in the game. Um, even though both games provide a very similar like type of experience, the first one's setting and character designs and everything was much closer to to that like conveyed that more easily. >> Got it. So the first detective game screamed detective game and the second one did not and that's why it was more difficult and that's basically the problem in a nutshell that that you've identified. >> I think I think it's one of the big problems uh like I identified a few more as to what went wrong. I think the market also changed in between the two releases. The first one being in 2021 at the height of COVID and the second at 2024 when a bunch of games were coming out that was still like funded during the COVID boom. Uh so we kind of went with the highs and the lows of the market as well. It's impossible to tell if like if the release windows were switched what would have happened, >> but I do think there are other issues that are inside our control like the marketability that made it harder to >> I have the two Steam pages open here on my second monitor and like looking at the art is this hindsight bias, right? It's always easy to say in hindsight, but I think I kind of get why the the first one sold better. >> Mhm. And I think it's also my theory would be also it's got a bit to do with the 3D >> style because it's you would think that 3D sells better. Typically in my experience 3D actually sells better. >> Mhm. >> But I but I think one of the side effects of 3D is that um it makes assets more expensive to make and so you make less of them >> and then the the rooms look a little bit uh more generic and empty because you have to reuse more and so on and so so forth. So, when I look at the 2D screenshots, I think they they have a lot of personality because there's a lot of detail. And when I look at the your 2.5D screenshots from Between Horizons, they they also look very nice. So, don't get me wrong, right? I'm complaining on a very high level here, like expert level complaints, but I think they do look a bit more generic. >> Yeah, I agree with you. Uh we, you know, when we first started out, we thought, okay, maybe we can have a a production level quality of of some of the games that that like, for example, I don't know if you saw um a game called The Last Night that was announced and never came out. >> Um in the meantime, a game called Replaced was announced that is probably going to come out at some point. Um, and those are also like mixing pixel art and 3D, but if you're if you're honest with yourself looking at these, the workload, um, and the level of detail they have to put in every scene is kind of insane. So, with the budget and crew that we had, there was just no way to to achieve that level of detail in this time frame. >> Um, so like you said, it kind of ended up more barren than we anticipated. >> Exactly. And um I think detail is more important for some genres than others, right? For some genres it might not matter, but for a detective game where detail is kind of the interesting thing, >> yeah, >> probably does make a bit of a difference. >> I I also think uh to expand on this 2D thing, uh a lot of people who like our games are from the point-and-click crowd and they kind of recognize this is my type of jam. It's a 2D game. Um, and uh, it's kind of more it's closer in style to point-and-click games than the 3D game that we made. So, I think that's also a factor that people have a harder time recognizing this is the type of game I like because often times the games that are adjacent to ours are 2D. >> That's a very interesting point. Yeah. So the So Lacuna taps more into the nostalgia factor and also the the recognizability of people who have played >> lots of point and click. Got it. >> Exactly. Even though that wasn't that was kind of an accident like we don't really pay uh play point and click games ourselves much. We didn't take them as inspiration much and pixel art wasn't a nostalgic choice. It was a design choice like a art style that we like. But we just attracted these people who were like, "Oh, this is a lot like X and Y from the '9s or the '8s even." And we were like, "Oh, yeah, I guess." Um, but we did change a lot of things and people are receptive to them. So, you have like platformer controls rather than actually point. You never point or click. But to this day, every like third review we get says, "This is a great point andclick game." >> Okay. Yeah. I think um the point andclick genre at some point kind of disappeared, right? I I remember there being a lot of point and click adventures when when I was young. >> Yeah. >> Now there kind of aren't. I wonder why that is. Maybe maybe because the the formula evolved into sort of the type of game that you made with Lacuna and it's just uh combining everything with everything in the inventory is maybe not the proper way to design games anymore. >> Yeah. I I think back in the day when not as many games were coming out and you couldn't just look up every little thing online immediately, you would like be ready to engage with a game and click every pixel on the screen and combine every item with every item and think that's peak gameplay, right? But like 30, 40 years later, we found other more entertaining ways and we have a shorter attention span. So I think that you know we modernized on a lot of these aspects. You don't have an inventory. You don't do pixel hunting. You can just hit a button and see what's interactable around you. You don't have to click and wait for your character to walk there. Instead, you just play with a game pad or or was right. So, um a lot of these things are that are like tedious about point and click games are not in our game. But at its core, >> um it's still, you know, very narrative and puzzly and you have to think and read a lot. So, I think it's the same people who who like point andclick games. At least there's a good overlap. I think that makes a lot of sense. I I also have one friend who really likes point and click and actually also really is into this old retro look and feel. So >> yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I can >> they often go hand in hand. >> Confirm that from my personal circle as well. Yeah. I saw you also have some uh other regrets though. For example, one related to maybe growing the team too quickly. >> Yeah. >> Was it just that you too quickly? you know, it wasn't even uh necessarily too quickly or maybe it was for the wrong reasons or for no reason at all. Maybe like we off the heels of our first game, we had you know quite a successful launch and then we were talking to our publisher again to Assemble Entertainment who published our first game >> and they were like sure let's do let's do the next game together because they were happy um with how it went and we had the budget and we were like okay okay cool I guess that's what you do then like >> uh when you're successful you just like get bigger and you scope your next game bigger and that was a little bit without rhyme or reason even though the ways in which we extended the formula. They were all based in thorough game design considerations and discussions. At the end of the day, we didn't need to change the formula in such a way that it blew up the budget and the team and the scope and uh and the runtime of the production. We could have uh improved the formula without doing these things. And it sort of resulted in had side effects that in hindsight made it unnecessarily hard and and not fun for me um because I was just managing a lot >> and uh I didn't get to do the fun parts as much >> and sort of my creative input was was less on on between horizons just because when you have seven employees you have less time for that and you get you know you let other people do the get like get their hands dirty with the actual game development, but it also resulted in me not having much of an insight into the nitty-gritty anymore. So, I didn't know how systems worked anymore. Um, and whenever I would like run into a bug while I was trying to implement content or test something or had to send out a build for whatever reason and there was an issue, I had to rely on someone else. I had to make a ticket and report uh, you know, everything in detail and record footage. And as someone who works basically 24/7 because it's what I like to do and I pay myself, that would often times result in me having to wait three days until a coder was like free from their task or because the weekend was over. So, you know, with Luna, I could just grind at it all the time because I had my hands in every little system. And with Between Horizons, I kind of needlessly gave up a lot of the control when we could have just made a game that improved on some things without having to do all this. Would you say that back then you maybe didn't fully understand why the why Lakuna was successful in the first place and thereby uh expanded on the wrong things maybe a bit. Is that a way to put it? >> I'm not sure. Uh I don't really know. I don't really remember what I knew or thought 3 years ago. Um, but I will say that if I had to expand on the formula now or like make changes like as Luna with Luna as a starting point, I would definitely make different changes. I mean that's the power of hindsight like you said but the types of changes that we made to the formula even though they were well thought out they added stuff um in ways that wasn't necessary um when I would have maybe even cut down on stuff >> like I would have more tried to find the essence like what is the core and what makes that core fun >> rather than thinking okay we have a working thing what could we how could expand on that >> because we didn't need to expand. The thing we had was already good. I think um if you look at some later really like uh the case of the Golden Idol came out after Luna and just overtook us in in a short amount of time even though it has arguably fewer features and it's more simpler and more focused on the detective loop in a very very elegant way. And I think I would have strived for elegance rather than adding stuff if I had to make the choice again. >> That makes a lot of sense. It's always so frustrating as a developer cuz you you fall into this trap where you think if you put in more effort it will do better or if you or if you scale it up it will do better, right? So we have a working formula. So if we scale this formula up it will do better. And that's just >> not how it works at all. >> Not at all. Not at all. Not at all. You have to know exactly which which corners you can cut and what what you have to really nail. >> And I see this a lot with like I I play a lot of these very cheap horror games on Steam and they often times are quite successful. Like they have like fourdigit amounts of of reviews or at least uh you know like for for what they are it's impressive because the the the UI looks like trash. Everything is this ter it's like the default UI. they just slapped it in there. Um, but as long as there is like somewhat of an atmosphere or some cool little gimmick that people like, nothing really matters. Uh, like it it does the horror thing that people came here for. And if they only paid like five bucks, a lot of people will come for just that. And you can pretty much like let everything else fall by the wayside if you have a cool little concept with the gimmick that people like. >> With the knowledge you have now, what what would you say? How do you find this essence of your game? How do you know what matters and what should what should be left out? >> I can only speak to the detective genre. I think with the detective genre, we focused more on the story that we need than we needed to because while that is kind of cool, people will get invested in the story by having to think about the story either way. even if it's nonsensical or silly or not that well written at the end of the day once they figure it out that is the mo like the eureka moments right that's kind of what what makes the the fun in detective games so I think the >> the process of of solving a case and that isn't a puzzle or a riddle or a miniame so like cases are sort of a different beast in that you have a lot of information that the player is presented with um ideally something that isn't very fun I think is the memorization of that. If you have to go looking for all that stuff again, ideally the game organizes for you in a concise way and it's like a puzzle that you have to put together in your mind. Detective games are very elegant in that they don't really care how you arrive at the solution. They don't provide a template for you to communicate uh your thought process. What they do is they they throw a bunch of stuff at you and let you organize that in your mind and then you just communicate back the solution. It's like writing the answer to a math problem without any of the steps um right in between. And this process nailing this um and making the UI um non frustrating in such a way that you have everything right where you need it. Um and then just giving it to the player that is kind of what a detective game is at its core. And we did a lot of other stuff around it. Like you can walk around and you have characters and you have choices and a story and that kind of makes it unique. But like if you look at games that just do detective gameplay really well like Return of the Ora Den or Case of the Golden Idol that are less focused on the story and where the story is always subjugated to the game design clearly. Even though the stories can be good, it really doesn't matter that much. Those are all much more successful than ours >> because they did this one thing and they did it really well and they communicated often times better than we do. Like if you have something like the case in the title is also very smart, >> right? Uh we joke internally that our next game will be called the case of of the mystery clue or something. >> Yes. >> So when you talk about um detective games, you do mean games where eventually the player has to make a guess of who uh committed the crime or who was the murder or something. So you have uh the entire game leads to that one moment where you put in that one name essentially, right? >> Yes. Yes. It can be like there are different ways to ask the solution from the player. One challenge is that you don't prompt them with the solution, right? There are some games that have moments where you have to like pick a solution. I think in in The Wolf Among Us, there's this moment where you have to have this big revelation, but you only have three dialogue choices and like two of them make no sense. So like you pick, you know, uh and kind of a good detective game has to like do the opposite by uh having a like combinatorial explosion, right? you. Like for example, you have the player put together a whole sentence that is like a closed text and they have a bunch of verbs and a bunch of nouns and it's kind of impossible to guess unless you really went through the whole thought process and then you have this moment and then you just put in the three words out of however hundreds or thousands of combinations you can make with those words. >> This is when you really like you have to make players feel clever. I think that's the fun. >> And of course, you can have intermediate steps where maybe you need to guess um certain sub goals or sub information that you need to solve the final case or something like this, right? >> Yes. But one thing with detective games is that you can't really confirm or deny that a solution is correct until, how should I put this? One problem is that if you let players guess at partial solutions and it's kind of easy to just like go through all possible solutions and just lock in the one that when the game tells you this is the correct one, right? Um then you can just brute force your way through the whole thing. Uh so detective games often have mechanics like Return of the Ora Den where after you get like Return of the Oprah den to those who don't know is like um you uh enter like an empty ship that comes back with everybody is gone or dead on board and you have to figure out the fates of everybody that was on the ship. Um and you have a bunch of like verbs of like how they died like stabbed or eaten or whatever, right? Um, and you have to match the names to the people and the fates. And only after a set of three fates that you got completely right will the game tell you correct. So basically, you can only like guess at it a little bit when you are certain of two fades and with the third fate you're like, is this like impaled or is this speared or is this stabbed? And you just go through it until the game says yes. Okay. Yeah. >> Um, but you can't do this in small increments otherwise people can just brute force it. >> And when you say detective games where your choices matter, what does that mean that choices matter? >> So it means two things. For one, you can have choices in the story that are like usually moral gray areas where there's no real good solution like Telltale games, right? is like usually choosing between two defensible positions or two bad things uh in just in the story. Uh and those are usually related to the core questions that the the the story has like or like the themes of the story. Um but also in our games so far you could get the cases wrong. Um and the story will go on and there will be repercussions and the game never explicitly says your case solution was correct or wrong. Um, and people really enjoyed that because it kind of keeps you on you only have one chance. The game like just saves all the time. There's no way of going back >> and you just have to keep wondering like did I get the right suspect or something and like two chapters later you're like, >> "Oh no." >> Oh, okay. >> Right. So, um, this is kind of a USP of our games, but is it worth it? Because branching content is is such a pain to implement. Um, and a lot of people left reviews saying, "Oh, there isn't even much branching." Which is untrue. Like, there's so many ways the game can evolve, but because it's kind of seamless and I hope because it's well written, you think you're like in the one main story line because there's no clearly, oh I skipped this whole cool part because I got this thing wrong. You still get the whole story. Um, and at the end of the day, I don't know how much people really appreciate this because other detective games who didn't do this, they did just as well or better. So, what what are we doing all this for? >> Yeah, that's what I'm that's what I'm also wondering about is if that's a necessary part of the formula or if that's one part of the formula that could be simplified away. That's an interesting interesting question, but that's also why some games have like these little popups. Jonas will remember that or something like that is like >> okay this does have some kind of impact I guess >> I think so I think so too they added this later because people were like well no like all my actions have no effects even when they did so they just they just put it there say no your action does have an effect because people didn't realize but um >> yeah they really do and we didn't do this we never we never show a visualization we are very obscure about like anything you can you tell anyone could have some ripple effect and you just don't know and I think that's really cool but it leads to a lot of people not even knowing that it did. I think the way to possibly solve that is in the onboarding process right you need to create one situation at the very beginning of the game where it becomes very very obvious without without having a pop-up >> that your actions do have consequences and then maybe players get it. Yeah. >> Yeah. Because like Luna was a is linear in terms of like which scenes you get uh with little exceptions but like a few. Um we have this in Luna in the very beginning you can like decide to go with a friend and then you're late for class and the teacher sculls you because you're late for class. So you're like oh  Okay that dialogue option in the beginning had uh like but in an environment where it doesn't really punish you right it's just to show you in a safe environment. Hey, your first choice impacted the next scene. Um >> Oh, you did try that. Okay. And that was the first problem. Okay. >> No, because people still don't know what later on really led to what, right? >> Okay. >> And in Between Horizons, it's kind of more obvious because there's much more agency on the player to begin with because we have like a semiopen world that's like we basically have like Metroid Vania style unlocks except you get the new areas with new cases. rather than new gadgets, right? So, you can just um freely move around the the spaceship and you can show anyone any clue. So, it's super open-ended. >> Okay. >> Um and you retain all the clues from the entire game. So, they might still be relevant to a case much later. Um and we had to account for a million things. Um to a point where it it becomes impossible to account for all that where we had the problem that players were like, well, they didn't account for anything. like I had this idea, but if you realize there's like 40 plus people on the ship and you have like dozens and dozens of clues to show them and you can talk to every person about every other person about every clue and about every location on the ship, then we would blow up our localization budget um to like unfathomable like bigger than the production itself, right? To just have people react to every little thing. So people are like, well, you give me this freedom, but I can only like really do something with 5% of it. >> I think this problem is probably in theory somewhat solvable with LLMs now if you're clever about it. >> Yes. >> But yeah, I see the point. >> Yeah. Yeah. So, but that that sounds like a a bit of an oversight of on your end as well then to >> um blow up the combinatorial space so much that you can only cover a small percentage of things people might try, right? >> Yes, exactly. I mean, it is somewhat alleviated if we nudge them enough that they're never like super clueless and try to like just brute force anything, but it can happen and then then they will blame the game obviously because that's how it goes. but also for the for the branching decisions and for the branching story lines. So players weren't like, "Oh, that's so cool that the story is branching." They were more like, "Where is it branching?" That was like more the reaction you got so far or >> um it's just a downside that I mentioned. A lot of people do appreciate and notice it. Um I'm just saying if you try to be extra seamless by doing like um like you know every story path justice and by obscuring what like decisions actually do have consequences then it might backfire in a way that people just never realize that that's what happened. I think there are a lot of people interested in in making story based games. I'm also curious, what do you think what makes for a good story in a game specifically? >> Well, in a game specifically, I would say it's player agency. I think that you can really give people something to think about if you put them, uh, in a tough spot, right? Like in a book, um, you can talk about something in depth, but in a game you can play make players responsible for their actions and what they say. And uh so I do think that that is like difficult choices are generally what makes games interesting and difficult choices in stories is what makes story games interesting in my opinion. Um, and what makes a story good in general, I would say, is an overarching theme or question. That's like universally true in my opinion. And that's usually like our guiding star when we write like every dialogue that you have or every major story beat at least somewhat contributes to the larger question or theme. >> So there for every game there's like one big underlying question, maybe a moral question or something along those lines. >> Yes, exactly. Yeah. >> Yeah. I often think about games in terms of of appeal, right? In terms of what attracts players to a game. Do you I I often wonder this. Do you think that story does have an appeal factor? Do are there people who play games for the story? And if so, how do you attract those players? >> They do. Um, the problem is that knowing if a story is good takes like three hours until you are like invested, right? Um, if if you have a game to sell someone because uh of a of a simple premise or gameplay gimmick or whatever, it's much easier like with story games, how how do you tell them, hey, we have a good story? It's it's super difficult to convey I think like as opposed to selling a game via an art style or or a core mechanic where or or even a premise like some games just say I like frog detective you're a frog that's a detective right this genius it's brilliant it's like what you see is what you get whereas in between horizons if I were to like describe to you why the story is good like we have to take five minutes right so it's a hard cell in that you're only going to know if you're interested and invested after you're already in the game. And this also makes it super duper hard for people to like we we barely go to physical events anymore. And if you do, it's more for other reasons because people will not play the game for an hour and start caring about the characters and start thinking about their predicaments. Like it's nobody does that at Gamescom, right? Um, so I think story games are for those reasons kind of a hard sell in general, but otherwise I think you sell them the same way you sell the other people on other genres. You try to get the tags right on Steam and you try to get uh, you know, um, into this crowd and this niche where the people already are um, who appreciate story games. But the people who come to your store page, will will they ever say something like, "Oh, the story of this sounds interesting. I want to play it." Or is it that they buy the game for different reasons and then they're hooked by the story once they're in the game? >> I mean, I we try to make the things that are immediately obvious, like the art style. We try to make them at least appealing enough so people will be then are not turned off by them. And I uh yeah, I think that um a lot of people look at game like when I imagine somebody looking at a store page, they might look at the review score. They might look at games similar to what you played. Um they might look at this is owned or recommended by a friend. Um and and many metrics that are not like really in your control that communicate to the player, oh this is some that is the type of game that I like. Um, I also think that UI is oftentimes a big giveaway to, you know, oh yeah, okay, I see there's a dialogue UI. I like games, so I have to make choices or or something like this, right? Um or, oh, there's a clue um thing UI or there's like a closed text. Oh, I like games where I have to solve cases. >> But I don't ever think people buy it because they think, oh, the question at the core of this game is something that I've asked myself for a long time. uh or you know I don't think that the narrative premise m much more the the the setting I think a lot of people are like oh I like sci-fi or I like noir um and that's my thing. >> Yeah. >> Yeah. I guess so the the the setting maybe serves as a proxy for the story in a way. >> Yeah. Absolutely. But I do think sci-fi is kind of tough. Like sci-fi is kind of very far removed from our reality and and like sometimes like very clean and clinical. I don't know how I think it's a harder cell than some other settings, but maybe it's just because it's a like I know there's a hard cell. Maybe everything is a hard cell. I sort of have this theory that what makes things interesting is often times making them oddly specific, right? a generic sci-fi corridor, that's not not interesting. Nobody cares about that. >> But if it's like very oddly specific, if it's like there are very specific cables leading to a very specific box that has like a strange design on it >> and and the floor tiles are like not typical spaceship iron floor, but it's like maybe >> maybe a specific carpet. And it's like there's a reason why this carpet is there. Maybe maybe it leads to the chief's office and he wants to have like a nice carpet to his uh to his capsule or something. Then all of a sudden it it gets so much more interesting, right? So >> yeah, >> oddly specific things are interesting and I think >> um those things are often lacking in sci-fi themes because sci-fi is so detached from what we typically see that we can't even really imagine how these oddly specific things might look like. I >> I agree with you. I think like for example mouthwashing is sci-fi but it has such a weird aesthetic of its own and the whole setting is such a twist and uh not very clean sci-fi at all >> uh that it's a much better much better like selling point than our very generic clean it's a it's a spaceship you know type deal and that's what I'm saying luna has this much more it's like when you look at the screenshots >> there's a lot more oddly specific things where like >> in environmental storytelling why is that there and you kind of see the the slums and all of the the houses and all of the specific people >> the furniture of the houses you're in it's like not not generic it's like specific furniture like >> this one screenshot I'm looking at is like very very high quality chair what it looks like >> paintings on the walls and so on >> I I think you you absolutely put your finger on something important and uh like one thing that you said is like doing like level of detail and personality in 3D just costs more than it does in 2D. Um but also this was had a few reasons like for one thing if you grow your team unless you pay very close attention or have very strong vision keeper things become a little more designed by committee like as the committee grows right um because with Luna um the team was smaller we had like one in-house artist and I would very specifically uh write up requirements and often come up with the like the premise of the environments I would be like what if we have like a market but that market is like on built on bridges between highrises wouldn't that be like I had sometimes like right um and a lot of this process was not as present in between horizons for a number of reason one >> I kind of gave it away more and I was like hey we need something and for the game play we need this and that clue to be there right but otherwise it's a machine room yeah right and that's pretty much it um the other thing was between horizons we had to develop the pitch and basically jump into the pre-production in parallel to Lacuna. Uh because you know you don't want to start thinking about your next game when your when your previous game comes out. You have to have a lot ready and basically be able to jump into pre-production uh the on release day of your previous title. So this was already going on for a while but we didn't have as much time. Luna was basically in pre-production for years before we even found the Digi Tales. So, it had a lot of time to rattle around my head and have develop more of a personality, right? Whereas in Between Horizons, it had a year during which we basically made the >> biggest part of Luna still. Um, >> so, um, yeah, it just had less time to evolve and from the first moment on, we were locked into like a monthly deliverable schedule with our publisher. Whereas in Luna, we had like 5 years to just like try stuff out and shove it sometimes and take it back out and then it, you know, would evolve much more organically. >> Yeah, the design by committee is also very interesting and very true. like the more like oddly specific is much easier to do when you're alone or in a small team. >> Yeah. >> Because when you suggest something oddly specific in a team, then other people are likely to to just say, "Well, that's that's odd." >> Yeah. Yeah. When it's actually the odd ideas that are often like really good, like like mouthwashing, like what the ship transports mouthwashing. Why? Like what is so stupid? But it's such a good game and such a good story um because it has this edge and this personality. >> Okay, maybe this is the time to to dive into studio history. Do you want to tell me a bit about how it all started and sort of the the entire journey how it's been like so far? >> So I uh started out making music and sound design for games uh about 11 years ago. Um I lived in Munich at the time >> and started working with studios there. um started freelancing uh parallel to my masters and then I joined uh clunk games that became the delic Bavaria and then became shut down um and basically I was in house there doing gigs for them audio stuff but that way I kind of got um bit of an idea of what it is to like work in a studio and what you know can go right and what can go wrong through that time I kind of wanted to do more and I I wanted to do video games because I was a gamer and I just could only do audio. Uh but I've always kind of thought about expanding that. And then uh yeah, with uh my co-founder Yasm mean we we started working on um the Kuna in our free time in parallel and then founded the studio in 2019. Um and this was a good time because the state funding program was just started. Uh we were just go headed into the pandemic which was bad in many ways but not for the games industry. Um and we had you know publishers had money to throw around at the time uh unlike now it feels like. Uh so we basically had our vertical slice ready at that point. We pitched it to Assemble Entertainment. Um they signed us which is kind of rare. We we pitched it to only a handful of publishers and one of them gave us a funding deal which was really uh a big leap on their part but it it paid off like Luna was very successful and then >> nice. So when you said so when you say we how many people were you back then? >> Uh we founded uh as four people we had Yasmin and myself who were doing pretty much everything except art and then we had one artist and one programmer. >> Okay. Got it. >> Mhm. And this was actually kind of a sweet spot. I think four people was really good. Uh and then for Between Horizons, as I mentioned, we grew the team. We worked with Assemble again and we were seven people. And ever since, like Between Horizons came out a year and a half ago, but it was supposed to come out even sooner. So, we had to uh cover the production for a longer time. Um and we've kind of uh yeah, been running on fumes for a while now. So, uh, we're we're okay compared to some some friends. A lot of friends have shut down over the past few years. >> Um, but, um, we're still kicking, but we also, uh, scaled the studio down. We're only three people in house now >> and two very regular external people. >> Got it. >> Yeah. >> And that's also why you're maybe running a planning to run a Kickstarter for your next game. >> Yeah. So, part of the reason for that, that's a whole different story. So, our next game is actually not Unburied for which the Kickstarter is already uh the Kickstarter preview page is up. Our next game is actually coming out in between uh and we haven't announced it yet. We're going to announce it later this year. >> And uh we also happened to become a publisher this year, which was more of a opportunistic move than a big strategy thing. But uh friends of ours uh were making a game called The Great Sassanelli and we really liked it. Uh it's like this World War I setting where you manage like a traveling circus in Europe and you have to make a lot of tough choices which is what was kind of our deal and it's really really well written and it was uh pretty far in development. So we decided to help them out to get it across the finish line and publish the game. Um, so those two are coming up next and then we're actually going to do the Kickstarter for Unburied. For now, this is all self-funded, but like I said, not not like from our Scrooge McDuck uh, you know, money bin. We are we are do running a very lean operation now. >> Okay. Okay. >> Yeah. But I mean by by circumstance but also by choice in a way because like I said earlier I felt like expanding wasn't even the right move to begin with. >> If you can break free of the the funding treadmill eventually that's like the the goal for most studios that >> that are in that place anyway. Right. So >> exactly now we're thinking we're going to make shorter games that we can bankroll. We're going to publish them more frequently. they're going to be cheaper, but if we're not giving a lion share to the publisher, we're still going to get the same, you know, amount per unit. Uh, but if the game is only five bucks and not 15 bucks, a lot more people might buy it. So, you know, we have a more frequent release schedule and we might just uh make uh just as much money with the games and and they're cheaper to make. >> Yeah. I mean, from a from a business perspective, this sounds like a smart idea, right? make your entire studio focused on like one specific niche genre and like get very good at it and then just pump out a lot of games. >> Yeah. Yeah. >> Sounds like a good idea. >> I'm I'm not sure we're going to stick with the genre. For the next game we will, but for example, Unburi definitely is outside of our comfort zone. It has like survival horror elements and and stuff that we never really dabbled in only like as fans. Um, but uh because Unburied is kind of a bigger production again, we're going to have two possibly three releases over the next two years >> that will help uh fund it because no Kickstarter actually finances an entire game's production. >> That's true. The thing is that when whenever you dip your toes into a new genre, you kind of have to relearn what people in that genre actually care about, right? Otherwise you'll >> you'll repeat the mistake of optimizing the wrong things, expanding the wrong things. >> Absolutely. >> And this is of course possible and doable. Like we also like dipping our toes into different jars, making different kinds of games. >> Um yeah, but it's it's a good question though, right? How do you how do you really find I asked the same question earlier. I'll just ask it again and see if we can uh dig a bit deeper. How do you figure out what what matters, especially when you get into a new genre that maybe you don't have as much experience with yet? >> Yeah, I mean, the good thing about genres like survival horror, unlike detective games where your choices matter is you can just steal it, right? Like, you know, I don't how does it I don't want to butcher it. Like good artists copy great artists steal uh or something. Um, I feel like there are some things that just still work about survival horror. Some things have become kind of obnoxious, but when you look at how survival horror games are remastered, I feel like we've already figured out what we want to keep around and what we want to ditch. Um, so a lot of really good survival horror games have been coming out that have a more modern formula. And if you do something like that, I'm not going to, you know, I I wouldn't reinvent the wheel. Yes, there's like safe rooms and there you can save uh and you have a magic crate that is everywhere and you have limited inventory space and uh like all these things in survival horror it is very formulaic. >> Yeah. >> Um and people because this market isn't super oversaturated from where I'm standing um people will play it if it has a good production value. That's so that's the hope. I mean interview me again in a few years. Yeah, it's a you always know more in hindsight. It's always what I find weird about horror games in general is their obsession with with monsters. They're basically they're usually just uh chase games, right? You're you're chased by a monster, you have to hide. May maybe sometimes you do some resource management and you have some some weapons to maybe either fend off of some weaker monsters or >> or to scare away the big monster. And that's kind of every horror game is kind of exactly this way. >> I wouldn't say everyone, but I think a lot of the more like um recent successes are very much built around gimmicky monsters like Poppy Playtime, right? You see their little little dude as a merch in every corner store and it's like >> crazy focused on that. there is this genre of like these games for kids with like a kids type setting that are actually really creepy um that have been making the rounds and but I think classic survival horror uh in the vein of Resident Evil and Silent Hill is is a little different, right? It's like I mean, of course, you have iconic monster designs. You have a you have like Pyramid Head and Nemesis or whatever, but at the end of the day, the the draw is more the overall experience, this like feeling of dread and everything being always running out and depleted. And I I have the theory that this like way of disempowering the player, because we like to see games as power fantasies a lot of the time, but survival horror games kind of do the opposite. Like you can barely fight back. You have like three bullets and 15 enemies roaming the area, right? And you already like are low on health and you have like no more pills and everything feels shitty and you dive deeper and deeper into this complex and everything feels more there's no way you're going to get out of this alive and at the end you actually do defeat the big bad and you actually do kind of find a way to overcome everything. I think it's just like delayed empowerment in a way, right? we like beat the player down and they and getting up at the end is all the more like uh cathartic and empowering. >> I wonder how much of that is like essentially a magic trick where programmers are just like if you have more than 30 ammunition, I'm just not going to drop any new ammunition and then as soon as it's low, we're going to drop some new stuff for you or something. >> Yeah, I I think there's a lot of trickery to this to making things feel more close, right? I'm pretty sure that they have this vague indication of health for example and I think that the lower tank more damage you're okay um but you take one damage and it's like um no long it's like it's like orange right and you take two damage and it's red and you run around in the red for a long time you're like oh my god I'm almost dead but in in reality it's like the health the half of your health bar is still left right you can still take and like this this impression of making it closer than it actually is um is I think big part of of horror games. >> Actually, health potions and like um ways to heal yourself kind of have the same effect cuz it essentially splits your health bar into multiple parts, right? In Dark Souls, if you carry 10 health potions, you essentially have 10x the amount of health that actually shows up in this little HP bar. >> Exactly. Exactly. that feels a lot closer because obviously if you don't manage to heal yourself then you're dead. Yeah. >> And and also I think in horror games in particular, you don't want to like people to die. Uh because that kind of takes you out of the experience, right? It's scary that you're afraid of dying, but after you died five times, it's gone. Like you know what it is and you just like start to think of it more as a game and you start minmaxing and you just go through and you get you tank all the hits and then you just reload the save and all that So, I think um making the player think they're almost dead all the time, but in reality, the monsters just like would awkwardly stare at you for five more seconds before you kindly move out of the way, right? Um, that's kind of also a big part of the trickery like in those haunted there's like haunted house videos on Tik Tok where people just don't run away from the performers and because the performers they won't actually stab you. They just like stand there because you're supposed to be scared of what they could do to you, right? >> And I I think uh yeah, a lot of this this magic is also in video games. >> All right. So you're you're getting into that genre with your unannounced game or No, no, that was the Kickstarter game is the going this direction. You said >> our unannounced game is more of in the vein of our previous games >> more detective story like yeah >> learning from from some of the mistakes. And what are you doing for differently for the unannounced game like without spoiling anything? >> So it's more linear. We have we have some choices that have some impact on the story, but we dropped the open-ended stuff from Between Horizons. And we even dropped the thing that you can solve cases wrong and the story will do something else. At least unless we can like sneak it in like a loweffort way, but probably not. We're probably just going to drop this. Um because of the games that since came out, they just require you to solve the case and then you can move on. And it seems people are fine with that. We always had this mantra of not getting stuck was one of our big design principles. Um but in a time when everybody can just like go on Reddit real quick, you're never really stuck, right? So we were like, "Oh, it's going to break the immersion, but like no, we we just have to balance it well and that's fine." So that that's gone, at least for this game. Um because other games have shown that it's unnecessary. M >> um so it's more focused on the detective stuff and the story is also more secondary. There is a kind of a story that's still deep. It's still a lot of yapping. It's still complex characters. It still has a message and a theme and all that. Um but it is less of a focus and more uh subjugated to game design. And now you're just uh curious to um explore new genres or what's your idea behind the change or are you like maybe maybe detective games is not uh where the big money can be made or what's like your what's your uh reasoning for the change in direction? >> The reasoning is honestly kind of personal like after over a decade of dabbling in detective games. I mean, we've been doing it full-time for like half a decade now, >> but the Cuna was already rattling around my head for 5 years prior. >> Uh, I've kind of I kind of want to do something else. >> Okay. >> It's not a strategic thing, but we are kind of in games because it's the thing we like to do, right? So, I think having that dictate somewhat what you want to do next is is fair. >> Yeah, of course that makes sense. Coming back to your article, let me quickly check what else you wrote about there. Suffering from success. Like the first headline I see here. >> Yeah. >> Do you think it's a common thing that people struggle with their second game? Actually, the interview I recorded last week was with Katarina from Spell Garden. >> Oh, yeah. Cool. >> They made Sticky Business and then they made Ritual of Raven. And also their first game was I think it's fair to say much more successful than >> Yeah, >> it's a common pattern. I think it's not super uncommon. >> Why do you think this happens and do you think this can be avoided? >> So in their particular case, we know we know each other very well. We actually worked on their on their all their latest DLCs that came out and updates that came out. We did those. >> Yeah, we made them and I actually I personally ported everything to Nintendo Switch that came out the sticky business for the last few years. are not funny. >> Yeah, I think that they uh in their case, if I were to like like criticize them directly, I think that they made a similar mistake to us, they uh Ritual of Raven doesn't really like it has a vibe like Between Horizons has a sci-fi vibe. Ritual of Raven has like a magically mystery vibe, but at the end of the day, um, what the game is is kind of harder to convey and it's much more than just it's a little magicy and mystery because you have all these contra constructs that you can um like program to do like your harvesting of your fields and stuff and like it's and it's all based on tarot cards and it takes a lot of tutorials to get across and stuff. whereas their first game it's called sticky business and you have a sticker business it right so I think the premise is just much easier to convey um the other thing is also that their first game came out uh in a better and different market than their second game which is not something you really control I think they have some of the same issues that we have with our with our games um but in terms of like why your first game might be your best game at least for a long time um is because sometimes your first game is the one you really wanted to get out and that had like a decade to develop in the back of your head, right? And after that, you're like, "Oh we have a game studio now, and we have to come up with another game." Um, and that might not be as mature of an idea, but uh yeah, >> it's not as mature, but at the same time, you want to scale it up and make it bigger. >> Yeah, exactly. Yeah, you have maybe you run into some of these fallacies too because at the first game uh you were maybe more full of doubt and scaled it small and you're like, "Oh god, awesome. We like made a big ass game and like like now we can just do a bigger game." But yeah, I think there's a lot of traps you can fall into off the heels of a successful release. And I think it's difficult like I think no matter if you're making games or music or whatever, you're always kind of uh afraid that you peaked back then, right? you're like, "Oh was that the best I could do? Was I better when I was younger? Was it lightning in a bottle or whatever?" >> Um, but I think that's rarely the I think you just have to analyze u what works and what doesn't and be honest with yourself and just try again. A lot of studios had slumps in the middle or had >> a game bomb at some point and their fifth game was their breakout success. I don't think there's a hard rule to this. >> I think this was something I saw in your article as well is that as a game developer, you never really feel like you made it, right? I I had this I had this feeling for a long time. I was like >> at my first successful game, >> the feeling of yes, I made it. It just never set in. It didn't set enough after the second game. And now even even after after the third one, I'm still like I don't know. I don't know if the next one's going to do well. >> Oh yeah. Yeah. You still have to put in the work. It never stops. >> Yeah, >> I completely agree. It's not like we were like, "Oh my god, we're on top of the world." It's not like we made a super successful game, but for a debut title, it was good and we thought, "Okay, we have something and we can expand on that, right?" >> Um, but that was already wrong. Like, we shouldn't have expanded on it in the ways that we did. >> Growth for growth sake. >> Yeah. >> Is there just a normal tendency to want to make your games bigger? Probably, right? It's like we want to make cool stuff. Bigger is cooler. >> Yeah. Yeah. I Yeah. I no longer think that, but yeah, that's the that's the thinking basically. Yeah. >> I I think if you have a really focused small game that does one thing really well, that's kind of what I strive towards more now. >> Mhm. And when you say play it safe, but don't play it too safe, what do you mean with that? >> So, I think that that's more a catchy wording for the headline. What I like and specifically meant there is making sequels is also kind of hard uh and selling them to people especially when they are clearly worded as a sequel because in my mind and what I've seen from some indie friends but this is anecdotal is that when people see that something is you know so and so game two or the reawakening or whatever the hell um and they didn't play the first game. Um, they will just buy the first game that goes on sale when like much more steeply when your second game launches, right? You have like a launch discount of 15%. But in order to like boost that, you put your first game on sale in a bundle or you you discount it by 70%. So, it gets a lot of traffic and you can plug your other game. But people are like, "Oh yeah, okay. I've never heard of the first one." So, they might buy it. Um, but then they might never install it and then they might never play it and then they might never finish it. Uh, and like by the time all these gates are passed, the potential person who buys your game part two is like is like just a tiny tiny percentage of of of everybody who uh like even considered your first game. So I really think that you hinder yourself if you if you even like as much as imply a little bit that it might be make sense to start with the first one unless it was like a breakout success. you have something on your hands like Little Nightmares and Little Nightmares 2. I guess that's fine, right? But even that for brand recognition specifically the the Little Nightmares people everybody knows they're now making Reanimal even though it's not called Little Nightmares because you can see their creative identity in it, right? >> Yeah. So, especially for indies, I would always recommend do a completely different franchise or if you're going to do the same universe, maybe make it sound like an anthology like uh the Mimi guys, they did like Shadow Tactics X, Shadow Tactics Y, Shadow Gambit. You see, it's like Shadow and so did this type of gameplay, but you never think, oh, I have to have played >> the other game to start this game, right? I think that that was mainly what I wanted to get across. >> Yeah. And this is especially true probably for story based games cuz first story based games imply an order that you should play things in. And that is that if they >> like statistically speaking it's just a lot of people don't finish games. It's just the way it is. And if they if they don't finish the first one they're they're not going to get to the second one. >> Exactly. That's the thing. You you're like making a game on purpose for incredibly small contingent of your potential player base because it's the people who bought, installed, played, finished your first game and all of these gates already let through like 5% of the previous people. >> So like why why are you selling a game to these five people? And that's interestingly different to how it works in the movie industry probably, right? Cuz for for films it's like a very seems or very for big studios it seems like a very safe strategy to be like uh let's make Madagascar 4, I guess. >> Yeah, people watch the last three. I I guess if it's worth their time, uh I don't really know their reasoning, but I mean in the case of Madagascar, you have a big success with the first one and you can ride the wave and that plays it more safe than doing something completely new. But as an indie game who had like a thousand or 2,000 reviews, which is good for an indie game, that still doesn't justify at all trying to make a sequel and getting this player base again >> because they almost nobody who bought your game finished your game. >> Yeah. I have to call you out on a similar thing I saw on your Between Horizons store page. >> Yeah. cuz your trailer starts uh with with a title card that says with the from the creators of Luna like >> that that's a bit optimistic that people know what this is even though it's quite successful, right? >> Yeah. >> I Yeah, I was I would never put this like on its own. We already start with visuals and it's sort of off to the side. Uh so it doesn't delay the start of the trailer. Um, we did this because we hoped that people would recognize us, but obviously, like you say, almost nobody ever heard of us. Uh, even people who might see this trailer, but surprisingly, every other review mentions, "I'm here because I played Luna and liked it." So, >> the good amount of our player base does come from our previous game, and they follow us as a studio, even though we didn't make Luna 2. So, we have those guys. And >> how did you how did you bring them over? Did you like heavily market from your other store page or do you like >> Yeah, I think it's mostly Steam internal traffic. We don't have a big uh socials that people follow and um I think they just have Luna and then they maybe follow our developer page. We have a decent following there. Um and we have uh like cross promotion between the games. Now Steam made it harder. Right now you can only at the bottom of your page say uh what you want featured there like more from this developer. Uh but for the most part since between rises came out it was still possible to add a little thing on your store page. So the first thing on Lacuna which always got a lot of traffic was also buy between horizons because by the same guys and I think this is the main driver. The thing is our publisher is the one who put the games out on the platforms and even though we can edit the store pages, we don't have access to the analytics data. So I couldn't tell you for sure. >> Yeah. Right. So now what you do is you just put a at least put a bundle at the very top here. I can see that um it's possible to get both of your games in a bundle at least. >> Yeah. Yeah. >> Yeah. And we did bundles with other games like Dark Side Detective and like games that people might like. >> Do you know what's going on with the bundle meta on Steam? because I've been getting like we've been getting lots of bundle requests recently. Is this like a like a very beneficial thing to be in bundles or is it is it that you're trying to uh get vis visibility on somebody else's store page essentially or what do you think? What's the the reasoning behind that? >> Maybe it's just bigger in the meta now because it's harder to plug your games on your own game pages, right? uh because they removed the ability to just add in these blocks until the very bottom of the page. So I think cross promotion by going to third party events and bundling with other developers are maybe more prevalent now. But that's just my guess. >> And I mean also one cool thing about bundles I guess is that they allow you to permanently discount your games which you can't do otherwise right? >> Yes. Yeah. Yeah. They don't adhere to the cool down of the individual game, right? >> Yeah. >> What do you think makes for good writing? Like on on the you answered the question on the macro level. You said like something have an underlying question. If we zoom in on the on the micro level of what what for example what makes for a good dialogue in a game. >> One thing that we strive for is that people speak like people. Uh this is not necessarily something that's universally good uh or bad, but I think it's something that gives you a certain style and also accessibility and like authenticity. A lot of game dialogue is very corny and you have, you know, villains doing the evil laugh and not behaving like humans, right? So we always try to have people have believable personalities and a way of speaking that is not only reflective of their personality but also easy to read for everyone. Um so we don't like use big words and should try to sound smart and we don't use uh we try to not use stereotypes too much in our writing. Sometimes stereotypes can be something you can hook someone in with. Like our noir main character dude, right? Looks like a noir main character dude. So it's like easily understandable on the surface, but then you can flesh that out and give it some twists and turns and some contradictions uh throughout the dialogues like you know and and make give give him a a more of a interesting profile. The other thing is I think dialogues are a good way of conveying story rather than just pros. Um, also I think I can write them more easily because I speak a lot and I hear people speak a lot. But writing in like a literary way, writing pros or poems or whatever, especially when it's not my first language, we always write in English uh, and I'm German, so we uh, you know, it comes more easily to us to just convey everything in dialects. And they're more they're more slow paced because every dialogue is a back and forth. It's one sentence or maybe two. Um you can have dialogues uh while people are doing things. Um you can have dialogues with uh um multiple people involved. I think one of the worst case scenarios and this is kind of something that we navigated ourselves in a corner with with Between Horizons is it's just two people looking at each other and just talking the whole time. Um because in Between Horizons you like go up to someone with like a piece of evidence and then it unlocks a thing and they they tell you something. Um, but when you look at how movies do dialogues, I mean, it's a budget question, too, but usually it's while something is happening, they're going somewhere or like something around them is happening and stuff. So, making a little bit of set dressing for the dialogue that makes it more dynamic um is is also good practice. Um, you can also do this by changing like by having the player just even if you just flip the sprite like somebody is mad at someone and they turn away from them. Like you got very cheap ways of making dialogue a little dynamic or moving the camera over or um like you know things like that. Um >> playing like changing the music up like with this restrictive camera view that we have. We can't do close-ups of actors faces with very limited range of expressing things. Um, so knowing how you can do things around the dialogue with the means available to you and using them a lot, um, is also part of the writing pro. It's like the misen, right? It's it's not just the words to make it less boring to just have people look at each other and talk. >> Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I see. A lot of games also quite heavily stylize their their text, right? When somebody's angry, like the text is shaking or Yes. >> stuff like that. Also cool stuff. We we've uh done this only to an extent. Uh we we had big plans for that but it was one of the things that kind of fell off the you know uh throughout production but um that is really cool. Yeah. When people are angry and they yell individual words and they appear immediately or or things like that. >> Um those are really cool and we utilize them also >> not as much as we wanted to. And what's really cool like the the to me the like big like mastery level is when you start using the UI uh in in like creative ways. Like for example in in Celeste there is this moment where a character like breaks out of their dialogue box like you have the portrait and and this person gets super angry and like grabs the dialogue box and like becomes bigger and like this like super creative use of this type of when you break the fourth wall in some ways. This is like super duper cool but also a matter of of budget and time. Um I share your love for dialogue and I think I can put a finger on it also why that is. I think the reason is that in dialogue you can write a single sentence but it can have a lot more meaning than a single sentence cuz >> yes >> the person could be lying. The person could be saying something but meaning something different. Like sometimes the reason you say something is like there there's so much subtext and dialogue that in my opinion that's more interesting than just plainly writing things out. >> Absolutely. You always communicate on like multiple channels if you want to or not. Right. You try to convey a self-image. You try to have a interpersonal message. Uh like the theformational contents are just a small part of of what you say at any given time. So I really think like keeping these channels in mind also makes for good writing for sure when you like >> people have an interest in conveying something that might be between the lines. >> Yeah. You want to I I agree. I think that's key actually. You you want to convey things and you don't want the dialogue to just be info dumps. >> Exactly. But this is difficult difficult line to tow because uh in detective games you sometimes have a lot of information you have to get across. Right. You have to have a premise. So, somebody broke in last night and they meddled with this and we have these scanners. They work this in that way. So, if somebody passed through here, blah blah blah. So, um yeah, we have to sort of strike a balance between providing information about the case and the ongoing story and still not lose everybody everybody's personality in the process. >> Have you played Outer Wilds? >> I have. Yes. Uh I I haven't finished it, but I look forward to doing that eventually. >> Yeah, you should. Um, but one thing I fi find interesting about um the writing in Outer Wilds is that it was one of the first games that made me care about reading all of the >> dialogues. And the reason for that was because I knew that every piece of information in there and also all of the subtext and everything like the the more I pay attention, the closer I pay attention, the there's like a direct gameplay reward in that potentially. So yeah, if I read carefully, I might get an idea that helps me advance in the game. This is exactly how we ended up with this story detective game combination because we realized forcing players to go a little bit out their comfort zone uh and having to think and having to read uh by making that making basically a test intermittently about uh how how well you paid attention to the previous bit is super fun actually. It it really invests you in the story. Um, if if the story is the game play and you have to pay attention like this is basically the negative example of this is how I originally came up with Auna because I was grinding some MMO. I was like playing Elder Scrolls Online and I was just like click click like yeah some NPC gives me some blah blah blah. I don't give a Where's the where's the quest marker and what's my reward basically, right? because you you get so focused on, you know, like the the things that actually matter to the game play, like what gear am I going to get? How much gold am I going to get? Whatever. I don't care if your sister fell into a well, like what's the where's the icon on the map? Um, so you just go there and you don't really give a about the story. Uh, and I was like, what the what the hell am I doing with my time? Like, I don't like I don't care about any of this. But then there was a quest where I actually had to pay attention and um you come up to this shrine and you have to recite it something in the right order and it was it was like a choice for me and was like wait what? Uh I had to listen to someone before this. Oh Um and then I did it wrong and it spawned a bunch of super highle enemies. I was like oh that's so cool. There are suddenly stakes to the things people say to me. Um and and so I was like taken out of this boredom and I went back to the person I was like so okay so about that poem like uh what what was that about right and and I was suddenly invested and I started listening and paying attention and the suddenly the when the dialogue mattered to the outcome um it was such like day and night switch and I thought what about making a game where that's the whole thing you have to pay super close to attention to everything everybody says and the story is the game play because it's the mystery and you'll get tested on how well you paid attention to the story and that makes people super invested and super immersed, >> right? But I think also the difference on how you're tested probably makes a big difference. I feel like if it's too much like a test at school where it's like fill in the correct answer here, then it's like can also be a bit frustrating because you're like I didn't know I had to pay attention to this or >> Yeah. you you so first of all you also have to get players into like the into that mindset and make sure they they know what they need to pay attention so sort of prime them a little bit on that >> you can also ease them in through the difficulty you have to give them some easy wins in the beginning and then then before they know it they >> are taking notes on a physical paper which a lot of our players do. they like pause the game and start writing down and taking notes and drawing connections on their on their notepads, which is uh >> which is not a level of investment that you're ready for when you start a game. >> Yeah. >> But be like turn turn the temperature up slowly. In the beginning, you have to retain two things and put them together. But once you're in that mindset, >> it can basically be like a test. It can basically be very straightforwardly. >> Sure. >> Yeah. >> Sure. But there are also the tests where you don't even know that you're being tested and then later you realize that there there is a test and like realizing that there is a test is like part of the test. That's that's also interesting and kind of the the way out does it often times. >> Yeah, that is really cool. We actually in Between Horizons we uh set up a mystery in the intro that is never part of the cases you get throughout the game. >> Mhm. Uh, and it's sort of a hidden case that spans much of the story. And you get hints that it is even a thing you can solve without the game ever telling you. And if you show the right hints to the right people and get referred to the next correct clue, um, you can basically discover this case and solve the mystery that is the whole setup for the for the story >> that other people will never know even was a mystery like or was solvable. >> Mhm. Yeah. that finding that type of stuff is very rewarding. >> Yeah. >> And I feel like the trick is maybe kind of to have a lot of things like this in your game because people are randomly going to find different ones like um like I I really like these Metroid brain, right? For example, uh blueprints was another one recently that I really enjoyed. And that game also has so many mysteries that you can solve, but there are so many different mysteries that you are almost certain to solve some of them almost by coincidence because there's just so much. >> Yeah. Yeah. >> And that gives you some that gives everybody some cool moments. >> I also think having a variety of mysteries to solve at a time. This was one of the things that we added to the design for Between Horizons. Kind of makes it more digestible because you can just if you're stuck on a case, you can just try the other case for a bit and maybe while you do that, you stumble upon a clue for your first case or you just give it more time to think and when you come back, you have like a fresh mind. So in the middle of the game, you can have like three, four cases open at a time. >> Yes. Um, and this is kind of also a nice way to balance it because people can just forget about a case if they are annoyed with it for a while. >> I think that makes a lot of sense. I think that is actually part of the reason also why uh classical point andclick adventures were often so frustrating is because they they had a very linear path of now you need to find this item then you bring that person this item like a very strict order almost and which you have to do things like a little bit of freedom in when to do what but typically you're very blocked on you can't do this thing unless you've already done this thing kind of kind of thing right >> and I feel like these um games, they're often at their best when they open up quite a bit more and they're like different things to work on and you can kind of decide what you want to work on and that way you're you're less likely to be stuck on anything. >> Yeah. Yeah. That that was our thinking for Between Horizons, but opening up the the map was also such a like a minefield of of design problems. >> Yeah. I mean, if you have multiple cases and then maybe also not knowing which clue belongs to which case, for example, stuff like that, right? You're probably going to be careful. >> I mean, we tried to make that part of the challenge. We were like, okay, we're going to really amp up the possible combinations and solutions to everything. Whereas in Luna, we had a preset amount of solutions for cases that just came like out of the ether. You like you just had words that you could fill in. They came from nowhere. And um they were just limited by us, the developer. I guess >> um in Between Horizons, uh the clues themselves are solutions to the cases. So if you're looking for a perpetrator, um any person clue you found in the game so far can be submitted as the solution. Um and if you're looking for a location of something, any room clue you found in the game so far can be submitted as a solution. Um, and while that that makes it more open-ended and kind of harder because you have to really think about everything, um, it also kind of makes it a little frustrating for players who are like, "Well, I said that the captain sabotaged the machine room and nobody had a word to say about that, you know, because they're always like, "Yeah, yeah, okay. We'll look at the solution of your case." And then and then later on they're like, "Okay, dude, that led nowhere." And they don't tell you, "Bro, what do you mean the captain? Are you insane? You're gonna be stripped of your duties." Right. So, uh, we never like in a lot of cases, we don't account for possible mistakes, specific mistakes you could make. >> Interesting. Yeah. So, this could either have been solved with a lot of writing or maybe with some very careful play testing to catch more of the common things people do. We we did uh play test the game throughout and we did account for some of the major ones. Like there's one case for example where a character it's like a cold case from the past and the character says I was accused and I I want to be exonerated. Um and there we had to account for the player finding the real culprit. I'm just going to spoil it. It wasn't him. So you can actually exonerate him. >> Um but we have to account for the player finding the real culprit. the player finding the wrong other culprit or the player accusing him again and saying it was actually you. >> Um, so we had to count for these three and for the wrong other culprit we had to sort of write our way around it by saying well this is implausible like uh because the guy we wrote it in such a way that the guy already knows who else did it but doesn't tell you. He wants you to come to the correct conclusion backed up by evidence and if you say it then he's exonerated. But so we had to account for three things there, right? And in some other cases we also had to account for some things that players might do. Sometimes even the order in which they talk to people about things. The the dialogue logic is extremely complex because sometimes there's like multiple people involved in something. Um, but we only have the big revelation dialogue with one of them. So, the other person is like, "Okay, yeah, I guess the jig is up." Uh, I admit it, but go to that other guy. Uh, he will tell you all about it. Um, and a lot of modules of dialogues can be said by different characters. Um, and they will often be strung together u based on what you already learned. So if a party already told you something um that module is no longer in the other person's dialogue when they come clean about it uh and like it's yeah we had to and we did account for a lot of stuff >> but the the infinite amount of stuff to account for >> just uh is still so vast that players will complain obvious and understandably they will complain that you didn't account for that one specific thing they And um I mean from making so many storydriven games with dialogue, do you have any recommendations for how you should organize dialogue from a code and logic perspective? >> Yeah, we have our own internal dialogue editor that we wrote uh because it just accommodated exactly what we needed. I would recommend people do some tailor-made solution if they can rather than doing a third party plugin because more often than not in our experience they don't deal what you need or then you update Unity and something breaks or you need to reach out to the developer and they're nowhere to be found. Like that's my general advice when it comes to third party plugins. I would just avoid them as I if I can and with dialogue tools especially to integrate them into your logic and tailor them to your needs. Just do your own. We have some basic features that I can tell you right now. Um they can check and set bulls. We basically our entire game state is just a bunch of booleans and uh they uh when you enter a scene based on the configuration of these booleans characters are present or not or you have certain dialogues or not and whatever um we don't actually retain a lot in the safe games in terms of this character is positioned there. When you go into a scene it's just like is this boolean true then the character is there and not is not there. Okay. Um and we do a similar thing with our dialogue logic. Basically, if you are in a certain game state, the dialogue is available or not. And dialogues themselves can check these. They can also set these. Um you can also have um branches where a game goes into one or the other based on this bool. Uh right. So a big tip there always account for all possible bool configurations because sometimes you might think oh you know if this is true we go here and if this is true we go here which is fatal because you know not one of them might like both of them might be false right um so always do the opposite um >> and then we have gated we call them gated nodes we also have gated choices So if a if a uh certain thing is true then a choice appears and if it is not true the choice isn't there for the player to make. Uh so gated nodes and gated choices are a big thing >> and all of these all of these pools I imagine the way a beginner would imagine this is like you have a C file with with lots and lots of pools basically defined as public variables or something. I imagine that's not the case. Are you using like a dictionary for the bulls or like how how are the spools handled or stored in your system? >> So we different games had different approaches to this. With Between Horizons, we had a bunch of scriptable objects, but what I can't recommend is that you save things to scriptable objects on runtime. Just use them as like a initial setup thing. I'm actually not sure. I I haven't worked on this part. This is mostly my co-founder Yasm mean. Um but at the end of the day they are all in our save game and read from our save game. That is like after you started the game once that is the instance where it's checked >> what's true and what is >> in your in your dialogue editor. Do you have like a drop down for all of the bools or do you type in the name or how does it work? >> For different things for the bulls specifically we just type them. >> Okay. >> Um >> makes sense. I I know that a lot of programmers are like, "Oh my god, that is so unsafe. What if you mistype it?" But that's never been a real problem. If I mistype it, I will when I I will immediately notice that the the game doesn't do the thing. >> Yeah. >> Uh or if not immediately, then one of the other thousand times I will play this. Uh I often times just copy paste. It's fine. You could just use strings as IDs. >> Sure. uh >> you could you could theoretically even write a tool that checks spelling of your things or something. >> Yeah. Or something like that. For some things we have drop downs like for the saved existing dialogues in our database. I can drop down I use a drop down but I because if I type something above it's like a search and it the dropown limits itself to the dialogues that contain that string. So we have a lot of um utility by now. Um, and you can see on a node immediately, uh, oh, there's a little lock on it. That means there's a condition to this node or, uh, or there's a little other symbol that means it changes a game state boolean and things like that. But yeah, >> yeah, got it. That makes sense. Also, the the save file is basically just a bunch of pools. >> Yeah, basically. Yeah. Yeah. It's your player, it's the player decisions, but also how far you are in the story in certain parts. Like had this and that dialogue is often times a bull that is automatically there for every dialogue. >> So you don't get that dialogue again because all our dialogues are unique. Like unlike point-and-click adventures where you can just have the same dialogue over and over, ours are always unique and the choices are locked in basically. Um, there's one exception which we call interrogation dialogues because it didn't make any sense for the player to not ask all the questions if there's no like time limit to how long they can talk to an NPC. Uh, so instead of the dialogue becoming unavailable, the individual choices become un like everyone has a bool and once that bool gets false, that choice is no longer available when you talk to the NPC again. But you you can't is like that information recorded in a different system or is it literally like if you don't write it down on your little notebook or whatever then the information is like gone. >> Well, there's always a log of all dialogues you had. >> Okay. >> And there's usually a highlighted words which is a feature you can turn off, but often times it helps people skim a dialogue again um in their log. That's kind of a big part of the gameplay that you reread. Hey, wait a minute. This guy said something else from this guy. and then you compare their statements or whatever somebody told you um pin code for somewhere, you can just read that up again in that dialogue. >> Okay, that's smart. So instead of having the immersion breaker of going to the same person again and having to ask the same question, it's like you have just have a lock of all of the dialogues you had. >> Exactly. We thought it we thought it was a good compromise because you also in detective games you have to be careful not to prompt the player too much with information, right? So, we didn't want to just have a journal that automatically writes down what was important about this dialogue because that should be up to the player to find and identify what's really crucial for your case. >> I like that approach. That sounds very reasonable. So, was that something you already did in Luna or was that something you innovated for um the new game? >> Uh, no. It's it's in all our games. >> Okay. >> It's in Luna, Between Horizons, and in our third game as well. Yeah, we we thought about making like it easier or something, but at the end of the day, people didn't really complain about it. You feel detective if you reread the log and you're just like, "Oh, wait. What did he say?" And it's >> it's fine. >> It essentially feels like you have like an audio recorder with you all the time and you >> uh can relisten to the recording or something like that. >> Exactly. We don't even explain that like narratively. We We're just like you're an investigator type and it's sort of a sci-fi world. So everything's recorded. Whatever. >> Which is honestly we already live in that world. Everything's recorded. >> Exactly. >> It's not that much of a stretch. I don't know. Do you want to engage in some general theory crafting about how to make a successful game? Is that something you think think about? >> Oh, for sure. Yeah, absolutely. >> What are your conclusions so far? I think in nowadays like climate, it's good to make a game with a premise that is quick to explain to people. >> Oh yeah. >> Like right people don't have time to listen to you yap for a whole minute. Like in the era of for you pages and short form content, your game better be a concise package with a name and a key art and a premise and a core loop that all work in conjunction in a way. I think that's the main thing. >> The case of the murder. >> Exactly. >> Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. No, I'm not kidding. Like our next game, it's it we're not set on the title entirely yet. We have worked with a working title for a long time. But the key art is just going to be like like a big magnifying glass because every other detective game has that. >> Yes, >> you like you have a magnifying glass. And we redesigned our protagonist to have like a hat that looks like detective just the we made remade all the sprites. We like no >> just going to put on the detective hat and the trench code because it's a detective game. And then we have like on the Kia we have like files flying about and like it's old mystery vibe and I don't care like this is generic because the non-generic stuff you only get to experience when you actually play the game and all the character and personality and uniqueness we can put in the game but like the character design, the key art design, the title we try to streamline for marketability this time around. >> That makes so much sense. Yeah, it's like the opposite of what we talked about earlier. That's where you don't want to be oddly specific. That's why you want to be >> uh generic on top. >> Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. >> I I think you can be oddly specific in a way that as long as the odd specificity is also quickly transported. >> Sure. From perspective. >> Exactly. It's like why a frog, right? Like that's kind of oddly specific, but it also communicates so much about the premise. >> Yeah. Yeah. That makes total sense. You also changed the capsule art for Between Horizon. And I think that was like one of your little regrets that you realized later on needed some changing. What What was the problem with the first one? >> The first one is just it just communicates sci-fi, which the title also communicates a little bit between Horizons. Okay, maybe it's like sci-fi. And then the key was also vaguely sci-fi. You see like people in generic space uniforms and this ring spaceship in the background. And it could be any like gameplay wise could be could be a 4X game. It could be anything. Um, so we were like, okay, we have to sort of bring the mystery more into the key art. So we had our protagonist hold up a flashlight and look off screen into some unknown, right? And you have in the background, you have these screens that like >> are like maybe some complex information or some We tried to convey that more. And we also just added a subtitle. We did it with Luna, too. We just said a sci-fi detective adventure because that's what people know. You know what? I think that your trailer for Thronfall is brilliant because it just like it just descriptive. It just tells people what they're going to do. Like nobody gives a that it's a mystery for the ages or what. Just in our game, you go and solve cases. You get clues and you walk around and you talk to people about them and then you fill in the I feel like our next trailer is I'm going to seal this. It's going to be just like it's going to be we're going to do a cinematic trailer and we're going to be a descriptive trailer and descriptive trailer is going to be the first one where we just tell you what you're going to do because people have this literacy and they know what they like. Um and if you just tell them >> Yeah. Just explain it. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. >> Yeah. It makes your life so much easier. And also what I found is that explaining the game in your trailer for forces you to have a a good structure for your trailer as well. Makes you show the correct things in the correct order because you're like >> um you basically show the footage in the same order in which you would explain it to a person. Yeah, >> even if they watch it, even if they watch it without the sound, even if they don't get your voice over, >> you still kind of get the explanation because you still show the explainy things in the same order. >> Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I agree. That's that's that's a good point. I didn't think about that. >> I mean, you have do have to account for people watching it without sound though cuz a lot of people >> Yeah. Absolutely. Absolutely. Oh, I wanted to think that. I want to say that I think it also serves a sort of a lightning rod for bad reviews because you're so upfront about what the game is that people who don't like it will also just not buy it. Uh, and that is kind of good. Um, right. I think a demo also plays this role very well. I think you I I think if we didn't have a demo out for our games, they wouldn't be north of 90% positive maybe. Um, because some people go in with the wrong expectations. I mean, a lot of people just buy it without playing the demo and then end up not liking it maybe and never review the game. But I think people who really are invested and want to know for sure, they'll just play the demo and they are only going to buy and maybe review the game if they already like the demo. And all those others will just shelf it. And I think a trailer that's just super upfront and honest about it will exactly not just address the right people, but also shoe the people away who are not going to enjoy it. Yes. Which is something you actually do want to do. Yeah. >> Yeah. Absolutely. >> For for Thronefall, uh we had the problem that people assumed were like a classical RTS game where you can place buildings wherever you want. >> Yeah. >> So most of our negative reviews are just people complaining about the fact that they can't place their buildings wherever. >> But you say it in the trailer, right? Sure. We know we we say it in the in the description on >> Yeah. I think Chris from How to Market a Game already explored this when he uh did this case study on watching people shop for games on Steam and he was like people >> with an eye tracker. >> Yeah. People watch it like uh watch a couple of seconds from the trailer and they look at your screenshots and that's how they make your decision. They they don't read anything. It's like >> Yeah, that's what I meant earlier when I said I think people look at a lot of stuff that's kind of not the first thing we think about. It's like, "Oh, it's similar to these three games that I liked and a friend recommended it and maybe from the screenshots they try to glean from the UI if it's the type of gameplay they like." Uh, but that's pretty much it. Like, who sits down and watches 2 minutes of trailer? I think the people who are engaged enough to do that or play the demo. For those people, it's great that you have a very clear Yes. way of communicating what the experience is. >> Yeah. People appreciate that upfront honesty when they go look for it because that's when they want it. Yeah. >> Exactly. Okay. And those are the people who are invested enough to write a review too. Like they have enough time on their hands to watch a trailer. They'll have enough time on their hands to write a review. >> Yeah. Good point. >> On how to make a successful indie game then. So you One thing we kind of got out of this is you want to make sure maybe that your screenshots do a good job at communicating what your game is. Also like that seems rather important for making sure the correct people download the game, >> right? >> Yeah, for sure. Especially the first four on Steam that you see when you like have a game in a carousel or when you hover and preview it. There's four screenshots and I think that those should show off the core experience and at the same time maybe a little bit of variety already. They don't look all the same. They're not too small in the preview window. So ideally it's not super zoomed out. I think there's a lot of rules to good screenshots and especially the first four. >> Mhm. Yeah. That's a an art in itself to get those right. You want them also you want all four of these to look very different so that it look like a lot of variety and stuff. >> Exactly. But at the same time communicate the experience >> and there's so much contradicting goals that it's really difficult to juggle because on the one side you as we mentioned earlier you kind of want to make things like unique. you want them to be a bit oddly specific, but then at the same time, you want people to instantly know what's going on in your screenshots. So, it's um difficult line to walk work walk for sure. >> I I think the way I think the way games do it is by making the oddly unique thing, like I said, easy to understand. Like, look at No, I'm not a human. It It's a clunky title, but it's like this dude looking at you that looks kind of strange. In the key art, the title is, "No, I'm not a human." It is catchy and weird and unique, but also this is the core gameplay. It's like, oh, you have to like figure out if you trust people, if they're humans, if you let them in or not. And even though it's oddly specific, it is also quite easy to understand. I don't think it's necessarily contradictory. just have to be pretty good at it. >> Yeah. And it's it's something you probably do need to design for a bit or get lucky that your game just um fulfilleds that criteria. >> Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. >> I'm going to tell you right now, our our games that we have planned now already kind of failed at a little bit. Like they're not completely streamlined with that in mind, but definitely more so than Between Horizons. So I think it's the also a good way to have a game be successful is to make a really good game. >> Yes, I agree. But also I think knowing these things and like thinking about which screenshots are there going to be on the store page, which expectations are going to people have. Thinking about that rather earlier than later, I think is a good idea. And even if your game isn't like set up perfectly for this, if you realize this early enough, maybe you can at the very least >> uh specifically design a couple of scenes in your game to explain the game play. >> Yeah. >> Or even if you it's like, ah, damn it, my game kind of doesn't explain itself very well. Maybe you can make things a bit better by having specifically making some scenes in your game to serve that specific purpose. >> Absolutely. Absolutely. We we are actually thinking about the like trailer scenes also because our games are super talky and static. So we need to have some action that we can cut into the trailer. So basically you see at least half the action scenes from our games uh in the trailer uh just because something's in motion and the trailer isn't boring this way. Even we absolutely wear on our sleeve that it's a narrative game. There's a lot of thinking, a lot of talking and reading. People know this, but having a trailer of just reading and people talking just doesn't work even for this type of game. So, we have to have like a minimum amount of action scenes that just look dynamic to cut them together, if only for the trailer. >> That's so true. A lot of games struggle from this. Also, this is not just a common issue with narrative games. Also, like card games or like all games with static screens have this problem where it's like how do you how do you make a dynamic trailer when you have a >> a static screen that not much motion is happening on? It's like very difficult. >> Yeah. >> And for those types of games specifically, planning for your trailer scenes, I think is a very smart idea. I think that's a good idea that you're doing that. >> We have to. We have to. I mean, you can make like I think the trailers for the case of the Golden Idol are quite good. Their problem is that they have extremely static scenes that have very little animation and they just like just zoom across the UI and cut it to the music. Like you can make even UI look kind of interesting if if you have a if you have a good hand for this type of thing, but it is an uphill battle for sure with this type of game. >> Mhm. >> All right. So, what else do you need to make your game a big hit? Uh well, commercially uh I would say it helps if the game doesn't have to make a million euros back in the first place to be a commercial hit. Right? If your game cost 50,000 and you made a h 100,000, that's good. So if you have a smaller budget to begin with, then you have a higher likelihood of having a commercial success on your hands. So I think making smaller games, scoping smaller, not moving across 5 years of sunken cost fallacy really helps. Um, getting concepts out early, testing early with people, being honest about uh what sticks and what just doesn't work, even if you liked it. This type of thing, I mean, makes good games, but also makes commercially successful games. is three to four people just the general sweet spot for indie teams or do you think it's hard to generalize? >> While it is hard to generalize, it is a good sweet spot for our type of games that we're working on now. And also I think and this is my hot take. Uh midsize teams are struggling in particular at the moment. If you have like 10 to 30 people, your burn rate is really really high. But what you said earlier when you said you think um when you put more effort into a game it will sell more units then you are solely mistaken right so when you think of breakout successes uh they aren't good games because 20 people worked on them they are good games because they are good games and people generally don't care if you had to spend 5 years and€ 10 million euros to make it um because at the end of the day the things that make games good are not tied to the budget. And I really think that a small team has a much higher chance because there's like less overhead and less design by committee and less money going around um to do something that goes beyond expectations for the small amount of money that went into it than a midsized team. I mean, and then of course there's like double A upwards. I think they have other ways of monetizing their games with like live service content and skins and what have you and I think that is that is a whole different world. But as an indie um especially nowadays when competition is fierce, people are pumping out quality games everywhere and you see them fail and you're like, "Oh, holy shit." Like this has really good production value and it it like >> it like drowned at like 50 reviews. You have to really think twice about throwing a million euros at a concept. Uh, so I think small games, at least in the current climate, uh, and small teams are a good way to weather the storm. >> Yeah. I've never really done the math on this. Like what's what's the rough cost you would expect for a person on your team per year? Maybe something like 40,000 euro 30,000 or it's like the the rough range. Oh, in your estimate, it's not specifically for your company, but what do you say? What would be a reasonable number to calculate with? >> Well, even if you don't pay yourself well, like even if you have like paying your team a junior salary, everybody gets like €25,000 uh gross. That costs your company much more than that. It costs over 3,000. Uh that means the salaries for three people are around 10,000 a month, right? Um, so, uh, for >> 120,000. >> Yeah. For a year of production, you pay around 120,000. And you haven't paid for an office or a Unity license or a Photoshop license or or anything. You haven't paid for your accountant for your month for your yearly tax statements. You haven't paid for right? So, um, 150k for a threeperson studio per year is pretty normal. So if you work on a game for three years, uh you're going to be out of half a million and you haven't even paid for QA, you haven't paid for localization, you haven't paid for marketing. So you haven't paid for any freelancers. So if you need tech art and you don't have that on your team, if you need concept art and you don't have that on your team, that's going to cost you extra. So I think a three-year production on a team of three people costs half a million euros. >> That's wild. >> Yeah. Yeah. >> So, and obviously like making half a million on a game is difficult, but if you 3x that team size, then >> yeah, >> different calculation. There's one rule you should never do math on on video. We broke that rule. There will probably I'll probably in the edit find out that we uh made some math mistakes here. But >> I do a lot of this math because I'm the business guy at our office at our company. So, uh, that's the unfortunate reality. I mean, also, >> did we calculate with 10 people or with three people, though? We like >> that was that was three people. >> Three people. >> Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. No, you're right. So, one person is like three at least 3,000 and then 3 * 3 is like 10,000 per month. Yeah. Like 120,000. Yeah. Okay. Yeah. >> That's wild. That sounds so expensive. Half a million for three people for 3 years. That's wild. That's why I specified earlier when I said that your audience is literate in a way because they are literate in the way that they know what kind of games they like, but they don't really know what goes into making a game. They don't know what it costs. They don't know how much work it is. And I I think a lot of people would be extremely surprised at the budgets of even the smallest productions because uh if it's your livelihood and you're like your full-time job and you have to like pay for stuff >> then the salaries just blow up the budget immediately. It's like 95% of your expenses. And in a country like Germany where I mean thankfully we have you know good healthare system and all but that is very expensive too. Um, and we have a quite high tax burden. Uh, as a as a Nema Gazelle, the type of company that we are, we pay like over 30% of of our income incoming money. Like, >> Steam takes another 30%. >> Yeah, that's the other thing. the the amount of units you have to sell in order to uh break even is is crazy when you think about, you know, discounts, regional pricing, refunds, credit card fees, Steam cut, um all that type of thing that that goes away. Um when I calculate this type of thing, I usually go with like 35% of the sale price >> uh ends up reaching >> us. And then you know often times you split that with a publisher and they get 70% of those 35%. So you make pennies on the dollar um for every unit sold on average. >> Yeah. The the 30% I can plus one that rule. That's roughly the the rule of thumb that we arrived at as well. >> Yeah. >> Independently of you. So confirming that >> like if somebody buys a game for €1 on Steam then 30 cents uh end up on our bank accounts. And in the case of uh Grizzly games, that would be 15 for each cuz we're two people at the moment. >> Yeah. >> Yeah. Exactly. Yeah. This this type of math makes you realize makes you think twice about committing to a project that takes so long, especially when it's not proven. I I think you're also someone who who really appreciates the iterative nature of arriving at a good formula that is worth your time and you know testing it early and honestly axing stuff before it cost you a bunch of money. >> Uh so yeah, >> that's a good point. A big part of making a commercially successful game is to keep your costs and control as well because the the bar for how successful your game has to be rises with uh with what you spend on it. >> Exactly. Yeah. You're commercially successful if you break even and then some. If that's your definition, then don't make it so hard to break even. >> Yeah. So that's why it's like extra important to focus on that core of the experience and uh not have not have any fluff cuz it'll basically a win-win. It makes your game better. It makes your game easier to understand, but it also makes your game cheaper. So it's like a double win. >> Exactly. Exactly. Just focus on the thing that makes it good and people will appreciate that and you won't have to spend money on all the other stuff. >> That checks out. >> Anything? Anything else? what what you need to make a successful game. >> This is going to this probably going to get me some hate. Um but in terms of your team composition, of course, it's kind of you have to really decide if if you are able to work with people who aren't already seniors themselves, right? Um there's this meme going around about like who wants juniors to have jobs and then who wants to train these juniors and everybody lowers their hands, right? So, um, we adopted a policy that we're just not taking any interns anymore. Even though I really like like sharing res and then onboarding people and and giving people excitement for the thing and sharing wisdom and everything, but at the end of the day, a threeperson team of really like experienced people is madly efficient. And um and in the past we sometimes brought people on uh who we couldn't dedicate the necessary resources to to help them uh through the processes and onboard them properly and all that stuff. I I really think that I mean I I definitely don't want to pull the ladder up behind me but since we are already struggling right um we uh we don't really have the time to to uh hire juniors or train interns and any of that stuff and I mean one way to become more knowledgeable is just to do your own thing that I would encourage everyone to do to some extent. And I mean of course you can't immediately live off your own thing. It's taken many years for me too. Um but at the end of the day that was also a learning like really be selective who you work with, who you who is your subcontractors, who you hire especially >> it sucks but it's it is also a big consideration. >> Yeah. And I mean I I also have an opinion on this. I'm like people typically like to work with people who are as talent as as talented as them or more talented in in indie teams, right? So it's like it makes the most sense to team up with people who are either as skilled as you or who are more skilled than you. So it makes sense that if you have made a bunch of successful games and so on, like I get a lots and lots of emails of people who are like, "Hey, I want to team up with with you." And I'm like, >> "Yeah, >> maybe not." And that's >> you can look at that like it's like pulling the ladder up behind you or whatever you said, but I I don't really see it that way. It's like the best thing you can do to find better teammates is to keep improving your own skills. And I think luckily in the in the indie space, you can do that quite easily by working on your own stuff and like earning your own skills and that will give you access to other more talented people. Like the it's just the way it works. the more talented you are, the more you'll attract other talented to people who want to work with you. Then >> I I completely agree. It's it's very accessible nowadays to just screw around with whatever tool of your choice and and just just go at it. That's that would also be my advice to anyone starting out. Just like do the thing. Like nothing trains you better at doing the thing than doing the thing. Like not even learning anything abstract. Like if you want to learn programming for games, try to program games. That's >> right. >> There's also learning that we've had with people who have good qualifications um and might be better like a better programmer than me, for example, and know more about programming and more more concepts and might even have a degree. At the end of the day, having shipped a few games, you kind of have a better grasp on what's important about like what can be just held together by some duct tape and a prayer and where it doesn't really matter if it's clean code or not. Uh because the gamers won't care if it's not player facing and it kind of does the thing, then it's good enough. Yeah. And if you don't have this like academic mindset, a more pragmatic one, that just comes with experience. Even if people have good qualifications and are very intelligent and very good programmers, um having 10 years of of uh game development experience is just gives you other things, right? So you that's what I also agree to. You want to practice exactly what you want to get better at, right? If you >> yes >> practice something slightly related, of course there's knowledge and wisdom that transfers over, but a lot of it also doesn't. Like if you're very you're like a software programmer or something, there are obviously skills you can use in games, but maybe you'll tend to overengineer things that uh dirty code would just do just fine, right? So >> yeah, and sometimes it's even just knowing that the engine can do that stuff for you. We've had we've had games uh where we like for one reason or another joined the codebase later and we're like why did they write this weird loader or management system or whatever like just use the thing that Unity does already like so much wasted time uh to write a feature that is just already in the engine. >> Man that's knowing what's possible is becoming such a crucial skill. >> Yeah. and and even more even more so now because um you can literally ask an LLM to code something for you but only if you know that it's possible and if you know that it exists. So like knowing what's possible is is the biggest thing you kind of need to wrap your head around and like >> Yeah, absolutely. I also have like um I code with cursor sometimes which uh you know this like a AI writing code for you and I I feel that it does better in areas where I already know exactly what I want and I know how I want the implementation to be and I know the exact >> words for the things and then it actually does a pretty good job. >> Exactly. Yeah. But if you're like, I want the safe system to work, make it work, and you're like just too vague about it, like that's not going to work, man. >> Exactly. Yeah. >> But if you know what's possible, if you know the correct words for it, if you even kind of know what architecture you want to have for it under the hood and you explain that, >> it's it's crazy. It's such a timesaver also. Yeah. >> Yeah. Yeah. And then you develop meta knowledge of what AI is good for and what it can't do in the experience with that. Like for example, I found that when it comes to like editor scripting and tools, AI is pretty good. Oh yeah. Like those are things that it does just does for us at this point. >> Um but there are other things I would never let it like let the AI touch because it would just mess it up and go in circles and fantasize weird in my experience. >> Yeah, that's true. I'm more and more coming to the conclusion that knowing what's possible is such a crucial part of the of the wisdom that you acquire in in any discipline. Yeah. Yeah. Absolutely. And that's just often times something you just have to learn over time. It's it's rarely taught like just and that's why just making games is the best way to get better at making games, I think. >> Yeah. And exactly what you said happens so often that you write a custom thing and then you find out there's a built-in solution for it or there's somebody who uh wrote like a very good plugin that like everybody in the industry uses but that you didn't know about like >> for example I think a lot of people use rewired for input and unity because it's like just better than the unity input system stuff like that it's like you got to know to know >> yeah our luna was ported by an external studio and they just plugged in rewired and we're like what was that? >> Yeah. >> Right. Yeah. And but that's just like you said that's just something you learn at some point because somebody mentions it or does it in another project and you're like oh that's cool. >> Let me quickly finish scrolling through your article here. >> Focus on your strengths. That's obviously also good advice for making successful games to lean into your strengths. >> Yeah. It's how we ended up making narrative games because both my co-founder and I have a background in literature. So I have a master's degree in comparative literature and she has a doctorate. So we were like the like we probably good at yapping. We're just going to like write a lot of texts. We're not going to make a physics-based game because we're bad at math. So >> I mean you don't need to be that good at math. Like engine does most things for you, right? >> Yeah. Maybe we haven't ventured in that area yet and we might never because it's just so far like across the spectrum from where where we are getting slowly getting good at now. >> What's your opinion on on marketing? Does it does it even play a role or is it mostly the game anyway? So I think there was like a time when people were all saying like this basic the common sense advice like oh game developers they always just make the game and then they don't market it and they forget it. There was like a few years ago. I remember this going around a lot. And then they don't think about it early enough and they don't launch their S pages early enough to farm wish lists and build hype and whatever. And everybody had an opinion on that. And I feel like that is true to an extent, but nowadays it's also my impression that a lot of people do marketing and still don't have any success. Like they they try to get the word out all the time. They post about it. They hire social media managers or they are themselves publishers or PR agencies, marketing agencies, and they have projects under their belt that end up dying at 14 mixed reviews. And I'm like, what's up? What's up with that? I thought marketing was so important and this whole it's your whole gig, right? Um, and I actually talked to a friend recently who basically had a similar experience with um, PR and agency and they were like, "Hey, um, your marketing doesn't actually convert to wish lists at all." >> Like like not even not not withstanding that wish list might not even convert to sales, but like pre-launch wish list is like your one metric that kind of shows you how the launch might go. And they were like, "You guys, you >> like it's not doing anything, right?" And and they also didn't like in German we say they also were just cooking with water, right? Uh so they were just like, "Yeah, I don't know like do an Instagram post, maybe do like a mailing list." I don't know. Like all our campaigns are not working at all at the moment. And I think that's a shift for multiple reasons. One is that we have a overabundance of games coming out. But the number is super big, especially postcoid. During COVID, everybody had money to throw around. Bunch of productions were being funded. They're all flooding the market now. Um, people's access to tools and the quality that some people can just make alone at home super high. So, we have a lot of high quality stuff coming out and not standing a chance. Um, and I also think that uh the shift to like for you pages has changed the uh landscape a lot because you don't really build followings anymore the way you did. Even if you have a big following, they might never see your stuff. Like I swear that a lot of people the last time I saw them is when I hit the follow button on their account >> and never saw them again. >> Yeah. because the algorithm like who goes on the following uh page who will go on the for you page and you just uh like get served up stuff and then and then maybe you have 10 million views on that one video but you have 200 followers out of that and and who closes Tik Tok and then goes to wishlist the game I feel like it can happen it can work well for some people if you go super viral then you have like a critical mass that that enough like that 1% of all people is a thousand wish lists So that's really cool, but at the end of the day, I feel like it's harder to cultivate a fan base with this type and everybody jumped on the train, right? Instagram uh is a for you page now basically and just a worse one. Um and I think that this is uh harder to build and cultivate a fan base that actually recommends your game to other people because they might never see you again when they follow you and most people who do see you don't even follow you, which is a blessing and a curse. So I think the rules have just changed a lot. >> Yeah. >> If you know how the new landscape works, I think doing good marketing isn't rocket science. I I think if you know how to like quickly hook an audience, if you know how the editing works, you know, you have the subtitles with the individually highlighted words um with for people who watch without sound or people who just like something moving on the screen, you have um very quick hook and you know the types of hooks like you start out with a sort of blatant untruth or with a very provocative question or just frame it in such a way that people want to watch the end if you just start put a finger down if you and then you talk for two minutes, right? And people just want to know. Uh, you know, you have these like weird hooks that work well on the on the for you pages. But I'm I kind of haven't jumped on that yet because I'm kind of I often feels disingenuous and I don't like it and I want people to like the stuff that we do for the stuff that it is. Um, but it's probably wise. Um, I mean that can also work, but that's also why why I personally have the feeling that um the marketing nowadays depends more than ever just on the game itself. Cuz if if you have a game that's easy to understand and marketable, >> then it automatically works better on for you pages and yeah, for you pages and algorithms is where the the visibility comes from nowadays, right? >> 100%. And if you have um like don't be shy to just put that premise into every video at the start. Chances that people go over your page and watch every video and they are are like infinitely low. So uh the the higher chances that whoever sees your video sees something from you for the first time. So just put the thing at the top. Say we're making a game about whatever the this is your first sentence and it's like uh hook like that's the same for all videos because you have to pick up people who never even heard of you and might never see you again and if you have a game that lends itself to that is really good and if you don't it's an uphill battle I think you can still use all these tricks um but another thing that kind of works in an era where everybody tries to market to you is like authenticity and rawness and like scruffiness in a way where when it's not polished, it's actually kind of going to keep people sticking around. Like if you sit in your car and rant to your phone camera about the games industry, I'm pretty sure 160,000 people might like it, but if you just post your cinematic trailer in Vertical Y, >> people feel marketed to. They will just not care. >> Yeah, sure. And you need you got to need the you need the correct personality for some of these things. Like for some people you can listen for them rent in their car for hours and for some it just is like not really that interesting. It's like >> depends a lot on which possibilities you have. Yeah, >> I agree. But I also think that that's nothing that a publisher or a marketing or PR agency will ever provide to you. They don't have the guy that rans into the phone. Um it has to be like something personal from the developers. And you're lucky if if one or somebody on your team is that or you can hire someone to be that. But uh I think the type of like cleancut marketing with a marketing plan and beats and how to build up the hype and leak stuff and reveal stuff and then post all this cookie cutter like u engagement bait or which one is your favorite design I think that's just on the way out and I I I think paying people for that is not worth it. Yeah, I think the there's one thing that I think might still be worth paying for and that is like content creator outreach. If you have someone who's like very good at content creator outreach and already has some good contacts and so on, I think that's something that's potentially worth it because that feeds into the creator economy and into the algorithms in a way. >> Yeah. Yeah. And and content creators, they often try to have their own viral moments, right? If if you have a game, especially like lately this like friend slop titles, you know, like uh Lethal Company or Peak, uh they are just meant to be to have viral moments and and content creators go viral themselves and they play these games in the hopes of having a good clip that's going to do numbers on TikTok to increase their own following. So you basically can leverage that and uh but that's only if you make a game that is good good for this type of content which we really don't. >> Mhm. >> Yeah. That's also a problem you have with uh storybased games that they more difficult on for you pages, right? >> Oh, for sure. >> You have like look we made new text boxes today. >> Fantastic. >> Yeah. It's like, trust me, bro. Like, if I were if you stayed on this page for half an hour and I explained the whole premise to you and what the characters motivations are, you would be so hooked. >> How do you convey this? >> You You got to get them with the setting. So, the first sentence would be something we're making a detective game in a sci-fi world where cats have conquered space or something like that. >> Yeah. Yeah. Honestly, yeah, that that's that's definitely much easier than the narrative pro premise. I just want to add because you said creator outreach. >> Um, there are like tools and platforms and services for that for you to do it yourself, which is something we're more likely to try out than pay some agency to do that. >> Yeah. Yeah, like you know where they have like oh there are people who plays games that are tagged similarly to yours in our database and they're this and that big and they facilitate aggregating content creators who might be interesting for you and consider reaching out and managing the keys and all that stuff. I think that's actually more interesting than having someone else do that. Yes, there are different tools like that. For example, one that used to be quite popular is key mailer, right? Stuff like that. But I think there are uh better solutions now. And I think the the solutions that >> work a lot better now are just like data mind databases of actual >> um streamers and content creators and you just reach out via their normal email. I think that's >> Yeah, >> that's the way to go. >> Yeah, that's true. >> Yeah, it's interesting. I think we we're like from the conversation we had here, it feels like we're quite aligned on on how we think about making games because quite interesting to to find out that even though we haven't really talked before, we have a lot of very similar opinions or arrived at a lot of very similar opinions. It's interesting to see. >> I agree. And even though we make very different games. >> Yes. >> I I think the things are that are true about making a good game are kind of universal. >> Yeah. >> I even I even agreed I even agreed with the with the best game design award. I was like, "No, no, no. Thronefall deserves it." because uh I I was very surprised uh to because this was the one time we met before was when we were both nominated for best game design >> and I thought I was very vindicated that we got a nomination uh at the do computer price because I thought >> oh my god like I'm so glad the jury recognizes that it's like a and a half to write the logic for open-ended detective gameplay in like a semiopen world. But at the same time, it's not uh it's like a narrative driven game at the end of the day, right? It's not really a obvious candidate for this award. So, uh I never expected to win. I didn't even think about what to say because I was so sure that thrown for would win. >> I didn't really expected to, but really no. It was a pleasant surprise, I would say. >> Okay. Did you think about like, oh god, I got to thank this and that person or something? >> No. >> No. Okay. Also, Paul, we we agreed if something happens, Paul just does the talking, though. I I was chilling. Yeah. >> Okay, that's good. That's good. >> Yeah. Is there anything we should plug? I'll obviously put a bunch of links in the description, right? To the Kickstarter when that goes live and so on. >> Oh, yeah. >> Anything else you want to shout out? >> I want to shout out to maybe follow us so you can hear about the new things. Uh, one thing that we already have live on Steam right now is the game that we're publishing. It's called The Great Sasanelli. Mhm. >> Um, it's a super unique, uh, very cool game also for people who are in that niche, who like narrative games and who like a good story and reading and tough choices, that type of deal. Um, and you can follow our socials at Digits Interactive. We're on Instagram is our main platform by now. We quit Twitter. We're kind of new on Blue Skies where we have almost no following, but you can join us there. We have a Discord server if you go to digits.games, games, our website. This is where all the socials are linked. >> Um, and there's also the the postmortem that we've been talking about, right? This article that I wrote sometimes I I I vent on our website, >> Digital Tails Block. Yeah. >> Yeah. Yeah. Exactly. It's one of those obscure domain endings. Oh, I almost forgot. Unburied is the name of the Kickstarter, but it it's going to be a while till that goes live. >> Got it. Nice. Yeah. Cool. I'll put that all in the description. And >> thank you very much. So once again say thank you much for your time.