do not pre-architect everything because I've never seen someone who draws the architecture and then codes the architecture like that and it works. I rarely have seen code from video games that are well structured. [music] It's always a mess but it works. This is a conversation with Rick Pelosu, co-founder and lead director at Epic Tellers. He has over 20 years experience in the industry including lots of experience in AAA. For example, he was the development director [music] at Krytek for Rise Son of Rome. Now he founded his own studio Epic tellas [music] a 30 plus people remote team building a CRPG in good. >> I found people [music] that they want to show that they are very good programmers. So they over complicate this the system saying yeah but look at what I can do. [music] You need to acknowledge that compared to the complexity of the code that you are doing your brain [music] is stupid doesn't cannot handle it. Your brain is very limited compared to all the complexity you want to handle. So what you are doing is that [music] you transform the problem in something that your brain can handle. So you keep [music] breaking it down into small pieces until one piece feed your brain. >> They're the biggest GDO team out there that I know of. Then I'm mainly here to ask questions about coding and code architecture, coding philosophy for video games. I hope you enjoy. Let's dive right in. I think I stumbled over an interesting quote of yours while doing some research and I think you said something along the lines of you're more afraid afraid of big success than of small failure or something along those lines. >> It's a very odd thing. I know big success it's uh extremely dangerous for your brain. >> Um most of people that I see that [music] has big success with some exceptions that success eats them. We all know the cliche of someone who got money very fast and then somehow went crazy or or or I don't know or famous actors or people that uh famous rock stars and and people like that. And every time I meet people that have a lot of money or it could be money but this kind of success depending also it could be this kind of critical success but really really good. I don't see those people very happy to be honest. All those people after a few years they they stop producing very good stuff. Again there are exceptions but that's [clears throat] why I'm scared. Statistics and my experience tell me >> it's actually very uh toxic for >> for your ego. >> So this is maybe not the the business side in your speaking. This is the artist side in you speaking. And like the artist side and you was like scared that it's difficult to stay grounded after a big hit after like a very big hit or something. Yeah. >> Oh no, no. And this also also for for the business side. >> For the business side also. >> Yeah. For the business side. I mean I think if we do enough money that we do not need to worry about money as long as we keep our you know feet on the ground and we are not looking for yach or something like this. As long as we we just keep doing our normal life and keep going ahead, those things are this is fine. But if you get a lot of money, I mean, it's extremely difficult to control yourself. >> And then there are also the more money there's on the table, the more interest groups are like interacting like weirdly with you and and that sort of stuff probably also plays a role. >> That's very accurate. One of the the main problems with this kind of success is that people treat you differently. like you have the owner of some sort of secret formula for success or something and deep down luck is 70% of it. >> Okay. So you don't think there's a you don't think there's a formula. You think it's a lot of luck. >> The percentage of luck involved is always way bigger than what people think because your brain keeps telling you that there must be something that I do that makes it happen. Yes, there are something you can do to increase your odds, but luck is a huge factor. The thing is that if we would accept that luck is that big factor, probably would not stars many endavors. But remind yourself that you need to be lucky. There are people that have fantastic games and they just ship in the wrong moment with the wrong publisher with the wrong technology in a moment where I don't know and something else happens and they are not lucky or they are people they are just son of someone and this is extremely the case of lucky right you are born >> in a family that has a lot of resources and money can give you a great education >> that's really rolling dice so Um that's why I think that it's something that try to remind myself that it's about that it's about >> but you need to again you need to create generate opportunities but remind yourself that it's not everything up to you. I think most developers would probably agree that there's a lot of luck at play, but I think where the opinions differ is maybe where where the luck happens, right? For example, I think it's very hard to argue with the fact that there's a lot of luck in where you are born like which family you're in. If you're like like good financial starting position and so on, that is extremely luck based. But do you think that is the biggest factor or are there more luck based factors after that like you already said like announcement like where do you see the most luck in in this process in the entire pipeline? the people you work with uh the situations in their life. Um, you could be working with someone who I don't know is fantastic with depression, going through a divorce, losing someone in their life and sadly that person is turn off by circumstances and it's not that they choose that and since and and the bigger the team uh well the bigger the team or the more involved the team the you are rolling more dices. I mean the the uh I did a presentation a few weeks ago in a university. They asked me what is the most difficult factor to build a studio and I told them people I mean you need to yes the right game the right technology but making games is not difficult working in team is difficult is in the scale of difficulties that's it that's how high it is >> making games well it's just a it's tedious it's a lot of work but it's just you solve physics you solve collisions you solve tools and you keep going but all those things have solutions I mean it's not difficult ult to make video games. It is difficult to coordinate with people in the same direction. That is that is tough. >> I think if I'm correct, Epic sellers is about 30 people team around that number at the moment, right? >> Yeah. Epic tellers, not Epic Sellers. That would be really bad. >> Oh, Epic Sellers would be even better though. [laughter] >> No, I don't think so. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Right. Um, yeah, we are 30 30 I think a bit more because we needed a bit more bandwidth and and we got two more people. So I think it's 32 or something like that. >> Yeah, >> that's quite a huge team. So that comes with with quite a burn rate as well, right? That's like quite some hefty bills to pay every month, I assume. >> Yeah. [laughter] Yeah. But it's it's a calculated thing. Um and and for I mean and it's not a huge thing actually for my my previous work it will be like one department so maybe like the coding department could be like 30 and and then you get to people like 130 150 >> 200 and I I haven't been there but other I mean I have friends working in a company of or in a project of more than a thousand people. Maybe to quickly summarize your like development journey, you were in AAA before or could you quickly summarize that that whole journey for us? >> Quickly would be I started in a small studio in in Madrid uh the ones that created the Commandos series, Per Studios >> as the first job. Then I went a bit more indie with a studio called Tidago. Uh it seemed that it it didn't went anywhere. So I moved to I I got accepted at Krytek where I did the bulk of my my development experience. Uh I joined Krytek when they were finishing Crisis one and I was part of another team that was developing new IPs and new new games in order to pitch it to publishers. I [snorts] was there moved from senior coder, lead programmer, project manager and project director. [snorts] And the last project was uh Ryson of Rome when I was project director and that was >> we started like 20 30 people uh it's considered micro and then we end up like 130 or something like this by the end then I went back to to Spain teach at the university then game programming engine programming all those kind of things and then I was hired by smallgate to build a studio small Barcelona here in Barcelona and handle the whole tech thing and and they're using Unreal. Um but after a few years the smugget thought that no we don't want to do that anymore but by that time I already got the idea with Albert my co-ounder to to build the studio ourselves. >> So that way we started the big like two two years ago two three years ago I don't know I tend to forget things very fast. So yeah. >> And so have you always been in in more of a lead role or when did you grow into this lead position? >> That leadership position happened when I was in that uh team building new new games at Kryekch and the lead programmer left and then they asked me to fill that position. Uh I was very hesitant but um a very good friend uh from HR Haiko he told me I think you will be good lead and he somehow handholded me the whole process and and it it went well. I mean the the team was happy with the with uh with my my kind of leadership and that and then after that was successful that's when they told me okay can you do the same thing you do with programming for [clears throat] the >> rest of the teams and that's why production manager >> and then after that then production director and stuff like this so uh yeah I would say >> more than half of my career. >> What exactly is your position now? Would you see yourself as more as like CEO or would you see yourself as tech lead or how would you describe your position now? >> I mean Epicto is very unorthodox in how it is built and structure. So some stuff that I explain not does not map to other studios but I I am kind of a project director. So I tend to oversee tempos, what we are aiming to do, how the player should feel and trying to to go through all the areas and make sure that we are all aligned. Um and when there is something on the tech that the the coders uh because some of them are very young and they don't have uh enough experience even if they are super smart way smarter than than me in many areas I just go there and and build some systems uh so they can then jump in and then build build really the system after that but having a bit of the structural um idea behind those systems It's it's it has proved many very many very many beneficial but normally my week is Monday to Friday is kind of direction. So I I talk to all the t the people I talk to do one ons I I go through all the departments and we look at all the problems and I try to find a way that there is quickly quick decision making for everybody. So there are no any any important block uh in the middle and we move forward and then during the weekends normally I get one day like Saturday or Sunday and then it's like okay what are the things tech wise that we could uh that we could solve quickly and then I jump and I start either fixing bugs creating base systems and things like this and that has been pretty much since the beginning. One thing I've been wondering about is like how are AAA games developed from like a tech perspective? Let's say like the studio decides we're going to make a new game. What is what is the starting point when you're in AAA? Is it like okay here are the systems we'll need or do you already have like a bucket of reusable systems from the last last project or how does that look like or do you think it's very different from studio to studio? It is very different from studio to studio. Uh very different. So >> okay, >> for example, uh creative believed a lot into building their own their own technology. So um it was a very technology oriented company where they built some technology and then they created games around it and then when the [clears throat] game was evolving then they was requesting technology. So it was like this kind of very strong relationship. in this market it was vice versa. Uh it was built in the correct steps. It's like okay what is the game first? What are we trying to do here and then what is the right tool to achieve that in the most efficient way. So in that case we were using a real um because of the the game required very realistic graphics and and u we wanted to have a bit of a jump start and and being technology feel very new. M >> so real made sense for example I have some friends in Ubisoft I don't have that experience by myself that they have so much code so much systems built already for other games that >> uh sometimes as a coder it's really building a puzzle or like okay I need to build an inventory well we have like 10 different inventories in different code bases >> okay >> pick your battle here >> uh because there is so much history and so much technology built before as studios of of they focus less on technology and more into how we make the next game interesting. So they are more game game design dependent than technology dependent. Again engines more or less is kind of a soft thing. >> We do we do few improvements here and there but they are not too much difference. So with a tech stag or with a techn technology the you sort of get into a groove and then the main problem you try to solve at some point is just the design of the games essentially. >> Yeah because it's rare that nowadays you do a game that will be interesting because of the technology. Rare to a point that I actually cannot recall any innovation comes more from hardware like I don't know like the latest >> consoles are super fast hard drive. of this way we can maybe get from hard drive to VRAM very quickly and that changes things. It means we have access to a bigger pool of textures. Um but that's kind of our we are trying for example Sony is doing very interesting trying to build new things in the kind of audio making audio way more interesting way more technical those are things that we evolve but there is it's not that back in the days when I was playing Doom and Quake every game was like wow it's like 10 important improvements and and I would just want to see this game I don't care if it's fun I just want to have it in my computer to witness fantastic things. Um, but nowadays it's not the case. I mean, you you are happy. I I'm happy playing a pixel art game. It's it's more about that. Technology is out of the way now. >> Okay. To what degree is prototyping typically part of the process on AAA games cuz we we indie devs, we talk about prototyping a lot, right? Is that also something that studios do in AAA or is it more like here's the design document, this is what we're making. What's how does that look like in your experience? >> Again, every studio have different formulas. Um, I can tell you what I talk with my peers about because for example, I have a friend in in God of War. I have a friend in in in Ubisoft, other Ubisoft projects. I have friends in Korilla. I have friends in many different game. And every time we share stories and it's not much overlap. Um the culture of the company >> finds what work with them in the past and stick with this kind of rituals. That's what they call the culture of the company. For example uh at cry we going we got one kind of ritual is that we were building something and for example I remember that rise we couldn't figure out combat. we were a bit stuck combat something felt good but it was not good enough um and we don't know what to do it so I can't recall the name of it there was a name for that but uh cabal or something like this I can't recall it so everybody basically we took the a bit like a scrum what a scrum does we took uh game designers we took programmers and we and we took an artist or something and we put them in a room and we said that's your only job you're not going to do anything else and we put the name is like those guys are solving combat you do you >> kind of a you know situation room or something and uh at it worked well because when you have a big companies there is so much noise and so many opinions >> so a way of saying guys we trust you you have game design you have code you have and every two weeks we will just up around is like you guys fine but you have three months to fix it so make combat fine >> and that was a a thing that that that work well. Well, Combatant Rise wasn't that good, but at least we moved it from unplayable to boring. Uh, which is a progress. Um. >> Mhm. Yeah. So, okay. So, the approach there is you create a little sub team with a clear task or responsibility and you have them let her go at it in like a smaller team basically. >> Yeah. I mean depending on it it highly depends on how clear the vision is and how strong vision you have coming from the creative director. Uh if you have a creator that have is that has their vision is strong and is very good at communicating that vision and has acceptable kind of flexibility around it things becomes very easy. Uh basically he starts he explains what he's asking for we uh what he what he has in his mind then we build teams around it and normally we do yes we do prototypes uh normally in the pre-production phase we do prototypes for I don't know uh movement com uh well transversal normally we call it then we have uh combat we have this kind of I don't know narrative bits how we are going to deliver those things we have those teams building those he reviews those we iterate And there is a a step that it could be a publisher, it could be leadership from the studio, it could be editorial in some other place in the world, it could be something that says okay I want to see this and verify that we have something there that it's interesting and once we have it >> uh some normally we have it like 60 70%. But it feels good enough and then we go into production. It's like okay now we are going to those are the pieces that we are going to build the game around and now we will build all the content and we will keep saying I don't know we have like four things we have combat dialogue and inventory management and this and then we keep playing with them distributing in the through the game but I have to say it's way more messy than what I explain. So when you start working on a new project, it almost sounds like you have like different people or different mini teams uh maybe working on on different things, right? Maybe someone is working on the inventory, someone is working on the movement, someone's working on the combat >> and then at some point you have to bring that all together and they're like, but in the beginning they're all like making their own prototypes and you're trying to test everything individually. Is is that roughly how it works? >> Yes. Uh I mean I think we are moving past that but uh the moment I I started in AAA it was the moment that everybody discovered the scrum and it was like the new big thing. Um so and mind that depending on the team you will have many opinions and that's the problem. You have a creative director that talks to a lead designer or a a design director. The design director have lead designer or lead designers and then those lead designers will have game designers and all those all these people need to have I mean even if they share the vision they normally have a strong opinions about how to make it good and they need to have some sort of room for iterating those things. So you normally it's like I don't know combat. Okay, you guys are the ones that have more experience with combat. You get combat programmers. You get some animators. You go into a room. You guys have I don't know two months which is like three sprints and fixing. And then from there let's check let's check with the creative director again. And then when they get all this they play they give feedback and they decide what's the next step until you get something that plays nice and all. Um again this is this is the ideal but the human factor kills it. Sometimes you get someone who is >> very charismatic and even if a project is bad they will tell you but it will be fantastic and everybody somehow feels positive about it and convince people that that was good enough even if it is not. And sometimes you get the opposite, someone who is not very charismatic, very pragmatic and shows something and says, well this is as much as we got and it feels like a bit of a downer even if it works well and people feel like they want to improve it. So human factor is is is big and it's chaotic and it is what it is. >> That's interesting how bigger teams sometimes manage to make very poor design decisions and nobody seems to notice, right? Have you >> have you heard of the Have you heard of the term uh toxic positivity? >> I have. Yeah. Yes. Yeah. >> Do you think it's a thing in bigger teams that can happen or >> The thing is that you label it like it's a thing but it's more about as I said the charisma of people. Let me tell you an example that happened to me. I am this kind of boring pragmatic guy. Uh I come from tech so it's true or false for me. Um so I remember for example discussing a milestone with a big publisher and I told them okay so this is the milestone we have done out of a 100 things I kind of remember the details more or less it went to we did 97 those three we are missing them we are moving them to the next mile and then they making a big thing of it oh this is terrible you haven't done those three things those were the most important ones this you your ray car dropping in the ball and I was like, "Well, then don't approve the milestone. What do you want me to do?" Well, but I want to and they were looking for this kind of pushing back, right? This kind of convince me that I don't have I don't want to convince you. If you don't want to approve the mountain, that's nothing I can do. I mean, I told you the things I we did 97 items and that's a lot. If you don't value that, >> that's really up to you. I I respect your decision. And um and then I I that was on a call. We are not talking to them directly. And then there was a guy behind me uh lead for another department who is very different from me. And he's like can I join? He's like yeah if you want go ahead and he started talking and after 2 minutes they were like yes this is exactly what we wanted to hear. You guys passing the milestone. You guys are fantastic. We trust you. those three things were not done. He was just very magnetic. >> He was like, "We hear you. What we are doing is that we really want to do those things right." >> So we thought that we need to take the right time because we know that those are important for you. It's like what is going on? I was like clueless. It's like we are not doing them anyway. Uh so and and after that the guys were like so happy. is like, "Yes, by the way, Rick, can we have that guy in the room every time we we we do a milestone report >> and I was [laughter] thinking that he will be here for all?" Yes, that's fine. >> So, is it about the items? Maybe I'm not charismatic and I'm, you know, so that's what I mean. We pass milestones because someone is sweet to someone. That's why uh big teams can can generate this kind of uh big mistakes. >> So there can be false negatives and there can also be false positives depending on the charisma of a person. Basically for for a milestone it could be could be that they don't want to improve a milestone even though you deserve it. And it could also be the other way around that you don't deserve the milestone being approved but somebody's charismatic so it's approved anyway. or or you so your negotiation skills is bigger part that what my you know programmer mind thinks of. Um and I learned it the hard way. [laughter] So um I see >> I mean we all know you do an interview and and to a company and maybe you you ace the test or something but they don't feel it or quite vice versa you are really bad with the test but the others feel it. What is the feel it? What is the connection? It's extremely circumstantial. It's luck. It is again human behavior. humans talking to humans and trying to guess and use their intuition to see how things will be. But bigger teams make mistakes or even more mistakes I would say uh than smaller teams because there is an expectation with hierarchy and experience then those people become very good at what they are doing. >> Um so if you were part of very successful game and you were the lead designer so we trust you. If the lead designer of this awesome game says this goes, this goes, we trust you because you were successful once. >> So this is almost what you said in the beginning is that this creates a chance for you to become a bit less grounded because maybe if you had like a big hit, maybe people trust you more than they should and then you get caught up more in your bubble and in your mindset because of that. >> Yeah, because people generate kind of an image of >> Yeah. Who are you based on your past success? Like but that's fine. I mean this is the shortcuts that the brain takes. I mean you made an image of me like you have a career and successful. I've just been coding games for that whatever people ask me. I have done nothing special. Um but this kind of image that we do for other people tricks us into well if this guy says this and he sounds very experienced must be true. So let's go for it. And again makes sense. But in corporations and when there is big money that's sometimes the only way for making choices. >> This guy did a very good game last last year. So if he says the this game is good, this game is good. They don't have any other thing to base their decision making into. Um but then you look into the reality and maybe that guy was part of a 200 men or team 200 devs that they were doing a game. he was lead designer but maybe he the creative director was overruling him and making a lot of correcting his bad choices all the time and there were many designers that did fantastic uh despite of him but you have that guy bringing that title it's like I've done this guy I was there and suddenly it's like you are the guy >> but in aa there is not the guy I mean there are so many people it's very very difficult to to said you are the creator, you are seat measure, you are this kind of name that defines quality. Uh business people love those but this is basically smoker mirrors. It's >> I see never. So it sounds a little bit like even as a lead director or something you don't see yourself as that important or what what's like >> oh no no [laughter] no >> what's like the value you provide to the team as a lead director >> it's value but in the end it's a bit difficult to explain >> I mean experience is worth something right you can't be like exper experience isn't worth anything like surely surely surely you would rather have somebody who's been in the industry for 20 years than a newcomer as like your director for your game, right? >> Not entirely true. >> There there's a pragmatic answer coming. >> No, no. I I I would love to give you easy answers, but there are none. [laughter] I'm too old for easy. No, that is not true. So another example probably that that that I I tell my students very often I was push I was pitching a project um when I was at Kryte to a big studio and um they were liking the project and then I gave them the the the time to ship and I I can recall let's say two years uh and I remember there was one guy in the publishing side it's like no no no you could do it in half. I was like what where where this comes from? No I we cannot do it in half. Yes, you can. And he was very confrontational in that meeting, but he's uh and I don't want to cliche people, it all but it always happened with me with Americans. Americans in a meeting room can be very strong. This is this is my business side. But then the moment and and Europeans is like, man, [ __ ] you. I mean, I come on, don't be that like that. But the moment they leave the room, it's like, hey, let's grab a be let's grab a beer. Uh you're super nice to work with. It's like you were just yelling to me. [laughter] Okay. >> My goodness. Okay. >> They are very good at compartmentalizing those kind of things at least. Again, those are the ones that I work with, which is of course statistically no value, but that has been my experience. So, I grab a beer with that guy and I told him, why do you think we can do it in half time? It doesn't make sense to me. And he said, well, because I have done it in the past and it only took me one year. Like, what have you done? Well, I did it the game in uh in the past u similar to yours and it took one year. Okay. So, I'm doing um fighting game. So, your game was a fighting game. It's like no, was a racing game. Okay. And you did it with a team of 100 like the ones I'm doing. Oh, no, no, no. We were 60. Okay. Did you got the team in the star or you need to hire? No, no, no. I already got it from another project from racing racing games. This team was been doing racing games for six years or seven years. Okay. So, if I understand correctly, I need to hire a bigger team. I don't know those guys. I'm starting from a scratch and I'm going to do a fighting game and my assume is two years. And because 10 years ago for another console, very old console, you did a racing game with a team that has been doing five racing games and you did in one year, you think I can do it in one year. I was looking, it's like, yeah, now that you put it like that, it doesn't make sense. It's like I Yeah. [laughter] Uh yeah, but man, can you please think about it before you you start yelling at me in a meeting room? Yeah. Well, I'll talk to my boss tomorrow. I think that yeah maybe that I it was a bit too too much but the thing is was his experience valuable? There is something but as with uh luck I tend to see that people overvalues experience a lot because uh and the reason is because the people that have experience we like to show this kind of experience. This is like I've been 20 years doing video games. This is how you open everything. Every website in everything, everybody talks about the years doing video games. >> Oh yeah. >> I've seen many professionals and the way they behave or how fast they learn or how or how they are different over time varies extremely very very different. Uh it's like saying two people went to the uh same I don't know school and they know exactly the same. That's not true. There are people that uh iterate very fast but they never go to the end of a big game. There are people that like um only experience end of games because they are in a big companies like Ubisoft and they one year they finish one game and then they s jump to another game that is finishing and they do not experience perp production. There are other people that have been promoting very fast and they only know leadership and they have never been in the trenches. There are people that have been ignoring the company and they have been in the apprentice forever and never give enough value. There are people that they are only supporting one system for 10 years. I've been doing my physics thing in 10 years. After 10 years, the only thing that you know is this. >> Uh so your 10 years are extremely different from someone has done 10 years. So we put that number because again simplifies the communication. Okay. 20 years. Okay. So you are silver level gold. >> Yeah. Yeah. Exactly. But um and also there is the factor of negative experience. Senior people come with the this worked for me in the past. >> Um exactly as as as that guy that mentioned well it worked for me in the racing game in the super old console and he has this stand of I want to value my experience. This is what I'm bringing to the table. So that's the first choice for him. But is it things are extremely different from project to project from team to team from technology and from game so different than when we say we are the video game industry. Yes. But you look at other industries and everything is more structured. When you go to make a movie there is a structure in that in that um in that process. There is a script, people buy a script, then you go hire a director, then you put the money, then you do this, then you do that. It can go well or bad. But you do 10 movies and normally it's the process is very similar. When you do video games, everybody in most of the teams, they improvise and they decide how they are going to do it. There is no book of let's do a video game page one you have to do this >> and or or well there are actually many but people ignore them. So no um experience could be bad and I've most of the time experience is way way lower and uh could be negative could be a negative bit. Most of the people at Epic killers are very young >> and um and I honestly I'm super happy with the productivity and how bright they are and they see nothing is impossible and and they just want to you know eat the world and that is a value that sometimes seniors are not getting. Uh because yeah I tried something 10 years ago it didn't work that doesn't mean anything nowadays but they are wired to not try it again if you know what I mean. I see. I see. Uh I recently talked to a old gamedev friend of mine we worked with in the past. He sort of gone a different way, made a bunch of cool games. And one of the things he told me was that the more he works on games, the he like he feels like he's getting better at it, but he feels like his theories for what makes a successful game become less and less well defined the more he works on games. He was like he could have given better advice on how to make a successful game 5 years ago than what he can do now. So I'm wondering a bit do you think that maybe maybe if you don't call it experience but if you maybe call it something like wisdom can you grow some wisdom maybe the real wisdom is in knowing that you don't know do you think that's a thing? >> It's a good term I like it I think some sort of wisdom you carry few things with you that's for sure. being selective about which things you want to use or which you don't want to use is the skill. Um, for example, I when I go on the during the weekends when I go and and and build a system, uh, sometimes some of of of of the coders in the team, it's like you did an audio system in in one day. You are amazing. You are the final coder. You are great. It's like how do you look at my audio system? >> It's 80 lines of code. Um like oh yeah, I'm looking at it. Well, it's Yeah, it's very simple. Yes, that's the magic of it. It's very simple. It doesn't do anything it doesn't have to do. I could over complicate it. I could I've done very big systems and normally 60% of it they are never used. Um so you become very practical. You become very aware of the time that you have, your energies, your mood and you try to control yourself about okay, I will have my Saturday. I will have no one at home because uh my wife is getting the kids somewhere. I will I will be resting and then I will be focused on this and I keep thinking of okay what are my goals for this system? those three things, I will just get those three things in the absolute easier way possible and a way that it's easy to read, easy to fix, and I don't care if I destroy it and start again and not get attached to it. And that simplicity is probably one of the things that I I would carry with this wisdom. Just do the less that you can do. I mean sometimes with test the other day I was talking with with a big a tech director at IO a very good friend and told me that they do test for coders when they try to join the the company and they give them so much code trying to prove their skill and he keeps like I don't know at my age I just value the guys that just solve it directly with as simple as solution as possible they don't mess around they don't need to build all those kind of abstract classes in order to build a system that it's like you know those are three functions and it works so if it works it works and I love those guys and we miss those I would say that's probably one of the the the kind of wisdom that you carry with you how to be practical and this kind of wow you program very fast is I just decide what not to do and that's and that's it >> right yeah okay I see some would call that experience some some would call it wisdom so maybe the thing is also So that not all experience is created equal, right? Some of it transfers better to new projects than than other experience. Like I think people sometimes overv value how or overestimate how transferable skills are. I find that they're not as transferable as people think they are. >> Yeah, totally. They are not much transferable. uh what you can transfer is the way you your attitude towards it how practical you are and and the kind of understanding you and and how practical you become in order to let's say to analyze the problem and probably preview or or think ahead about problems that you could have with this this very morning actually few hours ago we are talking about uh with with Oscar one of our uh great programmers at Epic was was saying well I think I finished the safe system. So I told him um we need to do versioning because at some point the safe system it doesn't have a version if it's old and we change it we don't want to be loading trying to load all safe systems and these are the kind of things it's like yes it makes sense I don't need to explain anything he will be fantastic at doing it but it is this kind of I've been there done that let's do this now it's very simple it will save so much trouble >> um other things like are very simple like for example But when we upload files, we have um there is a match of where files can be and which extensions and in which folder they can be. And it felts like like very simple. You could tell, hey, your audio needs to be in the audio folder. Just do it. Um but my experience tells me that audios will end up everywhere because people are fast because we are closing this milestone. You just put it here. No worries. Nobody removed them and in the end you have a chaos of a file system. So now the pipeline does not allow any audio files outside the audio folder as an example. >> I see. Mhm. Mhm. Do you have any strong opinions about how you should approach the code architecture of a new pro project? Are are you the the way I would estimate your answer is probably a very pragmatic. Oh, it depends on the project, right? Do you have any any strong opinions on like anything like you should be super minimal, only do what's absolutely necessary or what what are those I wonder what are the strongest opinions you have about that? >> So I've I've I've been the over engineering coder because I could and I want to test myself. Uh I like to build systems that are very well designed, very well structured and they're with minimal dependencies and things like this. At some point even after I jumped totally into the object-oriented kind of trend uh back in my time [snorts] and I felt like doing for example a C function in the middle of code was like a sin. um you need to make a class or a structure that has a class inside that defines and then you go with STL and you do this and you do that and it's and and this kind of let's say it it made this kind of you are proud of your area of the project because in bigger teams you don't have control of pretty much anything. I mean >> there are people deciding they are you actually >> do not talk much with them and there are designers and everybody is like yeah Rick but you need to make sure that this network code syncs correctly fine so you hyperfocus there and then it's like okay this is my area I'm going to be happy in this kind of playground and now I'm going to build this playground so I am the network coer the combat coder the audio coder it doesn't matter But I'm going to make this program. Then you make your classes, you make your systems, you make your things, then you are happy with it because you are kind of building your house in the middle of a big city which is the game and you you want to be comfortable in your house. >> Um but also you want to prove yourself that you are smart that you can build very complex and very smart houses. So you start building not just a house but you build you know an office building with leaves and and parking garage and tons of areas and you feel very good when people is like why I don't I look at your code is there's so much stuff it's like I know >> I know I'm very good [laughter] >> well after a few years that's not a compliment >> that's actually a bad thing um >> people should go to your house and understand immediately what's going on. >> Yeah. >> So this this kind of thing of for example no need to comment your code should be readable. Uh I I normally found an average there comment the intention of the code. So normally it's tell you open a file the first line I'm build I'm doing this file because I intend to do um I don't know solve this I don't know audio listener in 3D to do this. My intention is that with in this file I cover all the API with this. You don't need to document anything. This is what I try to do. And let's see if the file accomplish that. And then the the the rest should be very readable. Uh always prefer readable code of course, >> very simple codes. Um and remove dependencies as much as you can, even if that means sometimes adding having to add some some code in order to make sure that things are separated. Um because then you can analyze the well it's very simple but you can analyze the stability of each area by itself. So would you for example include the rather include the dependency in like multiple systems rather than all have them depend on that separate system. I don't know if I have like a bunch of utility functions, I have the choice of having like a utility module and all of my other modules reference the utility module or I could just hardcode all of the utility functions into each individual module and then I have I mean they have duplicates of them but each system is more independent. What what would be your way to go there? Cuz you kind of have the tension between duplicating and decoupling systems. I mean duplicating is normally the last resort. Uh but it is acceptable sometimes. Um you don't need to be dogmatic about copy code. I mean it's fine to copy code if code you feel is not going to change much which it normally does but uh simple code that you want to just keep in an area and make sure that this code is by itself like you are building a DLL or something like this is really like self-contained then it's fine to copy code uh as long as it's not >> it's not again it's not a big piece or you think that the changes are coming to this code but it should be your last resort uh as long as you Right. So for example in our code every time I need a function to be function I don't know there is a we there is a file that we call misk mistania uh that we put functions that we don't know where to put. >> Mhm. >> And then they have this other thing of um do not prevent how do not architecture the code too much because you are not that smart and the code is very complex. So sometimes people ask me Rick this function here feels odd. I I don't know. It's like just put it there and if the problem grows over time and at some point you see that you have a group of factions that are out of the same theme and they need to be their own stuff then later we will move them out. But >> do the first work now and keep going until the system works and then we can analyze after the work is done how the game is going how the code is going and decide where to move stuff. But you can decide later. Do not >> right >> pre-architect everything because I've never seen someone who draws the architecture and then codes the architecture like that and it works. It doesn't uh >> you figure out the architecture as you as you go right yeah >> brains are not are not wired to I mean sometimes I see genius people but then genius people do not architect they just go directly um but normally this architecture then code is you can draw something in order to communicate with other coders a bit of an intention but uh after that you start coding and and then you start you know iter operating on the smaller things and then is when you can do your stuff and if you see again something growing something that makes sense no worries change it and uh it's fine you don't need to stick with your cor with your previous um thing of architecture you got in your mind I don't know if I am answering the question but there is it's it's very broad I mean coding it's uh >> Mhm. It's a it's a big topic like u I don't know coding patterns for example is something that I discovered halfway through we never got a book for coding patterns. Well when I was coding there was no books. >> Yeah coding pattern is something I I wanted to ask you about cuz I've seen a lot of like you see people talk about a lot of different coding patterns and always they're like oh this is the one like SOAP is the [ __ ] now or ECS is the [ __ ] now. And then it's like you end up very confused that which one actually is the [ __ ] I don't know there are too many. [laughter] >> Yeah. I mean that that's for people that love talk about that as this is their goal of their job and not and they are detached from the goal itself. I mean yeah sorry I'm not explaining myself. If you are in a big big company and again you don't know what's going on but you are doing this. 01% of the next assessment script and you need to speed up I don't know the way inventory shows then you open your okay what is give me the the the solution for this and then you look for something you could speed up maybe with doing some nasty tricks like you know whatever uh adding ugly code that will speed up code but or you could do something nice and you are very well paid to do the a big very big task and when your lead programmer asked you, you said, "I just need two weeks and it's going to be amazing." And then you build, as I said, your comfort zone. And then you open the book. I've never done this kind of thing. That sounds a nice solution. And then you get excited and you jump and do it. I get it. I've been I've been there. I've been open a book. It's like, "Wow, this solves all my problems." And then you do it and it solves 60% of your problems, but creates other problems. And maybe it's not the perfect tool. So you end up having this nuance about selecting the right tool for the right situation. Um when someone becomes very dogmatic is like if you don't do ECS in your in your um engine you are doing something wrong. Oh that's I that turns me off quickly. Why? Depending on the game depending on the situation. I mean yes it is a very nice solution for some stuff but all those nice solutions after few years you start seeing that they are not that good and maybe there are other solutions. So it's the new thing. It's very cool and you want to architecture around and you want to challenge yourself. But you will hear me very all the time saying it depends. It depends. Um there are very very I mean they are very good and I probably I will recommend everybody to con them once or twice. You get this very good book of game programming patterns which I think is fantastic >> very well explained and try them. try them and decide which kind of tool makes sense and sometimes you pick one and change it. No worries. It's not about the pattern, it's about the outcome that you expected. >> So every pattern comes with advantages and disadvantages is what you're saying and which is I think also what makes sense, right? Their pros and cons to everything. Would you say that it makes more sense to pick one programming pattern for your entire project or do you think about programming patterns on like a systemto-system basis? >> No, no, it's always system to system. I don't think of any pattern that is kind of a general solution. So um no no no I mean for input for example if I recall really the command pattern is very interesting especially if you need to buffering different inputs for the whole structure of the tree for the scene ECS is a nice choice I mean you could deal with something else but it's very well packed for memory um memory serization continuity I don't recall the name in order everything is packed in memory so you go through uh very fast very optimized for that kind of problem you apply that solution but the moment you need to do um an audio system or you need to integrate wise or something I mean it really depends I would say no no it's it's better to have knowledge of all all of them and decide which one to pick or don't pick any I mean you don't have to uh they are just solutions that have proven interesting and good in the past for certain areas but each of them in like in the book will tell you if you have problem A, B or C, this could work. Try that. >> I see. So you would pick more on a system to system basis and you don't think it's a problem if I use ECS for one scene and then soap for a different thing or whatever. Got it >> for the scene manager ECS if you stick with it go for it. >> But do not be dogmatic at everything needs to be like that. Okay. >> Especially nowadays it's very rare that you are CPA CPU bound. I mean you need to be quite a bad coder um to or you are doing a mistake if you're CPA bound nowadays. Um >> okay >> again depending but with GPUs taking so much work out of your hands be practical. I don't mean that you do not optimize things or you don't you do things but and don't be reckless about overusing the CPU because you don't care. Just be nice to the CPU as long as you are nice CPU will be easy time GPU will take over most of of of the serialized work. So you should be fine. >> Sure. Yeah. At university, I remember one of the first game projects, some of my friends, they they had a prototype um with weather effects and like all of the snow particles were like rigid bodies in Unity. That was not very optimized. [laughter] >> They were not very >> That's what I said. That's a coding mistake. That's or that's that's a mistake. But it's not that it's slow because your computer or something. >> It's slow because you did a dummy mistake. But that's fine. I mean, you learn from this and uh and we all have done this and probably will do it in the future. That's fine. But and again, it's more of an easy clear mistake than back in my days. You really need to take care of every cycle of the CPU and be very careful. >> Mhm. >> Nowadays, you don't I mean, it's not that you can ignore it, but just again be nice to it and that's it. With Starfinder, you're fully working in God, right? >> Correct. >> I think that's one of the the biggest God teams I've heard of. Do you know any of similar size or >> do I think that there might be others, but maybe they are hiding in the shadows doing a fantastic game that will come over in the future, >> but no, I mean >> I was talking to Renee about uh PBKK. Fantastic game. they're doing I think they are 8 10 something like that >> but they have contractors and people helping them so that will that number does not explain the whole story >> um but no ours is is is pretty big I would say if not maybe one of the the the five biggest using the tune right now >> do you think that good maybe incentivizes certain design patterns more than others like for example I think GDO has like these this event system right where you can connect things with signals I think they're called. >> Yeah. Uh yeah, God do is is built in a way I mean one of the reasons I pick it because I probably will make if I would do an engine right now it will do things very similar to them. Um I think it make a lot of sense all the decisions that they made >> and it's a small it's small. I like it that it's a small >> and [laughter] it's nimble. It's not blurred out and and it is how it think should be. You can do so much with one or two megabytes of this in a video game. I mean I it kills me when I see wasted hard drive CPU cycles you with Unreal and Unity just loading it. You see all those things. It's like come on man. The things I can do in a millisecond and this I've been 10 minutes waiting for this. This is this is outrageous. go incentivizes. I mean, the structure for the scene tree is very interesting. So, the concept of everything is a note works. Uh, I think it's it's just a way of doing it. I mean, I wouldn't say it's it's good or bad. It's just a way they they do that and which is fine. I think the moment you get used to it, well, you see the benefits of it. They their symmetry is very well optimized. So you can handle hundreds of thousands of nodes, no problem. And but the the good thing about it makes it very transparent to see what's going on. It could be complex, but it's transparent. But I wouldn't say it's the biggest the the biggest uh perk and that has got over other engines. Um you I mean when you in Unity or Unreal you pick one game object and suddenly you see all the components are down there and you could be scrolling and there are many things wow that's a lot of stuff >> um which is fine but all those stuff it will be notes in the scene tree in kod do it's really the same you can get the same complexity but visually it helps a bit I wouldn't say it's a big thing signals are a very smart choice for god dot it is a way of the cop link things that works very well. The only thing that that that worries me is that I don't like that that very long uh call stacks and signals by default they immediately call functions and so normally I am the guy putting always no this is a deferred signal so you call it on idle time I don't have long call stack but again I think that's me it's not a big deal but I prefer things to be in video games you end at isolating things in the frame. the frame is your kind of playground there to work and the moment something happens if possible it's like okay something happened I'll take note >> and I'll do that later >> but to try to not do something and then that thing does something and then does something and and then suddenly you see a spike in the middle of you get a frame that does a lot of stuff you want to do stuff uh see that oh the player hits um I don't know a detector a trigger or Okay, I'll take note. I'm not react right now and I'll react maybe next frame. I'll react by the in the idle moment of the frame or when I finish this. And this thing balance things out and actually makes the code easier to understand. You know that the moment you are reacting to something, you are just doing that. you are not calling from 10 things uh that that that could generate a very long call stack uh >> and probably makes it a bit more efficient for the CPU as well because you can like batch process all of the things right if you have like very deep stacks then the CPU has CPU has to go through a lot of different types of code whereas if you just take note of collision events or something then you can just batch process them in one go >> if you have multiple of Mhm. >> Uh yeah, normally I I I prefer this because it's also easier to debug uh like for example >> the bark system. So uh the things could be happen in the game and then the characters in our game could be saying I don't know there is a window or you are doing this uh there is a bad guy coming and they notice things. Um so the way I do it is like every time there is anybody calls like hey this guy should be saying a bark I just take note of it >> and then at some point when I get to the process it's like okay what is my cue of barks to say I mean it's this this this you know those are a lot I don't think I will process all of them so let me process three and uh I'll take two or three and then the next frame I will do more I will it's a cue that I will be exhausting because frames in the end I mean when you have a game that goes 30 60 frames this goes extremely fast you don't have to solve everything in the same frame >> so when you have that mindset of a slicing frame slicing or I think it's called that putting things later those systems breathe very easily because you see okay I'm going to solve three of those and then you solve one then you look at it and you know that when it's h you know the code when is going to be the code executed in the process not exactly when somebody says that this guy should be saying something else gameplay wise it's not important that it happens on the microscond or in a second game a code gets simplified that way even if you have to do a queue which is basically in a way you pop and push but nothing. How do you personally go about planning the architecture for a new game? Is it is it like multiple programmers sitting on a table and like you come up with this big master plan or do you break it down into smaller systems immediately or let's just say I want to make a new game. What would be your recommendation for how to approach code architecture? >> First thing need to come from the game. Uh code architecture is is like saying hey how do you approach to build an engine for a car? It's like it is a racing car or which car it is. First is which car it is and that is very important to have it as much as you can define. So for example in epic we we know we wanted to do CRPG. >> So what you do is literally make um in Spanish we said cartes magos which is uh the letter to Santa is like what are the toys that I want? >> Okay. >> Uh so you go open balders get three. Well, I need a dialogue system. I need people moving around. I need combat in turns. I need to um upgrade levels. I need and you start going with a high very level. Okay. Done. And at some point you have your your the toys that you want. You have like I don't know 30 40 very high level because in the end we are copying a kind of a structure of a game. The genre already expects those things. Again, this goes game by game. If you are going to do a very innovative game, this could go through a different s sorry a different cycle of discovering but most likely nowadays you are taking 60 70% of another three games. So you just first make the list in a paper >> and once you have that then is um you start breaking them down into pieces. Okay. So yeah I need to do combat. What is combat? Well, I need for combat is turn-based combat. So, turn-based combat, it means that um how do I isolate those pieces in a way that they do need to talk to each other as much as possible? >> Can you sorry to interrupt? Can you quickly explain why decoupling things is important? I think I I think I have some answers for this, but I'd be curious in how you answer this. Why Why is decoupling things important in the first place? >> I don't know. Feels too obvious to me. I never [laughter] I never got to. >> Is it easier to debug or is it um does it make systems more reusable or like what? Okay. So first again with as with anything you don't need to go crazy about the coupling. Sometimes coupled systems are fine but the so the coupling systems allows you to separate things in smaller elements and uh um breaking big problems in small problems. Again the the first thing and is you need to acknowledge that compared to the complexity of the code that you are doing your brain is stupid doesn't cannot handle it. Your brain is very limited compared to all the complexity you want to handle. So what you are doing is that you transform the problem in something that your brain can handle. So you keep breaking it down into small pieces until one piece feed your brain and the moment you have that then I can code for it. >> Okay, that also makes sense. I see. >> So combat uh as I said so the example will be for example one of the things that we did is like combat it's a lot of pieces. So in a turnbased can I have a system that just handle turns. >> You give them ids of entities or something >> and it will and then it will tell you okay turn zero your turn. And then it waits for the entity to say I'm finished. It's like okay now it's your turn. Now it's your turn. Now it's your turn. We found the round. We finished the round. We start again. It's your turn again. And then maybe you can tell the turn sister. Oh, by the way, this entity is no longer in the combat. Fine. Okay, it will handle it. It's like now it's not your turn. It's the other turn. Or you can say, by the way, this guy moved and it only handles it problem. And you take away everything and s combat is too big for your brain. And suddenly turnbased. Well, I think I can handle it. It's just basically IDs and entity IDs that are in one sequence. How hard this could be. Well, normally that happens. is that is actually not a simple thing and and you start coding it and and you as long as you keep practical maybe you can solve that in I don't know 500 lines of code or something >> uh well that's because we use GDScript and it's very easy very quick in go do but in C++ it will be three four times that but >> regardless of that you solve that problem because it feeds your brain >> and that's it I solve it I have this turn manager and the manager doesn't care. You just know need need to know that do I start what are my entities and it can decide by the way I don't have entities so the combat is finished it will tell you because I don't have more entities that are active and will signal those things in and out and you have this box that solves this problem and the good thing is like out of combat you remove 20% of the problem it's like okay this is solved and I do test and I make sure this works and the co and the code is easy because if there is a problem there it just 500 lines of code. It's easy to find out what's the problem, >> but it doesn't try to do everything. It just solves one problem >> move and then okay now uh skills I need to start finding a skills and killing people. How what is death? Okay, death is is a comp is a complex concept in a game like that. uh you can be in conscious, you could be participating, you can be inactive, you can be so what how we are going to handle that and then you break it down in another thing and you try to like okay there it has to be a criteria to decide what is that and what is not and this will be handled by by this this is skills this is this this is that this is movement and you make sure that all those pieces gradually solve the combat problem which is a big system is a like epic level kind of system, >> right? So, do you sort of think about it in terms of layers? So, you have like basically systems building on top of each other or is it more like a puzzle with a bunch of interlocked systems? >> No, those are layers of course. Um, >> layers. >> So, what you do is going back to the turn system. So, does the turn system know what's an entity? An entity is a class somewhere else. Mhm. >> Um doesn't need to I mean what is interesting for the turn to know about the entity you don't have to so okay so they are not going to be entities they are just going to be ids so it's like hey there is a new thing that goes into the turn system and the turn system okay you are going to be number three and I don't care what you are it's just I only handle order so I don't need to know that entities exist I don't need to Oh, if people are alive or dead, I will call it deactivated or out of combat. You decide what means death or not death. >> And you keep removing all those concepts until turn system is something you in theory and again this is not a very good goal but in theory you could give it to someone else and they will have a tour manager that they could apply for other stuff. It's important to not go crazy with this because modularity it has its place and some people some people go crazy about everything needs to be modular and and things like this. Don't don't go crazy with that but it's a good goal to try to achieve. So uh our term manager as this example doesn't know what is an entity doesn't know anything about anything else. It just knows it just handles order and uh and that's about it. And that's already few things to solve. And in my experience, sometimes programmers, young programmers, um, inexperienced programmers, it's like that's too easy. I can do turn and then this and then that. It's like, okay, if it's too easy, >> just do it quicker. That's fine. You feel it's easy, but trust me, it's going to be more complex than this. >> Yeah, but come on, Rick. I just I think that I can do the whole combat together. No, no, no, no. Just solve the turn thing. And when you have it finished, let's talk about how it is built. But just do that. And 90% of the time they come back, it's like actually yeah, there was a lot of nuance into for example, there are the concept of you can delay your your action. Um it means delaying your action. It means that you can decide to not be not take your part. Wait, and then you could send a signal. I want to act now. Well, this is part of the turn system. Well, that's few functions to handle that. and new member variables and it keeps growing and also the fact that it's a small thing. The moment we grow in the future, we can just go one of those small pieces of code. It's like you grow but it grows. They they were small in the first place. So they never become normally they do not become overloaded. So yeah um that that's what we call the base layer that the base layer of systems that do not talk to each other and do not know anything. But then you can the next layer you build on top of that they obviously need to know the layer below the site. That means they they must have dependencies. They don't they don't work without the dependencies. >> Yeah. So for example there is the game state. The game state is where I am in the in the game right now. Um so um there is a state that combat the stars. Um and the state as another example just handles movements between states. It decides when the state is finished and what to execute before going to another state. It decides arguments when the when the state starts but it's actually variant. It's just normally a I don't know like 50 lines of code 80 lines of code each state. So for example the combat state starts and it does okay it seems that everything is right. combat to the star. Um I have people and they are alive and they hate each other and they are different factions. Feels like combat is right. That's my job. The only my job is to know that state is fine. Okay. Now I uh call into memory or activate or whatever the combat manager and I know about the combat manager and the combat manager appears there. Hello, I'm here to handle combat. Yes, it is the right context. I checked combat should start and the combat manager is like fine. What do I have to do? Uh, okay. First, I need the turn manager. Turn manager, I'm starting. Those are the 10 entities that are going to fight each other. Those are their their factions. Okay, you have it. Fine. Okay. Now, and then I have that. I am going to play a cinematic saying combat the stars. Okay. I'm going to grab this cinematic with this system and this character will save his voice. What do I have to know? Well, it seems that combat a turn manager. Are we okay? What is the first guy to go? Ah, it's it's ID number three. Whatever it was, you say I three is entity. Oh, now it's the time for the character to play. And then he basically orchestrates three or four systems together. There is a moment you do this combat manage, but that's the, as you said, that's the second layer. >> So, you do have um orchestrator scripts cuz I >> the the modularity extremists. I'm not sure how they would even approach it. Would they try to make a generalist orchestrator script that they pluck other scripts into or that's that's not a good good approach anywhere, right? >> No, no, no, no, no. So the uh I mean there there was a a very smart uh coder Casim Monator which is absolute genius and he described coding as I think was syntactical I think simplification or syntactical compression something like that. What you are doing is layer by layer you make things simpler. So imagine for example that we don't have a turn manager and we have the combat manager and the combat manager starts like okay I'm starting I need to know who goes first. Okay I'm going to start coding this. It's like okay this is the entity you roll initiative you go there you go that and it it grows and it's very big. Um so the what term manager is doing is syntactically compressing this complexity into five function calls >> right >> so suddenly the combat manager is like uh term manager just start and do your thing um those are the 10 guys which one is the first oh I did everything it's number three this is code that is compressed syntactically you compressed tons of complexity and the term manager just handles that Um, so term manager is syntactically compressing this. So when you look at the combat manager, you don't need to have a long combat manager. It's just telling the com the term manager to do something. Then it uh goes to the entity and tells them, hey, you need to wait or the UI, you need to wait for the character to decide what to do or it's an enemy. So just AI system which is already compressing all this complexity. You do you tell me when you're finished and you are selling. that the code even if you are calling different systems is simple. It's syntactically compressed is readable. You see what's going on at every step >> and with functions of 20 30 lines of code you see one turn happening because you are calling all those systems that handle the problem for you. >> Right? So if you write a system and you notice it becomes too big and too unmanageable then perhaps that means that you need to compress some of the sub problems into their own system. So you you keep doing that. The idea is you keep doing that until the problem almost becomes trivial, right? Or >> correct until you see, as I said, um at some point the combat manager with all of this would not feed my brain. And it's like, well, I don't know what's going on. There are always bugs here. It's so long. And honestly, I just after two weeks, I don't understand anything that that I did here. So it's clear that you did a code that the moment you were coding it you felt confident that you understand it but when you are back it's very difficult to handle and other people cannot understand. So uh at this point what you need is it's it is a symptom that you need to do syntactically compress something and it happens very often and you need to be flexible on that mindset when you're coding. It's like okay this is growing too big. I feel this is a problem in itself that doesn't need to be connected with other stuff. Um can I compress it to a manager and put it into layer zero which it just solves this problem and sometimes we have managers that are literally 60 lines of code >> that solves a very simple thing but it makes the code the gameplay code very easy to read. is like I'm calling this manager for example mouse we have a mouse manager that decides which kind of uh mouse icon you're showing >> it's really like a call function just put that mouse into it but if you start thinking about it it's really a stack so when you go into I don't know you go into an area of the screen that the mouse goes in it changes to I don't know looking at something but then there is an inside area where your mouse goes in and Then there is this other one. When you leave, you are it's basically a stack base. You remove the top one and then you see the previous one and then you see the previous one. Well, okay, there is a stack to it. Fine. How do I define the icons? the icons are I don't know maybe it's an enum maybe it's a list of resources but it needs to be very easy for me in the gameplay code say put the icon of whatever you use when you are observing an element or you want to attack or you want to pickpocket >> pickpocket and that already justifies a mouse manager and the mouse manager actually not simple it has many things and this keeps happening for example I got surprised how difficult the target targeting manager was um Mhm. >> When you are selecting different skills in our game, it's like, okay, you need to have a cone. Well, I thought that you pick an enemy and that's it. It's like how difficult that is. So, I put it into the combat manager. And then I was like, okay, just picking an enemy that's fine. And then the designer is like, yeah, but what about if you need to pick two enemies? It's like, yeah, I guess that I can just increase it. You pick one or two. Yeah, but you can only pick uh enemies that have this condition. And if they had this other condition, they don't like, okay, so I need to filter by tax. Um, by the way, this other um skill has a cone, you need to first send the cone and out of the cone, you need to select three uh entities and that has this condition like okay, let me stop you there. Targeting system, let's get all this into something that solves this. and I go to the targeting system and targeting system actually has grown in one of the most complex >> uh systems that we have because there are many ways to it but I didn't uh didn't expected this to be that complex and well I learned the lesson but again you just need to be flexible about it >> would you say that like what differentiates a good programmer from a bad programmer in terms of how they architect their games is is the skill in knowing how to compartmentalize your code or what's what's the difference if you look at like a first game jam student project versus like a professionally done AAA or what are like the what's the learning curve what are the skills that you can work on to get better at that >> I will start with the same so it depends so if you are a systems programmer um your goals are very different from a gameplay programmer things like this and >> um so systems programmer for example have more a focus focus on understanding the underlaying hardware and how to optimize correctly for it. Uh so in this case for example in our system will be the go dot programmers that are improving the the engine. Uh what we do in Epic is basically gameplay programmer and we don't do uh engine programming because God do solve that for us. Um so game play um gameplay programmer have a different goal. gameplay programmers. My experience tells me that they need to have this 30% of game designers that they play the game, they want the game to be fun, they the game want to be useful and they are not solving a coding challenge. They are solving a player facing feature and they need to be able to put themselves into the shoes of the player understand what the designer is wants to achieve challenge that if it's needed they need to be a bit of game designers and once they get it they need to embrace it because no game designer is going to take to do it right in the first place they said okay I think that for targeting I think for the combat for this for that this makes sense and a good designer will tell you this is my intention. It won't tell you details because the programmer needs to fill those. Um and then you go and do it and then you start okay I want the best experience for the player. The code is a tool. Code needs to be of course minimally well structured, easy to read, easy for other people to jump in and as long as it's it's like that you are doing a good job and and that's about it. minimal, practical, everything that I said before. I can go with examples of bad programmers uh that that I found. So I found people that they want to show that they are very good programmers. So they over complicate this the system saying yeah but look at what I can do. I don't care [laughter] this is not necessary. I'm sure that you are super smart that you could do amazing things but the solution for this is way simpler. Mhm. >> Then there are the ego ones where well the designer told you this other thing and this sounds not very compatible what they were intending to. Yeah but this is better. The designer doesn't know. Uh okay that's uh someone who collaborates cannot collaborate correctly with the rest of the team. There are designers that say there are programmers for example that they are too cautious like oh this will take me a month. It's like what? No, come on. This is really like two days maximum three if you want to check it. There are coders that upload all the code and forget about it and suddenly things are crashing and then the first reaction is to blame others. It's like well you should be doing something wrong because my code works well because it tested once. Um so in general the gameplay coder is really a good team player and code needs to be good and needs to be easy to work with for the rest but team player uh QA design other programmers bring them together find the easy solution for the problem and move forward for the next feature. Simple as that. >> Got it. Why why is it that some people or what would you recommend to people who code themselves into a corner a bit like this happens? I think this can happen if you're like not as experienced. If you're making a big project for the first time and at some point you open the project and you can't work on it anymore because it like the complexity got too out of control. This is something like I you don't hear this super often for like people who have been making games for a while cuz they're more careful with it. But this is something you hear sometimes from from people who make their first games where they're like, "Yeah, I had to start from scratch three times because I coded myself into a corner two times." [laughter] >> I don't think there is a good solution. That's a that's what that's the programmer journey. I've done that so many times just for the fun of it. There was a good very good presentation at go.fest by Rene from Bib and Beeps where it was explained in the beginning exactly what all the coders we have been through. We want to do games. Maybe we don't have artists around us, but we want to do something cool. We have a general idea. And then you get into how cool is to code, which is different from how cool is to make a game. It's very easy to different to the >> to differentiate the focus because you get attached to a very good ideas that you have while you are coding. It's like I took this shortcut and suddenly collision is super fine and and very easy and you are proud of yourself. uh but you are doing things just to challenge you um and to proving yourself which is great. It's like I can do it. Uh for example, I remember I spent a week coding from scratch in C and Dungeon Crawler that uh that with collisions and everything very old classic, very like uh sharp corners and everything. And um I was having my kids just drawing me bad guys and I was putting them like a billboard and they were having much fun. >> Nice. >> Um and it was cool and then move on because I mean it's nothing. It's just an exercise. You need to feel it like programming is like a sport every morning. Uh sport people just go I don't know pick the bicycle go running and things like this and it's fine. I mean you do it corner yourself and learn from it. But the most important thing is learn from it. Most of my intuition and my practicality coming from cornering myself into those problems and already saying wait if I would not have done it probably I would still be overconfident that we can complicate it but it will fine because we are very smart. Um I learned the limits of my brain by by doing things that are way more complex than I can handle. Uh so I think that you should probably try to not feel very bad about it but move on uh move on and do it again. Um do doing exactly the same thing again you will see that you will have many different ideas and you will do it differently but that's fine. I mean just own it. >> Okay. So not you don't see a problem with starting from scratch. You see it like a as a natural part of the learning journey. I mean in a big company where you need results and people are watching over your shoulder if you get things done in time if you feel you are approaching this involve your lead programmer and involve other people and they they will give you perspective on what you are doing on other ways of doing it. >> Sure. Um at some point for example most of the the the college epic tellers they smell that they might be something too complex and they just call me what you're how am I am I is this a good direction how do you feel about it then we have a conversation and normally sometimes they doing fine sometimes I give them some perspective sometimes I do not add anything but um but at least you become good at the smelling that you are probably building, digging yourself in a hole. Um, >> but in your spare time, I would say do it as many times as possible. As long as you learn from it, every time you will become a better programmer. >> Is there anything like programmers who want to learn like in my specific example, I'm trying to understand what I need to do to become like a better programmer and better at architecturing my games. Is there a specific question that people want to become better at programming don't think about that's sort of a that they should think about? Is there anything I didn't ask that maybe I should have asked? >> Okay, Jonas, what you have done so far? I mean, how long you've been coding and what are the things that you have done? >> Sure. I've made like three indie games in Unity that have been commercially quite reasonably wellreceived. I would say I made no one of them was actually in game maker. So I made islanders in Unity and like a team of three. So fairly small indie team. Then I solo developed a game in game maker which was like a platformer. And now I recently released a game called Thronefall which we made in Unity over the course of let's say two three years. And that was like a fairly big project, like multiple levels, top down strategy, tower defense kind of thing. >> Okay. >> Yeah. >> And now we're thinking about maybe going into multiplayer and like stuff that where I think it could could really be beneficial to struct like to structure the projects properly. I've never so I think I've developed a bit of intuition about how to structure code and I've had my learnings from it but I feel like there is so much to learn still [laughter] [gasps] >> uh but but you are concerned about how to become a better programmer but it seems that you are doing fine so what is the problem I mean why why what is what is this kind of image that you have of then I will become good and I will cross that frontier and I will be joining programmers what is Yeah, sure. I see it as a gradual learning journey, but I guess part of that gradual learning journey is also to ask people who who've been in it long for longer to to see if there's anything to learn from them, I guess. So, I don't see it as like, oh, there's one secret check. It's probably like a continual progress, right? That's probably the case. >> Your goal is to to become better programmer or commercial success with your games. I guess both or >> I think the the goals are interlin. I want to become better at everything if possible. >> They don't have to. I mean being commercial success and being a good programmer feels like they are aligning but they are circumstantially aligning. they are not uh there are people that are very good at picking the right game to do uh that that is attractive for the audience at that moment and and things like this and and these people will be way a step ahead of you no matter how good programmer you are. Uh so a good programmer what will what will make is that the game will be will have less bugs will be easier to maintain you will have to do less crunch and you will have feel happier while you are doing it but it's a tool the game the decision of which game to do the decision of with whom doing it uh you are talking plural so I understand that you are now part of a team >> small team yeah two people at the moment >> uh Okay. So deciding who to do whom with whom to do in this game and the game itself it's uh 80% of the equation. Uh with you becoming a better programmer again after what the background that you have you will get 2% more or 3% more into this kind of quest into making a better game. But you also seems that you have genuine interest into the engineering of coding and enjoy having uh solving problems in a smart way. That is fine in itself. But you need to make sure that that you see the difference between those two. I rarely have seen code from video games that are well structured. It's always a mess, but it works. Uh we don't care. We do video games. We don't do uh you know uh space level NASA kind of code that needs to be stable or people will die. >> We do >> very simple you know not not critical systems. I actually recall a guy that we hired in in in Peter Studios that came from making an operating system for trains for train system that need to go in and the guy couldn't survive a week. He look at the code. He's like, "Oh, you are doing this, you nuts." It's like, "Nah, we don't care." And then the game is fun. So that's the goal. [snorts] Um, and he he couldn't he couldn't. I don't understand. This is so complex. There are pointers that could be null and you don't check anything. You're nuts. Well, it sort of works. So, we don't care. So, that's that's uh for video games, you need to understand that that code mastery is is a is is is not that attached to it. For code mastery, normally the best thing you can do is probably join a company with other coders that that will drop you. You will see other code you it will be for example beneficial for code mastery to move to another engine, try to do things in Unreal, try to build even your your own engine. Um all those things brings you closer or faster to code mastery. Remember what I said that all the experience are not of the same value. Five years of experience doing unity are not as good as five years that that I did on Unity and real my own engine and go or something because you are changing the context so much you force your brain to to learn very new things. But that's a road for code mastery. >> Making a successful game is not that road. >> It's a different road. Okay. >> Then it's like use whatever the tools you are used to. If Unity is your thing, do Unity. If the kind of game that you want to do, go for it. And then your commercial success will be based on your smart choices around what makes it fun and the iterations that you allow yourself to do and how do you you know listen to your players and things like this. This is way way way more important that which kind of code architecture that you have because as long as it works that that is not super relevant for video games. >> So this is the difference in how efficiently you get there. So the main deciding factor is like game design idea market fit a little bit of luck and so on. And then if you have a better code architecture, the perk you get from it that is that you get there more more efficiently and that maybe your project is more more scalable a little bit or something like that or how how do you look at it? But the scalable systems are also a bit of a myths uh like like reusable code and I don't know I'm too old. I've never reuse [laughter] much code. I mean the the best thing you can do is just start from scratch >> um most of the time. Yes, you could reuse code, but also it's very boring. You want to code your own stuff. >> No, it's it's a bit of a myth from my point of view. >> So, you don't believe in building a code base and then when you make your next game, you re reuse half of your previous code base or something like that. It's not doesn't speak to you. >> I do believe and life have teach me otherwise. Um I still believe it. For example, um one of the reasons we are doing CRPGs in Epic Tillers. Um and we are announcing that the company is about that >> is because I strongly believe that if you keep doing CRPGs, technology can transfer decently well because you focus on content and not technology >> because CRPGs have not progress on technology that much. Pillars of Eternity, King Maker, Divinity, they are all having the same approximate systems, but you build very nice narrative. You become better better at writing music for it. You have levels that are more interesting. You have companions that are have better art. That is fine. That is content. But the systems can be reused. But I have already specifically targeted to build a studio around one kind of junk which is is is a that that's why I I said I believe that you can reuse some having said that um in general uh people overuse the term um this will be something that I will use in next 5 10 years because video games and life are very chaotic. They are not predictable. Your brain tricks you in telling you that in 10 years you will be doing your theory game and this system you are coding right now will be fine. Reality it's a mess. The systems and thinking changes very often. You will have a different perspective about code in uh 8 years and you will look at your code that you're doing today like what the [ __ ] I was thinking. you will have different games and uh there is one thing that people uh uh normally don't don't think about is you will become bored of doing the same thing >> or using the same code >> and this is a huge factor because the fact that you are asking me several times I want to become better and that's fantastic that's an energy you have to learn now imagine that you built your next game in multiplayer or something and you master it and now you have to do three versions of it, three sequels that are exactly the same. >> You don't touch any code and you just design, you will become bored very fast because >> that's true. >> Your your brain wants challenge. You want to What about all those books that tell me that there are fantastic ways of solving things? I want to solve complex problems. >> Want to write a new question. [laughter] >> Exactly. So um this this this is for example I something I I repeat a lot to my my my my my the team and the ptors is that oh this is very complex now this is very hard but I think that when we do the next game will be more experience so it will be easier. Um yeah but also will be boring. Now you have this kind of energy that every time you learn something your brain is very happy and makes you happy. Uh it's a survival thing. Brains want to be learning all the time. >> Yeah. >> Um if you at some point stop, your brain tells you, "Come on, what is my drug? I want to learn more stuff. >> I am not high on learning." Um and then you will make the game more complex just because. So let me bet right now that the fact that you want to do multiplayer in this new in this new game >> is also because >> feels cool to do something you haven't done maybe before or you already maybe don't something directly tried to do a game that with technology you haven't tried because you want to do multiplayer and check how it is. >> It's a way to up the difficulty for sure. Yeah. Mhm. >> So you will be keep upping this difficulty. So this system that you think that in five years you will use you will want to re rewrite because you will have better ideas. So no rewriting is a myth. I modularity in a way that you can reuse code. >> It's a bit of a myth because of the human factor. >> Mhm. With the exception of maybe specifically building a studio around a very specific genre and then strictly sticking to that genre which makes reusing maybe more viable. a percentage of more viable, but I assume that we will be doing more stuff. So, for example, uh our game is not multiplayer and as you said in our next game, CRPGs are very cool in co-op. >> So, I would love to to jam and do multiplayer. We needed to cut it to keep a scope doable. >> Um, but what happens? We have all the systems figured out and we have multiplayer figured out and what we do, I don't know, multiplatform. Multiplatform is cool. how it would be to move your game to a switch to that's a very interesting problem to have. I would like to see a dev kit. I would like to see how are the [snorts] me the memory. How do I solve that problem? That's cool. >> What happens when you solve you put the game in all your consoles and you put you solve multiplayer and you just do another game with a different characters and different music and stuff. >> Boring. >> Mhm. >> And that's a human factor that then it will be it will be a problem in the future. I suspect if we manage to survive a current status industry and but we will have to deal in the future but right now I keep telling we are in a very sweet moment you will remind remember remember this moment because you are super energized because everything you do every day is new and that is a fantastic uh thing to even if you feel that you are not experienced enough and you could be doing mistakes that's the situation you want to be always you want to do the fourth game I'm feeling that you are doing something new. >> Yeah. >> If you look at the statistics, >> all the game studios do one game and then the second game takes more time than the first one, even if it's a sequel. >> Mhm. >> How come? >> Interesting. >> Always. And it's something that project managers do not understand. It's like, how come we built everything? So, we just How come? >> That's because it would be a shame if the second game was smaller than the first one. >> [laughter] >> you you want to >> but even with that >> you you spend you have more people in the second project >> and it becomes less uh more difficult to ship it and it got you get more delays and it's it is a tough thing. So again human factor uh code yes code could could be reused but uh it won't >> interesting >> one of the things that that probably uh that that um teaching at the university I think is something we are missing in the game mastery education but specifically talking about it not about shipping cool games again I told you that those things are different >> yeah different yeah >> um I think everybody should be writing their own engine It's like as an exercise or to actually use it. >> Well, exercise usually doesn't make much sense nowadays, but as an exercise, >> um, when I was in the university and and we were building a curriculum for this video game kind of official course, very well suited, four years, I managed to do a bit of a trick because they said, "Okay, Rick, there's going to be a a subject that is called game engines." and and they assumed that I was going to teach a real unity and I don't know cry engine things like this >> I said oh fine I can take over and I handled yes yes yes you read you do everything >> so then the first day the first day is like okay guys we are going to build an engine this is the subject for game engines and we are going to learn to do all this all the parts of a game engine we are going to do everything in C++ from scratch we would use SDL to just open the window and the rest is ours. We have an OpenGL context. Let's go for it. We are going to build all the systems ourselves. And they were like, whoa. Oops. It was a hard subject, but it's like learning C++ and then or C and C++ and then learning our language. You learn Latin, you learn the source of everything. You learn you understand how what is a scene tree. You understand what is an audio or how do you handle audio? Do you understand physics engine? How do you understand how to load geometry? How you draw it? And you have visited all the systems in the most not in the most because you could do it even lower level but you have tested all the system yourself in a pretty decent low level. And then when you first open Unity, it's like okay, how this handles audio? How what is the physics system? Oh, okay. Is this attached to the frame to the visual frame or did you guys detach frame or uh how do but you have a lot of concepts clear because it has gone through your fingers while you were coding. Um, and I see that it scares me a bit that we are evolving to a moment where the only people that knows how to do game engines are the people working at Unity and Unreal. And there should be if if that will be the case, God do not exist. Uh, and uh, and probably other engines, maybe there are other engine in the future that should happen. But we should not be stucking with especially commercial companies that they do something and it's kind of black sorcery again how to do game engines but everybody knows how to use them but not how to do them which again it's fine to make that difference but if you are going through the path of code mastery building your own engine makes a lot of sense um it's a lot of time and you will corner yourself into a an impossible code complexity And that is fine. But if with some guidance and some way of of some structure, we were building a full engine. Not a full engine, but let's say with a core part in four months. Well, actually it was four months and then I asked them to expand on one system to each to each of them. Like for example, you are going to do the physics, you are going to do cold reloading and scripting for example in C++ or you are going to have a VM for Lua or you are going to have a UI system that is really well done in an editor. But everybody did all the synt of of of I don't know audio all those things. You could already put geometry there, have a character, move around. It's like okay I have everything there in an editor and you build your own editor because nowadays there are enough libraries on C++ to simplify your things like your life like in GUI for example which is excellent um a s to load geometry so you can patch the most low-level things and then in three months you can build your own your own engine um and that's something I think that I'm scared that in the future it will be only few people that still keeps this kind of low-level knowledge. >> Um, so I would say for coding for coding, I think it's a healthy thing for everybody to go through >> because you understand a bit more what's going on under the hood, you understand the the systems more. >> Yeah. I mean, you know, I mean, compiling shaders, what means compiling shaders? Why why there is a need to compile shaders? What is the concept of that? If you've seen through the code and you've doing it yourself and you have organized that you understand what Unreal or you have the better intuition what Unreal is doing because of course there's a lot of complexity in there and um and you can learn any engine quicker because you have this kind of understand of the moving pieces around >> um so which I think it should be more the goal of the university to understand the base and then yeah you could do a course on on real or unity but you understand the pieces of of of how the machine works. >> Why why do you think why does it feel so much like Unity and Unreal have so much bloat compared to good? Do they just have more features or is it something else? >> I mean this is commercial this is specifically commercial reasons and historical reasons. um historically in a way that you accumulate stuff and you keep working on the same thing and commercially wise you are pushed to have new things all the time. So you want epic ones like the next Unreal is going to be amazing because it has this and this and that. M >> and Unreal and and Unity are not paid by the coders are paid by the business owners of the comp of the video game studios and they will attach a price with value and they will see a video where someone in half an hour has built a racing game and it will tell you well we have the game already have done because I'm unreal I'm going to pay this incredibly expensive license so you go there have an easier time and and for them makes sense but normally they have a lot of legacy a lot of systems and things that everybody's asking for in different ways sometime also they have their own needs like Fortnite there's new thing needs something so real engine will focus on what Fortnite needs for a while and then wrap it into we have new things that we need for Fortnite but you know what I mean the same for Unity Unity has becoming bloat because they want to do everything and especially for for mobile games and indie and >> and it's from my point of view is unacceptable bloated I mean what means that I have to download and downloader >> yeah [laughter] I mean it's but it's that that's why good feels good just have what it needs and it doesn't and and not more >> so do you think good do in the very long run will have the same problem where because people still want probably new features with every release, right? So, is is it the doom of every game engine to eventually become more and more bloated or there way around that? >> The the thing is that they are a foundation. So, you are not they are not going to be better paid because they have a better version or something. So, their their motivations are different. Um, so I remember there was one one version I upgraded from God do and it was smaller and this is goosebumps for a coder. It tells me that >> wait there are 3 megabytes of the executable that are gone. Oh yes because we thought that this is not very much used so we decide to remove it. If you want to keep using use that that old thing >> and somebody is like this is fantastic. This is exactly what I need. [laughter] I mean, Unreal should be smaller >> every time if they need to be effective, >> but it keeps growing and growing and exploding because it's this kind of, you know, fanfare of of all the things that you want to do. God doesn't try to do everything, but always tries to to keep small and this is the more developer uh mindset more than the >> the executive mindset. >> I see. So the financial incentives, different financial incentives create a different outcome. >> Yeah, absolutely. Absolutely. And they are very strong. I mean, in the end, uh Epic needs to needs to keep selling games and and and Unity it's their it's what they do. That's why they try to milk as much as money from from their their teams as possible. >> Yeah. Do you think God uh God's user base will grow? Are you bullish on GDO in general? >> Bullish? What do you mean bullish? >> Uh do you do you think more developers will use GDO in 5 years than now? >> Well, the statistic says says yes. Uh it keeps growing every year. >> Okay. Um, I I mean, don't take me wrong, I'm I'm I'm not here to say God do is the best thing, but >> the >> there are things that still piss me off a lot of of the engine, but [clears throat] um um normally when people ask me the difference between all those engines, there is a measure that I call it is fighting the engine. So, every >> every day when I work with Unreal, I know the two hours of my life are going to be fighting Unreal. is like, "Okay, Unreal, why? How do you want me to do this? Which kind of forum from 3 years ago I need to find of somebody that hacked this in order to make this happen? What is the button that I need to press out of three million buttons in order for this to happen?" And and that that will be two hours of my life spending to finding how unreal, how do you want me to do this in Unity? When I used Unity long ago, it was it used to be an hour because Unity 4 for example was very small, was very simple. It was bare bones and I guess okay, Unity, how do I do that? Oh, this way. And actually, if not, I could do it myself. So, you felt this kind of freedom that on real if you don't do things the way Unreal wants, you are in a mess because it's extremely complex. >> Um, with go with Unity, it used to be like that. Well, with God do is 20 minutes. Sometimes it's it's five and sometimes you don't find it. So yes it is a problem but the measure of the problem it's important. Um >> and uh this this the thing is that it does not compile. It opens in 5 seconds. Everything is very quick. >> I mean this uh makes you feel that by the end of the day you are way more productive than normally how you feel with other environments. When you are productive, you are excited about what you're doing because impact is the base of happiness and when you are happy, you become more creative about how you solve problems and this is a a very good loop into to be >> just about that. So I suspect that yes, it will become more and more used. It's used in a lot of places without telling them because it's open source and I know it's built on cars and things like this. They just grab the code and do whatever they want. But I mean it's very well done and it's evolving in the right way. Normally every time there is a new version it's like yes yes yes and yes and that's very good. Thanks. Oh all those things well I don't care but those old things normally with Unreal was upgrading is like you are doing what? Why? Who needs that? [laughter] I guess that Fortnite what about oh you're making this bigger. Oh my god I'm going to have trouble and it's a big big deal. Um, >> so yeah, that's why it's different. I I think it it has a bright future. Yeah. >> Yeah, I I 100% see the appeal. Yeah, >> I I Yeah, the longer you use Unity, the the more annoyed you get by by the bloat and by all of the fighting the engine. And it definitely increases my urge to either go to something more lightweight or to write my own engine. Though that's probably not the smartest decision for making commercial games. >> No. No. For making commercial now, but for coding mastery, yes. But no, no. Don't do your engine to build uh your own game. Um maybe in the future you want. I mean there are people that >> that get to that nirvana of programming that they can build very specific terminology for a very specific game. >> Yeah. >> Um that is fine but normally you go ahead and do that when you have the luxury of not being looking at your bank account every month and making sure that you are doing well. If you have this time why not I mean whatever makes you happy man. Um but if you need to do something commercial uh sensible and in time uh [sighs] probably the best approach is to use use a a solution there and use the solution that you are more used to. One of the reason unity keep hitting is because people have been using unity before and they feel comfortable in that environment >> and they don't want to be looking into other environments because time is money. My assessment right now of God do is that for 2D games and small 3D games, there is no reason to use Unity anymore and they are not mobile as long as >> I mean you're making a decently big 3D game in good. So you don't seem to be afraid of that. Cool. >> Thanks for having me. I watch some of of your other videos and and I think they are very instructal instructional and I think it's a good effort. I mean the I I hope that more people get into the mastery of coding. Um it's very fun. It's very cool to code and get your own solution. It gets goosebumps. It's like yes I solve that very quickly and that's you know that's very elegant. That's very cool. Why not? Everybody wants to get excited about their the stuff they are doing. Um, I mean, you're right on the fact that it could almost be a distraction from the things that actually make games successful, but we cannot deny that it's very fun to think about these things and to to maybe even overengineer them a bit. It's kind it's kind of a fun [laughter] >> as long as you see the difference is like, you know, I'm going to give me myself a treat and overgineer this. Why? Let's do that. But you are conscious of what you are doing. You [laughter] are not doing it. and then pretend that this is what the game needed. Yeah, >> don't do that. As long as you don't do that, that's totally fine. I mean, it's your time and your computer. Do whatever makes you happy. >> Yeah, I think you had very very fair and pragmatic answers to everything. I I really enjoyed your take. So, thank thanks a lot for for your valuable input. It was was quite enjoyable. >> Thanks. Thanks for having me.