Thank you so much for coming. It means a lot to us.
Um
So this is a talk called L Learning Machines. A game about training neural networks.
Um Fundamentally, this talk is about reinforcement learning in games.
Um And why training agents is actually fun.
And we made a small game about it.
And a lot of the second half of the talk is how to make training fast,
which is a very important part of this.
Um But first off, we need to kind of like recognize some prior work um black and white,
the 2001 classic.
I hope you all know about
it
creatures 1996 which is even bigger influence. I hope everyone knows what that is.
Um Both of these games uh
use forms of reinforcement learning actually while you play.
Um And then more like more recently modern machine learning
has been used in games such as Project Nero.
While True Learn
art
bot
which uh was made or we found out just as we entered early access, Incredible Game.
Um And then light bot which doesn't use machine learning,
but focus on t teaching kind of like simplified models of programming.
Um
But actually our main influence when going into
making little learning machines was uh reinforcement learning
uh short film we made
uh called Agents and it was directed by Pietro
Galeano who is in the crowd and he's the best.
Um And both of these projects were created by transitional forms. Um Trans
transitional forms was founded with the goal of kind of like human machine,
empathy and getting machines to understand
humans and humans to understand machines.
Um
I'm Nick, my background is in animation and illustration,
like primarily focusing on kind of like
general science education and I helped coir
direct this game
and we're coir directing this talk. So I am Dante.
I'm a, I was technical director on this game
and uh my background is in research and emerging technologies.
Uh One of which at the time was reinforcement learning,
specifically deep reinforcement learning.
Uh Quick overview of reinforcement learning. I don't want to get too far into it.
This is the A I summit after all, but
you have an agent, you have an environment,
they need to do things together.
Usually in the form of the agent
do taking some sort of action that changes the environment
and then that environment
changing and those changes being reflected in what the agent can observe.
So the agent has some information about the environment
that it observes. And the way that the agent
changes its own behavior is through
reinforcement,
reinforcement happens through the provision of rewards
that can either be positive or negative.
You tell an agent, you give an agent positive rewards for doing the things that,
that you want to do
and negative rewards for doing the things that you don't want it to do over time.
The agent optimizes and then learns how to uh develops a
policy or a behavior that um allows it to optimize this,
this amount of rewards.
Um Cool. So uh this really kind of, one of the places I'd like to start is with this.
Uh And this was one of the primary inspirations for uh our director Pietro when
uh he was uh coming up with what we saw in like RL as like being inspirational,
this idea that
within just these pixels,
you can see that the blue and the red pixel are collecting these green like apples
and uh they're shooting yellow lasers at each other.
But even within this like little two D simulation,
there's conflict and it's kind of like interesting,
you can root for one blue is my favorite, like by far.
Um And
this, this is a pattern that repeats during like reinforcement learning, right?
You can see uh this is an example of clean RL
where it's trying to learn how to walk in the Mijou
environment.
And yeah, there's like strife there, there's some sort of the,
the only reward function for this one was go, right?
And RL doesn't have the intuitions. We have So it just does what it can.
And this is, we thought that this was very cute.
Um And then finally, we also saw the RL at the time, kind of exceed our expectations.
Again, this is an old paper but opening, I trained a team of five players to play dota,
which is
if you've played dota, you know,
that's like really hard to collaborate at that dota.
So, um uh yeah, RL kind of uh created a model that played better than we did.
So that was like amazing. So all this kind of came to a head
when in 2019 to 2020 2019,
uh we released this film called Agents.
Yes.
And uh so agents was, like I said,
like the main inspiration going into little learning machines.
It's a short film about uh reinforcement, learning agents.
Um as you can kind of see in the film, it's uh kind of interactive,
you can kind of move these kind of creatures around this planet.
Um try to balance it out. Um And agents live on this place, it's weird.
It's spinning, it's kind of like
um being influenced by your interaction and the weight,
but actually gravity goes down, which is weird.
But also that means that agents can fall off.
So it's quite a dangerous place that they're trying to kind of like coexist
uh cooper, but also kind of like create a bit of conflict around this. Um
And what's special about agents is that the characters,
the actors were actually trained through reinforcement learning.
Um And this was back in 2019, like we just said,
they're just neural networks, they're just neural networks.
And more importantly,
users could actually interact with the pre trained
models in VR or literally on their smartphone.
Um And it was,
it was special for me at the time because I had no idea what any of this was.
And
uh uh it kind of like inspired kind of, I guess the next six years after.
Um
So the process was very classic um in this video, you can kind of see agents training.
Uh There's uh a simplified environment um all running
in parallel and basically uh developers at the time,
Dante and Alex would set up these trainings
and leave the agent's training overnight and hoping
for some sort of success um
uh often that took 1618 hours plus with our small team and for a long time,
we didn't see anything.
Um But +11 day we all came into the studio like
in the morning and we saw the runner.
Um you might not be that impressive to any like
A I enthusiasts in here, but to us, this was like a big deal.
Um And we love the runner. He's kind of like turned into the meme of the office.
Um And it was really the first time that
the team like really started feeling a connection.
Uh And kind of like a love for this kind of like digital being.
If you can see what he just did, he,
he tricked the other four agents to fall off by going to the other side
and then just continued to run
infinitely,
what was its reward function just to stay alive?
And it did, it did it well.
And so after this kind of success with the runner, we're like, OK, we can do this.
And we continued to train more behaviors like this one,
we call the flocking or the dancers and stuff.
And the more behaviors we trained,
the more we kind of developed a lot of love
and pride and attachment for these like little beings.
But more than anything,
we found that watching intelligence and behavior kind
of emerge out of the randomness they start with
is in itself a uniquely rewarding experience.
And unlike anything we had kind of like previously
worked on or kind of experienced in games,
so we started to think about
how we could use this in a, in a project in the future.
Yeah. So
uh now as like we were a small team and uh once
we started kind of coming together and seeing these things like happen,
like the mornings were just cool. It was like, oh, what did they do last night?
One time they actually learned like we gave them a award to
get as close to the middle of the planet as possible.
And they learn how to clip through the geometry, which it was crazy.
Uh So, but the, the problem we were having is like, OK,
we show up and we show the simulations
and then the whole team ideas, like uh like Nick had ideas, he
had ideas but like, like everyone,
like uh I think that one time our marketing manager Michelle came and she's like,
oh,
you want them to fight more just like
increase the scarcity or like have less flowers.
And then we did that and it worked and the film became more interesting.
So the whole idea is like, we,
we Alex and I were gatekeeping kind of
anyone from running whatever simulations they wanted.
And that would, that wouldn't work.
So we wanted to share, we wanted to make it like,
so that they can run their own simulations.
But we had some problems.
Um So the first problem is that it was slow, right? Uh 16 hours is a lot.
It's a long time. I can't even like, wait for my crock pot to go that long.
Like I usually just
eat raw meat and
you know what? Don't do it.
Um uh And then the other thing was hardware, right?
Like Alex and I had like big thread rippers like uh back in the day,
those were beefy and we ran them on that and we had to run, sorry,
we had to run like parallel simulations and that was expensive.
So uh we either had to pay for cloud compute or pay for expensive hardware and it,
it just, it wasn't something we could easily do or provision,
at least with a small team.
Uh The other thing is like, this may not seem like a big deal,
but coding is uh a big barrier of entry.
Um especially for something that we saw
as like as accessible as reinforcement learning.
So having to just code your own reward functions or change the
physics of the world or whatever was a big barrier of entry.
Uh It was also non visual,
which is uh difficult if you have like uh disabilities
that prevent you from like engaging with sexual formats or,
or, or it, it is, it is something difficult to work in a non visual format.
And then finally, it was just very complex. This is like reinforcement learning.
After all, it's, it's deep reinforcement learning.
There's a lot of like element equations and all that stuff.
So like having an understanding of um
uh uh of kind of optimize
was a bit difficult to kind of uh convey. Well, it was like, oh that won't optimize,
it won't converge.
So uh just to give you an example of how complex
things were when we wanted to help someone set things up,
it was like, OK, well, you have to install unity,
install Python,
set up your virtual environment. OK? Not that one
that other virtual environment set up tensorflow No,
not that version of tensorflow.
The, the, the one that's not
make sure it supports CO
A
but not for that video card. Uh OK.
Make get your environment running, do your award functions, whatever run the sul
oh you have a bug.
Ah Yeah, you might wanna try running it.
You know what? I hope you like graphs because that's what you're gonna be looking at.
Just graphs
and oh and command lines and more graphs and more command lines.
So shout out to ML agents, their, their, their tooling was great.
Um
uh But uh
we wanted to make it way more accessible and, and by way more accessible, I mean,
really accessible.
So we, we did it.
Uh we made this game.
Uh we, we made a whole game out of it.
Uh So yeah,
the rest of the talk is gonna tell you about little learning machines where we,
I oh sorry, wait, we made this game, sorry. I'm looking at the wrong slides.
Um
Yeah, we made this uh this game called Little Ring Machines,
which uh we're gonna talk about.
Um And in this game,
um we implemented something called real time reinforcement learning,
which is not a new A I concept, rather a game mechanic
and one that you can hopefully put into your game if you want your,
your players to experience it.
So let me just quickly run you through a live demo.
It was supposed to be a live demo, but Nick doesn't trust me with the computer.
Um, this is an agent that's been trained to water flowers.
You can see it's kind of walking around,
it's, it's kind of walking around looking at like flowers that it wants to walk.
All right, Nick, Nick moved it,
put it up here, we can see that.
It, it kind of navigates the area, looks for flowers to water.
But what we're gonna do is we're gonna reset it
just so you know that it's not pre trained.
And um that's what it looks like when you reset your brain. I know firsthand.
Um So this agent is now reset, it's brand new,
even though it previously was uh watering flowers,
the same network is now completely randomized.
So the actions that it takes are kind of at random anything.
Um And
what it's going,
what we're gonna do now is we're gonna give it something completely new to do.
Um And uh we were, I wanna show you how quick and easy it is to kind of
uh give it a new thing um to, to focus on.
So, uh in order to do that, we have to go to this uh space called the training cloud.
And in the training cloud,
we can set up an environment for our agent to learn. Um
uh The first thing we need is obviously our agent.
This one is affectionately named Chungus.
So it gets put right in the middle and we're gonna remove its old rewards,
doesn't need them anymore.
And uh we're gonna give it something to do.
So the easiest thing that I can show people in uh in a talk is just collect crystals.
Let's put down, I don't know, 14 crystals.
And um and see, can it collect them?
And we don't have to code any sort of a star and there's no pro this,
this agent is not preprogrammed.
OK? This is, this is like
completely empty. We could have trained it to, I don't know,
chop dogs with axes.
But instead of telling it that it loves
collecting crystals and like that's put in there,
we set up the end conditions so that it doesn't go forever.
We saw what happens when you let agents go forever and boom,
that's it. We're running a training.
It's a reinforcement learning happening on your computer
now. That doesn't sound like super impressive.
But to us at the moment, this was like, oh yeah, this was,
this is especially since in undergrad.
I did a lot of this in labs. It's like this is the the smoothest.
It's gone in a long time.
And uh as it trains, you can see right now, it's starting to take uh random actions.
But little by little
you can see
right now it didn't want that crystal,
but little by little it um develops uh a desire for crystals.
You can develop a desire for blood too. If you train it that way.
Um But yeah, you can see that there's a little graph on the left.
There's still graphs. We couldn't get rid of the graphs. At least not yet,
but it's, uh, a little bit more intuitive. It.
Uh, you can visually see the behavior that's happening.
You can get a sense of how the agent is improving and within the span of 2.5 minutes
we have an agent. Oh, well, the other thing is you can't really see the behavior
that well it developed in real time unless you kind of speed it up,
collecting crystals is like a macro behavior.
So if you speed it up, you can get a better sense of kind of
the macro decisions that your agent is doing,
which is why we added that little speed up there.
But yeah, ta
da a
trained agent in a matter of minutes.
Now, obviously, this is a very simple monotonic uh problem. But um let's recap.
Was it slow?
No, it was pretty fast.
It trained in like the setup is what took the
most part that took like a minute and a half.
But
the whole training happened in a matter of like a minute or so.
Um
Did we need a special hardware? No, this was trained on an M One Mac.
But if you have a surface Pro three from 2019, it will work just fine.
Um
Do we have to do any coding?
No, all we did was select the reward functions like visually
uh which
clearly the whole process was a visual one. And finally, uh was it complex?
Well, there we have a bit of a caveat and we'll talk about the, for the rest of the talk,
we'll talk about some of the complexity that arises in trying
to set up uh a world and in behaviors like this.
So I'll let Nick introduce that.
Yeah. So first of all, uh our approach requires kind of like four steps.
Um The first being,
designing an actual world for uh real time reinforcement learning.
The second being designing the agents,
the third,
designing the training experience itself and what kind
of like training loop the players will go through
and then fourth, like packaging it all into a game.
Um But before we start that,
I just need a few key learnings from agents that really kind of like
influenced early decisions on how we kind of like set those systems up.
Um First off, there's in agents,
there was a fundamental mismatch between how our team um experienced training,
the actual reinforcement learning agents,
seeing them learn and seeing their behaviors kind of emerge out of nothing versus
a audiences who like viewed these pre trained models for the first
time and may have not actually understood anything about machine learning.
So it was kind of like it's difficult to understand machine learning in general
or what a pre trained model is what they see what they're doing,
um And fundamental how they're trained.
Um
It's a lot easier to understand them when you're actually
there in the room experiencing and watching them learn.
Um Second,
um,
agents had this really beautiful kind of story with a lot of different story
states which each story state kind of
required different behaviors from the agents themselves.
So agents were expected to kind of like hit specific kind of behaviors at
specific different story beats,
which made it kind of really difficult to craft them.
Um And it didn't necessarily allow them to flourish on their own.
Uh
And on top of that, as you probably noticed the environmental conditions,
we place the agents in, in agents were extremely difficult
and very complicated.
Um Any action they took could easily like lead to their death.
Um On top of that, even their,
their actual actions they could take to survive were quite limited,
they could move, they
could um they could kind of like consume the
flower and they could also head butt each other,
all which kind of combined to making it quite difficult to
find really beautiful kind of uh behavior out of them.
And that kind of led to the main thought which is like the
agents can only be as smart as their environment lets them be.
Um So that's the main thing going into
the designing a world for little learning machines.
Um
So when designing this world like we wanted to, first of all, first off,
like prioritize potential diversity of behavior um by letting like the agents
uh develop personality and actually show that they're learning.
Um Second, the environment that is
we want to create an environment that was more of a
playground and like a bit less of a death trap.
And um which meant that like, it needed to be safe but not too safe.
Um It needs to be full of opportunities and it
needed to react to the decisions of the agents.
Um
And all the decisions we made
like in this design pro process were kind of like based on playfulness.
Um we want a agents to interact with each other,
whether it be through competition or cooper operation.
And so
because of that, the world itself needed to be able to support many agents running.
At the same time,
we ended up shipping with nine very diverse kind of brains in the experience,
but the system actually allows up to 100 agents um operating in real time at
time. Um
Everyone who starts a game like always wants to make an MMO
-- it -- needs to support everything. Yeah,
sorry.
Um
So we also realized,
realized that these agents would be like prone
to accidents and prone to silliness right off,
right off the bat, like inherently they are pretty dumb.
In fact,
they start off with only taking random actions.
Um So the environment need to needed to be
simple enough for a small brain to understand it
and diverse enough that it's not easily optimize.
But most importantly,
we want to encourage more generalized behavior over like over optimized zombies.
Uh
So how do you encourage general behavior?
How do you create a dynamic world the same way you do it for your players?
Uh You, you add the Dyna
dynamism
to kind of a component of the world and then you, you stretch that out.
So what we ended up doing is we create, we stole a,
a page from the book of Minecraft and uh we created items
uh which are these kind of uh uh things that
can exist on one of the blocks within the world.
And the
they allow the agent to perform dynamic behavior
without the agent having to be dynamic itself.
The you can have the same agent perform different types
of behavior depending on the item that it's holding.
Um Yeah, here's a couple of examples.
There's like a bat, an ax, whatever that is at the bottom, there's a dog,
these are all items within the world of little learning machines.
And then the world itself is supposed to be editable by the user.
The main uh user exper
uh like the the user journey is to kind
of create these environments in which your agents learn.
And we wanted to make the environment as editable uh by the player as possible.
So we, we uh took that concept of like boxes and items and
stretched it to as much as we could.
Uh But there was another reason we did this and this is probably one
of the trickiest parts of the talk is because making the world this way
lets you train really fast.
Um
The,
the world is actually not 3D, it's a two D type SOCO
band
tile type grid.
Um The little modifications in that there's like one item per cell and then
the agents kind of move around within those uh within those two D cells,
there's height, but the height mostly is used for navigation
and uh there's no tunnels allowed.
And the reason we did this is so that we could a disc criticize the space
and discrete observations for neural networks are much
faster to train than uh than analog ones.
And then the other thing is that uh continuous ones.
The other thing is that um we,
it allowed us to um kind of reduce the dimensionality
of the space um instead of having to store 3D information
and having to do uh a lot of the reasoning
of the agent having to do with like 3D information.
Uh It allowed the agent to make decisions on a two D uh space which is uh again,
trains a lot faster.
But these are, and there was no kind of end problem to the user.
The user still sees a 3D world but the agents and the A
I train a lot faster because they're able to work on reduced dimensions.
So uh the representation drove the design.
Uh but not only do we disc criticize space, we also disc criticize time.
Um having an agent make a decision every like every couple of frames was um
not possible for the kind of scale.
Again,
don't make an MMO the kind of scale that we were hoping to reach with
this kind of game and also uh having it run on the player's computers.
And uh the, the more we kind of disc criticized time, the faster it trained.
Um So what we ended up doing is we ended up dividing
uh actions into turns. So every time uh
anything in the world has an effect on other parts of the world,
uh any item has an effect on an item or an agent has an effect on, on an item.
Uh these all happen uh within turns and that lets the
um that's the evaluation of the of the simulation happen much,
much, much faster.
Um
Yeah, but not only that, but the,
the key kind of focus on kind of making training
fast was also the design of the agents themselves.
So the design of the agents, um the agents in little learning machines,
uh we call them AMO
um and we want to create like a goofy character that could
demonstrate kind of the the transition from non intelligence to intelligence,
semi-in intelligence.
Um uh the desire is the design is like directly influenced
by the networks themselves with their actions representing their body,
which you can kind of like, you know, like put some gloves, shoes on or some eggshell.
Um Their network is kind of like their crystal brain.
Um And their observations are represented by their kind of like see through Balbi
head. It was really important in the design that we like,
made sure you could see the brain at all times because it's kind of like
the the kind of like core consistency of them.
Um But the main goal was con con converting the Depart
two D space and the
departs kind of time space uh into a 3d representation that
the audience could kind of like understand and learn from.
Um for a long time,
we didn't actually know how smart these agents could become and that was a
huge barrier and a huge struggle.
So we created a style that kind of showed that they're fallible machines in
quite dumb at times.
Um They need to be cute,
silly and most of all forgivable because they're
gonna spend a lot of time running into walls
and leave
the heavy lifting,
basically portraying their intelligence through the animation system.
Um Basically filling the gaps
uh of the two D
occupant style brains and their turn based decisions
like filling in those gaps with kind of like
animations that could communicate the intent behind those decisions.
Um So that players could actually
uh observe what they're doing and learn from what they're doing.
Cool.
So I'm gonna break down uh kind of some of
the agents uh architecture uh just uh really quickly.
Um it's gonna get a little technical but hopefully we can get through it
in
some, some quickness.
Um The first thing is the vision, as I showed you earlier,
the agents can see kind of an area around them.
Some agents can actually see infinitely far away,
but they can only see a certain number of items.
Uh And the way that kind of gets processed is that each of these observations
um is kind of this stack of of kind of uh specific features that they can.
So uh for example,
this agent that you see on the top left can observe a range of five by five around them.
And within that range, they can observe uh maybe the terrain,
whether like the medium that kind of that uh that that cell has any items,
any creatures and things that the creatures themselves are holding.
Uh And then the each one of these features um turns into uh a set of uh of
boolean values. Uh There is there are still some kind of um
uh floating point values that get passed in. But
uh we found that the, the more we stuck to again, um boolean values, the,
the easier it was to train the networks.
Uh Originally, we had a one hot encoding for every single item
in the game.
But that quickly blew up as uh the number of uh
observations needed to grow with everything that was in the game.
So eventually we landed on kind of this like 20 questions model,
which are these handcrafted embeddings where of items
that are similar can share similar uh embeddings.
And this uh this also actually sped up training again
uh because it allowed uh certain uh o
it allowed an overlap in the types of
behaviors that certain agents were able to develop.
So if you want an agent to not step on flowers and not step on, on
uh fire,
then they can generalize that behavior more
easily through finding commonalities in the features.
Uh these,
so all of these kind of like uh bits get stacked
into a big stack and they get passed into the network.
Now, we, we, we put
these diagrams are in the game.
We try to explain this to the users to some degree to the point where
they can be confidently curious about some of the agents that they train with.
But uh we really don't think that this is that important.
Um It really,
it the the point of adding these different kinds of like learning to the
game is so that the uh players get a sense of a different taste
of the kind of uh like representations of the uh of these
different approaches at uh at kind of collecting observations for an agent.
And uh that's kind of how the whole game uh plays out different agents
have uh differences that kind of just make them feel a little bit different.
Uh As I said, all of these observations get like tacked on to uh a network.
Uh And this network is just a standard neural network.
Um It's very small, you'd be surprised at the,
at the level of intelligence that uh these kind of little networks are able to show
uh our smallest networks.
Uh For some of the first agents, we really wanna prioritize training.
There's two metrics that we want to prioritize.
The first metric is time to first intelligence.
Like the first, like as you saw when the agent was collecting crystals,
it happened really, really quickly
and we need that to hit fast so that players are confident
in the fact that training that they're actually learning.
Uh But then the second metric that we
try to balance against is maximum intelligence.
So uh smaller networks are not gonna be able to do some of the more complex
tasks in the game for which you'll have to use some of the more complex networks.
Uh So the our agents that we shipped vary from 128
like it's two fully connected layers of 128 neurons.
And then some of the later agents
just have 512 neurons in four layers.
And again, fully connected, there's nothing too special, but just with this alone,
they're able to do some fairly complex behavior if they're trained appropriately.
Uh One interesting thing we do is that every
these agents are trained using proximal policy optimization.
We actually use the ML agent trainer,
we kind of stripped it out and reuse it for our own purposes.
Uh So
uh one of the things that we uh that we do
is we reset the critic every time we restart the training,
you would think that this would result in slower trainings.
But actually, as long as the policy is accurate enough,
the samples kind of converge fast, uh fast enough that you can,
you don't notice a drop that much
and it allows you to kind of fine tune your
eight year policy towards the direction which you wanted to,
to take more easily.
Uh a
lot of tech words.
But finally, after we take all of those observations,
we put them into this kind of like network um that you,
you can either reset or train continuously,
they result in actions, which is what your uh character actually does.
So in uh in kind of uh deep neural uh
sorry, deep reinforcement learning, uh agents have or
in in reinforcement learning in general, agents have a set of actions. Um
In this case, we've divided it to uh one, a single action for return.
And this again allows us to uh normalize kind of the,
the uh the set of things that we're training for in agents, for example,
we had multiple outputs, but here we're actually just looking for one.
And the way I like to explain this is you kind of have a controller and uh you give it to,
to your little sibling where you're playing with them.
And instead of like holding the controller with both hands,
they press one button at a time with their finger,
That's basically what an agent is doing. It's pressing one button at a time. Uh
So every turn is taking one of these uh seven actions as to what, what it wants to do.
And here's where another kind of trick and optimization
happened that let us uh speed up the training,
which was
um converging actions in uh to have different meanings depending on semantics.
Originally, we had more actions.
But we found that the,
the that was really one of the big limiters on the kinds of behavior that we can train.
And we found that by having actions perform similar uh
types of uh have similar results depending on contextual
um contextual situations.
It allowed us to put the weight of, of training, not on the action decisions,
but on the recognizing the different situations, which meant
that we could reuse the latter parts of
the network to optimize for specific actions.
So to, to reuse specific actions, like for example,
the same kind of part of the network could be used for
like watering a flower than it is for chopping down a tree.
And it allows you to train an agent to do multiple things.
And uh the movement actions were also something where
we found uh quite a bit of success by
using these kind of tank controls instead of kind
of uh like uh what's called cardinal directions.
Um It allowed us to come uh exploit symmetries in a grid.
So you only need to train in one direction
and then a all actions are kind of relative to that direction,
which again was exploiting another symmetry for.
Uh so that you instead of
it actually sped up training by like
by a factor of three
which was uh pretty, pretty useful. Uh And it um it, it let
it let agents kind of develop egocentric views of the world.
Uh It's a little bit harder to debug because you,
when you're looking at kind of the agents observations,
you have to take into account which direction they're looking at.
But um it, it does result in better um like faster training times.
Um Yeah, so those were all kind of little tricks in designing your agent.
So they can train faster.
But now that we have this kind of uh world and we
have this kind of agent um collecting crystals isn't gonna do it.
What's kind of like some of the things you can
expect out of an agent that's spelled like this.
And uh I think they can cover the first time we saw that.
Um So this is sneaky. He's my all time favorite agent.
This was trained during the prototype.
Um
I love him a lot but he sadly no longer exists.
Um He's an agent that was trained like originally to use
multiple items to solve a puzzle as you can see.
Um, what he's doing is he, his goal is to collect all of those flags.
Um And he has access to two
tools at once. He has a block maker to make bridges
and uh acts that can break down those blocks. Um
And if you notice it, I think he doesn't make a single mistake,
he does it in the most optimized way and that is why I love him.
Um
But sadly, when I put sneaky into a different environment with the same puzzle,
uh he does nothing and he's basically overwhelmed
with indecisiveness or something.
Um At the time, I had no idea, kind of like what had gone wrong, like what did I do wrong?
But obviously, it became clear that he had over optimized
um for that previous environment.
And so rather than understanding anything about the environment, understanding,
kind of like the ideas of the, the different kind of items and stuff,
uh sneaky had purely um basically remembered a set of actions in a row,
basically kind of like
a cheat code from a Sega game or something.
So obviously,
we would have to address this and make this
clear in the design of the training experience itself.
Um So onto the designing of the training experience.
Um Our main goal was to kind of like faithfully
recreate training uh reinforcement learning as best as we could.
And we wanted players to have as much control over
the simulations as possible as we could let them.
Um So we based it kind of like just like how in real machine learning and robotics,
there's a simulation space and then there's a real world application.
We designed the experience so that we would have a training space,
which is the cloud that we showed separate
from basically the actual world they live in,
which is uh the sandbox,
Main Island and the Quest Islands that you kind of put them in.
Um And this meant that we would have a training set versus an evaluation set.
And this was inspired directly by what we saw with sneaky is that um
I was training sneaky um in a very specific environment for like a long time.
And at no point, did I take sneaky out
and just test him somewhere else at no point? Did I evaluate his behavior?
Um So we basically created a training loop from this. Um
We kind of like base it on a process
of tweaking and observing and tweaking and observing.
Um starting with tweaking, which is creating a simulation space,
setting up an environment setting, the rewards, setting the end conditions,
starting the training and then watching
the training happen, like watch the uh animo uh
kind of collect its rewards, but most importantly, watch its behavior,
see its intentions.
Is it doing something different?
Is it having problems even getting any rewards at all?
Um Is it bumping into walls or is it literally just running off a cliff?
Um which happens a lot? Um
And so we found that actually watching an agent train, lets you train them better.
And that even if you don't know much about the theory of training RL like,
like me,
I I'm very new to this
um through a process of tweaking and observing
training becomes actually quite intuitive,
-- but -- we didn't know that this was the fun
part of the game until very late into production.
Exactly.
Um So in this slide, I can just talk about like basically setting rewards,
a lot of this experience and a lot of part of
the tweaking is setting appropriate rewards for the appropriate environment.
So basically,
we um created this kind of emoji like system where it's kind
of easy to kind of set different very specific rewards based on
the kind of items that exist in the simulation space.
We kept the um the rewards to five at a time because these
are small networks and as soon as you have more than five rewards,
it can very quickly confuse them if an agent is gaining
five rewards that are kind of like opposite at the same
time,
they're getting,
they're just gonna get confused obviously.
Um And that's not actually a big deal because you can,
you know, always play it, observe it, remove a reward.
Um Their networks keep their shape so you can
constantly change them while you're tweaking and observing.
And also fundamentally,
you can get some of the most complex behavior with
a single reward in a really well made environment.
Um
And
yeah, so that's setting rewards.
And
while you're actually observing,
we wanted to make it important that you could see
the rewards being kind of accumulated at the right time.
In this case, this little guy is receiving a lot of rewards because he's receiving
just one for holding on to the block maker to make sure he doesn't drop it.
Um And then a lot when he's kind of uh using the block maker to
make a block at the very specific height to gain crystals or to collect crystals.
So you can kind of see and debug the experience
just by watching them and seeing them gain these rewards.
Um and it allows you kind of like figure out if you need to change anything.
And then, so after that,
you gain these checkpoints.
So all the simulations are kind of being
combined and kind of crushed in the background.
We got lots of running in the background.
And so we're averaging out kind of like all the
different rewards and we're sending them back in so that you
can see kind of like the average growth and progress
of your uh of your animal at the same time.
Um
So in this video, you can kind of like see me like just scrolling over.
This is a lot of checkpoints collected and you can see the averages of the um
the rewards being collected changing over time.
And most importantly,
you can kind of like see the ratio of the rewards changing over time,
which actually became
kind of like that's like
top tier players looking at the ratio change. Um
But uh
on top of that,
just going over and conditions really quickly, again,
we really needed to kind of like allow players
to control how the simulations were being reset.
Um Basically the first way to do that is how
many turns in a single simulation you can run,
you can run 50 turns or up to 200 turns.
And this really depends on the kind of behavior you want out of it.
Um And two, we wanted to end the simulation if a specific item that of your choosing
no longer exists.
And this is basically to waste no training time,
training time is precious when we're doing this.
And we also didn't want you to have a chance or the uh the animal to
have a chance to collect kind of like
straggler rewards when it already completed its task.
And
that's a no go as well. That can, that can lead to awful things.
And that's kind of like based on back in the day when we had this runner,
we didn't set the end of conditions properly.
It was able to trick the others to fall off and no,
they could no longer collect rewards.
He could just hog them all for himself.
And we don't want that, we want them to cooper, we don't want them to play.
Um And then finally,
one more thing um if you remember sneaky and the optimization problem
that's still potentially a problem here, like fundamentally,
you can kind of start a training and move and act a bit
further or tweak the environments to add a bit of noise on your,
on your own.
But by starting and observing and stopping
and starting that actual process becomes like quite
like quite a lot, quite quickly.
Um So we designed kind of the ability to kind
of create a bit of noise in between resets.
Um Sadly, we call this wiggle and we can't ever turn back.
Um But basically players can control how much they want
if they want their environment to change in between resets,
if they want the uh agent or the items to kind of like change place,
change places just to add a bit of noise or uh how much height they want to change.
If you can kinda see here,
I'm just like restarting the simulation and
everything is just slightly moving away.
So it's not able to memorize
that I need to walk forward, pick up this block maker and then walk forward again
uh and use it.
So just really trying to get them to operate in the training space,
but then operate in the real world with actual like integrity.
So, uh
and uh just to kind of break down what's happening while you're,
you're seeing these like kind of uh uh loops happen.
Uh Even though you're seeing kind of the training happen in front of you,
the training uh doesn't run in unity itself.
Uh We actually started by doing that.
Uh But there was a lot of problems,
the least of which was we had to write our own trainer and that, that,
that's harder than you may think.
Um The other thing is like sharing resources within the same
process can often get in the way of the game itself.
And we wanted to keep the game kind of running smooth while the training happened.
So we ditched the whole thing and sent it to another process.
Um So this uh what, what happened when you hit play?
It actually starts a Python process in the background,
which actually does the training.
Uh And originally we were, as I said, we were using the M Allegiance unity trainer,
but it turns out running unity is really expensive.
So, so we got rid of unity too.
Um Well,
we didn't get rid of the unity that you're seeing when you're playing the game.
But we got rid of the uh actually unity for running the simulation.
Uh What we ended up doing is we ended up taking all of the logic of the
game and shipping it to Python so that
the logic can run in Python completely uninterrupted,
making use of all of those optimizations.
We we've been mentioning throughout the talk.
Um This made it so that the,
the the training runs and like blazingly fast when you're watching a single,
like animal do uh a motion, it's performing hundreds and hundreds of steps.
Uh It takes like 100 steps for every step it takes
in, in, in game and that varies by your computer.
But even on the slowest computers,
we were able to get a significant speed up by doing this.
It's actually extremely laborious
and I go into detail uh later on.
But uh in, in the, in the paper you'll see at the end of the talk.
But it, it took a lot of kind of engineering to embed uh C# into Python and be able to run
the same logic that we used to run the game within the, the Python uh like kind of back.
And the other,
the other thing that this does too is that if we ever wanted to kind of ship to mobile,
it wouldn't be too difficult to kind of take that architecture
and just send it to the cloud and then just,
you know, have a mobile game where the training happens in the actual cloud,
not just the the training cloud.
So, um yeah, these are all like uh this kind of architecture,
let us uh really speed up training.
And uh and I, I should have put a metric slide, but I'm just gonna tell you
uh that sneaky behavior that you saw that, that Nick trained,
it took 30 minutes to train that like to get someone to build a block maker
and then like use an ax to chop down kind of either trees or obstacles.
Um And that, that wasn't even a generalized behavior.
Uh In the launch version of little learning machines,
you can get that kind of behavior in like five minutes or less and all the time,
you're kind of watching your agents kind of get stuck.
You have to change a couple of things and you have to run it again and it,
it creates a lot more of an interactive experience,
which actually makes it viable as a game mechanic in, in our opinion.
So just to kind of summarize all of the tricks,
the big bag of tricks on how to speed up your RL.
So you can put it in your game and
have your players experience it while you're playing.
Uh number one disc, criticize your space,
it's much easier to make decisions about a discrete space.
Uh For example, if this was a standing room would you know where to sit or stand?
It's much easier.
If there's chairs that are disc criticized, you can make the decision for yourself.
Um Number two,
reduce your dimensions as much as possible if uh you can flatten
it do so because uh making choices on multiple dimensions increases the
uh the
the arity of the computation you have to do which uses more uh more neurons
uh disc criticize your time.
Uh The less decisions you have to make the better disc criticize your actions. Um
using uh kind of leaving some of the
intelligence to the animation and navigation systems,
whether they're using a NAV mesh or a grid.
Um It kind of really reduces the kind of
uh like work that your network has to do exploit symmetries in your
world or design a world that has symmetries so that uh your agents can
uh reuse learning that they've done when facing north and
they don't have to relearn it when facing south.
This is especially useful if you have visual observations that use lighting data.
Um
Next uh exploit overlapping actions make if for example,
this is like contextual actions in video games, just like just like players, uh
networks have a limited amount of verbs.
Uh So if you can
use those very wisely,
it really reduces your uh training time and finally just optimize your code.
Uh That's not really something that I can give you
advice for but Steve here has a lot of,
a lot of good advice for you if you need that
and then uh finally
whole de of card.
Uh But uh yeah, and uh yeah, that's, that's all the,
that's all the tips and tricks on how to make a game
that has RL happening in real time in front of the players.
Um The last part of the talk
is about making it into a game.
There's just a little design indulgence where we talk
about kind of some of the reasons we made
into the game and why we have this little
training experience that's very like kind of packaged novel.
But what we were really kind of like
struggling with, especially in early prototype is uh giving players a sense of,
well, why should I train or what should I train?
So we kind of decided to
go both uh take two approaches on this.
Uh and kind of we were divided at the beginning, but we decided on doing both.
The first one is kind of like a player driven uh in
uh intrinsic motivation
where we give the players a bunch of items and tools and we create interesting
interactions between them and we leave it up
to the players to explore those interactions,
out of curiosity or a desire to see their machines grow.
But then also to kind of challenge the players and kind of give them a sense of, hey,
you can do this with an agent.
We've tried, we, we've been able to
uh we give them these things called quests. So we kind of divide the game into two.
So both of these are provided through islands and the,
it kind of creates uh an extension to the training loop we mentioned earlier.
Um There's this idea of a player progression where a player reaches a new island,
they get new items, new animal, maybe new rewards to train with.
And then they kind of get issued a challenge,
whether that's intrinsic or extrinsic, intrinsically, they're like, oh
there's a skull here.
I wonder how this got here or hey, this thing makes fire, what can I light on fire?
Um And then to be able to use that item,
the player can't directly interact with the world.
They have to train their agents.
Uh This is similar to what black and white did for like some of their creatures
that they're the only ways in which you can achieve certain elements in the game.
Um And then, but then also we kind of provided these quests which is like, hey,
do this thing, which we, you,
we know you can do and that gives players kind of the motivation
they need to kind of not get um the like uh like,
oh I, I don't think, I don't think the the networks are smart enough to learn this
uh by guaranteeing basically that they are. Um
And then this kind of ties into the training.
So the whole thing is like the player goes into an island figures something out.
They're like, oh, I wanna do that
and then they go into the training loop and then they're like, oh, I gotta tweak.
Observe is my agent doing anything. I wanted to tweak it more.
It's ready, bring it down to the island and
have a, have a go at it and then unlock more things and it kind of goes into this loop.
And the islands are kind of made to kind of uh increase like uh sorry,
unlock increasingly complex items.
But what this is actually
uh this is actually uh uh uh illusion because what we're
actually trying to do is show players different reinforcement learning skills.
So if you're trying to
do reinforcement learning in an academic setting,
there's like a set of like things that you have to understand
that aren't necessarily immediately intuitive from how you would, for example,
train a dog,
like you have to realize that oh your agent can kind of get stuck doing a certain thing
or you have to teach it to do something before you teach it to do something else.
Some of these are kind of uh can measure it with training like an infant or a dog.
But there are specific things that we think are like unique to neural networks,
for example,
uh
this is the first quest and, and we, we don't want to overwhelm players.
We don't want to introduce randomization right away.
So we introduce the dog and the dog kind of has randomization built into it for free.
You pet the dog and the dog runs away. He's like come chase me, come pet me over here.
And that's basically recreating the same problem for your agent
and it's doing the randomization for you.
So you don't have to modify the environment.
You don't get stuck in the same trap that sneaky got stuck in.
And then the kind of the the dog does that
like
that, that that skill for you and you don't have to learn it as a player
later on.
Um What's interesting is the second quest you have
to pet the dog in those cacti over there.
And the first thing you notice is that your animal that you
have just trained to pet dogs is starting to pet cacti,
guess what?
It can't distinguish between either of them because
the cacti were not in the training data,
you didn't train an animal that can pet dogs,
you trained an animal that can pet anything in front of it.
So it's gonna start petting the cacti and be like, I can't do anything with this.
Uh
So as you can see uh this kind of the,
these little like skills allow players to become more familiar
with uh with training,
but also with kind of some of the intricacies of of A I such as like, for example,
bias and data sets or, or being able to kind of shake up things a little.
So in conclusion, um
basically what we've learned and what we've been trying to tell
you is something you might already know that watching something learn
is an amazing experience.
Like whether it's like, I don't know,
watching you guys learn or uh like a family member or
a pet rat or something uh or an animal agent.
It's, it's fun to watch something learn,
especially when it's happening in front of you.
And that by using careful design uh to train,
you can actually train agents in real time as a gameplay mechanic.
Um And we believe audiences are capable of this,
uh It doesn't have to be a niche thing.
Um It can be understood like any other game mechanic in time.
It's kind of like what we always
hope Pokemon kind of like promised us when we were Children,
something that could actually
live
your your
thing.
It actually,
-- it actually -- grow.
Um
But
we have a few reflections as well, like what did we learn from making this game?
Um
First off, learning should have not been just real time,
but it should have been real time and continuous.
Uh We want to mimic the experience generally used in reinforcement learning
that we talked about the simulation space in the real world space.
Um But in doing so, we limited them to kind of perform tasks of the user's desire.
Um rather than having
the agents actually potentially discover behaviors on their own.
Um in the future, it would be nice
to like aim towards letting the agents teach us as much as we were inflicting our,
like our agents on them.
Uh But,
and, and fundamentally,
one of the problems that was in agents was that we talked about,
um was you were just watching these pre trained models and in fact,
we kind of like repeated this mistake in the learning machines to some extent
because all the action really happens when you're training them in the cloud.
And that's where you really find that like
that lovely space.
And when you're actually showing them in the Quest Islands and stuff,
you're just watching pre trained models and watching pre trained models is not
nearly as fun as like watching them learn in front of your eyes.
-- If we -- did it again, they learn all the time.
-- Yeah, they would -- learn all the time, they would be continuous.
Um And that's possible also,
it's OK to use smaller and older models like bigger isn't always better.
Um These, these days when people talk about A A I and like,
I'm sure lots of people are talking about A I here,
but they're often talking about large language models with
billions, trillions of different neurons and parameters.
And, but we believe that understanding like the foundations of A I
can actually happen with a lot of different scales of models.
And we believe that there is like kind of
a beauty to like the small micro examination of it
and that you don't need to use the newest tools you can actually just use uh
the best the tool that works best for you and just go deep into it.
Um And then finally, like while working on little little learning machines,
Dante heard me talk about this a lot was always
kind of like the idea of like the fruit fly.
And if any of you have taken like a biology course in Univers university or anything,
you know, that we study the biology of a fruit fly or like a small worm.
And we kind of like look at the neurons and look at all the factors of it
in order to kind of project into a larger scale
and teach us kind of like the fundamentals of,
you know, was some pretty amazing cool science.
And in this way,
I think that like playing with A I at these smaller scales actually creates a
literacy and intuition about um A I
systems that are kind of like becoming ubiquitous
um all encompassing and somewhat scary.
-- Um Like -- last week I was talking to someone about embeddings and it was
much easier to say this is how an animal sees a flower.
And like this is how like your large language model, see your words,
they're just like
bits exactly.
And that like using real time learning as a game mechanic,
like makes this sort of understanding and experience
a lot more accessible and fundamentally like,
I think we believe that this base level of
understanding is kind of more important than ever now that
we're in this kind of like
A I world or.
Um
So thank you. Thank you for coming. Thank you for listening to us and going on.
It's like weird. Thank you for staying till 630. Yeah. Thank you for staying 630.
I'm sure there's lots of fun, cool things going on and I hope to see you out there.
Um Also thanks to all the people that are listed here.
Um We couldn't have done it without any one of them. Uh And
and to the organizers of the A I summit, the good first day,
-- I would say very interesting -- talk.
So, yeah, great stuff. So I think
I, I know everyone wants to just get out of here. But uh do we have time for questions?
Maybe? Yeah,
five minutes, maybe.
07 minutes. That's what we're aiming for.
Um And if there are none, that's ok too, go get a drink.
Uh I think we have one over there.
Oh, awesome.
Thank you for the wonderful talk.
Um When you're doing your simulations, are you under the hood?
Are you doing many worlds in parallel or are you just doing one single world?
So we started with doing many worlds in parallel and we tell the players,
we do many worlds in parallel.
It's much better for cash locality if you do one at a
time.
Um I'd recommend you check out the mini world simulation paper.
It's a graph 2023 from my lab mate um Brennan Shacklett.
Um There's some work on high performance GP U simulation of games using ECs systems.
So when, when we first designed the system, the reason why it's grids
is because we wanted to do a GP U based simulation. But
man, that's
engineering is hard, man.
Let's talk, let's
talk.
-- Cool, cool, -- cool.
Thank you.
Uh
Yeah,
let's alternate.
Sure.
Really wonderful talk.
I think this is wonderful work and um maybe one of the
largest repositories of RL behavior or trained RL models in the world.
So almost,
well, I actually think it's true and it's, it's beautiful.
Um You mentioned old techniques.
Um actually about 20 years ago was a game called uh Nero.
Um It was you, oh, you guys are aware? Yeah, so,
oh, it's on the side.
It was, it was on the
first. Oh I missed the first side. Sorry about that.
Um Was that?
No, no, no. Uh my advisor Ken Stanley. So, but yeah, yeah.
Um
So I, I was,
I was gonna say
Julian's also done a lot of work in evolution.
I'm wondering if you tried something like that because
you know, 512 by four even, you know, uh fully connected layers that large
uh neural evolution techniques kind of go from the ground up kind of approach
where you take as few nodes as possible and grow them um you know,
in many ways to skin a neural network.
But
-- so -- I'm gonna try to get it. I have a couple of questions here.
Uh Often when I talk about this game, people ask, hey, why not tabular RL?
Uh why not near evolution?
And uh so we,
one of the things that we really wanted
to emphasize is uh not capturing the whole problem
uh like within the network itself
here.
And this allows for the network to develop more complex behavior,
but more specialized behavior that is not tuned to the whole problem.
Uh Tabular RL
grows and dimensions really fast.
And then neuro evolution has a problem where you
kind of have to start from like basic principles,
you have to teach it how to navigate first.
Whereas
uh neural networks just kind of learn everything at once, which uh well, at least in,
in, in our, in our experience.
And it turned out to be the, the,
the best implementation for us to kind of follow in this.
Um Hopefully that answers your question, but uh
hopefully it matches your research as well if you've done it
um like like black and white, um
you've got the gameplay, I'm sorry. RL is part of the gameplay.
Um
And have you uh uh
your Q A team might want to talk to you about.
Other people want to put, learning in games,
please check with your Q A team about learning after
ship and make sure that it's the player that controls it
and not the game so that your game doesn't go stupid or they accuse
it of cheating because it got too smart because they figured them out.
Um,
any comments on that at all.
I'm not sure if I fully understood the question. Sorry,
it's the decision of
if you're learning in the field,
is it a gameplay element or is it hidden?
And here you have it exposed and it's under player control,
uh which is a good thing for the technology because then your Q
A team won't leave you in the parking lot one night when it,
you know, goes stupid in the field
otherwise because a player did it
and it's the player's problem if they teach it stupid or if they teach it too smart.
I see, I
you want to talk about like
problems Q A in this game and
-- yeah, -- this is like, I, I think you're like bang on and,
and uh like creating a game like this is extremely difficult to Q A and we like,
like we were to
it a lot ourselves before we could even pass it on.
But fundamentally that so much can go wrong
and,
and it does go wrong that you kind of can't catch it and I think like,
there's like a lot more work to do in this space in order to kind of like,
find kind of like where these behaviors actually kind of like
break and how to more than just Qing it communicating properly,
why they broke.
And at what time? And I think like, we tried our best uh in some elements of this, but
you could, we could have made, spent five more years doing that
one funny story is that one time we, for a month, the game,
the agents could not see like deep water.
So the agents kind of disabled when they fall into deep water
and they couldn't see where deep water was and they still worked
because they were able to kind of memorize a lot of the maps that you train them on.
Uh So there was a moment where we were telling you
like, oh no, they should learn, you're just training them wrong.
And then she was like, no, they're, they're really stupid.
And then we go in there and we look at them and they're like, oh yeah, they're,
they're broken
sea
water. Can't see water
are bad.
But uh but yeah, no good call.
I think one more question and I think we got that site next.
Hey guys. Um, great talk, great work. And I,
first of all, there's lots of like, you know,
particular technical things I'd like to comment on
from having done some very similar stuff myself.
But I'm gonna refrain from that.
We can take a whole long discussion over the overfitting problems and so on and, and,
and uh
GP U parallelization.
But first point is like,
not a question.
I think it's awesome that this happens and I it must happen because this is the kind of
work if we're ever going to use machine learning
in runtime in games in an interesting manner,
we need to design around it. We need to leave all paradigms that are designed
for the lack of A I.
And we need to leave the thinking that we can ever Q A it,
we need to be able to step out into the bold
new future and do things that are built on abilities,
not on lack of abilities of A I.
So I think it's great work.
Um
The question here is like,
shouldn't this be much more of a social game?
And why should, and, and the question is,
and, and the reason for this is that there's always going to be a tension
between um wanting things to learn fast
and that
learning something that is interesting is always going to take a long time
um at least in interactions.
And isn't this something that should happen over
kind of a social time scale between players?
I,
I love that question because I think that's just a
great idea and like kind of like what we,
why we want to kind of give this talk
um we,
we kind of like framed a lot of this
game over kind of like teaching fundamentals because,
um and maybe we did our best at teaching that.
And I think if there is more of a base level
of reinforcement learning,
you can kind of like quickly get to kind of games
and experience like social games that you're talking about because I,
I totally agree.
I think that is kind of the best use scenario for this kind of uh project.
Um
And I got to like, end it, but thank you so much and like,
I totally agree with you and thank you.