[Music] All right. So, I would like to start off
All right. So, I would like to start off with a question. How many of you your
with a question. How many of you your school has at least one course offering
school has at least one course offering in game design? Okay, pretty much
in game design? Okay, pretty much everyone or at least a lot of you. Um,
everyone or at least a lot of you. Um, now let's talk about specialized topics
now let's talk about specialized topics within game design. How many of you have
within game design. How many of you have an offering in serious games or
an offering in serious games or persuasive games or games with a purpose
persuasive games or games with a purpose or something? Fair number of you. How
or something? Fair number of you. How many of you have something related to
many of you have something related to game writing like narrative, world
game writing like narrative, world building? fair number of you. How many
building? fair number of you. How many of you have an offering in game
of you have an offering in game balance? So, a lot smaller. So, and and
balance? So, a lot smaller. So, and and some of you are like h sort of like an
some of you are like h sort of like an actual class dedicated to that. Um, now
actual class dedicated to that. Um, now I'll just point out I mean every game
I'll just point out I mean every game project, not every game project is a
project, not every game project is a serious game, but we have a lot of
serious game, but we have a lot of those. Not every game needs a serious
those. Not every game needs a serious amount of gamew writing, you know, but
amount of gamew writing, you know, but we have a lot of those. Pretty much
we have a lot of those. Pretty much every game needs to be balanced in some
every game needs to be balanced in some form or other at some point, and we
form or other at some point, and we don't have a lot of those. So maybe, at
don't have a lot of those. So maybe, at least for those of us with game design
least for those of us with game design programs that go beyond 101, maybe we
programs that go beyond 101, maybe we should all think about doing this.
should all think about doing this. That's what this is about. It's a case
That's what this is about. It's a case study in how I teach it. Um, so this was
study in how I teach it. Um, so this was my f first iteration on a full 10E game
my f first iteration on a full 10E game balance course back in 2010. It's still
balance course back in 2010. It's still up there online. It's released under a
up there online. It's released under a Creative Common license. Anyone who
Creative Common license. Anyone who wants to mine it for anything useful can
wants to mine it for anything useful can feel free to do that without having to
feel free to do that without having to ask
ask permission. Um, this is from the first
permission. Um, this is from the first page of the syllabus of my most recent
page of the syllabus of my most recent iteration on the course. I think all
iteration on the course. I think all courses where the topics build on each
courses where the topics build on each other should probably have a tech tree
other should probably have a tech tree in it so students can see all the things
in it so students can see all the things that they learn and how they level. And
that they learn and how they level. And I also think every game direct game
I also think every game direct game degree curriculum with prerequisites or
degree curriculum with prerequisites or tracks or course sequences should
tracks or course sequences should probably be laid out like this. I don't
probably be laid out like this. I don't know if anyone's doing it like that, but
know if anyone's doing it like that, but you might want to think about it. Um, so
you might want to think about it. Um, so I'll just put that over there on the
I'll just put that over there on the left side um in one piece. And let's
left side um in one piece. And let's unpack this a bit and walk through kind
unpack this a bit and walk through kind of what I put in this course. Um, so we
of what I put in this course. Um, so we start off with some critical vocabulary.
start off with some critical vocabulary. Just laying out basic definitions like
Just laying out basic definitions like what do I mean when I say game balance?
what do I mean when I say game balance? How is that different from pacing or
How is that different from pacing or tuning? Uh, reminding everyone what a
tuning? Uh, reminding everyone what a system is and what positive and negative
system is and what positive and negative feedback loops are. Uh, what we mean
feedback loops are. Uh, what we mean when we say that a game is deterministic
when we say that a game is deterministic or solvable. Uh, especially since that
or solvable. Uh, especially since that starts getting weird when we get into
starts getting weird when we get into solving games of chance. Um, and rule
solving games of chance. Um, and rule symmetry and asymmetry. This is where we
symmetry and asymmetry. This is where we set the boundaries of the course for
set the boundaries of the course for what exactly the scope is when we talk
what exactly the scope is when we talk about balance. Um, and by the way, I
about balance. Um, and by the way, I just love that a word cloud is the first
just love that a word cloud is the first thing that comes up when I Google the
thing that comes up when I Google the word vocabulary. It's just so meta. Um,
word vocabulary. It's just so meta. Um, so how I define game balance for this
so how I define game balance for this class is creating game balance is
class is creating game balance is creating the appearance of fairness in a
creating the appearance of fairness in a game and appearance is really important
game and appearance is really important here. It's about player perception as
here. It's about player perception as much as reality because as game
much as reality because as game designers we are crafting an experience
designers we are crafting an experience and it's that experience that matters.
and it's that experience that matters. Uh, so balance is part math, part
Uh, so balance is part math, part systems and part psychology. Uh, we do
systems and part psychology. Uh, we do this through several methods. One is
this through several methods. One is designer intuition or experience. The
designer intuition or experience. The game designer chooses to make certain
game designer chooses to make certain things a certain way because it feels
things a certain way because it feels right to them. Uh another is play
right to them. Uh another is play testing. You create a rapid prototype,
testing. You create a rapid prototype, play on your own or with friends,
play on your own or with friends, observe and make changes based on any
observe and make changes based on any rules, exploits or weaknesses that you
rules, exploits or weaknesses that you find. Uh play testing is another thing
find. Uh play testing is another thing that everyone has to do and there's few
that everyone has to do and there's few very few courses offered in. That's a
very few courses offered in. That's a different presentation in this summit.
different presentation in this summit. Um a third method is analytics. taking
Um a third method is analytics. taking actual data from games and using
actual data from games and using statistical analysis to draw conclusions
statistical analysis to draw conclusions about how it's actually played. And a
about how it's actually played. And a fourth method is mathematical modeling,
fourth method is mathematical modeling, using math to understand the
using math to understand the relationships between all the numbers in
relationships between all the numbers in the game in order to choose the most
the game in order to choose the most appropriate ones. And most of the focus
appropriate ones. And most of the focus in this course is on learning
in this course is on learning mathematical tools to do this modeling
mathematical tools to do this modeling and also building spreadsheet
and also building spreadsheet proficiency. So students can use these
proficiency. So students can use these to solve problems and present solutions.
to solve problems and present solutions. Uh we also spend a lot of time well we
Uh we also spend a lot of time well we spent some time on analytics because
spent some time on analytics because that's widely used. is very useful. Um,
that's widely used. is very useful. Um, I want them to encounter that. As for
I want them to encounter that. As for building their own intuition and
building their own intuition and building their own play testing skills,
building their own play testing skills, we do that through practical exercises
we do that through practical exercises where they analyze the balance of an
where they analyze the balance of an existing game or do balance on a game of
existing game or do balance on a game of their own. I also point out to my
their own. I also point out to my students that on the very first day that
students that on the very first day that math is a skill. It can be learned like
math is a skill. It can be learned like any other. And the whole concept of a
any other. And the whole concept of a person being good at math or bad at math
person being good at math or bad at math is just an American cultural myth.
is just an American cultural myth. There's been a ton of research showing
There's been a ton of research showing that. Um, so therefore, this will not be
that. Um, so therefore, this will not be a valid excuse in this class to say,
a valid excuse in this class to say, "Oh, I'm bad at math. therefore I suck
"Oh, I'm bad at math. therefore I suck at this. Um, every student can get this
at this. Um, every student can get this if they apply themselves. And so far
if they apply themselves. And so far that has turned out to be the case. Um,
that has turned out to be the case. Um, so once everyone's clear on the scope of
so once everyone's clear on the scope of the class and everyone's been given the
the class and everyone's been given the chance to drop if this isn't what they
chance to drop if this isn't what they thought it was, then we start off
thought it was, then we start off looking at numeric relationships cuz
looking at numeric relationships cuz just saying I have five hit points left
just saying I have five hit points left is meaningless unless you know whether
is meaningless unless you know whether other things do zero damage or
other things do zero damage or occasionally one or things are doing one
occasionally one or things are doing one to five damage or if things are doing a
to five damage or if things are doing a thousand damage. It's all about how
thousand damage. It's all about how numbers in the game relate to each
numbers in the game relate to each other. So we examine linear and identity
other. So we examine linear and identity relationships, triangular and polomial
relationships, triangular and polomial relationships and exponential and
relationships and exponential and logarithmic relationships and also
logarithmic relationships and also chains of relationships like how if a
chains of relationships like how if a player is getting stronger in an RPG
player is getting stronger in an RPG through polomial growth and monsters are
through polomial growth and monsters are also scaling polomially then the
also scaling polomially then the relationship with the monster between
relationship with the monster between the player power and the monster power
the player power and the monster power will be linear not polomial things like
will be linear not polomial things like that. Uh we also examine resource flow
that. Uh we also examine resource flow diagrams like yours Dorman's wonderful
diagrams like yours Dorman's wonderful minations tool um just cuz it's a great
minations tool um just cuz it's a great way to visually show uh relationships
way to visually show uh relationships between numbers. Um and I also have the
between numbers. Um and I also have the class play cookie clicker and
class play cookie clicker and mechanically it's just a very pure
mechanically it's just a very pure implementation of the relationship
implementation of the relationship between numbers. You have cookies that
between numbers. You have cookies that are increasing at a rate of cookies per
are increasing at a rate of cookies per second and then you use your cookies to
second and then you use your cookies to increase your cookies per second but at
increase your cookies per second but at less efficient rates of exchange over
less efficient rates of exchange over time. That's pretty much all the engine
time. That's pretty much all the engine of the game is. Um, it's also important
of the game is. Um, it's also important historically as the game that really
historically as the game that really popularized the idol game genre. Um, and
popularized the idol game genre. Um, and this is controversial among my students.
this is controversial among my students. They generally hate me for introducing
They generally hate me for introducing them to this game if they haven't played
them to this game if they haven't played it before because on it's totally
it before because on it's totally addicting and yet it's really stupid and
addicting and yet it's really stupid and you're fully aware of how stupid it is
you're fully aware of how stupid it is that you're clicking on cookies and
that you're clicking on cookies and that's all you're doing just to
that's all you're doing just to increment a counter and it's stupid but
increment a counter and it's stupid but you get addicted to it and continue to
you get addicted to it and continue to do it anyway. So really it's a game
do it anyway. So really it's a game about self-loathing and which is one of
about self-loathing and which is one of the prerequisites to being a game
the prerequisites to being a game designer which is why I keep it in
designer which is why I keep it in here. Um from there we look at a special
here. Um from there we look at a special case of numeric relationships which is
case of numeric relationships which is resource systems and economic systems
resource systems and economic systems cuz those come up a lot in games. We
cuz those come up a lot in games. We cover the bits of an economics 101
cover the bits of an economics 101 course that are directly relevant to
course that are directly relevant to games. Things like how supply and demand
games. Things like how supply and demand would affect prices in an MMO auction
would affect prices in an MMO auction house, how inflation affects those
house, how inflation affects those prices, and different strate strategies
prices, and different strate strategies for handling inflation in a game
for handling inflation in a game economy. uh and interplayer trading and
economy. uh and interplayer trading and the differences in how that works
the differences in how that works between closed and open game economies
between closed and open game economies and also various auction and interplayer
and also various auction and interplayer trading systems which are a lot more
trading systems which are a lot more common in Euro games than in video
common in Euro games than in video games. Um and I encourage them to play
games. Um and I encourage them to play Euro games that have strong trading or
Euro games that have strong trading or auction mechanics here like Settlers of
auction mechanics here like Settlers of Katan or Modern Art. Um after that we
Katan or Modern Art. Um after that we have enough tools to get into our first
have enough tools to get into our first real in the trenches game balance
real in the trenches game balance project where we talk about games where
project where we talk about games where better stuff costs more. I giggily refer
better stuff costs more. I giggily refer to this as transitive relationships
to this as transitive relationships between the various game elements. And
between the various game elements. And one of the purest examples and the one
one of the purest examples and the one that I examine a lot just because of my
that I examine a lot just because of my personal experience in the industry is
personal experience in the industry is TCGs like Magic the Gathering or
TCGs like Magic the Gathering or Hearthstone. You have a cost to put a
Hearthstone. You have a cost to put a card into play and then the card has an
card into play and then the card has an effect and more expensive cards are more
effect and more expensive cards are more powerful. And what you're doing is
powerful. And what you're doing is putting all of the cost, limitations,
putting all of the cost, limitations, and drawbacks and also the powers,
and drawbacks and also the powers, abilities, and benefits in terms of
abilities, and benefits in terms of numbers scaled so that a card is
numbers scaled so that a card is balanced if the value of its costs
balanced if the value of its costs equals the value of its benefits. And
equals the value of its benefits. And you can put this into a spreadsheet
you can put this into a spreadsheet where each mechanic has its own column.
where each mechanic has its own column. Each row has each row is its own card
Each row has each row is its own card and there's one column that just
and there's one column that just contains some math function that
contains some math function that incorporates all the other columns and
incorporates all the other columns and spits out a number that tells you if the
spits out a number that tells you if the card is balanced or not and if not how
card is balanced or not and if not how far off it is in which direction. Uh
far off it is in which direction. Uh very powerful technique. I actually just
very powerful technique. I actually just talked about this in the math for
talked about this in the math for programmers tutorial an hour and a half
programmers tutorial an hour and a half ago. Uh if you want to look that up on
ago. Uh if you want to look that up on the vault later. So, one of the projects
the vault later. So, one of the projects here is for students to take an existing
here is for students to take an existing game with transitive mechanics and
game with transitive mechanics and analyze it to find the game objects like
analyze it to find the game objects like the cards or whatever that are the most
the cards or whatever that are the most powerful, the weakest, and the most
powerful, the weakest, and the most balanced and then compare that in their
balanced and then compare that in their math with the generally accepted wisdom
math with the generally accepted wisdom of the games
of the games community. Um, so at this point now
community. Um, so at this point now we've taken things as far as we can
we've taken things as far as we can balancing games based on skill, but we
balancing games based on skill, but we haven't done anything involving
haven't done anything involving mechanics of chance yet. So now we dive
mechanics of chance yet. So now we dive into basic probability specifically how
into basic probability specifically how to calculate independent probabilities
to calculate independent probabilities like die rolls where each roll doesn't
like die rolls where each roll doesn't affect the odds of future rolls and
affect the odds of future rolls and dependent probabilities like drawing a
dependent probabilities like drawing a card from a deck where each card draw
card from a deck where each card draw does affect the probability of future
does affect the probability of future card draws if you know what was removed.
card draws if you know what was removed. So this is basically taking a
So this is basically taking a probability 101 class extracting the
probability 101 class extracting the parts that we use in games and ignoring
parts that we use in games and ignoring the rest. Um although I do make sure
the rest. Um although I do make sure they encounter things like the Monty
they encounter things like the Monty Hall problem just so they understand
Hall problem just so they understand that probability isn't always intuitive.
that probability isn't always intuitive. Um, I also go over ways to do sanity
Um, I also go over ways to do sanity checks like probabilities are always
checks like probabilities are always between zero and one. Adding up all the
between zero and one. Adding up all the non-over overlapping non-over
non-over overlapping non-over overlapping outcomes should always get
overlapping outcomes should always get you one exactly. Uh, cuz probability is
you one exactly. Uh, cuz probability is very easy to screw up if you don't know
very easy to screw up if you don't know what you're doing and you're not
what you're doing and you're not careful. But most of the time if
careful. But most of the time if something goes wrong, it goes wrong
something goes wrong, it goes wrong enough to fail a sanity check. So, it
enough to fail a sanity check. So, it kind of has its built-in debugger, which
kind of has its built-in debugger, which is nice. Uh, this stuff actually doesn't
is nice. Uh, this stuff actually doesn't take that long to cover. Just a week or
take that long to cover. Just a week or so. But I throw in another week of
so. But I throw in another week of playing some dice and card games in
playing some dice and card games in class and analyzing them like the
class and analyzing them like the strategy between behind bluff and liars
strategy between behind bluff and liars dice or which side has the natural
dice or which side has the natural advantage in one night ultimate werewolf
advantage in one night ultimate werewolf or any other relevant games that I've
or any other relevant games that I've acquired recently. Um now at this point
acquired recently. Um now at this point my students know how to calculate
my students know how to calculate exactly how fast they'll go broke in
exactly how fast they'll go broke in Vegas and then I deliver some bad news
Vegas and then I deliver some bad news which is probability doesn't actually
which is probability doesn't actually solve everything for two reasons. Uh the
solve everything for two reasons. Uh the first is that humans suck at
first is that humans suck at probability. We generally find it
probability. We generally find it unintuitive. Even if you do your odds
unintuitive. Even if you do your odds calculations correctly as the game
calculations correctly as the game designer, a lot of times they will feel
designer, a lot of times they will feel wrong to players. The great Sid Meer
wrong to players. The great Sid Meer even talked about some of his
even talked about some of his experiences with this at a keynote here
experiences with this at a keynote here in GDC back in 2010. So you also have to
in GDC back in 2010. So you also have to learn about not just how to calculate
learn about not just how to calculate odds and probabilities, but also
odds and probabilities, but also cognitive biases to explain why people
cognitive biases to explain why people get intuitive probability wrong and when
get intuitive probability wrong and when they do. And we talk about game design
they do. And we talk about game design strategies to compensate for your
strategies to compensate for your players being buggy. Um, and this is
players being buggy. Um, and this is also a great time to revisit games like
also a great time to revisit games like Liars Dice and Poker to learn the
Liars Dice and Poker to learn the difference between just doing the math
difference between just doing the math and actually using psychological
and actually using psychological mechanics like bluffing. And
mechanics like bluffing. And interestingly, another thing that we
interestingly, another thing that we mention here for the first time is
mention here for the first time is ethics. Because whether we should be
ethics. Because whether we should be honest with our, you know, should we be
honest with our, you know, should we be honest with our players and do the
honest with our players and do the probabilities the way they we say we're
probabilities the way they we say we're going to or should we um, you know,
going to or should we um, you know, fudge our die rolls to conform to and
fudge our die rolls to conform to and reinforce our players flawed
reinforce our players flawed understandings of probability.
understandings of probability. basically, is it okay to lie to our
basically, is it okay to lie to our players or not? Um, that's something
players or not? Um, that's something worth thinking about. And I mentioned
worth thinking about. And I mentioned this here because we normally don't see
this here because we normally don't see matters of professional ethics emerging
matters of professional ethics emerging as a key topic in a math class. Um,
as a key topic in a math class. Um, second thing that goes wrong with
second thing that goes wrong with probability is that even if we're honest
probability is that even if we're honest and our random number generators are
and our random number generators are not, physical dice and cards are
not, physical dice and cards are generally imperfect and not fully
generally imperfect and not fully random. Any pseudo random numbers
random. Any pseudo random numbers generated on a computer of course can't
generated on a computer of course can't be random at all. And it's worth
be random at all. And it's worth understanding a little bit about how
understanding a little bit about how these things work so you can predict how
these things work so you can predict how players could exploit these random
players could exploit these random systems to gain an unfair advantage.
systems to gain an unfair advantage. Whether it be through cheating at Vegas
Whether it be through cheating at Vegas or at a high stakes esport or just
or at a high stakes esport or just scumming the save files of a single
scumming the save files of a single player RPG to gain an unfair
player RPG to gain an unfair advantage. Um, now I could switch this
advantage. Um, now I could switch this next topic with the previous, but I like
next topic with the previous, but I like making sure that students don't come to
making sure that students don't come to rely too much on probability before
rely too much on probability before realizing its limitations. But after I
realizing its limitations. But after I do that, I cycle back to a couple of
do that, I cycle back to a couple of other useful probability tools. uh
other useful probability tools. uh specifically Monte Carlo simulations and
specifically Monte Carlo simulations and marov chains. Now Monte Carlo is just
marov chains. Now Monte Carlo is just repeating a random trial a few thousand
repeating a random trial a few thousand or a million times and seeing what
or a million times and seeing what happens and then through the law of
happens and then through the law of averages your result should be pretty
averages your result should be pretty close to an exact mathematical solution
close to an exact mathematical solution if there is one. And Monte Carlo
if there is one. And Monte Carlo solutions are useful cuz they're easy.
solutions are useful cuz they're easy. There's no math required. You just make
There's no math required. You just make a spreadsheet or sometimes do some light
a spreadsheet or sometimes do some light scripting. They can be used in
scripting. They can be used in situations where calculating calculating
situations where calculating calculating an exact solution is impossible or too
an exact solution is impossible or too unwieldy and slow or if the student just
unwieldy and slow or if the student just doesn't know how to do it. Um, Monte
doesn't know how to do it. Um, Monte Carlo solutions also work as a useful
Carlo solutions also work as a useful sanity check if you do have an exact
sanity check if you do have an exact solution. If you solve a probability
solution. If you solve a probability question both ways and with Monte Carlo
question both ways and with Monte Carlo and with math and get the same answer,
and with math and get the same answer, then it gives you a lot of extra
then it gives you a lot of extra certainty that you didn't make a
certainty that you didn't make a mistake. Uh, marov chains on the other
mistake. Uh, marov chains on the other hand are useful for solving some very
hand are useful for solving some very specific types of game design problems
specific types of game design problems that involve repeating something where
that involve repeating something where the results of one thing affect the
the results of one thing affect the results of the next recursively. Uh, as
results of the next recursively. Uh, as an example, consider a board game
an example, consider a board game Monopoly. And if you're trying to figure
Monopoly. And if you're trying to figure out which properties are the most or
out which properties are the most or least likely to be landed on in order to
least likely to be landed on in order to compute the ROI for the purchase price
compute the ROI for the purchase price of the properties, you could do that
of the properties, you could do that with a Monte Carlo simulation. Just, you
with a Monte Carlo simulation. Just, you know, start at go and roll 2d6 a bunch
know, start at go and roll 2d6 a bunch of times, go to jail when you roll three
of times, go to jail when you roll three doubles in a row, that stuff like that.
doubles in a row, that stuff like that. But you can also treat this as a set of
But you can also treat this as a set of states where each state is a combination
states where each state is a combination of what space you're on and how many
of what space you're on and how many times you've rolled doubles in a row.
times you've rolled doubles in a row. Uh, and you can build this transition
Uh, and you can build this transition matrix of probabilities between states.
matrix of probabilities between states. Take a column vector of probabilities of
Take a column vector of probabilities of being in any given state at a time and
being in any given state at a time and multiply that by the matrix a bunch of
multiply that by the matrix a bunch of times and you'll know after every single
times and you'll know after every single turn in the game what the possibility
turn in the game what the possibility space is in terms of which spaces you
space is in terms of which spaces you might be on with what probabilities.
might be on with what probabilities. It's a bit complicated compared to most
It's a bit complicated compared to most of the other topics in the course and
of the other topics in the course and it's limited to some very specific
it's limited to some very specific situations but it's very powerful for
situations but it's very powerful for getting exact mathematical solutions for
getting exact mathematical solutions for things that you couldn't do any other
things that you couldn't do any other way. Uh, if you haven't encountered this
way. Uh, if you haven't encountered this before, there's a blog on a website
before, there's a blog on a website called datagenetics.com that has an
called datagenetics.com that has an analysis of games like Candyland and
analysis of games like Candyland and Shoots and Ladders and things. They're
Shoots and Ladders and things. They're very helpful primers on that kind of
very helpful primers on that kind of thing. Um, so now we've covered
thing. Um, so now we've covered non-random transitive mechanics and also
non-random transitive mechanics and also probability. And the next thing we do is
probability. And the next thing we do is smash those two things together to learn
smash those two things together to learn how to balance transitive mechanics that
how to balance transitive mechanics that have a random or situational element to
have a random or situational element to them. Uh, this is something that most
them. Uh, this is something that most students will have run into already in
students will have run into already in their earlier design analysis of a TCG
their earlier design analysis of a TCG or similar game. What do you do when a
or similar game. What do you do when a card with a card when it says you only
card with a card when it says you only get some benefit in a particular
get some benefit in a particular situation like only if you're fully
situation like only if you're fully healed or only if the opponent has more
healed or only if the opponent has more than four cards in play or something?
than four cards in play or something? And the short answer is that you come up
And the short answer is that you come up with some kind of reasonable estimate
with some kind of reasonable estimate for how often that benefit would trigger
for how often that benefit would trigger and you treat it as a probability, no
and you treat it as a probability, no different from saying 50% of the time
different from saying 50% of the time you get this benefit or whatever. Um, so
you get this benefit or whatever. Um, so probably the purest instance of
probably the purest instance of situational balance I've seen is in
situational balance I've seen is in tower defense games. And I like to have
tower defense games. And I like to have the students play and analyze desktop
the students play and analyze desktop tower defense 1.5 specifically. It's old
tower defense 1.5 specifically. It's old enough that many of them haven't played
enough that many of them haven't played it before. It's historically important
it before. It's historically important as one of the games that popularized the
as one of the games that popularized the genre. And almost everything in that
genre. And almost everything in that game is situational. You have some
game is situational. You have some towers that do area effect damage, which
towers that do area effect damage, which work great when enemies are clustered
work great when enemies are clustered together, but not when they're spread
together, but not when they're spread out. Towers that only hit flying or
out. Towers that only hit flying or non-flying enemies, or other towers that
non-flying enemies, or other towers that can hit both, but are less powerful.
can hit both, but are less powerful. Towers that do no damage at all and just
Towers that do no damage at all and just boost the power of the towers next to
boost the power of the towers next to them. So, it all depends on where you
them. So, it all depends on where you put it, and so on. Uh the value of
put it, and so on. Uh the value of everything depends on the board state
everything depends on the board state and what kinds of enemies are in the
and what kinds of enemies are in the next wave and what kinds of towers you
next wave and what kinds of towers you make. And if you really want students to
make. And if you really want students to go allin for this, you could even have a
go allin for this, you could even have a tournament, see who can use their
tournament, see who can use their analysis to build the best tower loadout
analysis to build the best tower loadout and give your excess GDC swag to the
and give your excess GDC swag to the winners. Um then we take the stuff that
winners. Um then we take the stuff that we learned about numeric relationships
we learned about numeric relationships and transitive systems and put that
and transitive systems and put that together with probability again to
together with probability again to examine reward systems and advancement
examine reward systems and advancement and progression and pacing. This
and progression and pacing. This includes things like random loot drop
includes things like random loot drop tables in RPGs so that you can make sure
tables in RPGs so that you can make sure the player doesn't get the ultimate sort
the player doesn't get the ultimate sort of awesomeness plus five as a random
of awesomeness plus five as a random drop in the first dungeon. Uh we also
drop in the first dungeon. Uh we also look at progression systems like
look at progression systems like leveling curves. How many enemies do you
leveling curves. How many enemies do you have to kill to gain a level on average?
have to kill to gain a level on average? How long is that expected to take in
How long is that expected to take in play time? So you're trading off danger
play time? So you're trading off danger for time for advancement. Uh and also
for time for advancement. Uh and also looking at advancement in the story,
looking at advancement in the story, which is a reward in and of itself. And
which is a reward in and of itself. And then bringing in human psychology and
then bringing in human psychology and how a lot of little rewards spread out
how a lot of little rewards spread out provide more impact than a single big
provide more impact than a single big reward. and how rewards on a random
reward. and how rewards on a random reinforcement schedule are more powerful
reinforcement schedule are more powerful than a fixed schedule, stuff like that.
than a fixed schedule, stuff like that. If you want to place more emphasis on
If you want to place more emphasis on this, you could easily make this a
this, you could easily make this a semester long project where you take a
semester long project where you take a game like an old school JRPG and go
game like an old school JRPG and go through all the encounter and loot and
through all the encounter and loot and level charts and tables and use math to
level charts and tables and use math to predict how long it will take a player
predict how long it will take a player to grind through each area, when to
to grind through each area, when to level up and how often, and generally
level up and how often, and generally when is the player receiving some kind
when is the player receiving some kind of reward and then cross referencing
of reward and then cross referencing that reward schedule with the most and
that reward schedule with the most and least memorable events in areas in the
least memorable events in areas in the game in order to understand from a
game in order to understand from a mathematical perspective where the
mathematical perspective where the enjoyment of the game is coming from.
enjoyment of the game is coming from. Um, this is also another place where
Um, this is also another place where professional ethics comes up because
professional ethics comes up because reward schedules come up a lot in social
reward schedules come up a lot in social and mobile games and also in the
and mobile games and also in the gambling industry as ways to
gambling industry as ways to psychologically manipulate players to
psychologically manipulate players to pay money or continue playing. Uh, and
pay money or continue playing. Uh, and there's the question of whether that is
there's the question of whether that is okay and if so, where do we cross the
okay and if so, where do we cross the line into unethical behavior and what do
line into unethical behavior and what do we as game designers do about it? Uh,
we as game designers do about it? Uh, next up we take a look at the reverse of
next up we take a look at the reverse of probability which is statistics. In
probability which is statistics. In probability, you know the nature of the
probability, you know the nature of the randomness and you use it to predict the
randomness and you use it to predict the what the actual data will look like,
what the actual data will look like, like the results of a die roll. In
like the results of a die roll. In statistics, you see the results and you
statistics, you see the results and you use those to try and derive the nature
use those to try and derive the nature of the randomness that they arose from.
of the randomness that they arose from. Statistics is a bit harder than
Statistics is a bit harder than probability because it's just as
probability because it's just as unintuitive, just as easy to get wrong,
unintuitive, just as easy to get wrong, and there's fewer sanity checks to alert
and there's fewer sanity checks to alert you to being wrong. You know, there are
you to being wrong. You know, there are some people that have this saying that
some people that have this saying that numbers don't lie, but in reality, the
numbers don't lie, but in reality, the data are always trying to trick you.
data are always trying to trick you. They're very mean. Um, so once we learn
They're very mean. Um, so once we learn some basic statistical tools like mean,
some basic statistical tools like mean, median, standard deviation, standard
median, standard deviation, standard error, the Z test, statistical
error, the Z test, statistical significance, then we dive into
significance, then we dive into analytics to learn about what kinds of
analytics to learn about what kinds of numbers we should record for a game and
numbers we should record for a game and how we would use the results to
how we would use the results to determine whether the game was balanced
determine whether the game was balanced or not. Fighting and brawling games and
or not. Fighting and brawling games and MOBAs are great with this because you
MOBAs are great with this because you have a ton of characters that all have
have a ton of characters that all have to be balanced against each other in
to be balanced against each other in ways that don't easily lend themselves
ways that don't easily lend themselves to being analyzed purely through math
to being analyzed purely through math formulas and spreadsheeting uh that
formulas and spreadsheeting uh that relate them to one another. Uh, one
relate them to one another. Uh, one exercise I like to do is give them uh is
exercise I like to do is give them uh is to come up with metric have them come up
to come up with metric have them come up with a metrics plan for a game that
with a metrics plan for a game that they're working on themselves. Like if
they're working on themselves. Like if you you might be working on some, you
you you might be working on some, you know, small passion project like a like
know, small passion project like a like a simple board game or something, but if
a simple board game or something, but if you had a few thousand play tests and
you had a few thousand play tests and could record any data you wanted, give
could record any data you wanted, give me a question that you'd want to know
me a question that you'd want to know the answer to and then list what data
the answer to and then list what data you would collect to get an answer to
you would collect to get an answer to that question. And then how would you
that question. And then how would you interpret that data to get an answer
interpret that data to get an answer like what would a positive or negative
like what would a positive or negative result look like? Um, and this is yet
result look like? Um, and this is yet another place where professional ethics
another place where professional ethics is discussed in regards to metrics
is discussed in regards to metrics driven design. If you find out, for
driven design. If you find out, for example, that changing a certain number
example, that changing a certain number or mechanic or whatever leads to greater
or mechanic or whatever leads to greater revenue, but also reduces player
revenue, but also reduces player enjoyment, such as might be the case
enjoyment, such as might be the case with mechanics that hold your players
with mechanics that hold your players accounts for ransom or that create
accounts for ransom or that create intentionally create pain points that
intentionally create pain points that can only be removed by paying money. Is
can only be removed by paying money. Is that something that's good? Is that
that something that's good? Is that something that's unfortunate but
something that's unfortunate but necessary? Or is it something that's a
necessary? Or is it something that's a breach of professional ethics as a game
breach of professional ethics as a game designer? And as with other ethical
designer? And as with other ethical questions raised in this class, I don't
questions raised in this class, I don't give any answers or opinions. I just
give any answers or opinions. I just point out that these are things that a
point out that these are things that a game designer should be thinking about
game designer should be thinking about and forming an opinion about because if
and forming an opinion about because if you don't, then someone else will make
you don't, then someone else will make that decision for you. Uh the last thing
that decision for you. Uh the last thing we cover in the class is intransitive
we cover in the class is intransitive mechanics. That is things like rock
mechanics. That is things like rock paper scissors where there's no concept
paper scissors where there's no concept of better or more powerful because it
of better or more powerful because it all depends on what your opponent is
all depends on what your opponent is doing. Um something is strong against
doing. Um something is strong against one thing and weak against another. Uh,
one thing and weak against another. Uh, and this is where we get into the fields
and this is where we get into the fields of linear algebra and game theory
of linear algebra and game theory dealing with payoff matrices and Nash
dealing with payoff matrices and Nash equilibriums to solve these kinds of
equilibriums to solve these kinds of problems mathematically. I think it's
problems mathematically. I think it's pretty fascinating that you can ask a
pretty fascinating that you can ask a question like suppose we're playing rock
question like suppose we're playing rock paper scissors but if I win with a rock
paper scissors but if I win with a rock it counts double and if you win with a
it counts double and if you win with a rock it's just normal uh and we're
rock it's just normal uh and we're playing to best of 10. You can actually
playing to best of 10. You can actually use matrices and systems of equations to
use matrices and systems of equations to come up with a solution of exactly how
come up with a solution of exactly how often both of us should choose each
often both of us should choose each throw and how big of an advantage this
throw and how big of an advantage this is for me. Um, yeah. So, this is some of
is for me. Um, yeah. So, this is some of the mathiest, geekiest math that I cover
the mathiest, geekiest math that I cover in the class. And frankly, it's not all
in the class. And frankly, it's not all that useful in a lot of games because
that useful in a lot of games because it's very pure and it's it's very uh
it's very pure and it's it's very uh work intensive. But there are a lot of
work intensive. But there are a lot of games where that have some kind of
games where that have some kind of intransitive relationships. Any
intransitive relationships. Any situation where you might use terms like
situation where you might use terms like hard counter or soft counter, which
hard counter or soft counter, which would include units in RTS's, characters
would include units in RTS's, characters in fighting or brawling games or MOBAs,
in fighting or brawling games or MOBAs, character classes in MMOs, decks and
character classes in MMOs, decks and strategies in TCGs, all kinds of things
strategies in TCGs, all kinds of things like that. And so like marov chains, I
like that. And so like marov chains, I don't think that game theory is used a
don't think that game theory is used a lot in the field, but I do find it to be
lot in the field, but I do find it to be a really fascinating tool that's very
a really fascinating tool that's very powerful in the right situations. So I
powerful in the right situations. So I want my students to encounter
want my students to encounter it. So one thing I want to point out
it. So one thing I want to point out here is that actually playing games
here is that actually playing games either in class or as homework or maybe
either in class or as homework or maybe home play uh is really important in this
home play uh is really important in this class. Math is not always intuitive if
class. Math is not always intuitive if you just write a bunch of equations on
you just write a bunch of equations on the board, but if you can see it in
the board, but if you can see it in action, it's a lot easier to gro what's
action, it's a lot easier to gro what's going on. Um, it's also useful to
going on. Um, it's also useful to provide context that the concepts we're
provide context that the concepts we're learning here are useful and can be
learning here are useful and can be applied directly to analyze games or
applied directly to analyze games or solve real world balance problems. In
solve real world balance problems. In all the years I've been teaching this, I
all the years I've been teaching this, I have not once been asked the question,
have not once been asked the question, when will we ever use this? Um, so
when will we ever use this? Um, so students are seeing the theory and the
students are seeing the theory and the application at the same time. That helps
application at the same time. That helps keep the students engaged. Uh, plus they
keep the students engaged. Uh, plus they love playing games as part of a course
love playing games as part of a course requirement and it lets me introduce
requirement and it lets me introduce them to a number of games that I
them to a number of games that I wouldn't normally be able to get them to
wouldn't normally be able to get them to play otherwise. So that lets me add to
play otherwise. So that lets me add to their personal game cannon as
their personal game cannon as well. Another thing this class lends
well. Another thing this class lends itself to really well is PvP mechanics.
itself to really well is PvP mechanics. Having students compete in some kind of
Having students compete in some kind of game balance or mathematical analysis
game balance or mathematical analysis task where the final answer isn't clear,
task where the final answer isn't clear, isn't obvious, and there are multiple
isn't obvious, and there are multiple layers of potential analysis. I have
layers of potential analysis. I have players either play on their own for a
players either play on their own for a high score or play against each other in
high score or play against each other in class in a tournament. uh and I usually
class in a tournament. uh and I usually modify these games slightly both to
modify these games slightly both to simplify the constraints so the analysis
simplify the constraints so the analysis space isn't as huge and also to prevent
space isn't as huge and also to prevent the students from just using Google to
the students from just using Google to find optimal strategies. I also try to
find optimal strategies. I also try to find favor games that can be solved in a
find favor games that can be solved in a spreadsheet because spreadsheeting
spreadsheet because spreadsheeting skills are really important for game
skills are really important for game designers and for game balance in
designers and for game balance in particular. So this serves as a good
particular. So this serves as a good practice for them. Uh cookie clicker and
practice for them. Uh cookie clicker and desktop tower defense I've mentioned
desktop tower defense I've mentioned already. Battle battle was actually
already. Battle battle was actually presented here by Eric Zimmerman last
presented here by Eric Zimmerman last year and it's been a wonderful in-class
year and it's been a wonderful in-class exercise for me. Cordial Minuette is a
exercise for me. Cordial Minuette is a game designed by Jason Roar that is a
game designed by Jason Roar that is a pure game theory problem with um and
pure game theory problem with um and there I had to do some very heavy uh
there I had to do some very heavy uh changes to that because uh two elements
changes to that because uh two elements of of the original game are real money
of of the original game are real money gambling which is required and also
gambling which is required and also satanic themes um so I had to remove
satanic themes um so I had to remove those things obviously um pig is a
those things obviously um pig is a traditional dice game that's a great
traditional dice game that's a great example of calculating probabilities and
example of calculating probabilities and Gapu is an intransitive game from the
Gapu is an intransitive game from the sequent series of RP of JRPGs you could
sequent series of RP of JRPGs you could just look all those up and and probably
just look all those up and and probably figure out what's going on with that.
figure out what's going on with that. Um, another important topic that's
Um, another important topic that's distributed throughout the class is how
distributed throughout the class is how to use spreadsheets because the vast
to use spreadsheets because the vast majority of game balance problems can be
majority of game balance problems can be solved in Excel and I want students to
solved in Excel and I want students to be strongly proficient in
be strongly proficient in spreadsheeting. I divide these things up
spreadsheeting. I divide these things up and introduce them a few at a time each
and introduce them a few at a time each uh a few at a time each week using the
uh a few at a time each week using the ones that are relevant to the problems
ones that are relevant to the problems that need to be solved that week. I go
that need to be solved that week. I go into a lot of detail with this, mostly
into a lot of detail with this, mostly just pointing out features in Excel that
just pointing out features in Excel that are useful and then asking them to use
are useful and then asking them to use those features in their design work for
those features in their design work for the week. We cover formatting to make
the week. We cover formatting to make the spreadsheets look more readable and
the spreadsheets look more readable and usable. Various types of graphs and
usable. Various types of graphs and charts that can be used to visualize
charts that can be used to visualize data. How to comment your worksheet
data. How to comment your worksheet properly uh the same way so that the
properly uh the same way so that the same way that you would have to comment
same way that you would have to comment your code. How to use formulas at a very
your code. How to use formulas at a very basic level. Doing sorting and data
basic level. Doing sorting and data validation. Dealing with multiple
validation. Dealing with multiple worksheets and how to format them for
worksheets and how to format them for readability and usability. dealing with
readability and usability. dealing with all the different ways to fill or copy
all the different ways to fill or copy and paste to save time and showing them
and paste to save time and showing them a wide variety of useful functions of
a wide variety of useful functions of which there are too many to list in this
which there are too many to list in this slide. One notable exception here is I
slide. One notable exception here is I do not get into writing scripts such as
do not get into writing scripts such as VBScript in Excel or the scripting
VBScript in Excel or the scripting language that they have with Google
language that they have with Google Sheets because 99 times out of 100 it
Sheets because 99 times out of 100 it isn't necessary and it just makes things
isn't necessary and it just makes things way more complicated and I get a lot of
way more complicated and I get a lot of programming students that tend to
programming students that tend to default to writing script rather than
default to writing script rather than learning to think in spreadsheets. Um I
learning to think in spreadsheets. Um I want students to be able to think in
want students to be able to think in terms of formulas here not code. A
terms of formulas here not code. A typical case is a student who will write
typical case is a student who will write a thousandline script to implement an AI
a thousandline script to implement an AI to play a game and then I'll have to
to play a game and then I'll have to walk through it with them line by line
walk through it with them line by line to show them how to do exactly the same
to show them how to do exactly the same thing in about 50 cells instead. Greatly
thing in about 50 cells instead. Greatly condensed and way more readable. Um the
condensed and way more readable. Um the class also lends itself to multi-art
class also lends itself to multi-art projects uh that are longer term. One is
projects uh that are longer term. One is designing doing a design analysis of an
designing doing a design analysis of an existing game or part of an existing
existing game or part of an existing game. I've had students do the math to
game. I've had students do the math to derive the design thinking behind
derive the design thinking behind Hearthstone, Dominion, Netrunner, and a
Hearthstone, Dominion, Netrunner, and a number of other card games. figuring out
number of other card games. figuring out the relationship between costs and
the relationship between costs and benefits and then creating a new 5 to 10
benefits and then creating a new 5 to 10 card mini expansion for the game with
card mini expansion for the game with cards all focused on a single mechanical
cards all focused on a single mechanical theme that requires the student to
theme that requires the student to invent a new mechanic and then figure
invent a new mechanic and then figure out how much it costs. Uh this kind of
out how much it costs. Uh this kind of thing becomes particularly awesome in
thing becomes particularly awesome in cases where I happen to know the
cases where I happen to know the designer of the game that a student is
designer of the game that a student is analyzing. In a lot of uh cases,
analyzing. In a lot of uh cases, designers are particularly amused that
designers are particularly amused that their own creative work, their own
their own creative work, their own commercial work is being used as a class
commercial work is being used as a class assignment and they're usually very
assignment and they're usually very happy to be available for questions from
happy to be available for questions from students. though in my experience the
students. though in my experience the students are usually too intimidated to
students are usually too intimidated to take advantage of this. In the future
take advantage of this. In the future I'll probably organize a required Q&A or
I'll probably organize a required Q&A or something like that. Um the other
something like that. Um the other benefit is that in some cases I've been
benefit is that in some cases I've been able to actually send the student work
able to actually send the student work to the designer for consideration in
to the designer for consideration in using their expansion as part of a
using their expansion as part of a future release. Having a professional
future release. Having a professional design credit for a class project is a
design credit for a class project is a kind of holy grail for the student in my
kind of holy grail for the student in my class. It has not happened yet, but
class. It has not happened yet, but these things are slow and the
these things are slow and the possibility is there. uh for students
possibility is there. uh for students working on other games or for a
working on other games or for a different class or just on their own
different class or just on their own passion projects. Analyzing their own
passion projects. Analyzing their own games from a balance perspective and
games from a balance perspective and creating mathematical models to improve
creating mathematical models to improve the balance of their game is also a
the balance of their game is also a useful way to go about this or just give
useful way to go about this or just give them time a game to balance. I created a
them time a game to balance. I created a game called Harmony that I presented
game called Harmony that I presented before. It's a very simple TCG with just
before. It's a very simple TCG with just four mechanics and the goal is to
four mechanics and the goal is to balance those mechanics with each other.
balance those mechanics with each other. Starts off completely broken
Starts off completely broken intentionally and students have to
intentionally and students have to figure out how to uh relate these things
figure out how to uh relate these things to each other. Projects in this class
to each other. Projects in this class are super important to practice these
are super important to practice these skills on real games because it's one
skills on real games because it's one thing to say make a game as a project.
thing to say make a game as a project. It's another to say now balance that
It's another to say now balance that game. Um I've also been working over the
game. Um I've also been working over the past couple of years to document
past couple of years to document everything in this class and I now have
everything in this class and I now have the first draft manuscript for a
the first draft manuscript for a complete book. The first draft is done
complete book. The first draft is done and I will be talking to publishers here
and I will be talking to publishers here at GDC and shortly after. So if you want
at GDC and shortly after. So if you want to run a class like this and you can
to run a class like this and you can wait a year or so to get it into your
wait a year or so to get it into your curriculum, I should have a textbook
curriculum, I should have a textbook ready for you before too long. In the
ready for you before too long. In the meantime, feel free to use what's
meantime, feel free to use what's available on Game Balance Concepts, even
available on Game Balance Concepts, even if it's an earlier iteration, and feel
if it's an earlier iteration, and feel free to write me after the show if you
free to write me after the show if you have any questions about it or anything.
have any questions about it or anything. Um, thanks for listening, and now I will
Um, thanks for listening, and now I will be happy to take a couple of questions.
be happy to take a couple of questions. [Music]
[Music] [Applause]
Hi. Okay. Uh, as a game designer, I actually run into this issue a lot in
actually run into this issue a lot in that, um, I too am usually running or
that, um, I too am usually running or sorry, as a programmer, I'm usually
sorry, as a programmer, I'm usually writing a lot of code and I'm trying to
writing a lot of code and I'm trying to code my way around the things you're
code my way around the things you're talking about with the spreadsheet. It
talking about with the spreadsheet. It occurs to me that actually probably one
occurs to me that actually probably one other advantage in doing so much design
other advantage in doing so much design through the spreadsheet is it probably
through the spreadsheet is it probably creates a natural limitation as well to
creates a natural limitation as well to the scope. So does it am I correct in
the scope. So does it am I correct in that it actually probably helps to
that it actually probably helps to prevent scope creep at least on within
prevent scope creep at least on within ourselves? I I would say that probably
ourselves? I I would say that probably is true. So the question is would um
is true. So the question is would um learning to do things balance in
learning to do things balance in spreadsheets as opposed to code um you
spreadsheets as opposed to code um you know limit our limit the help to limit
know limit our limit the help to limit scope of complexity. Uh I think that's
scope of complexity. Uh I think that's definitely would be true. Um you know
definitely would be true. Um you know usually I have to usually I have to go
usually I have to usually I have to go the other direction in that uh trying to
the other direction in that uh trying to get them to stop using code in the first
get them to stop using code in the first place. Um, and just getting them to
place. Um, and just getting them to think in spreadsheets. Um, being able to
think in spreadsheets. Um, being able to think in terms of formulas, in terms of
think in terms of formulas, in terms of relationships between mathematical
relationships between mathematical things. If you've got something in, you
things. If you've got something in, you know, a uh, algorithm that's super super
know, a uh, algorithm that's super super complicated, then analyzing it is very
complicated, then analyzing it is very difficult. And if something is too
difficult. And if something is too difficult for you to analyze, then it's
difficult for you to analyze, then it's too diff then it's too complex to to be
too diff then it's too complex to to be put in the game. So, yes.
put in the game. So, yes. Hello. Um, do you ever talk about logic
Hello. Um, do you ever talk about logic and how logic can connect to balance
and how logic can connect to balance when it comes to design? Okay. Um, can
when it comes to design? Okay. Um, can you uh can you clarify what you mean by
you uh can you clarify what you mean by logic because that's a very large term,
logic because that's a very large term, right? So, um, I often uh with my
right? So, um, I often uh with my students realize that they don't
students realize that they don't understand the logic gen generally of
understand the logic gen generally of the maybe the puzzle or challenge that
the maybe the puzzle or challenge that they're putting together. And then when
they're putting together. And then when it comes to balancing that experience in
it comes to balancing that experience in the game, like what's the the difference
the game, like what's the the difference between level one and level two in the
between level one and level two in the difficulty because they're not following
difficulty because they're not following they're not they're not thinking through
they're not they're not thinking through the logical problem. They're having
the logical problem. They're having trouble just putting their head around
trouble just putting their head around what is the balance then of that player
what is the balance then of that player experience. Okay. So you're talking um
experience. Okay. So you're talking um you know do do students have difficult
you know do do students have difficult time you know do I go into game logic
time you know do I go into game logic and understanding these mechanics and
and understanding these mechanics and how they relate to each other? um you
how they relate to each other? um you know because if students don't
know because if students don't understand how the mechanics of the game
understand how the mechanics of the game work at a core level then it's kind of
work at a core level then it's kind of hard to figure out how the numbers work.
hard to figure out how the numbers work. Is that correct? Is that what you're
Is that correct? Is that what you're asking? True. But also the more sort of
asking? True. But also the more sort of formal concepts of logic like spatial
formal concepts of logic like spatial reasoning
reasoning versus you know the different types of
versus you know the different types of logic. Okay. Different types of logic in
logic. Okay. Different types of logic in the current iteration. I don't do that
the current iteration. I don't do that as if as you've noticed there's a lot
as if as you've noticed there's a lot that I am covering. Um that hasn't been
that I am covering. Um that hasn't been a problem for me in my experience. I
a problem for me in my experience. I think a lot of it helps that I'm at RIT
think a lot of it helps that I'm at RIT which has a very technical focus. So I
which has a very technical focus. So I get so students understanding some kind
get so students understanding some kind of propositional logic and you know
of propositional logic and you know lambda calculus and things like that
lambda calculus and things like that like they get exposed to that through
like they get exposed to that through their computer science classes anyway.
their computer science classes anyway. Um for a less technical group usually my
Um for a less technical group usually my biggest challenge is getting them to be
biggest challenge is getting them to be able to have the mathematical thinking
able to have the mathematical thinking to understand at a you know just an
to understand at a you know just an intuitive level how different numbers
intuitive level how different numbers affect each other. Um, and so logic
affect each other. Um, and so logic would certainly be a part of that. Um,
would certainly be a part of that. Um, but I'll take one challenge at a time.
but I'll take one challenge at a time. Okay. Yes.
Okay. Yes. Hi, I work with a lot of teenage
Hi, I work with a lot of teenage students, 13 to 7K mostly, and I was
students, 13 to 7K mostly, and I was wondering for a mini course for that age
wondering for a mini course for that age range, what concept do you think you
range, what concept do you think you would start them on? So, so this is
would start them on? So, so this is Yeah, as you've noticed, I I call this a
Yeah, as you've noticed, I I call this a math class that's cleverly disguised as
math class that's cleverly disguised as game design. That's kind of how I pitch
game design. That's kind of how I pitch it to other people here. So, the one
it to other people here. So, the one thing that I found is interesting is
thing that I found is interesting is that even though we get into some pretty
that even though we get into some pretty heavy math, because it's contextualized
heavy math, because it's contextualized in games that students already
in games that students already understand and can already play, the
understand and can already play, the math is, you know, it has meaning. Uh,
math is, you know, it has meaning. Uh, and all of a sudden, you don't really
and all of a sudden, you don't really like the prerequisite for this class in
like the prerequisite for this class in terms of what math you've encountered in
terms of what math you've encountered in the past is basically, you know, can you
the past is basically, you know, can you solve an equation, you know, from
solve an equation, you know, from algebra 1? If you know how to do that, I
algebra 1? If you know how to do that, I can scaffold everything else on top of
can scaffold everything else on top of that. I would certainly take some of the
that. I would certainly take some of the more challenging parts like linear
more challenging parts like linear algebra and you know and uh game theory
algebra and you know and uh game theory out or at least greatly simplify it or
out or at least greatly simplify it or just say you know this is something that
just say you know this is something that exists. It's a lot hard you know it's a
exists. It's a lot hard you know it's a bit harder. It's beyond the scope of
bit harder. It's beyond the scope of this course. You know this is for a uh
this course. You know this is for a uh audience of you know of of younger
audience of you know of of younger younger children and teenagers. um you
younger children and teenagers. um you know but most of this it's you know it
know but most of this it's you know it usually it's not the actual mathematical
usually it's not the actual mathematical skills and that that's the challenge it
skills and that that's the challenge it usually it's just building up the uh the
usually it's just building up the uh the mathematical reasoning and and intuitive
mathematical reasoning and and intuitive uh which do you think is actually like
uh which do you think is actually like the most important concepts or that you
the most important concepts or that you should start in like you're like okay I
should start in like you're like okay I got 10 hours of teach what are you
got 10 hours of teach what are you teaching them right so I would say for
teaching them right so I would say for yeah if if you only have 10 hours how
yeah if if you only have 10 hours how how would I you know pick the most uh
how would I you know pick the most uh important concepts in this class And
important concepts in this class And that's a good question. I I would say I
that's a good question. I I would say I would go
would go through, you know, the I would go
through, you know, the I would go through numeric relationships and I
through numeric relationships and I would go through the balance of TCGs
would go through the balance of TCGs just because it's, you know, it's very
just because it's, you know, it's very pure. It's very related to like algebra.
pure. It's very related to like algebra. Um, so so it kind of builds on those
Um, so so it kind of builds on those skills that are probably going to be age
skills that are probably going to be age appropriate at that range. It and and
appropriate at that range. It and and you know, and it lets you, you know, and
you know, and it lets you, you know, and it relates it to games that that a lot
it relates it to games that that a lot of them are playing right now already.
of them are playing right now already. So, thanks. That was helpful. Okay. And
So, thanks. That was helpful. Okay. And I'm not sure if people are going to boot
I'm not sure if people are going to boot us out, but I'll keep answering
us out, but I'll keep answering questions until someone tells me to
questions until someone tells me to stop.
stop. Uh, I have two questions. The f first
Uh, I have two questions. The f first simple, how long, how many hours for of
simple, how long, how many hours for of course and how many hours for the
course and how many hours for the students represent the course and at
students represent the course and at which level is given this course. And
which level is given this course. And the second question is uh we have quite
the second question is uh we have quite similar course but we have taken the
similar course but we have taken the point of view that you can uh explain
point of view that you can uh explain everything taking the point of view of
everything taking the point of view of game theory. If you want to go you make
game theory. If you want to go you make games against the nature to introduce
games against the nature to introduce probability and you can choose game
probability and you can choose game negotiation to explain other topics.
negotiation to explain other topics. What do you think about this point of
What do you think about this point of view? because I understood that you
view? because I understood that you you're taking game theory only only at
you're taking game theory only only at the end for non non-transitive choice
the end for non non-transitive choice system. Yeah. So um so so let me repeat
system. Yeah. So um so so let me repeat that back because I I'm not sure I quite
that back because I I'm not sure I quite got that. So the first question is just
got that. So the first question is just um you know how how long does this take?
um you know how how long does this take? Like how how many hours this is uh in
Like how how many hours this is uh in its current incarnation it's a three
its current incarnation it's a three credit hour class over 15 weeks. Um you
credit hour class over 15 weeks. Um you know there are certainly things in there
know there are certainly things in there that I could cut if I had to take it
that I could cut if I had to take it down to 10. Um you know for the um and
down to 10. Um you know for the um and for the second question you were asking
for the second question you were asking about the second question is uh uh in
about the second question is uh uh in the course we are given the whole the
the course we are given the whole the whole contents that you have given is uh
whole contents that you have given is uh is taken as different point of view from
is taken as different point of view from game theory for example if you when we
game theory for example if you when we introduce probability we introduce
introduce probability we introduce probability as games against the nature
probability as games against the nature and thing like that. So my question
and thing like that. So my question would you introduce game theory only at
would you introduce game theory only at the end? Okay. So yeah the reason I do
the end? Okay. So yeah the reason I do game theory at the end is is partly
game theory at the end is is partly because it ties together a lot of other
because it ties together a lot of other things we've been doing in there. So it
things we've been doing in there. So it kind of requires you to understand a
kind of requires you to understand a little bit about probability a little
little bit about probability a little bit about transitive mechanics and how
bit about transitive mechanics and how they relate to things. Um you know
they relate to things. Um you know there's there's all these you a little
there's there's all these you a little bit about human psychology and just the
bit about human psychology and just the idea that you know we can try to mo like
idea that you know we can try to mo like that human brains aren't always
that human brains aren't always mathematical. uh you know and and
mathematical. uh you know and and bringing all you know and also just uh
bringing all you know and also just uh encountering things like matrices and
encountering things like matrices and matrix multiplication in uh when when we
matrix multiplication in uh when when we talked about marov chains um so all
talked about marov chains um so all those things kind of are prerequisites
those things kind of are prerequisites that lead up to this that's part of the
that lead up to this that's part of the reason why it's at the end of the course
reason why it's at the end of the course that I talk about uh game theory the the
that I talk about uh game theory the the other side of this is yeah I mean like I
other side of this is yeah I mean like I said it's it's not something that's
said it's it's not something that's widely used in the field as a tool and
widely used in the field as a tool and you know and it certainly has a lot of
you know and it certainly has a lot of limitations to it um I just think it's
limitations to it um I just think it's kind of neat and and certainly You're
kind of neat and and certainly You're you're absolutely right though that you
you're absolutely right though that you know even game theory doesn't always
know even game theory doesn't always predict human behavior and that that is
predict human behavior and that that is worth mentioning in that section. Um
worth mentioning in that section. Um that certain and I do mention that if
that certain and I do mention that if you're once your games get sufficiently
you're once your games get sufficiently complicated where you need game theory
complicated where you need game theory in order to you know figure out things
in order to you know figure out things and you're working at things on multiple
and you're working at things on multiple levels uh it's probably too complicated
levels uh it's probably too complicated for someone to actually solve it
for someone to actually solve it intuitively anyway and player behavior
intuitively anyway and player behavior is going to diverge from optimal math.
is going to diverge from optimal math. But you could at least use that to write
But you could at least use that to write a good AI. So, okay. Thank you.
a good AI. So, okay. Thank you. Okay. And I'm being told to stop. So,
Okay. And I'm being told to stop. So, thank you all.
thank you all. [Applause]