Welcome everyone.
Uh I appreciate you coming. Uh especially on a Friday
at this time.
No people are, are leaving uh and appreciate the people who are here.
I have a lot to cover,
but
I gave this talk a similar talk to this in 2019.
And the reason I want to give this again because a lot
of the landscape has changed since 2019 in the game business.
And so I want to go over some other things that I,
that I think you need to have some other tool sets you need to look at
uh when you want to uh when you get into the game industry,
how many people are in the game industry now?
Excellent. How many people are looking to get into the game industry?
OK. Good, good. Um
What I'm gonna do in, in this presentation
is first, I've been in the gays business for 30 years, almost 30 years now
and it's been a fantastic journey for me.
Uh So everything I say here, there's maybe some,
I wouldn't say negative,
but I wanna have eye opening discussion with you guys
and what it is like to be a game developer
and how to survive in this business because it's, it's somewhat tough,
especially if you've seen what happened recently.
Um
I started um
uh three studios uh and I'm now on my fourth one. I, I'd started a Sony Studio
Indy that later got into Bio
Austin and to uh Bethesda studio, Battle Cry,
then later became Bethesda Game Studios.
And then my last studio, which I'm doing now
is called T Minus Zero.
So I have a lot of experience about
not only working because I work for Sony Electronic Arts and Bethesda.
And it gave me a great understanding of what the game industry is, is like to work in,
especially as long as I have.
So I want to share and give back
today. We're just gonna go over what I call the reality check.
Just kind of give you an idea of you, especially people who are into this,
who are getting into this business, what you're getting into.
Uh And then I'm gonna talk about something I think is very relevant today
is how to survive a layoff because I think that's part of it.
Now, the 1st 15 minutes we dedicated to that,
the next big part of the presentation will be how to fit in.
You're either going to start working for a new company or
you're uh
at a new comp uh or you are a new person going into a uh a new studio and then
how to be successful.
Like how do you grow your career while you're in the gaming industry
and then we'll have a Q and A session.
Um
The reality check here in this section will be,
is kind of like giving everyone who's wanting to get into this business.
A little eye opener of what it's like to be a game developer
before I go into that part of it.
I want to say that I had the best experience in my life being a game developer.
I love building games, people play,
I like seeing people play my games.
I love hearing people sometimes talk about my games. Um
There's always there uh to deal with the community.
But
one of the biggest things that I learned is there's nothing like this moment
is when you walk out a New Yorker,
uh I was born in New York.
You walk down Times Square and see your game in lights.
That is an amazing, amazing feeling
and that's what makes it all worth it. To be honest with you.
When you see it on the shelf here, people talk about it on the Amazon reviews,
talk about it in, in, in uh in your forms and discord
and you are part of it.
That's what makes this industry great.
That's the great highlights of this industry to me is being, launching a product
and I wouldn't trade it for the world.
But one thing I will say to you that is a true
in our business is change is inevitable.
We are on a platform that changes all the time,
whether it's console mobile social Vrar, whatever you wanna talk, it,
it's changing
all the time.
So we don't have a constant base like film or video
does like series. We, our technology behind us is changing, allowing us
having more incredible abilities to build great player experiences.
But again, because of that change,
there's always uh when change occurs,
there's always things you change management that you have to go through, right?
And so you got a bit used to that this is not a stable business.
So if you want stability, I wouldn't come to this to, to be a game developer.
One of the biggest things about
when you first come on board to a game company,
there is very little on boarding that goes on the very basics, onboarding goes on.
In most companies, they kind of tell you where you're,
where you, what you're gonna do, the the they give you a handbook to read,
they tell you, you know how to log into your account from an it perspective,
how to get your equipment and things like that.
Very little training goes on in our business,
very little mentoring.
And if the mentoring is done, it's not done very, very well.
I mean, there are instances of studios doing a better job with this, but in general,
my experience, it has been lacking career counseling is almost non-existent
why I put a steer, why I put a ship wheel on this.
It's up to you to steer yourself in this industry.
You have to be a self starter. If you want to be in this industry and survive,
you have to guide yourself
and
steer yourself to what you wanna do, what you're passionate about. By the way,
the other thing about this industry is it's very stressful
and
lots of things can happen in the street that makes it stressful.
Uh You have deadlines to meet sometimes and
this has happened many times in our industry,
you're crunched
to make those deadlines and sometimes those deadlines aren't very realistic.
They cause trouble with your family life. Uh A lot of my friends who have were married
are divorced. I'd say about 70% of my people I know uh
coworkers and things like that have been divorced through game development.
It's just the reality, things are getting better. Uh
quality of life balance of life,
work, life balance is the big thing.
It's something that I would say every if you're going to look for a job or
uh at a studio,
make sure that they have a good work life balance. They're not constantly crunching
and a lot of studios do that even today.
Uh It's tough, it's tough on you. It's tough on your family.
One of the things that I always found very interesting
in our business is this is the food chain,
so to speak,
when
anything happens, usually the execs are the last to leave. Engineers are the second
designers and then so on Q A is always at the bottom,
which by the way bothers me,
Q A is so important, but it's always treated
as a second class citizen in a lot of companies.
And unfortunately,
and
what bothers me more than anything of this list is designers
aren't treated as the number one thing
that a company should always try to keep
maintain
and pretty much
do anything
to not have them leave. Designers are the reason why games are fun.
They are the fun, they are the engagement, they are the player experience people,
but yet they're not seen in the hierarchy,
their third tier, which really blows my mind.
Now,
the good news is, is a lot of that is changing recently
where I think publishers
and
studios realize that without a fun game, you can't sell anything, right. So
I say in the past 5 to 6 years, that's kind of changed,
but it still sort of still exists this way in a lot of
a lot of publishing, a lot of companies.
The other thing is
I looked at forming these studios.
I the, the uh Bioware Austin studio, we had 450 people.
Um I got to see a lot of resumes growing these studios from seven people
to 450 people and from 7 to 100 and 25 7 to 100 and 25.
Uh I've seen a lot of resumes come through.
What I've seen is basically the lifespan of a developer
is about three years at a company
and generally, you have 90% chance of being laid off.
Um In five years.
This leads to the state of industry today. After the pandemic,
the state of industry today,
as you've seen with the massive layoffs that have
happened in 23 and 24 is a market adjustment.
Basically, what happened in the studios had this huge boom during this uh pandemic,
hired, hired, hired, hired or crazy
uh investors came in and started building studios
and hiring people away from the publishers.
And so there's a resource shortage that happened during the pandemic.
And what happened was
salaries increase
exponentially.
And what that caused is our burn rate go up by 40% since 2020
average,
that's huge.
And if you're looking at products that take 3 to 5 years to build,
that's a lot of money.
And so I call it pandemic bloat.
And so what's happening now is that's unrealistic to think
that sales and everything else is gonna continue like that.
Even though the game industry had a good year. Last year,
the issue is they have a massive burn rate that they have to hold.
So that what the easiest thing to do in a lot of companies
will lay off hiring them cheaper later.
And so that is what's going on in the state of industry today.
It's just adjusting itself.
It will get back to 2019 very shortly
and start growing again.
So this is a temporary blip
now because of what happened.
I and because of that 90% probability I really
wanted to go into how to survive a layoff
because
again, majority of anybody here, the likelihood of being laid off is very high.
One of the things I always talk about
is be kind to yourself.
It is very important to not blame yourself for why you're getting laid off.
A lot of times it's out of your control.
So
realize that be kind to yourself, take a break, chill out
and figure out what your next steps are.
Don't be a victim.
That's the worst thing you can do in our business.
By the way, if you ever come and interview with anybody and you badmouth
your former, a former employer, you're pretty much done
guaranteed.
Don't blame it on the always look forward by the way, once you get laid off,
don't look pa
only what happened in the past, look forward in figuring out what's your next
thing that you wanna do? What's your next journey gonna be like? It's my advice.
The other big advice that I always tell people is take time
to unpack your baggage from your because you're a lot of people run
100 miles an hour in another company and suddenly you're at zero,
you're still
ca calculating what, what happened, why it happened
and you have all these preconceived notions or what I call ptsd
from other companies that affect you in your next company. They do, trust me.
I've been there
and sometimes I have to tell myself, oh, I, I,
it's not gonna happen that way, but there's something in the back of my head
where I'm cautiously optimistic that
it will happen in a positive way.
But there's something in the back of my head that pauses me and makes me
take time to make a decision where I shouldn't have to worry about that.
But again, unpack your baggage,
take time to find the right job.
What I tell people to do is go
Google
glass door.
Look at your companies,
you want to go to look at the bios of the people that run your company,
talk to people in the industry, always look for people to help you. By the way,
don't be afraid to ask your colleagues for advice
is
be cautious about that. And by the way it, you can get very panicky. Trust me.
I've been there myself where my runway is running out very soon. You have a family,
you know, this gets really hairy
but really take your time because,
uh, sometimes, uh, you don't want to get in a worse situation than you were before.
Again,
look for avenues to get help. I always tell people to go talk to your colleagues,
go talk to people you've networked in or go to G DC and network and talk to people
and figure out
what your next direction is going to be. Your next adventure.
Update your resume.
Keep it simple short concise.
Have an executive summary of your skills and, and little G gray
that you've done in the beginning of very first thing you put on your
resume so people can look at it and get a quick glance at you
because there's thousands of re uh hundreds of resumes.
People are looking at you want yours to stand out
when you, this is the most important thing when you interview people,
when you interview, feel confident
don't have uh your,
your posture or the way you communicate through your
body language is so critical during an interview,
even
if you're on Zoom
or teams,
uh you really need to be confident,
be passionate. This is a real important one about what they do, do your research
about the company you're talking to and the people you're gonna be talking to.
They like that.
By the way, I found lots of people who didn't, who interviewed with,
with me and didn't understand our core values.
Oh OK.
Then you didn't really
uh look at us very well. So
that kind of effort
and be comfortable with being questioned. By the way, some people get very nervous,
go have a friend practice with you.
Trust me, it's worth it. And by the way, this is something
that I always tell people is
when you look at who you're going to interview with. Stack, rank them
and do the and do the first one,
try to do the first one you don't really care about first.
It's an awful thing to say and it's being recorded too. Um
But
do the first one
that you really don't care about first so that you don't blow the one you really want
in the third lineup really is what I do practice interviewing
and what I always tell people to do, even if you're employed
go out and, and search around.
Sometimes it's actually not a bad thing to do for opportunities,
especially if you know, there could be someone, for example,
if a head a recruiter comes into you and says we have
this fantastic opportunity that you may not have at your current company,
we love to interview for it. Go do it.
That's what I tell people go do it.
It's worth just exploring
to see number one, what your value is
and
you know what the opportunity is,
it may be uh something that you would never get at your current employer, right?
One of the things that I think is very important,
they always tie this to severance or anything
else they giving you extra beside besides your
your normal payroll that they have to pay out by law,
get a labor lawyer
to look at it before you sign it.
They give you, I think 20 days or something like that to
uh, have it reviewed. Please take the time to do that. It's well worth it.
A lot of times when I do that, I actually get, I've been laid off twice, by the way,
I actually get better terms.
So it's my advice to everyone is to do that.
Cobra. Please take Cobra.
If you Cobra is insurance, health insurance, if you get laid off,
please take Cobra right away.
They say, well, you got two months.
The problem is, is when your insurance lapse at the end of the month, it's done.
You can't use that insurance anymore.
Even though they say that you pretty much most,
uh, most doctors won't accept anything but cash until you get your, uh,
until you get COVID set up.
So it takes,
it takes a couple of weeks to do so I do it immediately while you still have insurance.
Um,
another thing is don't get discouraged.
Look at where you are, look at where you're going.
Don't get discouraged because it is tough out there right now.
Uh, and my advice is to keep a positive attitude as,
as you move forward cause people can attack that.
Now,
I'm gonna talk about
how to fit in. Let's say you got a new job,
let's say you're new to the industry,
um,
or you're new to a new role within
a uh cause as you change your role, by the way,
uh and grow in a company,
you have to learn how to fit into the second tier.
If you have a three or tier system, like execs
mid management
and
the people who do the work, you may get to the second tier,
that's a whole different ball game
or the fir even the going to the first tier is a different ball game.
It takes a different types of sets of things to fit in.
So
one of the things is determine
the type of environment you're working in,
whether it's in office hybrid or uh remote,
they both all have different requirements for fitting in, right?
Um
What I mean by that is if you're in a remote first studio,
then you're gonna have to put more effort
into communicating than you have done before.
Same thing with a little bit of hybrid too.
Uh And how you present yourself, how you're being more proactive.
So
the other thing about culture is someone's top down
that you worked at. I mean, everything comes from the top,
then some
bottoms up
and some are kind of in between, right? But
the key is if it's top down,
then you understand, if you question somebody, you have to do it diplomatically,
right?
And you have to work cautiously for a political environment.
If it's bottoms up, that's a little bit more freedom, a little bit more openness,
a little bit more things to talk about.
So you have to be careful about that from a culture point of view.
Um
There are different companies that are creative
and different companies that are tech driven.
Now.
Creatives are great company. Creatives like Blizzard,
uh tech driven companies are more like epic,
right?
So
depending on the type of company you are,
is the type of per uh a personality you wanna fit in,
whether you're a tech person or a creative person,
you know, creative persons do well at tech companies, right?
It's just that they're more tech focused.
So they're they,
they hold tech as a higher priority than the creative side sometimes.
Now,
why is this important?
It's called DNA matching.
So if you don't do that, excuse me,
what happens is you are swimming upstream all the time.
So if you adapt
or not
and if you don't fit into companies,
you don't become a positive, become a negative,
what things will happen? Trust me.
A if you're seen as a negative person,
that means you're not able because you, you just don't understand how things work.
You're not flourishing well in that environment, maybe you,
you just got promoted and you're not doing very well.
Sometimes people will help you out,
hopefully that you work in an environment that will
and so
and you become a negative,
you don't ever want to do that because what will happen
is either you adapt or you leave on your own or by
uh being fired
usually.
So
this is the most important section is tips of being successful.
One of the biggest things I think that's important
uh that
I have to talk about is
hard. Skills are easy. Uh When I say this, most people come in,
they understand what they have to do from a, from a programmer, from an artist.
They have those skill sets.
But one of the things that's always lacking in my opinion,
you always look at people, how did that person
get to where they are
when he really doesn't know how to do this certain thing very well, right?
Is because they have very good soft skills
and
soft skills, believe it or not.
And when you get evaluated and, and not just hard skills,
but soft skills are actually important, especially for
in today's world where I if remote or hybrid situation exists,
it's really how you communicate,
how you uh proceed forward.
How uh if you're a self starter, all this stuff is very important and,
and more valuable,
of course, hard skills are important. They assume you have that
it's valuable in a sense of growing, right? This is how you grow in a company.
If you're really good at what you do, that's fantastic.
But if you have fantastic soft skills on top of that,
you grow much faster than an organization that I found out.
Now.
What does it mean by that you'll be dealing with a lot of different personalities
in our
uh
in the workplace. We have a very creative industry with very
creative quirky people.
Uh You will work with many different types
from people who have large egos to people who
uh are, are very introverted to uh people who are not introverted, extroverted.
So you have to learn how to get along
with your, your teammates, right?
And so one of the biggest things in soft skills that I talk about all the time
is called emotional intelligence.
It is really critical
as you've seen here to be self aware
of
who you are, how you treat people.
Understanding that when you screw up, you understand when you screw up
that when you talk to someone, you could see it through their lens, right?
And so we'll talk a little bit about each one of these
sections that I break off when I talk about emotional intelligence because
this to me is really important if you want to
be successful in your career at a game company,
if you have really good emotional intelligence, real,
I've seen people accelerate very quickly.
Adaptability is one of them,
right?
Um
Accepting change
don't complain about it.
Here. It is,
figure out how you're moving forward.
You understand, this is, this is a good example,
is a lot of times designed when you're designing a game, you pivot
because cer certain things don't work the way you want
some of the things that you worked on, get thrown out, put on the floor,
just like any good uh uh film that gets edited your ton on the floor,
right?
And so
you have to be
willing to accept that your baby is on the floor now
and they're moving on.
And so
that's important to have that,
that ability to understand that things do change in our business
being collaborative.
So not being a lone wolf
is really important.
Don't be in your shell
un introverted a little bit, believe it or not. I am
and I had to pull myself out of that.
And
collaboration is about communications. It's about working with others.
Well, work with your people. Well, and again, because you have different
quirkiness in our industry of people you're working with,
you have to learn how to meet halfway.
You have to learn how to see through their lens,
you have to learn how to work with them.
And that could be challenging. At times,
some people can rub you the wrong way
just because
they're seen as embrace it.
And sometimes when I get to embrace a person, I talk to them,
hopefully they become self-aware.
If they don't, then that's where your manager comes in, right?
And you talk to them about that.
It's important, right? For your team, your team is dysfunctional.
Your game won't do well,
I, I dealt with a lot of very talented people
that have large egos
and are not self aware.
Those are very destructive people and they are really hard to deal with.
You will have those people when you're working for a company one time or another.
Humility is good. Being, self aware is awesome.
I don't mind someone with a big ego if they are self-aware,
meaning that they understand.
Oh, you're right. I did that.
That wasn't great.
OK, I'll change my behavior,
meaning that gives them the ability to change their behavior.
So
if you're that way, humble pie is awesome. As I say in this business,
if you have that ability and not become uh you know, your ego stroked uh and have it,
have people receive you as a large ego. That's
not a good thing in our business.
Confidence is good by the way.
And I try, I that's why my next slide is confidence is good.
It's always good to be confidence to high confidence,
but you have to balance that out sometimes, right?
Except that other people have really good ideas. Everyone can contribute.
That's really important.
This is one I think that's most important for me
communications
and
communications
is the ability to understand listening here
and be able to
talk to this individual
and communicate,
correspond with this person
in a very
compassionate
and concise manner, right?
So
being concise
is really, really important. I I've seen
people meander all over the place. We all know them.
We all probably work with them, they can't ever get to the point
and you lose people's attention.
And so what the most important thing I can
recommend everyone is learning how to be concise,
learning how to focus.
Because if you do that,
people will really appreciate that
and see that and you will grow
in your company.
One of the other big things um
that I think is important
this nonverbal communications that we talked about.
I, I talked a little bit about her.
They speak loudly.
You can see people when they're pissed on teams, you can see people slumped down,
you can see people not pay attention because they're multitasking.
Um because you see their eyes going all over the place
and you know, they're most multitasking, right? Everyone does.
Um
this non verbal communications,
we hit you hard.
And so it's very important to learn how to neutralize that form
a body language to become a positive.
And by the way,
trust me, I've,
I have been in many meetings where I've experienced what I call wtf moments
and I wanted to reach out and slap someone really hard
with my hand and I didn't,
I just held it in
neutralized it,
it's like anything.
It's like you never
are. When you're angry, you want to send an IM or an email until you calm down, right?
So
it's really important for body language while you're talking,
especially if you are hosting the meeting to make sure
that you neutralize that as much as possible. That helps a lot. That's a soft skill.
It's really important, especially because again,
you work with a very opinionated,
green developers are very opinionated.
And so you need to understand how to see their through their lens
and how to neutralize your body language.
One of the biggest things I will tell you is, um,
I've had um
different types of managers. I've had
introverted managers, uh extroverted managers,
extroverted managers are easy to work with because they're,
they're always coming at, you can always, they always talk to you,
they always come and ask you how you're doing.
Introverted managers. By the way, are people that
uh don't come to you all the time?
Don't give you a really good uh counseling or mentoring, right?
These are the people you want to try to pull out introverted people are awesome.
They just don't want to confront the
introverted people don't like situations where stress
and conflict can occur.
And so the best way to deal with introverted people
is to, to im them
uh
go out one on one with them, try to get to know them.
Um
But
these are the type of people you will be dealing with.
Now, I've dealt with managers that are extremely rational,
really precise, very data driven,
very much.
Let's get to the problem. I've also dealt with the opposite
when you uh as a, as a, a person,
whether you're in management track or individual contributed.
If you're very emotional,
people don't want to talk to you.
People pull back from you.
Now, there's passion, passion is great, there's emotion which is different.
Um And so it's really important to make sure
passion is good.
But when you come very upset or very emotional,
it really pulls and then you don't think well, when you're emotional,
people see that
it doesn't reflect well on you, right?
If you're dealing with a manager, manager type, that's very emotional. I have
what I always try to do is diffuse it with asking a question.
Why
do you say that?
What, what are you trying to get at? What's your goal? Right.
That diffuses it
and then it pulls that person back from being emotional sometimes,
uh sometimes they're very pissed because you missed a deadline.
Uh Things aren't working out well on your team,
you ask for advice, right?
You try to pull,
you try to turn that negative feeling that emotional person has into a positive
and that takes some diplomacy by the way to do,
I've had a very emotional bosses
that
made my life a living hell at companies before.
And sometimes you, they, they do get to the point where you,
you can't deal with it anymore.
It's not worth the mental health.
By the way, if you're dealing with a manager that's very emotional
and very aggressive towards you,
that's almost harassment.
And so I always pull back
and say this is not worth it
and look elsewhere.
Uh But I would, before I do that always kind of work. I'm not a quitter.
I always try to work rational. People are awesome.
Uh They're the best managers I've ever worked with.
But again,
there's also a point of being too rational
where they don't have the empathy side of things
I've dealt with before
and that's where you kinda help with that, right? Cause
sometimes people are very short with you and you take that personally, don't,
that's someone very logical, very,
very much to the point. It's not personal, a lot of times, right?
So that, that's something you have to realize in the game business,
you will deal with
self management.
Self management is, is what I talked about earlier.
It's about self-control and self-regulation, right?
That's what self management is.
Um
It's a, it's a your ability to regulate your emotions.
It's really important to have self management.
There will be many times in history
where I almost wanted, like I wanted to scream
where I've seen things like happen.
Like I, I still can't believe happened in front of me in this games with
I, I still say, did that person really just say that?
Uh Yeah,
and
I'm just blown away
but I, I have to control myself.
There are people
in a team meeting
in a company meeting who don't have very good self management and ask
those difficult questions that he didn't he or she didn't want to be asked
and you can see immediately putting that person on the spotlight,
has just had their expiration date moved up.
Um, is what happens when you're in that situation.
Um, but it's really important to regulate that
and
again,
regulate it in a productive way,
ask questions, diffuse it. Right.
Let's talk about that.
But you know,
the one way to diffuse it at your moderator com uh moderating a teams meeting.
Let's talk about that offline. Great point.
Let's just move that offline out of the meeting. That's, that's very helpful.
Again,
self management
is very important to have as an emotional IQ part
of the emotional IQ part of being successful in our,
social awareness. Boy, this is really good.
Um
The ability to this is where the, the, the really uh the um
the logical
manager, you know,
goes into where I told you about.
Sometimes they don't have social awareness, the empathy part, right?
It's really important to empathize with others and your group,
your coworkers or whatever.
Um
A again,
understanding diverse backgrounds,
understanding people's preferences and not letting it get to you.
I have had many situations where people were put in,
they felt like they're being harassed because of their,
their decisions they've made in, in, in life, right? And then again,
having an,
you'll have many, you'll face this in our industry,
we're an entertainment industry
and so you'll deface diversity in our industry and the best way it is,
make it sure it's a comfortable environment for everyone and be part of that
culture, not a boys club culture.
That's what you don't want to do.
We have way too many white males in our business.
It's time to accept diversity in our business.
Relationship management is a really important one as well.
Now, what is relationship management?
Uh uh You know,
basically it's your ability to build long term long
lasting relationships with your coworkers.
still talk to people. I worked with 2025 years ago. Now.
It's only a handful because most people got
sane and went outside the games business.
But
I still talk to people
because I formed that long lasting relationship
with them.
Networking here is part of that, right? Go out meet people.
Uh, I sit at, uh, for example, Mel's and I meet something interesting.
Every breakfast that I sit alone in.
Mel's, someone comes up, we start talking and it's like, holy crap.
I didn't know I work with that group too.
And
so you have a conversation now, you have a friend, right?
I met so many good people like that in this industry over the years
at G DC just by going to a bar or sitting at a,
at Mel's in a diner
and they sit by you and you just talk, that
is really important even at work, by the way,
looking at building relationships with your coworkers are are important.
Again, one other thing about relationship management is trust.
This is why you see this big graphic here, someone helping someone out,
you always do the trust thing where you stand
behind someone and ask them to fall backwards,
right?
Implicit trust is important.
Understand you're trusting your coworkers to do your job
if you're a manager, trust but verify,
don't over manage someone micromanage someone,
right?
These are, this is a very important,
that part of the relationship management is very important in my opinion.
Uh As you grow into, let's say, an individual computer to a manager.
One of the hardest thing for a manager to
do who was an individual contributor is to let go
really hard to do.
But you have to trust the people around you to do your job,
that's key. If you don't trust your people
that they will not make decisions for you,
they will no longer make decisions, they will no longer take responsibility,
they'll, they'll have you make all the decisions.
It's something you don't want to do. It's a team effort to build these things.
It's very important to have that ability.
Why is this important?
Well, it's real easy
because
when you get reviewed,
they look at your hard skills, how you're doing, how you meet your, um that's very,
very important, how you get your work done, right?
But one of the things if you wanna grow in a company,
because they expect that at your level you're
getting hired or promoted at your level.
That's what they expect a hard school.
What they want to see also is how you're fitting in.
How are, how you play well with others. Right.
Um,
and it's, it affects your rating
and if people who aren't
that way,
guess what happens,
they get targeted.
Every layoff that major companies have like Sony or bungee or anything,
they're stack ranked, you're stack ranked with others.
So when they do layoffs, that's what happens.
So if you're not high in that layoff scheme, uh in that stack ranking scheme
and they have to let go of certain people, you will likely be targeted.
So it's something to always think about
uh why the soft skills I mentioned are important
because
you're going to have a lot of these moments,
trust me on this,
I've had many of them
and continue to have them.
Uh I don't, and again, one of the things about working in this business,
I expect one a year or a couple more, couple of year to happen.
Right.
It's just,
it just that we're in the entertainment business. It's crazy business.
And always ii I find myself in the
Am I in the Twilight zone or something just happened.
I thought it would never happen.
But
it, it does
um
which, you know, again, it's about managing stress,
managing emotion,
uh managing yourself being kind to yourself, right?
Understanding when to take a break.
There are people I know who don't want to go home and work all the time.
I push them home.
I make them go leave work. I make them stop thinking about it.
It's not good for your mental health.
Mental health is your mental health in this business is important.
It's up to you guys to treat it that way
because this industry can be tough.
And so mental health is something. Always keep on your mind. It's important to you.
It's important to you to succeed.
Don't get caught up into what I call an emotional death spiral.
It's not worth it.
It really isn't.
Life's too short.
Why, why, how I do this?
I always,
I don't look backwards.
I look forwards
when something happens to me.
I say, OK,
it's happened
now. How do I move forward? How do I get out of it? How, how do I
move forward,
out of this situation?
Because
looking forward helps you set the next adventure that you're going on, right?
It's a great way to focus on moving
this way
versus always thinking about
what they did to you in the past.
You can get consumed by that. It's very, very easy to do
and result of this,
you'll be a happy employee.
You'll grow.
If you take these soft skills, I talked to you about,
you grow in your, in, in your career,
in the game industry, you'll fit in
and you may not be targeted for the first round of layoffs.
If there, if it's not closing a studio down,
that's a different situation.
These are some good books
I recommend
people look at and read.
Um,
there,
there's lots of very good, uh, soft skill books out there.
I don't really focus on the hard skills. I assume everyone has them.
Um,
I, if they're doing their jobs right.
That's what I recommend. You, you look at
um
this, this will be,
this will be on the vault by the way later. So you can get that.
Uh it's being recorded as well.
So I'm gonna go into uh give us some time to ask some questions.
So who wants to ask questions?
Anybody?
Good.
Turn on, hold on.
He's getting it in the second.
There you go.
Hello?
Thank you.
Uh Thank you for the talk. Really good talk.
Uh You said a lot about soft skills. Yes. Uh I'm really happy about it because uh
I agree with you. It's a very important thing.
I've worked with hard people and it's really hard to
uh manage when you work with uh bad soft skills teammates.
But I have a question
uh in as someone who has already interviewed people and I
think you
have been through lots of interviews too.
Uh How do you show off soft skills uh when you're trying to get to a company?
Because like we don't have many opportunities to do. So it's just like an interview,
a coding test
and something like that.
-- How do you show off the soft -- skills when
you show off your soft skills in interviewing?
Right.
Uh And you talk about, uh, you know, they'll give a lot of times,
depending if you're being a manager or a,
an individual contributor will ask you questions.
Well, how do you deal with this situation?
Right.
I do scenarios
what my job is not to test the hard skills. My job is to see if they'll fit in
right at my level.
So they'll, I,
I'll ask a lot of questions to try to figure out what your soft skills are, right?
How do you handle something
that's important?
All right. Yeah, but, but you're right, there's no uh
references are a good one, right?
Uh That's, that's where it'll come through.
All right. Thank you. Sure.
Hey, I was wondering um,
so you talked about layoffs and you talked about in the
game industry and I know for a lot of people here,
if we're not in the game industry, we're still gonna be in the tech industry.
You said there's a 90% chance of getting laid off in
your first five years getting laid off at least once.
-- Is that just in the gaming sphere or is that applied to the entire tech -- industry?
No, that's, that's my experience in the gaming career.
Just looking at all the resumes. I've looked at the average life span is three years.
Ok,
thank you.
Yeah.
Anybody else?
Anybody else go?
Sorry. Uh uh Hi. Thanks for the talk. I joined a bit later.
The question is, is it possible, um, kind of to anticipate and predict
like, not this, the recent layoffs, which is like market conditions.
But you know, like you're working in the company, you're doing it,
like the job, you're getting feedback and you, like,
you're feeling that you're doing it all right.
But maybe there is like some red flags on the like management level,
how they do presentations, what they're talking about,
like either like a way to kind of feel that
like the company is going in the wrong direction and
awesome.
So he's asking, is there any way to, to kind of be the canary in the, in the coal mine,
so to speak and basically to predicting when something is going to happen.
One of the things I look for when,
when I see is when I see a road show coming in with
a lot of uh upper level execs coming to look at your company,
look at your project
and they, and they talk about, you know, how good things are, but they,
they say we don't, we see you as family.
There's no family here, by the way. Um
That's a red flag to me
when you talk about not doing any layoffs.
That's a red flag to me that you can never promise someone not doing a red flag.
But if, if you look at where insurance starts to get cut,
like you get worse insurance than you have or they don't do any more for
your benefits, start getting worse. That's a real big sign.
Uh, that things are not doing well. Um,
you know,
they're just little subtle things you have to look for like I do. Right.
How you see, do you see the, uh, your, the management always stressed,
always having a bunch of closed door meetings, right?
That's usually a good indicator too. By the way,
do you advise to ask any question?
Like when you start seeing something like that,
do you advise to ask like your manager or director or someone,
some hard questions at this time?
You, you, you can
uh but the problem is a lot of them
really can't answer if they answer the questions in a way
that you feel like they are not quite answering the questions.
That's a good one too.
That's a real good one.
So they don't come direct answers, but they try to
camouflage what's going on or make it feel great then you, that's a red flag.
Thank you.
So I was just wondering, um,
ok,
let's say you have a role or you just got hired into a role and you talked a lot about,
you know, the likelihood of being laid off.
Do you recommend applying
while you're employed? Just at other companies up?
There are opportunities And if so how long into a new role
would you say you would wait before you start doing that?
Because the
in a
new role I would, I'm, I'm not a quitter personally.
I don't really like leaving companies and alerts,
especially if they invested time in me and things like that.
I'm pretty dedicated like that.
But when I see things like,
ok, insurance,
is there a lot of closed door meetings when I asked those hard questions?
They're trying to avoid the answers to it, right?
That to me is an indicator that
my spot senses go up and say I may be employed soon, unemployed, right?
So I'm gonna start looking now
if someone calls you out of the blue,
like like a a recruiter and offers an opportunity that you have.
That's amazing, right? That, that you would
that US U started this job maybe a year ago and there's an
amazing opportunity then that's up to you to decide what you wanna do,
but never,
here's what I'm gonna say.
Don't hurt your employer, right? Ask for, hey,
I'm looking at this other opportunity. It's really great.
Um You know, at that point, you, you better have um serious
uh ability to have an offer letter to do that, right?
But
um I would just, just be frank that you don't want to leave in a lurch, right?
So you offer to have a start date that's more
extended so you can help them make a transition.
So don't burn your bridges is what I get.
There's one degree separation in our business,
by the way, I found that out myself,
uh, when I applied somewhere else and that person was working there, I said, oh,
great.
Uh, oh, I know. I, I didn't get in.
So,
yeah, it's just really be very careful about that.
Thank you.
Yeah.
Uh What are some ways to build up relationship when you're working remotely
with? That's an awesome question.
So one of the things I always like to do and
uh if you're remote, working remotely
and there's a uh
depending on how they're distributed, like how many and where the employees are,
you may be on to go to somewhere and do something
social like I would actually if they're closer to take,
to take a road trip.
Um
I always ask them maybe you want to do quarterly, get togethers, right?
With, with different people.
Um
If there are people in your town that work
with the same company, I always try to socialize that way as well.
Um One thing that I always say is we get on Discord and play games together,
um go do um
you know, go to uh have a social space on Discord and,
and with the other groups and talk about
your interests, right? Or even have interest set out in Discord or Slack.
Um
and, and just try to bond that way right
outside of work
or even in work. Right.
Uh That's what I would do. Um,
I, I encourage quarterly,
especially for fully remote studios so that people can look
to get to know each other because that's trust building.
It's hard to build trust when you don't see somebody. Right?
Or don't interact with them enough. Right.
That, that's the, one of the downsides of remote, only
in my opinion,
is that
anybody else?
You have a couple, a couple more minutes?
Yes.
Uh
So
how do you relate a soft skill to promotion?
Um
You
uh so a lot of times people have job matrix and if they done it right,
it should have hard skills and soft skills that you need to have,
especially if you're on a management track versus an individual contributor,
track, individual contributor track won't have as many
of, of those uh
uh soft skills, but the management track will.
And so they should be able to tie your review to that,
right? That they should be able to do that
or ask for it again.
Like I told you,
there's not much out there to help steer you
in your career guidance in a lot of companies.
It just isn't based on my experience.
Yeah.
Well, ok,
I'll go again a little early. Thank you.