[music]
Hello everybody. Um I'm Chris Martins and this is Roelio Cordona Rivera. Uh we
and this is Roelio Cordona Rivera. Uh we are both at North Carolina State
are both at North Carolina State University and we're both really excited
University and we're both really excited to be here uh to tell you about some of
to be here uh to tell you about some of the things that we've learned about as
the things that we've learned about as uh researchers. So we are both
uh researchers. So we are both researchers at NC State. Um I just
researchers at NC State. Um I just started there as faculty in the fall and
started there as faculty in the fall and Raelio is finishing up his PhD. Um, I do
Raelio is finishing up his PhD. Um, I do work on tools for rapid prototyping of
work on tools for rapid prototyping of interactive stories and Raelo does work
interactive stories and Raelo does work on computational models of how players
on computational models of how players think about interactive stories. Uh, so
think about interactive stories. Uh, so this is our first GDC talk. We are
this is our first GDC talk. We are really excited. Um, we're we're kind of
really excited. Um, we're we're kind of motivated by um this idea that in
motivated by um this idea that in academia we have a whole lot of
academia we have a whole lot of techniques that people have explored and
techniques that people have explored and debated over the years. Um, and when I
debated over the years. Um, and when I come to conferences like GDC, um, I talk
come to conferences like GDC, um, I talk to a lot of people who are who are
to a lot of people who are who are saying like, I really want to create a
saying like, I really want to create a procedural story and I have no idea how
procedural story and I have no idea how to get started. So, uh, we're hoping
to get started. So, uh, we're hoping that we can share with you some some
that we can share with you some some interesting ideas and techniques that
interesting ideas and techniques that you may be able to use in your designs.
you may be able to use in your designs. So, um, a lot of academic work as well
So, um, a lot of academic work as well as a lot of early game development work
as a lot of early game development work started by sort of being inspired by
started by sort of being inspired by this idea of the hollow deck from Star
this idea of the hollow deck from Star Trek. Um, in other words, a simulated
Trek. Um, in other words, a simulated reality that affords not only the
reality that affords not only the experience, an immersive experience of a
experience, an immersive experience of a story that you can enter and take part
story that you can enter and take part in um as a a reader of sort of a script,
in um as a a reader of sort of a script, but also a reality in which you can take
but also a reality in which you can take improvised actions and have this the
improvised actions and have this the system respond in a meaningful way to
system respond in a meaningful way to those reactions. Um, in the early days,
those reactions. Um, in the early days, this was kind of realized through some
this was kind of realized through some of the uh early adventure games like the
of the uh early adventure games like the Hobbit DOSs game from Beam Software in
Hobbit DOSs game from Beam Software in 1983. Uh, and on the surface, adventure
1983. Uh, and on the surface, adventure games like this sort of seem to offer
games like this sort of seem to offer the promise of the hollow deck, sort of
the promise of the hollow deck, sort of showing you these um first-person images
showing you these um first-person images of spaces that you could inhabit and and
of spaces that you could inhabit and and narrating story around you and allowing
narrating story around you and allowing you to make some kind of choices. Um,
you to make some kind of choices. Um, and ultimately these experiences
and ultimately these experiences centered a particular kind of plot and
centered a particular kind of plot and progression. They they really wanted you
progression. They they really wanted you to in some sense follow the script of
to in some sense follow the script of what the designer had in mind. Um, but
what the designer had in mind. Um, but they're not very permissive of the kind
they're not very permissive of the kind of spontaneity and improvisation that
of spontaneity and improvisation that people initially sort of um fantasy
people initially sort of um fantasy designed in the Star Trek holiday.
designed in the Star Trek holiday. More recently, people have been very
More recently, people have been very excited about the idea of emergent
excited about the idea of emergent gameplay realized by games like Dwarf
gameplay realized by games like Dwarf Fortress, um, in which there's a rich
Fortress, um, in which there's a rich simulation underlying this game system
simulation underlying this game system and players can play players and the
and players can play players and the artificial agents within the system can
artificial agents within the system can very much improvise and have the system
very much improvise and have the system respond. Um, and then people perceive
respond. Um, and then people perceive that sort of there are narratives that
that sort of there are narratives that that get overlaid on top of these
that get overlaid on top of these experiences. Uh, for example, many
experiences. Uh, for example, many people like to post on Reddit uh
people like to post on Reddit uh detailed descriptions of their narrative
detailed descriptions of their narrative experiences within Dwarf Fortress that
experiences within Dwarf Fortress that that they think are are really
that they think are are really compelling.
compelling. So, this is sort of representative of
So, this is sort of representative of the other end of a spectrum in a sense.
the other end of a spectrum in a sense. Um, these these experiences are very
Um, these these experiences are very permissive of player and procedural
permissive of player and procedural spontaneity, but on the other hand,
spontaneity, but on the other hand, there is no enforcement of sort of
there is no enforcement of sort of authored narrative arcs. So just as a
authored narrative arcs. So just as a working definition for those of you who
working definition for those of you who may not have encountered the term
may not have encountered the term procedural narrative generation before,
procedural narrative generation before, I'm including both of these things under
I'm including both of these things under this umbrella term. Um, and basically
this umbrella term. Um, and basically considering any kind of automatic
considering any kind of automatic process that creates a narrative over
process that creates a narrative over time where that narrative is not
time where that narrative is not determined at the outset uh before the
determined at the outset uh before the process begins to be procedural
process begins to be procedural narrative generation. So, I've given a
narrative generation. So, I've given a couple of examples and I'm listing a few
couple of examples and I'm listing a few more here, including some that I think
more here, including some that I think are a bit lesser known that I'm really
are a bit lesser known that I'm really excited about um as examples in
excited about um as examples in procedural narrative generation. And I
procedural narrative generation. And I kind of have these, you know, loosely
kind of have these, you know, loosely following a spectrum of prioritizing
following a spectrum of prioritizing agent spontaneity uh to prioritizing
agent spontaneity uh to prioritizing authoral structure. And largely what
authoral structure. And largely what this talk is about is the challenge in
this talk is about is the challenge in uh first of all introducing agent
uh first of all introducing agent spontaneity in the first place. this
spontaneity in the first place. this kind of improvisation and and
kind of improvisation and and simulation, but also how to balance it
simulation, but also how to balance it with author structure. [sighs]
with author structure. [sighs] So, going forward, um I'm gonna show you
So, going forward, um I'm gonna show you just a simple example that we can use to
just a simple example that we can use to walk through a lot of the terminology
walk through a lot of the terminology and ideas and then we're going to go
and ideas and then we're going to go through in detail a couple of
through in detail a couple of approaches, the simulation ccentric
approaches, the simulation ccentric approach and the plot-centric approach
approach and the plot-centric approach um that have been really thoroughly
um that have been really thoroughly explored in academic research. Um and
explored in academic research. Um and then Raelio is going to uh well Raelio
then Raelio is going to uh well Raelio will will talk about the plot-centric
will will talk about the plot-centric approach and he'll also conclude with
approach and he'll also conclude with some of the ongoing challenges uh in
some of the ongoing challenges uh in procedural narrative generation.
procedural narrative generation. So the example that we're going to start
So the example that we're going to start with is an ASUP fable um largely because
with is an ASUP fable um largely because as fables tend to be relatively simple
as fables tend to be relatively simple and small and they can fit in a talk
and small and they can fit in a talk slide. Um so the uh so this is the the
slide. Um so the uh so this is the the ant and the dove. So a dove saw an ant
ant and the dove. So a dove saw an ant fell fall into a brook. The ant
fell fall into a brook. The ant struggled in vain to reach the bank, and
struggled in vain to reach the bank, and in pity, the dove dropped a blade of
in pity, the dove dropped a blade of straw close beside it. Clinging to the
straw close beside it. Clinging to the straw like a shipwrecked sailor to a
straw like a shipwrecked sailor to a broken spar, the ant floated safely to
broken spar, the ant floated safely to shore. Soon after, the ant saw a man
shore. Soon after, the ant saw a man getting ready to kill the dove with a
getting ready to kill the dove with a stone. But just as he cast the stone,
stone. But just as he cast the stone, the ant stung him in the heel so that
the ant stung him in the heel so that the pain made him miss his aim, and the
the pain made him miss his aim, and the startled dove flew to safety in a
startled dove flew to safety in a distant wood. Uh, the moral is at the
distant wood. Uh, the moral is at the bottom. A kindness is never wasted. So
bottom. A kindness is never wasted. So when we start to think about how to
when we start to think about how to introduce some kind of generativity into
introduce some kind of generativity into the story um or interactivity which
the story um or interactivity which ideas are closely interrelated um one
ideas are closely interrelated um one technique that underlies a lot of uh
technique that underlies a lot of uh that opens up a lot of possibilities for
that opens up a lot of possibilities for procedurality is logical modeling. So
procedurality is logical modeling. So some kind of formal representation of
some kind of formal representation of who the characters are and what
who the characters are and what situations they're in and how those
situations they're in and how those situations change across story events.
situations change across story events. So if we first think about discretizing
So if we first think about discretizing this story into kind of a comic book
this story into kind of a comic book form uh where we show different
form uh where we show different narrative situations in each panel, we
narrative situations in each panel, we can start describing um each situation
can start describing um each situation in a a sort of formal logical form. So
in a a sort of formal logical form. So we can represent this first panel where
we can represent this first panel where the ant is uh near the stream getting
the ant is uh near the stream getting ready to fall into the stream as uh the
ready to fall into the stream as uh the ant being thirsty and the ant being at
ant being thirsty and the ant being at the left shore.
the left shore. Uh the next panel
Uh the next panel is uh where the ant falls into the
is uh where the ant falls into the stream. So we can represent that as ant
stream. So we can represent that as ant at ant stream and the dove is above the
at ant stream and the dove is above the stream and so on for the rest of the
stream and so on for the rest of the panels in kind of the first half of this
panels in kind of the first half of this story.
story. So that's our formal representation of a
So that's our formal representation of a little example story. And now I'm going
little example story. And now I'm going to go through the simulation ccentric
to go through the simulation ccentric approach. So the basic idea with this is
approach. So the basic idea with this is that you're going to design the author
that you're going to design the author is going to design a bunch of characters
is going to design a bunch of characters and sort of world elements and
and sort of world elements and identities in terms of their uh
identities in terms of their uh personalities, desires, and
personalities, desires, and relationships to one another. Then give
relationships to one another. Then give a whole bunch of rules describing how
a whole bunch of rules describing how these entities can interact with one
these entities can interact with one another and potentially change those
another and potentially change those properties. Uh then you kind of throw
properties. Uh then you kind of throw them into a world and press play and see
them into a world and press play and see what they do. Uh so you have your
what they do. Uh so you have your designer who's going to feed these
designer who's going to feed these interaction rules and initial state into
interaction rules and initial state into a story generator and then that whole
a story generator and then that whole thing kind of gets packaged up and
thing kind of gets packaged up and becomes an interactive narrative which
becomes an interactive narrative which then the player can interact with in the
then the player can interact with in the usual way by uh submitting actions and
usual way by uh submitting actions and receiving responses.
receiving responses. So we're going to zoom into specifically
So we're going to zoom into specifically what the authoring process looks like uh
what the authoring process looks like uh for this kind of approach and uh we're
for this kind of approach and uh we're going to look at what's what interaction
going to look at what's what interaction what it means to design interaction
what it means to design interaction rules.
rules. So an interaction rule is basically a
So an interaction rule is basically a transition between story situations.
transition between story situations. Basically going from the ant is beside
Basically going from the ant is beside the stream and thirsty to the ant being
the stream and thirsty to the ant being in the water. Um, we can label this
in the water. Um, we can label this transition with a story event like the
transition with a story event like the ant falls into the stream. And to make
ant falls into the stream. And to make this formal, we simply have to think
this formal, we simply have to think about our logical representation of each
about our logical representation of each of these situations and then give a
of these situations and then give a formal label to this transition event.
formal label to this transition event. Um, the next thing that we do in order
Um, the next thing that we do in order to start introducing generativity into
to start introducing generativity into the story is to make the rule more
the story is to make the rule more general. So I'm using a particular kind
general. So I'm using a particular kind of quirky syntax with um this question
of quirky syntax with um this question mark which designates a variable which
mark which designates a variable which is an argument to the rule uh that can
is an argument to the rule uh that can range over any character. Basically any
range over any character. Basically any character can be substituted into this
character can be substituted into this rule to have it apply to them. Um so we
rule to have it apply to them. Um so we could say if someone is thirsty and
could say if someone is thirsty and someone is at a location somewhere and
someone is at a location somewhere and that somewhere happens to be near a
that somewhere happens to be near a stream then one way their situation
stream then one way their situation might transform is that they could fall
might transform is that they could fall into the stream and become in the
into the stream and become in the stream. Um, it's important to know that
stream. Um, it's important to know that when we're representing things formally
when we're representing things formally like this, we also have to uh make sure
like this, we also have to uh make sure we're preserving information that
we're preserving information that doesn't change. So, if our situation
doesn't change. So, if our situation doesn't change the fact that this
doesn't change the fact that this location is near the stream, we have to
location is near the stream, we have to repeat it on the other side. Um, so
repeat it on the other side. Um, so that's enough dense syntax for now.
that's enough dense syntax for now. We're going to go back to pictures. Um
We're going to go back to pictures. Um so we'll represent this kind of uh rule
so we'll represent this kind of uh rule with a variable in it with this um you
with a variable in it with this um you know outline of a person uh to say if
know outline of a person uh to say if the person is thirsty and the person is
the person is thirsty and the person is near a stream then the person can fall
near a stream then the person can fall into the stream. So that's one way of
into the stream. So that's one way of introducing generativity is sort of
introducing generativity is sort of generalizing these interaction rules uh
generalizing these interaction rules uh into things that can be instantiated
into things that can be instantiated with multiple characters and entities.
with multiple characters and entities. Another way is to introduce choices into
Another way is to introduce choices into the world to sort of say that well if a
the world to sort of say that well if a person is near a stream and thirsty then
person is near a stream and thirsty then they might fall into the stream and we
they might fall into the stream and we can label that rule drink fall. On the
can label that rule drink fall. On the other hand we could have a rule called
other hand we could have a rule called drink succeed in which they don't fall
drink succeed in which they don't fall into the stream and simply stop being
into the stream and simply stop being thirsty.
Other kinds of interaction rules we can represent with this rulebased style
represent with this rulebased style include movement for uh movement to
include movement for uh movement to location. So if a character wants to
location. So if a character wants to move to a particular location that they
move to a particular location that they happen to be near, then they can simply
happen to be near, then they can simply transition to being in that new
transition to being in that new location. Uh more interestingly perhaps
location. Uh more interestingly perhaps we can also represent social interaction
we can also represent social interaction rules. So we can say something like if
rules. So we can say something like if two characters X and Y are in a shared
two characters X and Y are in a shared location and X doesn't like Y then um
location and X doesn't like Y then um they can transition into a situation
they can transition into a situation where they don't like each other and we
where they don't like each other and we can call this this uh story event
can call this this uh story event insulting X insulting Y.
insulting X insulting Y. We can also represent social
We can also represent social interactions like helping. So if
interactions like helping. So if somebody uh has a cure for uh if
somebody uh has a cure for uh if somebody named X has a cure for an
somebody named X has a cure for an ailment that somebody named Y has um and
ailment that somebody named Y has um and X happens to like Y then um perhaps they
X happens to like Y then um perhaps they uh spend the cure to get rid of the
uh spend the cure to get rid of the element and now Y is grateful to X.
element and now Y is grateful to X. So those were just a few examples of the
So those were just a few examples of the kinds of interaction rules that you can
kinds of interaction rules that you can create in a simulation. And then I
create in a simulation. And then I mentioned before that you also have to
mentioned before that you also have to feed in an initial state. So what does
feed in an initial state. So what does that look like? Initial state is simply
that look like? Initial state is simply a uh sequence of logical operators
a uh sequence of logical operators representing the situation that the
representing the situation that the story is in before the simulation
story is in before the simulation begins. Uh so for example the dove being
begins. Uh so for example the dove being on the shore um sorry the the dove being
on the shore um sorry the the dove being above uh above the shore at the street
above uh above the shore at the street at the treetops the ant being at the
at the treetops the ant being at the shore and um other properties of the
shore and um other properties of the world that will be manipulated by these
world that will be manipulated by these rules
rules then when this is actually executed at
then when this is actually executed at runtime um what happens okay so the
runtime um what happens okay so the algorithmic concept is that our system
algorithmic concept is that our system is going to randomly explore this state
is going to randomly explore this state space and more concretely as an example
space and more concretely as an example What that might mean is that uh we start
What that might mean is that uh we start with some initial state including the
with some initial state including the locations and relationships between the
locations and relationships between the world entities and then we take a random
world entities and then we take a random movement in a particular direction like
movement in a particular direction like say the ant moves to the stream and note
say the ant moves to the stream and note that the other part of the situation
that the other part of the situation wherever the dove is and which locations
wherever the dove is and which locations are near each other and so on uh doesn't
are near each other and so on uh doesn't change across this transition.
change across this transition. Then we can follow that with another
Then we can follow that with another part of the sequence where the dove
part of the sequence where the dove moves to the stream. Now both of the
moves to the stream. Now both of the characters are in the same location and
characters are in the same location and some interaction might take place
some interaction might take place between them. On the other hand, we
between them. On the other hand, we might start from the initial state and
might start from the initial state and first move the dove and then move the
first move the dove and then move the ant which takes us back to the uh same
ant which takes us back to the uh same situation as doing so the other way
situation as doing so the other way around. So in doing this, we are
around. So in doing this, we are creating not what you may be more
creating not what you may be more familiar with is sort of like a
familiar with is sort of like a branching story tree but rather um a
branching story tree but rather um a branching story graph where things might
branching story graph where things might connect to the same node. Um, so a
connect to the same node. Um, so a concept that we could consider for sort
concept that we could consider for sort of generating stories includes randomly
of generating stories includes randomly exploring the state space. Um, but a
exploring the state space. Um, but a perhaps more useful way to think about
perhaps more useful way to think about it as sort of interactive experience
it as sort of interactive experience designers is that we can also include
designers is that we can also include the player in the loop and allow them to
the player in the loop and allow them to control some of the steps through the
control some of the steps through the state space. uh and whether it's a
state space. uh and whether it's a player or an or an automated uh decision
player or an or an automated uh decision maker taking these steps we can consider
maker taking these steps we can consider each traversal through the state space
each traversal through the state space to be approximately a story. So
to be approximately a story. So sometimes of course these things may not
sometimes of course these things may not be very interesting stories uh but some
be very interesting stories uh but some of them might be. So if uh you know the
of them might be. So if uh you know the ant moves towards the stream and the
ant moves towards the stream and the dove moves towards the stream um the ant
dove moves towards the stream um the ant could insult the dove and then the dove
could insult the dove and then the dove might eat the ant.
might eat the ant. Uh in terms of interacting with
Uh in terms of interacting with simulations, there are of course a lot
simulations, there are of course a lot of design questions to ask for using
of design questions to ask for using this technique. So uh one of the one of
this technique. So uh one of the one of the biggest ones is where is the locus
the biggest ones is where is the locus of control? How can the player intervene
of control? How can the player intervene in the narrative? Are they playing as
in the narrative? Are they playing as one character? Are they able to
one character? Are they able to manipulate all of the characters in the
manipulate all of the characters in the story and completely control what takes
story and completely control what takes place in the simulation? um or are they
place in the simulation? um or are they perhaps able only to um subtly
perhaps able only to um subtly manipulate the world around the
manipulate the world around the characters as they go about their you
characters as they go about their you know daily activities um using these
know daily activities um using these interaction rules and try to subtly
interaction rules and try to subtly manipulate their behavior in that way.
manipulate their behavior in that way. Uh there's a couple of examples I wanted
Uh there's a couple of examples I wanted to highlight. One of which is the game
to highlight. One of which is the game prom week uh which came out of research
prom week uh which came out of research from UC Santa Cruz uh in which the
from UC Santa Cruz uh in which the player does get to control all
player does get to control all characters but kind of one at a time. So
characters but kind of one at a time. So they select one character who's the
they select one character who's the actor and then another character that
actor and then another character that that first character will act upon uh
that first character will act upon uh and they get to decide what kind of
and they get to decide what kind of interaction will will be started but how
interaction will will be started but how that second character responds is
that second character responds is automated. Um, another example is Blood
automated. Um, another example is Blood and Laurels, um, which uses the Versu
and Laurels, um, which uses the Versu storytelling engine. And in that, uh, in
storytelling engine. And in that, uh, in that case, it's it actually plays a lot
that case, it's it actually plays a lot like a like a traditional choice-based
like a like a traditional choice-based narrative, but all of the choices that
narrative, but all of the choices that are presented to you are generated by
are presented to you are generated by the simulation possibilities underlying
the simulation possibilities underlying the world. Okay. And so with that, I am
the world. Okay. And so with that, I am going to pass this off to Roelio, who's
going to pass this off to Roelio, who's going to tell you how to actually
going to tell you how to actually introduce some kind of control over your
introduce some kind of control over your dramatic arcs that unfold.
dramatic arcs that unfold. Hi everybody. I'm super excited to be
Hi everybody. I'm super excited to be here. So in order to set up a specific
here. So in order to set up a specific narrative progression, which you won't
narrative progression, which you won't have in the simulationcentric approach
have in the simulationcentric approach because you kind of get to decide where
because you kind of get to decide where the narrative is going on the fly, you
the narrative is going on the fly, you need a way of specifying and enforcing
need a way of specifying and enforcing goals, which is again achieved through
goals, which is again achieved through the techniques that I'm going to
the techniques that I'm going to outline. However, the plot-centric
outline. However, the plot-centric approach does build upon the
approach does build upon the simulationcentric approach. So you you
simulationcentric approach. So you you need to describe you know what is the
need to describe you know what is the initial state of the narrative universe
initial state of the narrative universe as well as what are the interaction
as well as what are the interaction rules that allow the states of the
rules that allow the states of the universe to change.
universe to change. Additionally you require a narrative
Additionally you require a narrative agenda. So the agenda represents the
agenda. So the agenda represents the desired plot that you as a narrative
desired plot that you as a narrative designer want to have happen in terms of
designer want to have happen in terms of the trajectory through the state space
the trajectory through the state space that Chris was describing. So to give
that Chris was describing. So to give you a kind of diagrammatic
you a kind of diagrammatic representation of what's going on, this
representation of what's going on, this is the diagram that Chris finished upon.
is the diagram that Chris finished upon. And we're going to just shift the story
And we're going to just shift the story generator to the left. And in addition
generator to the left. And in addition to specifying, like I said, the initial
to specifying, like I said, the initial state and the interaction rules, you
state and the interaction rules, you also have the narrative agenda. Now the
also have the narrative agenda. Now the story generator in creating this story
story generator in creating this story actually needs an additional
actually needs an additional agent storytelling agent and one will
agent storytelling agent and one will generate the partial story structure
generate the partial story structure which is the generator and the other
which is the generator and the other will try to enforce that story
will try to enforce that story structure. So there's this idea that you
structure. So there's this idea that you have the narrative agenda that you want
have the narrative agenda that you want as a designer to have happen in the
as a designer to have happen in the interactive narrative experience. You
interactive narrative experience. You now need an additional agent that will
now need an additional agent that will monitor what the player is doing and try
monitor what the player is doing and try to get the player directed on that
to get the player directed on that narrative trajectory.
narrative trajectory. So the partial story is created, passes
So the partial story is created, passes to this agent called a story mediator
to this agent called a story mediator agent and the player once again takes
agent and the player once again takes actions that the mediator interprets. It
actions that the mediator interprets. It then requests story content from the
then requests story content from the story generator which in turn in
story generator which in turn in response to the player's actions creates
response to the player's actions creates this partial story and then delivers
this partial story and then delivers those responses to the player. So you
those responses to the player. So you can think of it as an iterative process
can think of it as an iterative process that takes place between the player and
that takes place between the player and the story system. Essentially they're
the story system. Essentially they're taking turns advancing the chronology.
taking turns advancing the chronology. So the player takes a turn in the
So the player takes a turn in the interactive environment and then the
interactive environment and then the system responds in turn.
system responds in turn. So like I said earlier you all you have
So like I said earlier you all you have to describe the initial state as well as
to describe the initial state as well as the interaction rules that can evolve
the interaction rules that can evolve states. The way that we approach
states. The way that we approach authorship in this plot-centric approach
authorship in this plot-centric approach is again I have I have an idea as a
is again I have I have an idea as a designer which of the states in that
designer which of the states in that space are desirable and that is the
space are desirable and that is the narrative agenda. So say for example
narrative agenda. So say for example that at the end I want the ant to be at
that at the end I want the ant to be at the shore right then what that does in
the shore right then what that does in terms of the simulated world is
terms of the simulated world is distinguish a state as desirable which
distinguish a state as desirable which I've highlighted there in that
I've highlighted there in that alternative color.
alternative color. So as we specify more conditions in the
So as we specify more conditions in the state space we get a more specific
state space we get a more specific trajectory of the interactive narrative.
trajectory of the interactive narrative. So the more that we specify the more we
So the more that we specify the more we have in terms of constraints of things
have in terms of constraints of things that we as designers would like to have
that we as designers would like to have hit during the progression of the
hit during the progression of the player. And this sets up nicely the
player. And this sets up nicely the first technique in the plotcentric
first technique in the plotcentric approach which is this notion of beats.
approach which is this notion of beats. So the idea that you have some state you
So the idea that you have some state you have the states of the state space and a
have the states of the state space and a subset of those states which are the
subset of those states which are the desired ones. And in the literature
desired ones. And in the literature you'll find these referred to as beats.
you'll find these referred to as beats. The second technique in the plot-centric
The second technique in the plot-centric approach is this notion of turn taking
approach is this notion of turn taking which I kind of alluded to and you can
which I kind of alluded to and you can think of it through an analogy through
think of it through an analogy through uh Dungeons and Dragons when you roll
uh Dungeons and Dragons when you roll for initiative, right? You you the DM
for initiative, right? You you the DM have players roll for initiative,
have players roll for initiative, establish the turn order of players,
establish the turn order of players, then the players go and the DM responds
then the players go and the DM responds in kind. So the DM and the players take
in kind. So the DM and the players take turns advancing the narrative arc. So
turns advancing the narrative arc. So the same principle applies here. From
the same principle applies here. From the initial state, the player is
the initial state, the player is allotted or afforded the opportunity to
allotted or afforded the opportunity to take action in the state space and then
take action in the state space and then the system is allowed to respond in
the system is allowed to respond in kind. And so this continues throughout
kind. And so this continues throughout the progression of the plot structure.
the progression of the plot structure. And the third technique is that idea of
And the third technique is that idea of mediation which I talked about earlier,
mediation which I talked about earlier, the notion that there are some actions
the notion that there are some actions in that state space which essentially
in that state space which essentially take us away from the desired plot
take us away from the desired plot points. So we have the beats that we
points. So we have the beats that we have specified in the narrative
have specified in the narrative trajectory and any action that takes us
trajectory and any action that takes us away from those beats from the systems
away from those beats from the systems perspective constitutes an exception. We
perspective constitutes an exception. We want to avoid those because we want to
want to avoid those because we want to hit those plot points during the
hit those plot points during the progression of the player's experience.
progression of the player's experience. So those dotted arrows that I'm
So those dotted arrows that I'm highlighting in the diagram represent
highlighting in the diagram represent those exceptional actions. And so if we
those exceptional actions. And so if we consider these beats to be hard
consider these beats to be hard constraints, so we don't want the player
constraints, so we don't want the player to deviate from these beats, then the
to deviate from these beats, then the system must fail the user's action when
system must fail the user's action when the player tries to take that or never
the player tries to take that or never present the action in the first place
present the action in the first place and otherwise the system will accept the
and otherwise the system will accept the player's action during the experience.
player's action during the experience. There's actually a third option here,
There's actually a third option here, replanning, but this requires a story
replanning, but this requires a story generator. In essence, if the player
generator. In essence, if the player tries to deviate from the beat path and
tries to deviate from the beat path and you have access to a story generation
you have access to a story generation system, then you can request additional
system, then you can request additional story content to try to replan the
story content to try to replan the experience around the player's
experience around the player's interaction
interaction and find a story that gets us back on
and find a story that gets us back on track. During runtime, the plot-centric
track. During runtime, the plot-centric technique is all about deciding how to
technique is all about deciding how to evolve the story in response to the
evolve the story in response to the player's actions. So, like I said
player's actions. So, like I said earlier, the player in the initial state
earlier, the player in the initial state will decide what action to pursue for
will decide what action to pursue for the narrative plot. Then when the
the narrative plot. Then when the systems the systems turn is is is up, it
systems the systems turn is is is up, it will suggest or the story manager will s
will suggest or the story manager will s suggest which action will get us closer
suggest which action will get us closer to a narrative beat. And so this
to a narrative beat. And so this interaction, like I said, it's a turn-
interaction, like I said, it's a turn- taking mechanism. And every time the
taking mechanism. And every time the system is afforded the opportunity to
system is afforded the opportunity to interact, it will choose an action that
interact, it will choose an action that will get get us closer to the narrative
will get get us closer to the narrative beats.
beats. So, some plot- ccentric examples, and I
So, some plot- ccentric examples, and I have to call out facade because it is an
have to call out facade because it is an unstated rule in academic talks that
unstated rule in academic talks that reference interactive narrative that
reference interactive narrative that facade must appear at some point.
facade must appear at some point. It's part of the PhD manual. Um, so
It's part of the PhD manual. Um, so facade is an example where you have the
facade is an example where you have the player afforded the opportunity to
player afforded the opportunity to interact in the environment, but
interact in the environment, but invariably you will hit some specific
invariably you will hit some specific plot points. Of course, the trajectory
plot points. Of course, the trajectory that you take to get to those beats will
that you take to get to those beats will affect the way that the experience
affect the way that the experience culminates.
culminates. Another example is a game that was
Another example is a game that was developed at North Carolina State by
developed at North Carolina State by Justice Robertson called Base Case,
Justice Robertson called Base Case, which in essence, the interactive
which in essence, the interactive environment is procedurally generated in
environment is procedurally generated in response to the player's actions. But
response to the player's actions. But it's also with this notion of turn
it's also with this notion of turn taking. So every time the player acts,
taking. So every time the player acts, the system responds in kind and actually
the system responds in kind and actually can manipulate things behind the scenes
can manipulate things behind the scenes to try to make sure that the player's
to try to make sure that the player's plot progression is as intended.
plot progression is as intended. So that concludes the plot-centric
So that concludes the plot-centric approach and I want to shift over to
approach and I want to shift over to talking about some challenges in new
talking about some challenges in new frontiers. So one big challenge that is
frontiers. So one big challenge that is currently uh that we're currently facing
currently uh that we're currently facing as an academic research community is
as an academic research community is going from this plot-centric approach to
going from this plot-centric approach to a more discoursecentric approach. So
a more discoursecentric approach. So this is in service of what Emily Short
this is in service of what Emily Short has called out before, which is there's
has called out before, which is there's no need to simulate part of the
no need to simulate part of the environment that ultimately will not be
environment that ultimately will not be told to players because it's not
told to players because it's not relevant. If it doesn't in some way
relevant. If it doesn't in some way advance the interactive narrative
advance the interactive narrative experience, there's no point in talking
experience, there's no point in talking about it at the simulation level.
about it at the simulation level. [snorts] So traditionally, systems have
[snorts] So traditionally, systems have gone from this simulation approach where
gone from this simulation approach where you generate the simulation of the story
you generate the simulation of the story world and through its state space and
world and through its state space and then you pick and choose and present
then you pick and choose and present over that that state space and lay a
over that that state space and lay a discourse above it. And that's
discourse above it. And that's ultimately what is presented to players.
ultimately what is presented to players. Ideally, we like to go the other way
Ideally, we like to go the other way around. So, the simulation of an
around. So, the simulation of an unnarrated part of the story is
unnarrated part of the story is unnecessary. Uh Chris and I actually
unnecessary. Uh Chris and I actually have been investigating new models of
have been investigating new models of communication, understanding what is it
communication, understanding what is it that we have to communicate to a player
that we have to communicate to a player and then figuring out the simulation in
and then figuring out the simulation in service of that. And I hope to continue
service of that. And I hope to continue that. That's really exciting work. I
that. That's really exciting work. I think another challenge is this idea of
think another challenge is this idea of scaling. So, uh, Nano Genenmo, the
scaling. So, uh, Nano Genenmo, the National Novel Generation Month, where
National Novel Generation Month, where you have one month to create an AI
you have one month to create an AI system that generates a 50,000word
system that generates a 50,000word novel. That's correct. Um, clearly we
novel. That's correct. Um, clearly we are not at a state as a as a community
are not at a state as a as a community where we can do this automatically and
where we can do this automatically and ideally we would want to scale our
ideally we would want to scale our interactive narrative generation systems
interactive narrative generation systems to encompass a wider story experience.
to encompass a wider story experience. Um there's an interesting problem in
Um there's an interesting problem in that in trying to write a small amount
that in trying to write a small amount of interaction rules that generate a
of interaction rules that generate a large body of text. So what is I guess
large body of text. So what is I guess the minimal amount of authoring that we
the minimal amount of authoring that we have to do in terms of input to these
have to do in terms of input to these systems to get a wide array of output.
systems to get a wide array of output. So some parting thoughts. One thing that
So some parting thoughts. One thing that we feel procedural narrative generation
we feel procedural narrative generation will get us toward is opening up the
will get us toward is opening up the possibility in terms of interactive
possibility in terms of interactive story experiences. So yes, for you talks
story experiences. So yes, for you talks about this idea of progression versus
about this idea of progression versus emergence in terms of the kinds of games
emergence in terms of the kinds of games that exist. And the basic idea is that
that exist. And the basic idea is that you have games in narrative about
you have games in narrative about progression where you have a very linear
progression where you have a very linear structured plot, something like what you
structured plot, something like what you might find in the secret of Monkey
might find in the secret of Monkey Island where you have some space to
Island where you have some space to explore interactions, but the main plot
explore interactions, but the main plot kind of progresses like checkpoints. you
kind of progresses like checkpoints. you do some actions in the environment, you
do some actions in the environment, you progress to the next plot point and the
progress to the next plot point and the progression is very tied to your
progression is very tied to your interactive experience. Contrast that
interactive experience. Contrast that with a game of emergence
with a game of emergence um where like for example in
um where like for example in civilization where you can think of
civilization where you can think of games of emergence as games that are
games of emergence as games that are simple to learn and difficult to master.
simple to learn and difficult to master. And so the narrative or the
And so the narrative or the narrativization of your experience
narrativization of your experience happens through the interactions that
happens through the interactions that you have in that game. And Chris and I
you have in that game. And Chris and I feel that procedural narrative
feel that procedural narrative generation can help move story games
generation can help move story games which have traditionally been games of
which have traditionally been games of progression to explore games of
progression to explore games of emergence. And this is not to say that
emergence. And this is not to say that these story systems one is better than
these story systems one is better than the other, but we feel that developing
the other, but we feel that developing these tools and techniques allow us to
these tools and techniques allow us to explore narrative games that exist
explore narrative games that exist beyond the traditional mold.
beyond the traditional mold. And lastly, uh this is um we're both
And lastly, uh this is um we're both very excited about this. Uh we have a
very excited about this. Uh we have a new resource to share with y'all. the
new resource to share with y'all. the story genen.org website which should be
story genen.org website which should be live and hopefully you won't give it a
live and hopefully you won't give it a hug of death and then knock it out.
hug of death and then knock it out. [laughter]
[laughter] Uh but so we've compiled a list of
Uh but so we've compiled a list of procedural narrative generators that
procedural narrative generators that represent systems that you can download
represent systems that you can download and play with and we recognize of course
and play with and we recognize of course that this is some of it is still
that this is some of it is still research software but hopefully that you
research software but hopefully that you can actually play with and use to
can actually play with and use to explore these interesting narrative
explore these interesting narrative designs going forward.
designs going forward. So as a recap, so we've covered you know
So as a recap, so we've covered you know the simulationcentric approach and plot
the simulationcentric approach and plot centric approaches and like I said just
centric approaches and like I said just now what we have presented is not
now what we have presented is not normative. You know designer designers
normative. You know designer designers still have to decide what the experience
still have to decide what the experience will be and hopefully the technology
will be and hopefully the technology that we've developed in our community
that we've developed in our community can help enable those experiences. We've
can help enable those experiences. We've talked very briefly about some
talked very briefly about some challenges and new frontiers and we
challenges and new frontiers and we really encourage you to visit
really encourage you to visit storyen.org. Hopefully you will be able
storyen.org. Hopefully you will be able to suggest new systems. We'd love to
to suggest new systems. We'd love to have that array of procedural narrative
have that array of procedural narrative generators expanded. Um, and that's it.
generators expanded. Um, and that's it. I'm Rael Cardono Rivera. This was Chris
I'm Rael Cardono Rivera. This was Chris Martins. Thank you very much.
Martins. Thank you very much. [applause]