Hello, everyone and welcome to building cognitive accessibility into your games.
Hi, I'm Jay Justice. I'm a consultant.
Uh I work independently but I'm available for full time.
So my most recent work has been on the Game Stray Gods,
which just won game of the year at the Australian game developer award.
So congrats to that to you.
I've also consulted on idol champions of the forgotten realm
and the upcoming Read Only Memories by Mid Boss.
Uh And with me,
I have some amazing developers that I am so excited to be getting to speak alongside.
Please introduce yourselves.
Uh Yeah. Hi. My name is Tara Belker.
So I am the accessibility lead for studios at uh Xbox
and I first wanna say that uh Jay does not do themselves enough justice.
Uh This panel would not exist without Jay.
They literally did all of the work prepping the submission.
I didn't even give anything to Jay on time.
Uh And they still made it happen.
So I wanted to talk Jay up um When I'm uh not here at Xbox doing uh accessibility stuff.
I'm the
co director of the game accessibility conference where I get to work with,
uh, amazing folks.
And, uh, one of the people that I love when I get an opportunity to work with
is the great Morgan Baker.
Wow, that's a great transition.
Hi, everyone. I am. Oh, can you hear me? Ok too. Am I close enough? Cool.
Awesome, because I can't hear myself. So, I'm Morgan Baker. My pronouns are she?
They? And I'm the game accessibility lead for electronic arts.
Uh, in my free time, I like to organize e sports tournaments,
play tabletop rpgs and play with my two Corgis
Mina and Zelda. Can you guess my favorite game?
But it's a pleasure to be here. And I want to reiterate.
Thank you, Jay for inviting both of us today.
Absolutely, excited to talk about my favorite topic, cognitive accessibility.
And hopefully you will show on your surveys that you will definitely submit at
the end of the session that it's also one of your favorite topics.
So please do not forget to fill out your surveys.
Uh Because that is how we know how well we did. So
I will only ask that twice,
once at the very beginning and once that a reminder on the end.
But please do not forget to fill out the surveys at the end.
And Morgan thank you for sharing your pronouns. I forgot to share mine, mine.
Are she her or he him
uh shear?
OK.
All right. So
let's get started.
What is cognitive accessibility
reducing or moving barriers between players and games that relate to cognition,
design or features that enable players to comprehend the information
presented to them so they can make informed decisions.
Do you guys want to expand on those definitions?
Yeah.
So uh we all have a little bit of a different background
in accessibility and just game design and game development in general.
But I talk a lot about gaming being a three step process that
the first thing we do is we get information from the game.
What do we see? What do we hear that has haptics? What do we feel?
And we take in that information and then we process it
and then as we process it, we determine our course of action
and then output back to the game, we tell the game what we want to do.
And it's three,
this three step process that is playing a game doesn't matter how complex it is.
But cognitive accessibility specifically is something has interrupted
the processing part of that
three
step
uh process for, for playing games.
And so when we're talking about cognitive accessibility,
we're talking about making sure that people can process the information correctly
so that they can provide the right uh output to
the game based on the information that they have received.
Yeah, absolutely.
And adding on to that too, it really ties into the idea of like perception.
So making sure that you can process this information comfortably,
you're able to comprehend it
and you're able to use the product with ease.
Of course, when we talk about cognitive accessibility,
it's universal and everyone wins when we're constantly thinking about it.
And so it's really important for us to consider these barriers that occur
in the nature of processing information.
OK. So we've defined it very clearly the next step. Who is cognitive sensibility for
everybody, everybody. But really though
players with conditions related to processing information,
including but not limited to A DH D TB is PTSD and many other neurological
and mental conditions and literally anyone who needs
it can be both situational and temporary.
You guys want to expand.
Yeah, I think what a lot of people don't realize is, you know,
yes, having a DH D is going to impact how you interact with the game,
having a traumatic brain injury.
Like
um having a number of even one good severe
concussion can interact how you play with games.
And um even things like PTSD again about how do you process information
can all be part of uh part of it and sometimes it is neurological,
sometimes it is going to be more specifically related to mental health.
Um One of the things that you're gonna see up here is like we,
we all uh have cognitive disabilities.
It's like, you know, we're all up here with our notes and everything.
They're like, oh yeah, like we, we wrote stuff down to make sure that,
that we can hit it. So for us, you know, it is a wide range of things that all have a very s
uh say
that all have a very similar set of needs. Um
I cannot talk about the irony about putting a talk uh
about cognitive accessibility by a bunch of people with
cognitive disabilities at 5 p.m. on a calm day,
like we are struggling, we're struggling hard up here.
Um So, you know, who is cognitive accessibility for? I mean, it's,
it is for us.
Exactly. And also too, I like that.
I wrote down my, it's so soothing at a cognitive accessibility.
I like wrote down notes for myself because I'm like, come on Morgan, you got this.
But I haven't narrowed down to thinking about cognitive accessibility for myself.
I often think about conditions as we've talked about like processing, but
we also have like processing, speed learning, memory, attention,
focus mental endurance and all these things overlap and this holistic
every disability, every condition, whether it's permanent,
temporary or situational, it is holistic in this nature.
And so again, it's for everyone,
but especially if you want to think about those who really, really need it.
And if you want to think about hard numbers,
remember that a lot of people who have processing
disorders may not even consider themselves to be disabled.
So there's millions of people who would benefit from
getting more accessibility
that would actually address some of the
issues that they're having with processing information
well,
and I think something that's really common is there are a lot
of people who first off never receive a formal diagnosis or,
or dia diagnosed super late in life.
So not only do we have people who do have these diagnoses who don't
um identify as disabled. There are people with these conditions who have no idea
that they have these conditions and that they basically been playing their
-- life on hard mode the entire time and no one told -- them
I, that's totally true. And especially
we have to really recognize that there is a stigma sometimes too around it.
And we want to
have that contextually when we're thinking about
our games and designing our games,
knowing that, you know,
people will have different worldviews with cognitive accessibility.
Of course, uh There's nothing wrong with, I have a DH do CD,
I'm like a hot mess express over here.
Ch
ch
all aboard.
You know, I think though it's important for us to
think about that stigma constantly to make sure that we are
approaching our cognitive accessibility with the
utmost sensitivity for our players.
Very well, sir.
All right.
What challenges do people who would benefit
from cognitive accessibility face when playing games?
Some challenges or barriers include
cognitive overload, sensory overload, unclear objectives, over stimulation,
illegible text
uh
and over complicated instructions.
And we're gonna expand on a lot of these challenges because they come up many,
many times.
Oh yeah, there, there are so many and they do repeat themselves when I think about,
you know, these challenges.
One of the things that I tend to think about is basically for some reason,
amount of info coming in short circuits, the processing part,
like it's overcharged, it's a transformer exploding,
you know, you want to continue, but the input is way, way too much
and you know, that just means when that happens for a lot of people, you shut down.
Um But that's only for certain people,
there are going to be other people where the reverse happens.
There's not enough information coming into the machine for
you to justify continuing running it right now.
So that's when you get distracted, you do something else.
Um But at the same time, when we expand and talk about mental health disorders like
that machine, basically, uh I mean,
it has its fight or flight triggers like it can literally mean that
you are transported somewhere else and you, you are not playing that game anymore.
You are in a heightened state of adrenaline.
Um such to an amount that like you can't
actively control what you're doing or what you're thinking.
And so like it goes, it goes wrong in so many different ways.
And it's uh I mean, because of all of the things that Jay just outlined.
Yeah, especially to when we talk about like
over stimulation and endurance,
we have to think about the short term versus that long term as well, right?
So the idea of the short term of so much
information being thrown at you at once that your brain,
I say it works.
Uh Let's be honest where we have the long
term of the constant pressure of trying to process information
and every single person has different thresholds.
And so we need to design accordingly thinking about these different thresholds. So
like for example,
we have different thresholds that relate to someone who
may have like a visual processing disorder versus an
auditory processing disorder versus anything else. Maybe it's sensory, maybe
uh it's sensation and all these things kind of combine together
to create well, what we need to address cognitive accessibility, right?
Uh And so that's something we constantly need to think about.
And actually for myself, sometimes I describe it,
uh this might not be helpful,
but I say I have a basket and I can only put so
many beans in the basket before they all just start spilling out.
And everyone has like
different types of basket sizes for like, yeah, my so
I have bad auditory processing.
So my basket for auditory is very small,
but I have good visual processing so that basket is much bigger.
And so we need to think about constantly
how we can accommodate and think about our designs
and our games in a way that is accessible
and approachable to everyone with different sized baskets.
I told you it's not a perfect thing. Just roll with me here. Ok.
But I, I think you can roll with the basket analogy because what,
what's really nice is like,
you know, I,
I have a basket but I'm just really particular about how full my basket is.
Like, I just want it to always be the same level.
There was actually a really great talk at the game accessibility conference
um by a uh accessibility consultant
named Shell Little and they talked about uh the sweet spot, uh you know,
between being overwhelmed and boredom
and how so many things can add beans to
that basket. And so for uh Shell, they have talked about having a DH D
and for them even just having
like, you know,
something that's like an animated like circle that shows your amount of manna.
But if it's constantly moving
every time that's moving, that's adding a bean into the basket.
Like none of us are saying,
you know what the cool core loop of my game is watching that animation, right?
Like that's not what we're saying. Like that was not the core loop for fun.
And if someone came up and tell you told you like, hey,
all I can do is watch that animation of that little potion bottle in the corner,
he'd be like, oh crap, there's a whole bunch of game they're not getting to.
But that's because that animation put too many beans in the back
it before they actually got to go and play and enjoy your game.
And as Morgan said, there's a lot of things that add beans to that basket.
It can be the sound, it can be animations, it can be haptics.
There is a lot, it could be your inventory management.
Um, but again, as Morgan highlighted,
it could be different for everyone and I'm sure that it's different for Jay.
I don't know what beans add to your basket.
We're just running with the beans in the basket,
the beans in the basket panel. All right.
So,
well, yeah, the, the big barrier,
it's like all of these things are different bricks in a wall and the, the big wall,
the thing that makes people stop playing games that they were otherwise really
enjoying is the fact that they're unable
to process the information because there's,
there's too much of something or there's not enough of something.
And the,
the big issue that we have is that a lot of games don't really take
into account that you don't need to be throwing so much information at the player.
You can figure out a way to make
something maybe more modular or maybe more customizable
so that you can pick and choose the things that are going to be getting an input
and we're gonna talk more about that
on the next slide.
OK. So this is how we do it.
What are some of the best practices for cognitive accessibility?
Uh you guys had some great suggestions earlier,
uh allowing manual saves any time we all need this offering trigger warnings,
offer easy to understand, subtitles,
sharing,
accessibility info ahead of launch regular testing
for light and motion sensitivities throughout production
and evaluating menu animations or U I determine if they're truly necessary
or offer the ability to turn the little mono thingy off.
All right,
please tell us more about some of these because I think these are
really great suggestions that can help people who are currently developing games,
get the idea for making it more accessible in the pipeline before they finish.
Yeah.
So one of the first things I want to call out about this list is some of them you may
not realize unless you live in the cognitive cognitive accessibility
space like we do is it's not immediately clear.
Wait, why does that help like having
easy to understand subtitles?
Like why does having easy to understand subtitles work?
I mean, obviously Morgan different deaf,
like clearly you like that's a required feature, but like I don't have um
you know, any sort of issues with being hard of hearing,
but I always play my games with subtitles.
And why is that?
Well, if I'm taking in enough information,
like if there's a bunch of sounds like at some point,
my brain will still not really understand
what's being said.
And so I still need that secondary channel of information
to reinforce what I'm hearing to kind of lock it
in to place
and, you know, there, I mean, there's, I don't want to look, I,
I could personally talk about this line, uh, for the next 45 minutes.
Um, but I think what I just kind of hit on that one.
Maybe I'll let Morgan and Jay talk about more and then
I'll just give a 20 minute lecture on trigger warnings.
Ok. All right, Morgan.
Yeah.
No,
but I think you're bringing up a good point and it kind of
goes back to the universality of when
we're thinking about cognitive access really,
right?
Designed for one extent to many,
it's beneficial for someone who is deaf or hard of hearing,
but also beneficial for someone who has auditory
processing or the intersectionality of it all.
For example, we don't just talk about
clear subtitles,
but like making them big and making them have like different
colors and maybe to ensure you have opacity in the background.
So they're easier to read.
And this is because people may have like an sld and reading dyslexia.
Um And actually the intersection of that and
deafness as a fun fact is extremely high.
Um So as a little tidbit for today,
uh just keep in mind that these features are beneficial for someone who has like, say
deaf or hard of hearing. They have a hearing condition
or it can be beneficial to someone who has a visual processing, auditory processing
or like honestly,
subtitles are just really nice because maybe your kid is in
the room and they're being really freaking loud and you're like,
you know,
I don't know what's happening in this game anymore.
-- It up the subtitle -- size.
Well, I think even like the example of like,
uh, you know, having kids in the room or other people in the room,
like as someone with, uh, a DH D,
one of the reasons like having manual saves is really,
really important to me is because I will lose track of
when the game last saved and I will get distracted.
Even if it's my favorite game in the entire world. Alan W-2,
I will get distracted and I will need to be
able to make sure that it has saved because I,
I know I'm going to
end up getting so distracted. I won't come back.
So being able to be like, hey, I need to save right now.
Uh It's also really important because there are times I know I'm
getting ready to go into something that is going to be cognitive,
really challenging.
And there is nothing worse than starting a really cognitive challenging task.
But the save
like 10 minutes before that cognitively challenging test starts.
So all of a sudden, like not only did I just die, but now I have to redo whatever I did,
which I don't remember for sure.
Like, oh, it's a puzzle that I should already know the solution to Nope, it's gone.
Like as soon as that was completed, my brain has dumped that information.
We're not coming back to that.
So if I have to redo that now to get to my new cognitively challenged thing,
I'm going to have a lot of issues.
So being able to, you know, make sure I've saved so that I always know, hey,
I get to have a point where I can start fresh or I don't have to remember that
thing that I did 20 minutes ago because I got to save after it was done is really,
really important to me.
Same.
I can't tell you how many games I've just never gone back to because I was like,
I'm not doing this again.
I swear
new.
So sharing accessibility info ahead of launch is extremely impactful and I'm so
happy to be seeing so many more companies do this because it tells you
like extremely large disabled audience that there is going to
be a way for them to experience this game.
It gives the, uh it gives people an idea of what to expect
and it gives so just really helpful information about like how
your game is gonna be able to be experienced by others.
Like it's just,
it's, it's fantastic and I really appreciate
to,
to see that a lot more and I hope that it's something
that gets done more as well because it shows that the,
the company and the developers had taken the time
to, uh,
do research and to really implement these
practices into their game because they're,
they're ready to go with this whole list.
And like there's been a bunch of titles lately that I had. Have you noticed the,
-- the Ubisoft ones that came out? No, -- the Ubisoft ones are great.
Um And uh, Jessica, is it Roche Roach? I love how IG her towards Morgan. Like she would
be able to tell, tell me how to pronounce that.
Uh But she uh works at Ubisoft uh in their marketing division and she did,
uh I'm just gonna plug others people's talks.
Uh This whole time,
she did a great talk uh about their accessibility marketing
plan and how Ubisoft specifically built a framework to get accessibility
out ahead of the game's launch so that players can
make informed decisions because especially
in the cognitive accessibility space,
being able to make an informed decision as a player is absolutely key.
And uh you know, we, we'll get a little bit more into that. I actually submitted
uh a bunch of slides for Dead Space,
which isn't even the title I worked on that was Morgan's title.
Um because they, you know, did some great stuff around informed decisions,
which is why trigger warnings are so important.
Brought it all the way back around. We talk, I talk a lot about trigger warnings.
They're
going
to when we get to that slide.
All right, first up,
what are some examples of cognit sensibility in
games that you've worked on or played.
How are they beneficial? Can I please do this one because I love this one so much. Ok.
So this is an example of an always available training area from Jedi Survivor,
which was a fantastic game.
I've absolutely loved it.
Uh This really helped the player and like experience getting to train as a Jedi and
if you forgot how to do a move, like it didn't take you out of the gameplay at all.
You were meditating as cal it was something that was always present.
You could just get to a safe point and you could just do this and it,
it really helped keep the flow of the game going without making it feel like
they were like, no, no one's gonna ever say that this is like, oh,
it's easy mood or whatever.
Like you're not gonna be able to make a player
feel bad for needing more training because it's something that
is just part of the gameplay experience and it was just so well done.
I, I just, I, I've, I've had other games that were similar, like Monster Hunter has a,
a very easy access training area as well.
But this one just felt so like rooted to the,
the core of the game itself that it was just, just perfect.
Like
it,
it made it easier to beat bosses that I don't think I would
have been able to beat otherwise because I was able to practice so often
and not feel like it was taken me out of the game because it
was just part of what CAL has to do to be the biggest,
you know, bad ass in the galaxy.
-- So -- yeah,
and then it's super encouraging when you have it builds into
the game and it feels natural to use it like that.
Like if players feel it's integrated,
they are more likely to use it and build up their skills
and have a better likelihood of having that memory or attention.
If this kind of thing is like tucked away in another menu or isn't, you know,
something that's only locked to a specific d difficulty or whatever,
they're going to be less likely to use it
because it's other r
and you know, players with cognitive disabilities, like we don't want to be up
there, we are regular players.
Um And so taking that time as a developer to make these
instances core to the experience and as weird as it sounds,
give the player permission and know that it's ok to do.
This is actually really important and your language and how you access these
things really can help inform how comfortable the player feels in engaging stuff,
like your tutorials,
your trials or even going back and looking
up information that they already had available.
Yeah.
And it's one of those things too where it's not
only something that's there that's a nice to have,
but it's encouraged to use,
it's something to help people like hone in on their skills and get better or
how many times, like, raise your hand. Have you put a game down for like two weeks?
And then when I don't remember any of the controls,
I don't remember anything about this game.
And so this is a perfect thing, right?
Because it's helpful for, let's say you pick up an item and you're like,
I just literally don't get how to do this.
I wanna like practice it.
I wanna understand it more,
really comprehend the mechanics around it and really
have that information processing and that kind of
space with no sort of penalty to practice.
But it's also like helpful too if you're just like,
I literally just don't remember what's happening anymore.
That that happens to me all the time and I can see many of you as well.
All right. Next up dead space.
Oh
This one, I mean, technically this is your game. I just put the slides in.
So I'm not sure who's supposed
to.
I
mean, maybe, maybe we could do a little, a little too for here. Like
so, um in addition to a DH D,
I do have PTSD and for me being able to make an informed decision is really important.
Um I am really lucky that I have most of my ptsd under control,
but I need to be able to make informed decisions
like many disabilities,
how impactful it is varies day to day.
There will be days that like I am unstoppable
and I can see things related to my trauma.
Absolutely no problem.
There are other days if I'm not in a good spot
that seeing that content can actually trigger a physical flashback.
Um I hope that you never have to experience one. But if you do have one,
your body literally feels like it did at the time that you experienced
the trauma.
Um And it is weird. You are both in your body and not at the same time,
it it's not, is not great. Uh Zero out of 10 do not recommend.
And there, there are some games that have some like pretty shitty content warnings,
like um I won't name the game.
Uh
but there was one that I played that the content warning was basically like, hey,
this game talks about serious topics.
Cool.
The topics in the game
were actually um I mean, these are graphic, it was rape,
the holocaust
and child sexual abuse.
And what like, how are you supposed to make an informed decision
around those things if you're only told,
hey,
there's serious topics in here,
like maybe one day I, I don't want to play a game about the holocaust,
it's OK for me to make that decision and it's
about empowering me to make those kinds of decisions.
And as a person who loves horror games who very
frequently have um these very serious or traumatic title or topics
I really, really want to have that,
which is why I was so obsessed with the Dead Space remake.
And I can also to uh reiterate some things. So we actually did
a talk at G AC which you're the co-director of.
Um I did a talk with uh Christian and myself talking about this
where specifically for Dead Space, there is kind of two features happening.
One is that you can hide the scenes visually, hide them.
And the second one is that we have a content warning that comes up
before the scene happens and we try to time it so that players,
if they read the content warning,
they can make that informed decision to say
not today, maybe I'll pause and you know, come back later.
And actually this goes back to
like informed purchasing decision conversation where
actually the motive website has an entire section dedicated
to these content warnings that show how they work,
but also to details each content warning.
So you can just read them
before you even jump into the game.
So we try to do that for folks so they can make that decision
before they ever even purchase the game if that this is something
that they want to experience.
Yeah, and it, it connects back to what we were saying earlier.
Like for me, as someone with PTSD, my processing sometimes just breaks.
And so it's me looking at my machine
and being like,
do I think it can handle the stress or do I think
that my processing will shut down if I look at that topic?
Which is why having these are are so great and why again, like, I cannot like stress.
How great of an example dead space is
in both being very transparent about the topic matter
that is covered and when it is covered in and also telling you in the game.
So which is double great as someone with PTSD and a DH D?
Oh, sure, I could read. Oh, chapter five is about this.
Do you think I remember that when I get to chapter five?
Absolutely not. So the the Ingra
slider like it helps both sides of my cognitive disabilities.
Thanks.
And I wanna say if you have any questions related to that feature,
definitely just go first to the J A conference talk
because your question will probably be answered for that.
OK?
And then this was the one that you sent me for grounded,
which has an arachnophobia mode, which I have arachnophobia.
So thank God,
I mean, well, by we can do the same thing,
you can talk about what it meant to use a player
and then I can talk about it from the developer side.
-- OK. -- So um
unfortunately, this is a phobia that makes a lot of games just unplayable for me.
Uh But luckily this one turned something that like I I physically cannot look at
without feeling ill and like I'm gonna panic and not just be able to function
to something that's honestly kind of cute. Like look at it
and the way that the the the option comes up
is just really like it's so neutral in tone.
This game provides several accessibility options that make it easier to read,
see and hear.
There's also an option to reduce the spider likeness of the spiders in the game.
Would you like to access those options? Now?
It's yes, so fast. Like it doesn't make the player feel shame.
It doesn't actually like have any kind of
negation whatsoever.
It's just an option,
it's completely un neutral choice and it just
makes the game like playable like it's just
accessibility in, in a nutshell.
Like we're not trying to tell you what's good or what's bad.
We're just making it playable for you.
Yeah.
And this was actually something that originated from out of the dead team itself.
So I do want to be transparent, this feature shift before I was in my role.
So I am telling the story of, I have heard from the devs,
I was not personally on the feature,
I don't wanna steal credit uh because they're amazing.
Um But
basically, there were some folks internally who are like, I am not into spiders.
Um And so like this is making it stressful.
So there was actually user research done internally within Xbox
where we ended up taking people from across Xbox,
not just on this particular DEV team and talking
to them about their experiences and how their arachnophobia
manifests, which is why uh so it's not called the spider slider,
but I like to call it the spider slider.
Um how that manifests. So uh what you see here is the danger dumpling.
So this is the least spidey spider
that you can get.
But for some people like the there was, you know, kind of a, a middle ground of like,
oh when it is full spider that is when and
I can't handle it. But when it was like halfway through the spider slider,
they were absolutely fine.
So that kind of shows that how, how spidey it had to be to try the phobia
was unique for everyone.
So being able to customize it on uh unblocked people with that phobia,
but again, it comes down to, we kind of hit on it earlier, like,
you know, being able to stand up to a spider isn't the key part of grounded.
It could be any creature like it didn't actually matter what creature
it was as long as it fit in the grounded universe.
So if we could unlock the ability for more people to play
by just making it a danger dumpling instead of a spider, like
that's pretty straightforward because again, like
that, it wasn't explicit in the game score loop that it had to be a spider.
A spider makes sense for grounded, contextually.
I mean, you little people and you're fighting bugs and all that stuff.
But like,
why did it have to be a spider?
No,
it was really about this kind of combat moment and this having something
bigger than you that you needed to be able to make decisions around,
you know, didn't actually
have to be a spider.
Do we include the example of the Lass
Aia
to the setting that they added?
Oh,
I don't know if we did, but I,
know, I'm
sorry,
that was my
one. Actually that's really related to this too. Is, um,
was it Horizon Zero Dawn added recently a
thalassophobia? Hi. I have
thalassophobia. In fact, I found out from playing sea thieves
that
Theia and
while I was playing the game, I was on the ship and as it left the thing,
I started just screaming because I was like, oh, no.
And then I remembered my husband was like, are you ok? And I'm like, no, I'm not. Ok.
This is terrible
crying. And then he's like, he just turned off my monitor and I was like,
00 my gosh, never again. And so one thing I really, really thrilled.
Well, first of all that game added a mode that makes it a little easier for me,
which we can talk about that another time.
But for Horizon Zero Dawn, they added the Las
Aia mode which is like, basically
you have infinite uh breath.
You have like all these different features to kind of remove
the actual encapsulated fear around the actual fear of uh sorry,
I should have said it's the fear of giant open water.
So the idea of like, no way, like
if you put me on a cruise ship, I will probably cry.
Although I really want to go on the Disney cruise so bad.
-- Maybe one day if you blindfold me and -- maybe, maybe,
maybe you just always have an interior cabin.
I know.
But then again, I like horror games.
So maybe it'll just be like a horror experience the entire time for me.
Y'all are having fun, you know, having your mixed drinks and I'm crying, you know,
I just, I I know this isn't the topic of this panel,
but I'm picturing you and being scared,
but like it having like a kind of like five
nights at Freddy's vibe because it's a Disney cruise.
Y'all are hilarious. Oh my God.
It's funny you mentioned Horizon Zero. No,
because the,
the slot I forgot to put in for myself was Horizon Forbidden West
because they added a feature that allows you to change your concentration time
and to have Aloy do an auto heel and also basically remove some of the load
of trying to remember all the things you have to do at once to loot the,
the robots as you're killing them to, to remember how to,
to do everything
and it still works in a way to make it feel like you're still playing as aloy.
It doesn't make the game more like easy.
It, it is still extremely challenging, but it removes a bit of the, uh,
of the mental load of having to remember to do so many things to avoid dying.
And it's just,
it's, it's just a fantastically accessible game overall.
But I really appreciated the cognitive features
that they added to make like hunting,
not quite as like arduous and like
I died so many times. And I was like, let me just turn the features on and like it just,
it just made the game just even more fun for me.
All right. So next,
what, uh,
cognitive sensibility features or design choices would you
like to see become standard in the future?
So, uh,
navigation assistance is one I added because I really appreciate games that don't
just throw you out like naked and afraid you're just in the woods.
You're just out here trying to find your way.
Uh I want every game in the future to have. Just press L three.
Tell me where I'm going, give me a ping, give me a direction, something,
um, an easy to access controls guide just
knowing what controls do what.
And I, I'll let you go on about your favorite thing.
I mean, yeah, useful trigger warnings.
If you have a trigger warning, that's not useful.
Like, thanks for wasting both of our time. Like, just, please just make it useful.
And Morgan, I know you suggested the, um, tutorials especially.
-- That was your thing. -- Oh, yeah. Absolutely.
Which kind of goes back to like Jedi Survivor.
And actually another, I'll bring up an example for y'all is immortal FEX rising.
Is that how you say?
Oh, yes. Yes,
I'm not.
But, uh,
it's Phoenix Rising, you know.
Well, it's really nice though because you can actually click through the tutorial.
It's always inside the menu
and you can click on it and they show like visual demonstrations
with like actual like this is the input, this is how it's done.
Which again, hi, how many people forgot what the,
what the mechanics are of a game because like all the time for me.
And so
the idea of having those always available tutorials
that also let you the ideally interact with
it because that helps with that kind of
cognitive connection of like understanding the mechanics.
But also too,
it's good to have like those visual demonstrations of showing this is how and this
is what it's supposed to look like to help kind of build that learning capability.
And in fact,
I think here some folks will talk about this like tutorial organization and
I've seen folks even play around with the idea of like learnability,
the idea of like being able to solidify that in
the memory and then also being able to revisit it
whenever you want to.
I once again, reinforce your understanding and reinforce your comprehension.
And also too, if you just
literally don't remember.
And speaking of, don't remember, uh,
persistent onscreen prompts like that you can toggle on and off as an option.
But like, I really appreciate how in monster hunter,
I don't remember how to attack. It's been three months. Oh, it's right there.
Literally, it is always right there.
I don't remember how to swing from tree to treat. Wait, there it is.
Like, it's just,
it's just part of the heads up display and it just makes it so much easier.
And I would love if more games did this.
So I know that there's a big move to
make games more cinematic like you're watching a movie.
And I'm like, but III, I want something to remind me that it's a game.
It's ok for the game to know it's a game like I'm, I'm,
I'm good with it being a press a to attack in the corner like an arcade.
Like,
-- so I know it's aesthetic for a lot of games, but I think it can still be -- accessible.
Oh,
yeah.
And I, I'm one of the people who also like, forget controls all the time,
especially if there's a game where
there's something like a stealth element where you're
supposed to come behind someone and then,
like, do something very specifically
to stealth, kill them versus like loudly throw an ax or something.
I will accidentally loudly throw an ax unless that like,
hey, don't forget, just, just press L one and you'll stab them silently.
Like I need to have that reminder. I'll just be like,
and no,
and then everyone will be alerted and I'll die because
I could not in the heat of the moment.
Remember what button is the, do it silently? This is the stealth part of the game.
You idiot button.
I'm always the meme. I tried to kill a guy and I gave him my rations
every
song.
There's too many controls.
Oh Man. Ok. And I remember Morgan you had wanted
to expand a little bit more on better motion and SIV considerations.
Yeah, absolutely. Especially for this one.
Remember we were talking about earlier like the overload and
stuff like that because it's not just the information you're presenting
but the extreme of that information, right?
So for example, if I have like, yeah,
there's one thing to have a prompt that says like press a but if you have a flat
someone's face and there's all these visual effects around that's
changing the way that someone can process the information.
And so we wanna make sure or if it's moving around too, which then
we can talk about motion sickness to all this is connected. It's the brain.
Welcome to the brain.
Yeah, I know
all three of us also get motion sick. Uh Thank you for asking.
So we we're just a combo the three of us.
But um that's something we need to consider.
And actually, I will give a shout out to Electronic Arts actually,
which released Iris uh last year,
which is a free photo sensitivity testing tool designed for games.
Uh Anyone can use it, you can go to our website and you can download the code,
you have to build a front end for it.
But yeah, that's a tool that's available to everyone in this room right now.
So definitely check it out.
And I definitely um
the cost is 399 again, um versus the other ones out there,
which costs um significantly more money.
I just want to reiterate if you're looking to do it,
that one is very cost effective and that you don't have to pay for it.
And this last one I added based on my experience uh in game development class with
other like Indi devs who were just starting out and learning how to make games,
teaching everyone who is learning how to make games right now that it's a good choice
to just at least attempt to present information
in as many ways as possible when developing
a game can actually help you figure out ways to make your game more accessible early
in the process as opposed to trying to finish the game and then do it later.
Because if you're thinking about how your player is getting information from you,
it will give you an idea of like, where, what,
where the gaps are and what you're making so that you can
actually help them get over that barrier before you've even made it.
And a lot of my classmates were asking me
because they know that I do access the consulting.
But I also like, I'm working in on real and I'm learning how to make games on my own.
But like, I can't, I, I can't make a game accessible by myself. I'm just one person.
I'm like,
you do not have to single-handedly hit this checklist that we,
we all like have in our imaginations of every single possible access need.
Like that's not what we're saying, we're saying based on what your game is,
what information is important, important for you to give the player.
And how else can you do that using the blueprints that you've learned in class?
Like I'm not trying to tell you, you learn everything right now.
But knowing what, you know,
how else can you do this?
Just starting with that small thought can really
empower a developer to reach a goal.
They didn't know they could reach because they didn't know it was possible. So
the, the gist of it is that I preach this everywhere,
even in the drive through mcdonald's,
like we're gonna make things more accessible,
ma'am. This is a Wendy's. Exactly.
Uh You know, I, I absolutely love that.
Um Jay added and brought this up um because it again,
gives me a chance to talk about Alan Wake too.
Um
So one of the, the really key things is like you can do this,
like re giving information to people and cool and
creative ways that can be enjoyed by everyone.
Um So if you haven't played Allen Wake Two,
it's a narrative horror um single player game and it has a very
complex story that has uh you swap in and out between two characters.
But one of the things that the characters have is their mind
board and particularly Saga who is playing uh she's an FBI detective
trying to solve this case. As you go through,
there is literally a board where as you learn new things,
you pin it to the board and you get to connect pieces of information.
And when Saga learns something important,
it gets put on the board. And if she is able to draw
conclusions from learning multiple things, she's like, oh case close,
puts a note on it about what she learned from
all of the information that she was able to collect.
And this exists that the player is always able to
go and look at it.
And you can always go back through any of the key pieces of information that you have
and you can even go reopen closed case files so that you can learn more information.
So for me, that's a really,
really cool way of providing this information
I received primarily via audio via inga conversations
in another way,
but also going a step further and contextualizing it with other key
pieces of story information that I have learned in the game.
And that also helps inform what your next objective is going to be.
So you can also view your current game story uh objective at any given time
on the same thing.
So for me,
I view that entire mind board as like a
great accessibility tool because it gives me that information,
it gives me that recap, but other people love it as well.
So like
you don't have to be prescriptive, just like Jay was saying,
like you can come up with cool ways to integrate this level in accessibility
that uh is new and radical and engages all of your player base.
And actually this, I know we kind of are touching and getting into this where
so often times when I'm working with different studios
and DEV teams when we talk about accessibility,
um you typically can buck it into
uh options. So play as you want.
So think of the idea of like turning down effects, turning down brightness,
that sort of thing versus that by design what you're talking about right now.
So the idea of you can make a game accessible to people who have temporary,
permanent or situational cognitive conditions just by design.
Exactly as you're describing, you don't need this.
This is like this story of all of our
lives is often times when people say accessibility,
I have accessibility menu and it's like, that's great.
But like also too, what are we doing in the actual fundamental design itself?
We can elevate
our games when we're thinking about accessibility early
and often fundamentally through the actual design itself.
And this is an excellent example that you brought up for this.
Oh yeah, you can see I'm getting a live like pedestal right now,
like I have accessibility by design,
but of course, it's a balance.
Both will always be necessary,
but this is an excellent example in the
context of cognitive accessibility where you can have it
baked in. That's all right. I'm making a baker reference because my last name is
-- Oh gosh. -- OK.
And that's it. Thanks for coming to our talk.
If you have any questions, we have a microphone set up.
All the polite applause is so sweet. Thank you.
And again, please don't forget to fill out your survey.
If you liked us. If you didn't like us, please don't fill it out,
please do.
Yes. Um
Is this
all?
Ok.
Hi. Uh
Tara
Thomas.
Hi.
Very nice talk and I, I um
I just want to add something uh that I
experienced from been working with people with
intellectual disability in the last few years.
And
that's a group that is highly dependent on
personalization or individual settings. At
the same time, they can't often do those settings themselves.
They are relying on other people to do it.
Like for instance, at day activity centers, staff that
uh need to help them to set things up.
And I've
worked also with games in these settings. And
one of the issues is that the staff is not tech savvy, they're not gamers,
they don't have to help to work with people.
So it's a hard time to
get them to actually learn how to make us have things and understand what the game
uh
set things are and what it means for the person and so on.
So
it has to be made
super simple so that the staff can actually understand
how to adapt it for the individual person.
Uh One way of doing it could be to have like instead of having a menu with settings,
you can have like a wizard style, like
you get one
question at a time
step by step and then you could
more easily at least um make correct settings.
But there's another way uh it is proposed by a
professor here in the US called Greg Van Der Huyen,
who is uh kind of
superstar in accessibilities behind the W three C.
Uh um We c A guidelines and many other things.
And he has come up with this
concept called the Global Public Inclusive Infrastructure GP
i.net.
And one of the ideas there is that you can have some
um universally
available um
preferences that is individualized and easily available.
So um you could adapt any type of
uh application.
It's not
smart
games, but I think it can be also applied for that
will require of course, that the game industry joins forces and come up with this
kind of a universal format that all game companies could
um
apply in their games.
So it means that if a person with
intellectual disability would need something,
all they need is a QR code or some
near field communication, a little card or something that
-- now this person is playing this game, adapt the -- game.
So
you didn't have a question.
No, it's just a comment. And then addition,
you're focusing not on, on the game itself, that's great. But also think about
how to make the set things because otherwise all the features of
um accessibility can be in vain because
they
will not be able to play the game anyway, because the settings cannot
be.
Yeah.
Uh We have limited time for questions, but uh this will,
this will be a great topic to cover at the uh the round table.
Um The IgD, a game accessibility
round table where we can have a, a proper discussion. Uh uh Great point. Thank you.
Hey, there, I'm Lindsay. Um First of all, great talk um
as someone with a DH D like I resonated with so many things and it was just awesome.
Um So my que
my question relates to
um my role, actually, I'm a narrative designer at Hasbro.
So I work on tabletop.
Um
So
working on working in narrative on tabletop
um means that you're responsive responsible for a lot of the
onboarding and making rules clear and accessible for um everyone.
So I was just wondering in your experience with playing tabletop games,
are there any,
is there anything that sticks out to you specifically
that you think could improve the onboarding experience?
Oh, good question.
Well, uh so for me, I'm handing me a rulebook is like a no go.
Uh it just, it's not gonna work. Um So for me, it's always um
I am more like, is it, well,
the number one way that I will learn a game is if someone is there to teach me,
um which I get, you cannot ship yourself with every game.
Um As much as I'm sure you would love to.
Um So for me, I do a lot better with like
um
so
normally I do not do well with verbal instructions.
So I acknowledge that what I'm getting ready to say also
doesn't sound like it would make a lot of sense.
So a lot of times it's visually being able to
see what is happening like the cause and effect.
So for me,
it's not as much like verbally hearing instructions like that's
not gonna work either because I will stop being intention.
But ha having even if it's just like gifts in the middle of written instructions,
like, hey, like you're watching a board game or here's your paper.
Uh Do you want to see this instead, like,
go visit this website where we've inserted gifts in, in the instructions
that is way more likely to sink in because I will see like the connection
of what I just read and what it translates to in the game itself.
So that's something I need. But I know m
you've got a lot more
like actual
Morgan said, the actual accessibility work board games. So,
yeah, no, but it's absolutely true.
When you're thinking about this, you want to connect the dots, right?
And so actually, well, speaking of board games specifically,
one thing that I like is
so I used to do consultancy work over at Exploding Kittens,
which is a lot of fun helping with accessibility there.
Super cool.
Uh And one thing that they value a lot is making sure that they have very
short videos that are super fast but very
instructional on exactly how the game goes.
In fact,
oh, I wish it was Carol's here. She could say,
but they have like literally a rule where it's like if you have it within X minutes,
players should be able to get it.
And so this is something that's really helpful because it reinforces hi,
I have a DH D.
So when I love board games, I will like drool if you sit me down,
I will just like not understand what's happening.
I see all the colors and the pieces. And I'm just like,
my brain goes this way and then people like, hey Morgan, I'm like, yes.
Oh sorry, you were talking and compounded with the deaf thing.
And so you wanna make sure that you have things that can
create these actual like synapse connections for players show don't tell,
right?
Interact. That's why too. I like them with board games where they have like
uh like f like put these five cards pull from the deck and interact,
that type of stuff because it helps people go.
Oh, I see.
So in a situation like this, you can kind of like design your games around that.
And so you should check out though for exploding kittens.
They did a talk last year on accessibility and how they've been thinking about
-- it for board games and they -- did a good one this year too.
OK.
Cool. Thank you so much.
Um Just a real plug in also quick.
There's a game called um Side Effects that has a QR code that you can
watch someone actually role play the whole um the game um logic in the loop.
I love when there's a QR code to a video.
I'm also an adult who has a DH D and I'm an occupational therapist.
So I work with kids who have a DH D.
I was lately diagnosed as an adult while working with kids
who have a DH D on the spectrum and you know,
or, and have also physical disabilities.
I also saw a lot of myself and I was like, wow, this makes a lot of sense.
And, um, I'm struggling.
Wow, this makes a lot of sense. Oh my God. Ok.
Um, I'm seeing, you know, a lot of them end up, you know, really relating to me.
And I was like, yeah, that was me. You are me and we, I get you.
Um,
So,
um for my question is um for someone like me,
I'm kind of trying to transition out of the clinical field
and I'm, I've always been a gamer. I always been,
I love a DH D and D and D those things
go really well together for a lot of beautiful reasons.
Um But I'm trying to get into more of the accessibility and video gaming world and
um I love the fact that you guys touched upon executive functioning.
Um basically,
in all the way you break down stuff and making cognitive accessibility in games.
What would you give as an advice for someone who's looking to get into
and kind of doing what you guys do? So
great question.
Uh We all have such different paths. Yeah.
So if you uh ask anyone who works in game accessibility,
how did you get into game accessibility?
We all came from radically different backgrounds because it's such a new field
overall.
Um You know, stand alone game accessibility,
jobs have not existed for a very long time.
So they,
I guess the good news is there's not a clear cut like path
forward and you can use your previous experiences and forge your own way.
Um, and
the bad news is, is there's not anywhere clear cut.
So I can't give you a guidebook and you're going to have to forge your own way.
Um But honestly, I think
a lot of good accessibility
work comes from connections and being able to learn from a wide
breath of people because everyone in
accessibility comes from different backgrounds.
You are constantly learning from everyone else in accessibility.
Like I learned shit from these two constantly.
-- So for me, -- I came from education and I work in games now. How did that happen? So,
yeah.
Um So like, honestly, I,
I would start with finding a game accessibility community
that it's easy for you to connect with.
Whether it's um finding people who are doing groups uh
meet ups locally or whether it's joining something online.
Like the game accessibility conference
has um an online discord
and discord.
It just finding those things and then making the
the connections and you'll like, again, like,
I there isn't a guide but like you'll start to
see your path forward as you get more information.
-- So that's not very helpful, but it's honest. No, -- but it's true too.
Just to add,
sorry is that there's like also things like accessible
like game jams are happening and stuff like that.
And so that's a fantastic way to start.
And I will always say this,
it's good to focus on accessibly but accessibly touches everything in games,
right?
That's what we've been talking about.
There's probably people here from every single background,
you know, doing different things in games.
And so the nice thing is to get into accessibility, no one's stopping you, right?
If you work in games, you can just do accessibility.
And I think that's the beauty of it, right?
And then as you fall in love with it, if you find that this is something I
want to focus more and more on,
then you can kind of start exploring the career paths for that.
I mean, that's basically I was a game designer.
I mean, like we just kind of all kind of fell more and more into this field in that way.
So I wish there was like a manual. I don't think any job has a manual in this industry.
-- No, -- but this one definitely does it.
-- Do you need the -- slower?
Ok.
Has to be accessible also.
Hi, I'm Frederick and I have a question for uh for Morgan about the, the
oops, sorry.
How about the trigger warning? And
the despite how can you avoid spoilers uh
with this uh
-- have you avoid spoilers in -- the trigger warnings of dead
space?
Oh, that's a great question. And I have to give the full blown credit.
So for the trigger warnings in dead space.
We call them content warnings and pick your tomato, tomato, right?
Um But the way we avoided,
that was we went through the entire script and the narrative team went above
and beyond to make sure that they
wrote language that wouldn't necessarily spoil the,
if you've played dead space,
you can imagine that there might be spoilers as you're saying,
certain things that if you know the game that kind
of involves mental health at the end of the day.
And so
it was completely on the narrative team and they went
through and did like mitigation and went through different risks,
looked through the actual language itself to make sure.
Is it telling the players what type of content and I talk about
this in the G A conference um where a lot of the content,
warnings are grounded specifically in
violence towards humans.
And so we made sure to write the warnings in
a way that can convey that information quickly one,
but also make sure that it doesn't spoil anything else
or kind of pull someone out of that immersion.
I give the full blown credit to the narrative team for achieving that.
Ok. Thank you.
Great question.
Yeah,
that's a hard one too if you know the game.
Mhm
Hi. Um I work for a platform which is mostly centered around user created content.
Um Do you have any suggestions for how we can, you know, add accessibility? But for,
you know, UGC for things that are end user created.
Is it like MODS is art like what's the content?
Uh sort of everything? It's uh VR Chat?
-- Oh -- OK.
Mhm.
Well, I think the first thing is um
so accessibility in any space is as much about culture chain,
culture change as it is about the actual technical or design implementations.
Um So honestly, like one of the first things that I would do is
because it's reliant on UGC.
Um Like you cannot personally go in and verify every
single piece of content to ever to be accessible.
I'm that's just not feasible, realistically like that does not scale.
And so honestly,
what I would start with would be having
an educational moment or push for your platform
to do the education and training to give,
give to your content creators so that they
understand what it is and what it's important.
So the first step would be kind of creating that educational moment.
But that the second thing is you'll need to figure out
some sort of rewards like if they have done it,
how can you reward them?
So like one of the things that exists on um not just xbox,
but also playstation is our accessibility tags in the storefront.
So if you meet certain criteria, like your subtitles are the right size,
the right contrast, et cetera, et cetera,
you can get the subtitle tag in
the storefront having subtitles does not guarantee you
the subtitle tag because they have to be good subtitles to get the tag,
right?
So like, is there a way where you could kind of have some process that, hey,
if a developer has said like, hey, we have done accessibility,
is there a way that you can make their UGC more prominent?
Can you give it a higher rating?
Um I don't know enough about uh I get VR six, so I don't really go into
chat and that kind of thing.
-- Um But -- that's kind of how SEO works for accessible the outside of games, right?
If you're adding like all text at the SEO actually improves for it.
So you can think about it through that lens of rewarding.
I,
I love that rewarding the players for thinking about accessible
design and those who are creating the content itself.
So
I
don't want to spread misinformation,
but I think Roblox might have a very similar system to this.
So I think that's right. I think they, they,
I think they even had like, they put out, they put out guidelines too.
They actually know
all I'm doing is subconsciously copying what Roblox did a couple of years ago.
Yeah.
Thank you.
-- We -- have time for one more question.
Hi, my name is Monica and I will stab my eye. Um You
know,
I um recently like started a Uiux Tech Club and I really
wanna include accessibility like in the planning phase as opposed to like
and
um but I'm, I have no idea like at
all about accessibility besides like, you know,
like the link for the URL and adding a LT.
And then so I'm learning a lot and I'm part
of the video game development club at my school.
And I'm usually like in some kind of leadership or like game manager position
honestly, like, we're all learning and there's not much time. So
I've experienced like, at least in the game
area where like accessibility is kind of just chopped off.
So I was thinking, and I heard that there's not really a manual,
but I was thinking are there is some like resources
out there that are like super bite size size.
So we can focus on
one aspect of accessibility because we also kind of like not argue, but we're like,
what about subtitles?
What about
something else? And I'm like, I don't know what you want to pick.
-- So it's, it's -- kind of hard.
Yeah. So there,
there is a lot to like we've all been accessibility for years.
So like what we would do would be different.
So I guess there, there's two things for for each individual title,
like what you go to tackle will not be the same because it,
it is gonna be dependent on your team size, your tech, what you've already done.
Um And what is the fastest easiest most bang for your buck is gonna vary.
Um That being said, um there are a bunch of guidelines that are publicly available
um including the Xbox accessibility guidelines, but they are very, very dense.
Um So for me, an accessibility expert,
like those are really easy to work with because I already have that background.
Something that may be more easy for you
to consume is um game accessibility guidelines.com.
And one of the things with uh that website
is it's broken down into basic intermediate and advanced
so that if you are brand new, you know, kind of like, hey,
these are some of the most important ones that you you can start with and,
and tackle those.
Um There is also some really great other things
that um Xbox has put out um transparency.
I did not work on them, but the team of folks who did are fantastic.
Um such as um there is
Microsoft Gaming accessibility fundamentals training course, which is a,
a learning course that you can take that will
give you a lot of really great information.
Um There is also everything has acronym acronyms and
I never remember any of them and I feel
really bad because Brandon's right back there and he
would like actually know the names of these things.
Um But one is the,
the the
person, there's, there's one that has personas that like break down some K
cons,
00, I'm on the hook, I'm
Gaming Experience, Disability Guide. Um
uh and there's also a great one on um
in person events uh that uh Brandon actually wrote.
Um but I would recommend all of those resources,
I guess I want
to start.
Yeah. Thank you. Uh And I think with that we're out of time. They open the doors.
Thank you. Don't forget to put out your survey,
out your survey.