[Music]
All right. Hello everybody. Um, as Tom said, I'm Jamie Anton, and uh, today I'm
said, I'm Jamie Anton, and uh, today I'm going to talk with you a little bit
going to talk with you a little bit about narrative paper prototyping. Uh,
about narrative paper prototyping. Uh, this talk is going to have three main
this talk is going to have three main parts. Um, first I'm going to be talking
parts. Um, first I'm going to be talking about uh, the problems that a narrative
about uh, the problems that a narrative paper prototype is designed to solve.
paper prototype is designed to solve. Sort of why prototype for narrative and
Sort of why prototype for narrative and uh, what a narrative prototype is. I'm
uh, what a narrative prototype is. I'm going to talk you through a building
going to talk you through a building process, how you can actually make a
process, how you can actually make a narrative paper prototype effectively,
narrative paper prototype effectively, and I'm going to uh finish up with just
and I'm going to uh finish up with just a couple notes on running, fixing, and
a couple notes on running, fixing, and using that prototype you've created to
using that prototype you've created to improve your final game. Uh, first, a
improve your final game. Uh, first, a little bit about me. I'm a game designer
little bit about me. I'm a game designer and a writer. I'm working at uh Disney I
and a writer. I'm working at uh Disney I have a great job at Disney digital
have a great job at Disney digital publishing. I make interactive
publishing. I make interactive children's story books and apps. Um, but
children's story books and apps. Um, but that's that's my current job. Um, that's
that's that's my current job. Um, that's not everything that I've done. I I've
not everything that I've done. I I've had a lot of different um I've sort of
had a lot of different um I've sort of made many different kinds of games over
made many different kinds of games over the years that cover a wide range of
the years that cover a wide range of interests. Um, first, I've made games
interests. Um, first, I've made games that allow players to uh be creative
that allow players to uh be creative with their choices. I've been really
with their choices. I've been really interested in games that create positive
interested in games that create positive and lasting player outcomes. I've worked
and lasting player outcomes. I've worked in games for health and games for
in games for health and games for change. Um, I've worked on a few games
change. Um, I've worked on a few games where the focus was to really generate
where the focus was to really generate powerful and unexpected experiences for
powerful and unexpected experiences for the player. Whether that's fear, as in
the player. Whether that's fear, as in hush, uh, delight and happiness, as in
hush, uh, delight and happiness, as in my work with, uh, Matt Corban
my work with, uh, Matt Corban Winterbottom, uh, or tranquility or
Winterbottom, uh, or tranquility or sorrow, or some weird mix of emotions,
sorrow, or some weird mix of emotions, as in, uh, the game The Pond. Um, and
as in, uh, the game The Pond. Um, and I've also been really interested in
I've also been really interested in games that connect players to story in
games that connect players to story in new and interesting ways.
new and interesting ways. So, uh, in this process the I'm, as you
So, uh, in this process the I'm, as you can see, I'm sort of interested in games
can see, I'm sort of interested in games that don't fit right into a clear mold.
that don't fit right into a clear mold. I'm interested in innovating a little
I'm interested in innovating a little bit. And to do that, I've really turned
bit. And to do that, I've really turned to paper prototyping. And I'm huge on
to paper prototyping. And I'm huge on this concept of paper prototyping as a
this concept of paper prototyping as a way to make great games. Um, so first of
way to make great games. Um, so first of all, let's define our terms. This is
all, let's define our terms. This is pretty this is pretty basic, but what is
pretty this is pretty basic, but what is a prototype? A prototype is a mockup or
a prototype? A prototype is a mockup or draft of a potential game. Um, and it's
draft of a potential game. Um, and it's made to sort of sort of narrow the risk
made to sort of sort of narrow the risk of making something that doesn't work.
of making something that doesn't work. Let's say I wanted to buy a tuxedo. Um,
Let's say I wanted to buy a tuxedo. Um, but I but I'm not sure if it's really
but I but I'm not sure if it's really going to work for me. I'm not sure if
going to work for me. I'm not sure if it's going to be um if it's going to be
it's going to be um if it's going to be a good investment. This shirt is sort of
a good investment. This shirt is sort of my prototype of a tuxedo. Um, it is
my prototype of a tuxedo. Um, it is focused.
focused. So, so the the tuxedo shirt is not
So, so the the tuxedo shirt is not focused, but um a prototype, a good one,
focused, but um a prototype, a good one, is usually focused on a core aspect of
is usually focused on a core aspect of the experience. I guess in this case,
the experience. I guess in this case, just this is the core of the tuxedo. Um
just this is the core of the tuxedo. Um it's playable. Tuxedo is not playable,
it's playable. Tuxedo is not playable, but um but a game prototype is um and
but um but a game prototype is um and it's playable so that um you know, you
it's playable so that um you know, you basically want to make sure that people
basically want to make sure that people can really test it out. um it's made
can really test it out. um it's made quickly and it's basically a disposable
quickly and it's basically a disposable practice run of a larger project. Um
practice run of a larger project. Um so here's something that you might be
so here's something that you might be used to seeing as prototypes. This is a
used to seeing as prototypes. This is a this is a very common prototypes and
this is a very common prototypes and games. It's it's something that's used a
games. It's it's something that's used a lot. Uh the digital sandbox. It's
lot. Uh the digital sandbox. It's something that game makers use to early
something that game makers use to early on determine the game feel. you sort of
on determine the game feel. you sort of put players in a area with not much art
put players in a area with not much art with pieces of the game all over the
with pieces of the game all over the place and just see how they interact
place and just see how they interact with the controls and you figure out the
with the controls and you figure out the moment to moment and what feels good and
moment to moment and what feels good and that is incredibly important. Um, but it
that is incredibly important. Um, but it doesn't tell you everything about the
doesn't tell you everything about the experience of a game. In fact, there's a
experience of a game. In fact, there's a lot that that prototype doesn't tell
lot that that prototype doesn't tell you. Um, it really focuses on that
you. Um, it really focuses on that single moment of first contact with the
single moment of first contact with the game where you're sort of feeling
game where you're sort of feeling through and excited by this notion of,
through and excited by this notion of, "Oh, I can jump and swing my sword." Um,
"Oh, I can jump and swing my sword." Um, it's goal-f free. It's free of context.
it's goal-f free. It's free of context. And, uh, it doesn't really address this
And, uh, it doesn't really address this larger experience of a game. It doesn't
larger experience of a game. It doesn't address the game's narrative. Um, so
address the game's narrative. Um, so before I go too far into that statement,
before I go too far into that statement, I'm going to talk about what's a game
I'm going to talk about what's a game narrative. And I'm sure that there is
narrative. And I'm sure that there is there are many different answers to that
there are many different answers to that question in this room since we're at the
question in this room since we're at the narrative summit. Um, but I'm going to
narrative summit. Um, but I'm going to take a stab at what I think a game
take a stab at what I think a game narrative is. And bear with me for a
narrative is. And bear with me for a moment. Um, first I'm going to sort of
moment. Um, first I'm going to sort of point out the traditional narrative.
point out the traditional narrative. This is going to be very reductive. In a
This is going to be very reductive. In a traditional narrative, in books, in uh
traditional narrative, in books, in uh TV, in movies, uh, a hero is often
TV, in movies, uh, a hero is often called to action and through a series of
called to action and through a series of events, they strive to overcome
events, they strive to overcome challenges in order to achieve a goal.
challenges in order to achieve a goal. Um, and why is this an audience really
Um, and why is this an audience really in they really enjoy these narratives
in they really enjoy these narratives that you see this form uh this sort of
that you see this form uh this sort of basic structure in all sorts of
basic structure in all sorts of narratives that audiences relate to. Um,
narratives that audiences relate to. Um, and why? Because they can step inside
and why? Because they can step inside the shoes of one of at least one of
the shoes of one of at least one of these characters. They can empathize and
these characters. They can empathize and suddenly they feel like they're they get
suddenly they feel like they're they get the rush of that they're overcoming a
the rush of that they're overcoming a challenge and they get the excitement of
challenge and they get the excitement of trying to achieve a goal. Um, in a game
trying to achieve a goal. Um, in a game narrative, it's a little bit like this
narrative, it's a little bit like this traditional narrative structure, but
traditional narrative structure, but it's a little bit different as well. In
it's a little bit different as well. In a game narrative, the player is
a game narrative, the player is performing the actions that influence
performing the actions that influence events, and they're learning to master a
events, and they're learning to master a system and rules that you put in front
system and rules that you put in front of them to achieve their goal. So,
of them to achieve their goal. So, basically, a game narrative structure,
basically, a game narrative structure, the player is the
the player is the hero. And I just want to emphasize that
hero. And I just want to emphasize that because that's really important. the
because that's really important. the player is the hero. Um, so a lot of
player is the hero. Um, so a lot of games take a lot of time to try to uh
games take a lot of time to try to uh create an association between an avatar
create an association between an avatar and the player. They try to make you
and the player. They try to make you feel like you are this collection of
feel like you are this collection of pixels. You're Mario. You're Batman.
pixels. You're Mario. You're Batman. You're Cubert. Um, but the avatar is not
You're Cubert. Um, but the avatar is not the hero. The avatar's story is
the hero. The avatar's story is completely directed by an outside force.
completely directed by an outside force. It's the player that is chasing a goal
It's the player that is chasing a goal that's in their head, overcoming
that's in their head, overcoming challenges that have a uh that feel real
challenges that have a uh that feel real to them. It's the player that's taking
to them. It's the player that's taking the action. It they are the hero of the
the action. It they are the hero of the game narrative. Um so now that we've
game narrative. Um so now that we've talked a little bit about game narrative
talked a little bit about game narrative and prototyping, I'm going to talk a
and prototyping, I'm going to talk a little bit about narrative prototyping
little bit about narrative prototyping for narrative. Um which is not the
for narrative. Um which is not the normal mode of game prototyping. Um but
normal mode of game prototyping. Um but it is extremely popular and useful in
it is extremely popular and useful in other storytelling mediums. Um, so in
other storytelling mediums. Um, so in books, um, before an author spends
books, um, before an author spends months or years trying to create, uh,
months or years trying to create, uh, sort of write a story, they'll often go
sort of write a story, they'll often go to an outline or to some notes because
to an outline or to some notes because they want to do a smaller risk write up
they want to do a smaller risk write up to see if their narrative, the narrative
to see if their narrative, the narrative that they have planned, makes sense. Um,
that they have planned, makes sense. Um, in filmer TV now we have a uh a medium
in filmer TV now we have a uh a medium that's a little bit more
that's a little bit more complicated. Um, and there are a couple
complicated. Um, and there are a couple prototypes. First, there's a script
prototypes. First, there's a script which is just getting the ideas down on
which is just getting the ideas down on the page, seeing if the ideas make sense
the page, seeing if the ideas make sense in themselves. And then once you've
in themselves. And then once you've gotten through that big risk, you go to
gotten through that big risk, you go to the next level of risk. Does this do
the next level of risk. Does this do these ideas make sense visually? You
these ideas make sense visually? You create a storyboard. In animated films,
create a storyboard. In animated films, um, there are it's an even more complex
um, there are it's an even more complex medium. there's so many technical steps
medium. there's so many technical steps between the idea and the final product
between the idea and the final product and uh basically it's it's a much bigger
and uh basically it's it's a much bigger production. So prototypes get even more
production. So prototypes get even more important script storyboard then an
important script storyboard then an animatic where you see how it all this
animatic where you see how it all this storyboard looks set up in a camera so
storyboard looks set up in a camera so that you're not wasting time on shots
that you're not wasting time on shots that don't matter. Um, all these pro all
that don't matter. Um, all these pro all of these narrative prototypes addressed
of these narrative prototypes addressed huge risks and then smaller and smaller
huge risks and then smaller and smaller risks that these elaborate ideas that
risks that these elaborate ideas that people have for their stories only make
people have for their stories only make sense in their head. So games as a
sense in their head. So games as a narrative
narrative medium are undeniably complex. They have
medium are undeniably complex. They have everything that uh animated movies have
everything that uh animated movies have and more. You have to make all your
and more. You have to make all your pieces from scratch very often for this
pieces from scratch very often for this very literal presentation. turn an idea
very literal presentation. turn an idea to art and sound and animation and
to art and sound and animation and logic. Um, but that's not the biggest
logic. Um, but that's not the biggest risk in your game narrative. The biggest
risk in your game narrative. The biggest risk and unknown in games is the player.
risk and unknown in games is the player. Um, so if your premise and goals and
Um, so if your premise and goals and choices and challenges don't make sense
choices and challenges don't make sense to the player, if they don't line up,
to the player, if they don't line up, then you're sunk. Um, because the hero
then you're sunk. Um, because the hero doesn't is not interested in continuing
doesn't is not interested in continuing on this journey. So, let's put the hero
on this journey. So, let's put the hero in the narrative as cheaply as possible,
in the narrative as cheaply as possible, as early as we can. Um,
as early as we can. Um, basically, I think it's really useful
basically, I think it's really useful when you're addressing this risk of
when you're addressing this risk of games as a narrative to create a
games as a narrative to create a narrative prototype, a playable and
narrative prototype, a playable and flexible outline of the premise, the
flexible outline of the premise, the rules, the events, and the choices
rules, the events, and the choices that's made to answer some really
that's made to answer some really fundamental question of what's the
fundamental question of what's the hero's journey for the player. Do all
hero's journey for the player. Do all your pieces fit together into a
your pieces fit together into a compelling experience? And does it all
compelling experience? And does it all make
make sense?
sense? So, that's a big question. That's a
So, that's a big question. That's a really heavy question to try to tackle.
really heavy question to try to tackle. Um, and architecting something like that
Um, and architecting something like that digitally seems to me at least a bit
digitally seems to me at least a bit overwhelming. Uh, because we want this
overwhelming. Uh, because we want this narrative prototype to be flexible and
narrative prototype to be flexible and to be something that uh that players can
to be something that uh that players can interact with in a sort of fluid way. We
interact with in a sort of fluid way. We wanted to have lots of small in sort of
wanted to have lots of small in sort of address a bunch of the features that you
address a bunch of the features that you see from your larger game and uh respond
see from your larger game and uh respond to the player intelligently. Um in code
to the player intelligently. Um in code trying to build a prototype like this
trying to build a prototype like this would be could itself become a
would be could itself become a cumbersome and overreaching mess like
cumbersome and overreaching mess like Matrix Reloaded.
Matrix Reloaded. Um and but um so that is
Um and but um so that is why I suggest doing a narrative
why I suggest doing a narrative prototype on paper. Paper is quick and
prototype on paper. Paper is quick and easy and disposable. It allows for
easy and disposable. It allows for improvisation and imagination.
improvisation and imagination. Basically, if your game is a show
Basically, if your game is a show starring the player, the easiest way to
starring the player, the easiest way to get them engaged early is to basically
get them engaged early is to basically create this little narrative paper
create this little narrative paper prototype. Set up a cardboard TV
prototype. Set up a cardboard TV essentially and invite them inside. Or
essentially and invite them inside. Or put another way, make your narrative
put another way, make your narrative outline as a board
outline as a board game. Uh, so you might have one or two
game. Uh, so you might have one or two of two reactions at this point. You
of two reactions at this point. You might be saying, "Oh, cool. Okay, I'll
might be saying, "Oh, cool. Okay, I'll get started." Or you might be saying,
get started." Or you might be saying, "Okay, I have no idea how to do that. I
"Okay, I have no idea how to do that. I don't know how to make a narrative
don't know how to make a narrative outline as a game." Um, I've done this a
outline as a game." Um, I've done this a lot. I've done this for a few different
lot. I've done this for a few different projects. And so, I'm going to walk you
projects. And so, I'm going to walk you through my steps for creating um for
through my steps for creating um for creating a narrative prototype
creating a narrative prototype effectively. Um, the first thing is what
effectively. Um, the first thing is what you want before you get started. And
you want before you get started. And this is this is a set of the things that
this is this is a set of the things that you really need to have before you begin
you really need to have before you begin prototyping. You need an idea, which is
prototyping. You need an idea, which is pretty obvious. You need an idea that
pretty obvious. You need an idea that you're excited about for a game and a
you're excited about for a game and a willingness to expand it. Um, second
willingness to expand it. Um, second thing, believe it or not, I would say
thing, believe it or not, I would say for a narrative prototype is you need a
for a narrative prototype is you need a deadline. And I try to make this thing
deadline. And I try to make this thing quickly if I can because it it should be
quickly if I can because it it should be disposable. It will change. Um, I spent
disposable. It will change. Um, I spent at most 3 days or a hundth of my total
at most 3 days or a hundth of my total time frame on this prototype. You need
time frame on this prototype. You need some people who are willing to make this
some people who are willing to make this thing. That's probably you. Um, and you
thing. That's probably you. Um, and you can have someone else work on this with
can have someone else work on this with you, too, but I'd say one or at most two
you, too, but I'd say one or at most two people should be involved in the actual
people should be involved in the actual construction of a prototype. If you have
construction of a prototype. If you have a lot of collaborators, that doesn't
a lot of collaborators, that doesn't mean that you can't brainstorm and come
mean that you can't brainstorm and come up with ideas beforehand, but the people
up with ideas beforehand, but the people that are doing the building, you want to
that are doing the building, you want to keep that small because you have such a
keep that small because you have such a short time frame and want ideas to be
short time frame and want ideas to be really pure and clean. Um, and you want
really pure and clean. Um, and you want some simple supplies. Um, so a couple
some simple supplies. Um, so a couple things that are important here. little
things that are important here. little dry erase board is can be very useful.
dry erase board is can be very useful. Um, playing cards, a couple pieces from
Um, playing cards, a couple pieces from old board games. Post-it notes are great
old board games. Post-it notes are great because they're sticky but not too
because they're sticky but not too sticky. You can move them around. Um,
sticky. You can move them around. Um, but basically most of this stuff you're
but basically most of this stuff you're going to either have around or you're
going to either have around or you're going to be able to get when you need
going to be able to get when you need it. Um, you also based on your idea, you
it. Um, you also based on your idea, you need some narrative reference points. At
need some narrative reference points. At least one game that has real
least one game that has real similarities to your idea and thoughts
similarities to your idea and thoughts about its player narrative. Um you so
about its player narrative. Um you so this is a game where the premise or the
this is a game where the premise or the mechanics or something is really in line
mechanics or something is really in line and where you um and where you've played
and where you um and where you've played through the game. You don't need to like
through the game. You don't need to like the game that you're that is your
the game that you're that is your narrative reference point, but you
narrative reference point, but you should have thoughts about what you went
should have thoughts about what you went through as a player in that game. So
through as a player in that game. So last is second to last is a personal
last is second to last is a personal storytelling experience. And this is a
storytelling experience. And this is a little bit touchyfey. Um, but you really
little bit touchyfey. Um, but you really want a time to uh look back at a time
want a time to uh look back at a time when you felt engaged and empowered as a
when you felt engaged and empowered as a storyteller. You want to look for your
storyteller. You want to look for your comfort zone as a storyteller and hold
comfort zone as a storyteller and hold on to that because you're going to use
on to that because you're going to use that later. Um, for you this may be
that later. Um, for you this may be telling a story around a campfire,
telling a story around a campfire, telling a joke or to a laughing audience
telling a joke or to a laughing audience or painting a picture. But me, I always
or painting a picture. But me, I always think um personally about being 10 years
think um personally about being 10 years old and my first experience with role
old and my first experience with role playing games. So, my friends and I
playing games. So, my friends and I didn't have rule books. Um, but I made
didn't have rule books. Um, but I made up a pretend world. My friends made up
up a pretend world. My friends made up characters and we rolled dice and told
characters and we rolled dice and told collaborative stories that are it's
collaborative stories that are it's still this place of warmth and comfort
still this place of warmth and comfort where I feel like anything is possible
where I feel like anything is possible when I think back at that time. Um, so
when I think back at that time. Um, so finally, of course, you need that focus
finally, of course, you need that focus on the central question of game nar
on the central question of game nar narrative as you go forward and as you
narrative as you go forward and as you get ready to make this thing. You want
get ready to make this thing. You want to keep this about how the premise,
to keep this about how the premise, rules, and actions come together to uh
rules, and actions come together to uh create a player story. you're not
create a player story. you're not testing um the the mechanics, the look
testing um the the mechanics, the look and feel or the game balance. That's
and feel or the game balance. That's gonna and you want to keep in mind that
gonna and you want to keep in mind that those are not what's on the table here.
those are not what's on the table here. Um so once you have that all ready, um
Um so once you have that all ready, um basically my first step is an initial
basically my first step is an initial write up. I lay out the narrative
write up. I lay out the narrative elements of my game. These can be notes.
elements of my game. These can be notes. Uh they can be totally informal. They
Uh they can be totally informal. They only have to make sense to you. And I'll
only have to make sense to you. And I'll go through these pieces in the order
go through these pieces in the order that I like to use because this is the
that I like to use because this is the order that makes sense to me. Uh, first
order that makes sense to me. Uh, first of all, the premise. This is the going
of all, the premise. This is the going to be the most fun part of this write
to be the most fun part of this write up. Just go nuts. Write down everything
up. Just go nuts. Write down everything that's exciting to you about your game.
that's exciting to you about your game. Um, so you know, you you might be like,
Um, so you know, you you might be like, "Oh, um, my game is is this world where
"Oh, um, my game is is this world where story to where stories come to life and
story to where stories come to life and there are luck dragons and rock biters
there are luck dragons and rock biters and empresses." Um, write all the stuff
and empresses." Um, write all the stuff that you think is really exciting, but
that you think is really exciting, but only uh do this for about 10 minutes
only uh do this for about 10 minutes because that'll force you to stick with
because that'll force you to stick with the things that you think are most
the things that you think are most exciting and important. And it'll cut
exciting and important. And it'll cut you off because if you don't do this,
you off because if you don't do this, you could waste a lot of time just
you could waste a lot of time just writing down exciting things about your
writing down exciting things about your game uh before you get to the meat of
game uh before you get to the meat of it, which is the player. Um, the second
it, which is the player. Um, the second thing is putting the player in that
thing is putting the player in that world. Think about the player role. Um,
world. Think about the player role. Um, does the player actually assume a role
does the player actually assume a role in the game? Are we going to put them in
in the game? Are we going to put them in the shoes of a character in the
the shoes of a character in the narrative? Are they going to be John
narrative? Are they going to be John Malkovich? Um, how much of an identity
Malkovich? Um, how much of an identity are we asking them to take on here? Or
are we asking them to take on here? Or are they really just playing the game as
are they really just playing the game as themselves? This is the second question
themselves? This is the second question you want to answer. Um, the goals of the
you want to answer. Um, the goals of the player. So, what's the carrot on the
player. So, what's the carrot on the stick? What's pulling them through the
stick? What's pulling them through the experience? Uh, so I always go back to
experience? Uh, so I always go back to um Scrooge McDuck. Man, Scrooge is so
um Scrooge McDuck. Man, Scrooge is so great. Scrooge loves getting money. And
great. Scrooge loves getting money. And you might think that that is his goal.
you might think that that is his goal. It's nice. It's simple. But money itself
It's nice. It's simple. But money itself is not his goal. His goal is to get all
is not his goal. His goal is to get all this money and then to swim around in a
this money and then to swim around in a huge pile of his own money. Like most
huge pile of his own money. Like most players, his goal is experiential.
players, his goal is experiential. There's an experience that he wants to
There's an experience that he wants to get out of this. And uh your players are
get out of this. And uh your players are going to be the same way. Um conflict.
going to be the same way. Um conflict. So what obstacles are in the way of that
So what obstacles are in the way of that goal in your story? What are the
goal in your story? What are the barriers to efficient victory? And I say
barriers to efficient victory? And I say efficient victory because a player can
efficient victory because a player can play your game for as long as they are
play your game for as long as they are intrigued by it. Um, so Cisphus here,
intrigued by it. Um, so Cisphus here, his goal is to get the rock up the
his goal is to get the rock up the mountain. And his conflict is with
mountain. And his conflict is with gravity. And for some reason, he keeps
gravity. And for some reason, he keeps on playing this game. It's compelling to
on playing this game. It's compelling to him. I don't know why. Um, so also, so
him. I don't know why. Um, so also, so then we start to get into more of the
then we start to get into more of the meat of where narrative comes in. Player
meat of where narrative comes in. Player choices. Jot down um the the big
choices. Jot down um the the big interactive choices. And
interactive choices. And basically, this is where you want to
basically, this is where you want to look at in the
look at in the abstract, big
abstract, big picture, what is the player trying to
picture, what is the player trying to do? Are these choices tough? Are they
do? Are these choices tough? Are they meaningful, like deciding whether or not
meaningful, like deciding whether or not to get on that plane? Um are they
to get on that plane? Um are they strategic? Or are they more tactical? Is
strategic? Or are they more tactical? Is it more a matter of who to aim at and
it more a matter of who to aim at and who to shoot in a moment? Um these are
who to shoot in a moment? Um these are all choices. and whether they're large
all choices. and whether they're large or small, you want to write them down.
or small, you want to write them down. And you also want to write down actions
And you also want to write down actions here. Um, so actions and choices, that's
here. Um, so actions and choices, that's sort of a fine grain distinction, but
sort of a fine grain distinction, but think about it in terms of this one-man
think about it in terms of this one-man band. His choices are where to play and
band. His choices are where to play and when to play, and his actions are this,
when to play, and his actions are this, his player verbs, his guitar, his
his player verbs, his guitar, his symbols, uh, his his drum kit. Um, when
symbols, uh, his his drum kit. Um, when he plays those things, those are his
he plays those things, those are his playing the drums, playing the guitar,
playing the drums, playing the guitar, those are his verbs.
those are his verbs. um resources. So, this is where you've
um resources. So, this is where you've talked a lot about what the player can
talked a lot about what the player can do, and this is where you draw the first
do, and this is where you draw the first clear connection between your world and
clear connection between your world and your player. What in the world can the
your player. What in the world can the player use? Um, and these these
player use? Um, and these these resources should be simple to
resources should be simple to understand, if possible, but elegant.
understand, if possible, but elegant. Uh, you know, in Monopoly, Monopoly is,
Uh, you know, in Monopoly, Monopoly is, you know, a little bit maligned as a
you know, a little bit maligned as a game. Um, but the as a resource,
game. Um, but the as a resource, Monopoly money is great. It's um it
Monopoly money is great. It's um it gives an opportunity to the player. It
gives an opportunity to the player. It provides information when you look
provides information when you look around and see how much money people
around and see how much money people have compared to how much you have. And
have compared to how much you have. And uh it also limits your actions in a
uh it also limits your actions in a challenging way when you don't have the
challenging way when you don't have the money you need. Um so for the final
money you need. Um so for the final element of we're going to talk go a
element of we're going to talk go a little farther into the world in the
little farther into the world in the story and uh we're going to outline our
story and uh we're going to outline our game events. Now you don't want to think
game events. Now you don't want to think about this as a formal system of rules.
about this as a formal system of rules. Not yet. We still want to keep it high
Not yet. We still want to keep it high level and think about what sort of
level and think about what sort of changes are taking place. Are these
changes are taking place. Are these changes regular and predictable or are
changes regular and predictable or are they, you know, or are they clockwork or
they, you know, or are they clockwork or are they big and dramatic? Put in
are they big and dramatic? Put in biblical terms. Does it rain twice a
biblical terms. Does it rain twice a week in your world or is there a flood
week in your world or is there a flood on the way that's going to hit at hour
on the way that's going to hit at hour two? Um, these are the things you want
two? Um, these are the things you want to think about. So, now that you've done
to think about. So, now that you've done that, you've sort of written down some
that, you've sort of written down some elements in this area that crosses
elements in this area that crosses that's formal and informal. you've sort
that's formal and informal. you've sort of laid out narrative elements of your
of laid out narrative elements of your game and uh you've thought about how the
game and uh you've thought about how the player is going to interact with that
player is going to interact with that world. So now it's time to start
world. So now it's time to start building out your story. Doing this well
building out your story. Doing this well may take you back into your right of to
may take you back into your right of to make changes and that's okay. Um but I
make changes and that's okay. Um but I want to go through a couple examples of
want to go through a couple examples of games that do this well. Um as and a
games that do this well. Um as and a couple principles that I think really
couple principles that I think really work. First of all, when you're thinking
work. First of all, when you're thinking about story, you want to think about how
about story, you want to think about how you're going to show the player your
you're going to show the player your goal. in journey you see the mountain
goal. in journey you see the mountain with the light and you don't need to be
with the light and you don't need to be told to go there you know if you can
told to go there you know if you can make something like that fantastic um
make something like that fantastic um give meaning to rules in your game this
give meaning to rules in your game this is a screen from Dino Run um which is a
is a screen from Dino Run um which is a game where you know the rules are pretty
game where you know the rules are pretty simple you're it's a little running game
simple you're it's a little running game and there's a timer that where if you
and there's a timer that where if you fall too far behind you're going to have
fall too far behind you're going to have to restart
to restart but story was used to really
but story was used to really narrativeized this goal in a really
narrativeized this goal in a really interesting way. In Dino Run, an
interesting way. In Dino Run, an asteroid hits and you have a wall of
asteroid hits and you have a wall of destruction. This is sort of the
destruction. This is sort of the extinction level event coming up from
extinction level event coming up from behind you. Staying one step ahead of
behind you. Staying one step ahead of that is much more interesting than a
that is much more interesting than a timer. Um, use characters uh if if you
timer. Um, use characters uh if if you can. Now, people are funny. They see
can. Now, people are funny. They see characters everywhere and once they
characters everywhere and once they start seeing characters, they start
start seeing characters, they start caring. Use that. Um, characters can be
caring. Use that. Um, characters can be goals. Keep Clem safe. Characters can be
goals. Keep Clem safe. Characters can be resources. In classic JRPGs, your
resources. In classic JRPGs, your options uh for play are personified as
options uh for play are personified as characters. And characters can be
characters. And characters can be conflict. Now, sometimes a character can
conflict. Now, sometimes a character can work as many uh in many narrative
work as many uh in many narrative elements as once, which is fantastic.
elements as once, which is fantastic. Like like Donkey Kong, he's a source of
Like like Donkey Kong, he's a source of conflict. I mean, he's holding your
conflict. I mean, he's holding your goal, this damsel in distress. He and
goal, this damsel in distress. He and but he's also throwing obstacles in your
but he's also throwing obstacles in your path. He's also disappearing back up the
path. He's also disappearing back up the level and driving you onwards for a
level and driving you onwards for a long-term goal. He's such a central part
long-term goal. He's such a central part of the game narrative that even though
of the game narrative that even though he's not the playable charact he's not
he's not the playable charact he's not playable, the game is named after him.
playable, the game is named after him. The game is not called Mario. It's
The game is not called Mario. It's called Donkey Kong. Um because this
called Donkey Kong. Um because this character is so key to the understanding
character is so key to the understanding of the story. Um finally, you've got
of the story. Um finally, you've got your story events that you've been
your story events that you've been interested in, the things that happen.
interested in, the things that happen. Try to tie them into the player's
Try to tie them into the player's actions as much as possible, the things
actions as much as possible, the things that you know the player will be doing.
that you know the player will be doing. Um and that will make them meaningful.
Um and that will make them meaningful. So, uh, finally now, um, you want to cut
So, uh, finally now, um, you want to cut story points that don't do any of these
story points that don't do any of these things, that don't reinforce or showcase
things, that don't reinforce or showcase goals, call the player to action, give
goals, call the player to action, give them feedback, or provide a break or
them feedback, or provide a break or reward. Um, I think I don't have as much
reward. Um, I think I don't have as much time as I think I do, so I'm going to
time as I think I do, so I'm going to keep I'm going to go fast. Um, okay. So,
keep I'm going to go fast. Um, okay. So, next, drafting the rules. Um,
next, drafting the rules. Um, basically, when you're figuring out the
basically, when you're figuring out the rules of the game, now that you've got
rules of the game, now that you've got the elements, now that you figure out
the elements, now that you figure out the story, remember you're playing as
the story, remember you're playing as the computer. So, keep these rules
the computer. So, keep these rules simple. Remember, you're not testing
simple. Remember, you're not testing mechanics. Um, so if you can
mechanics. Um, so if you can substitute, but you can substitute a
substitute, but you can substitute a challenge for another moment of
challenge for another moment of excitement and test different outcomes.
excitement and test different outcomes. If you can do that, that's great. So,
If you can do that, that's great. So, dice are a good simple way to do this.
dice are a good simple way to do this. They may not be the same test that a to
They may not be the same test that a to a player as combat, but they can provide
a player as combat, but they can provide that little challenging moment. But
that little challenging moment. But let's say you really want to test a
let's say you really want to test a player's skill to some degree. All
player's skill to some degree. All right, you can do that. Um, let's say
right, you can do that. Um, let's say you think it's important for the game
you think it's important for the game narrative to um, basically test their
narrative to um, basically test their accuracy as a shooter as a shooter will
accuracy as a shooter as a shooter will do.
do. So, okay, make a little micro prototype.
So, okay, make a little micro prototype. Put up a dart board and make that a
Put up a dart board and make that a little part of your game. And, uh,
little part of your game. And, uh, success or failure can can sort of
success or failure can can sort of depend on where they hit on the dart
depend on where they hit on the dart board. Um, so rules will be different
board. Um, so rules will be different for every game, but there's one more
for every game, but there's one more thing I want to emphasize. You may be
thing I want to emphasize. You may be simplifying a actions, but you want to
simplifying a actions, but you want to keep the elements of choice strong in
keep the elements of choice strong in your game, or else the player is not
your game, or else the player is not going to be doing anything in this
going to be doing anything in this narrative prototype. Um, identify your
narrative prototype. Um, identify your most important cho choice points and
most important cho choice points and figure out what's behind either door.
figure out what's behind either door. Um, so now it's time to actually start
Um, so now it's time to actually start building. And I'm going to rush through
building. And I'm going to rush through this because it's pretty
this because it's pretty straightforward. Choose your pieces. Um,
straightforward. Choose your pieces. Um, and use simple, familiar materials. As I
and use simple, familiar materials. As I said before, um, one quick note, don't
said before, um, one quick note, don't use anything too light. Um, so you're
use anything too light. Um, so you're going to be tempted to draw on paper and
going to be tempted to draw on paper and just like make a little resource that
just like make a little resource that way, but once you start playing these
way, but once you start playing these games, that's going to go all over the
games, that's going to go all over the place. Weight it down on something like
place. Weight it down on something like a coin or it'll scatter. Um, making the
a coin or it'll scatter. Um, making the board. So, uh, so your final step is
board. So, uh, so your final step is setting up a space that's going to
setting up a space that's going to abstractly for the player represent
abstractly for the player represent their world or more accurately their
their world or more accurately their screen. Um, this is your game board and
screen. Um, this is your game board and you want it to have weight. You want it
you want it to have weight. You want it to be flexible and sticky, and you want
to be flexible and sticky, and you want it to have some simplicity and focus to
it to have some simplicity and focus to it as well. You really don't want to
it as well. You really don't want to over complicate this with the UI
over complicate this with the UI elements that you'll need down the road.
elements that you'll need down the road. Just think about what the player needs
Just think about what the player needs in that space. So, now we've got a
in that space. So, now we've got a premise, a goal, a board to play on,
premise, a goal, a board to play on, resources uh that the players can use to
resources uh that the players can use to achieve their goals, choices, rules that
achieve their goals, choices, rules that create conflicts and opportunities, and
create conflicts and opportunities, and events that affect and inform play. Um,
events that affect and inform play. Um, so I know I started a little bit late,
so I know I started a little bit late, so I'm going to keep on going for a
so I'm going to keep on going for a minute or two. Um, you guys can
minute or two. Um, you guys can obviously leave if you want. Um, so
obviously leave if you want. Um, so finalizing your prototype. Um, basically
finalizing your prototype. Um, basically what you, um, what you need to do now
what you, um, what you need to do now that you've created this formal system,
that you've created this formal system, so it makes sense to you, is build out
so it makes sense to you, is build out your presentation. And this is where
your presentation. And this is where you're using that comfort, that
you're using that comfort, that comfortable place, that storytelling
comfortable place, that storytelling place that um really makes you feel like
place that um really makes you feel like you're conveying a good story. Um so for
you're conveying a good story. Um so for some of you it may be visual or written
some of you it may be visual or written or some performative, but this is where
or some performative, but this is where you're figuring out how to communicate
you're figuring out how to communicate those rules and systems to the player.
those rules and systems to the player. You're presenting that. Um, now that
You're presenting that. Um, now that you've done that
you've done that presentation, it's you're ready finally
presentation, it's you're ready finally to start rehearsing the running of this
to start rehearsing the running of this prototype. Phase one, run the prototype
prototype. Phase one, run the prototype on yourself. Uh, you want to be able to
on yourself. Uh, you want to be able to do one successful solo run if possible.
do one successful solo run if possible. It has to be possible. You need to do a
It has to be possible. You need to do a successful run on your own. And uh just
successful run on your own. And uh just see this as a conversation between you,
see this as a conversation between you, the uh the developer who's made this
the uh the developer who's made this game and knows all the rules and you the
game and knows all the rules and you the player who knows nothing about this
player who knows nothing about this game. Um you're going to find that you
game. Um you're going to find that you missed a lot of things. That's okay. Um
missed a lot of things. That's okay. Um you can just expect perfection, fix
you can just expect perfection, fix those mistakes, run it again. Um, phase
those mistakes, run it again. Um, phase two, once you've gotten a successful run
two, once you've gotten a successful run yourself, do a uh do a rehearsal with
yourself, do a uh do a rehearsal with someone who will love you, even if you
someone who will love you, even if you totally flub the entire thing. Uh, you
totally flub the entire thing. Uh, you want to leverage their patience to work
want to leverage their patience to work out the kinks in those presentation
out the kinks in those presentation elements that you uh that you put
elements that you uh that you put together. Um, and then once that has
together. Um, and then once that has worked and you've got the presentation
worked and you've got the presentation worked out and you figured out from the
worked out and you figured out from the first play testers, this person you
first play testers, this person you love, what is really unclear, now it's
love, what is really unclear, now it's time to bring in some people whose
time to bring in some people whose opinion of this prototype really does
opinion of this prototype really does matter. Bring back your conspirators,
matter. Bring back your conspirators, the uh, so either the collaborators or
the uh, so either the collaborators or people whose opinions you trust. Um, and
people whose opinions you trust. Um, and this is pretty obvious. Just um, just
this is pretty obvious. Just um, just listen to this feedback. Oh, am I Am I
listen to this feedback. Oh, am I Am I cut off? Okay. Um, great. Listen. Listen
cut off? Okay. Um, great. Listen. Listen to their feedback and look at what they
to their feedback and look at what they enjoyed, what's fun, frustrating,
enjoyed, what's fun, frustrating, boring, or unclear, and adjust that
boring, or unclear, and adjust that prototype as you prepare for play
prototype as you prepare for play testing. Um, God, Deborah did such a
testing. Um, God, Deborah did such a good job talking about play. You know, I
good job talking about play. You know, I was so cool talking about deeper user
was so cool talking about deeper user testing. This stuff is going to be very
testing. This stuff is going to be very light. I'm just going to wrap up on
light. I'm just going to wrap up on this. Um, I used to have a list of
this. Um, I used to have a list of questions here. I got rid of it. Um, I
questions here. I got rid of it. Um, I will put it up on the GDC vault, but um,
will put it up on the GDC vault, but um, write down a few questions beforehand
write down a few questions beforehand because you won't want to think about
because you won't want to think about them afterwards. Um, you want to write
them afterwards. Um, you want to write down questions and also if you can, you
down questions and also if you can, you want to think about recording the play
want to think about recording the play tests. Um, do vid use video if possible.
tests. Um, do vid use video if possible. Uh, but you need to get permission from
Uh, but you need to get permission from play testers. And, uh, if you want to
play testers. And, uh, if you want to improve your presentation style, point
improve your presentation style, point the camera at yourself. And if you want
the camera at yourself. And if you want to improve your game, you're going to
to improve your game, you're going to learn a lot more though by turning the
learn a lot more though by turning the camera on. to someone else. So, play
camera on. to someone else. So, play testing um it's I'm just going to sort
testing um it's I'm just going to sort of roll through that because that's
of roll through that because that's super basic stuff about what it means to
super basic stuff about what it means to play test. And uh but the real important
play test. And uh but the real important thing here is this is not a scientific
thing here is this is not a scientific play test. It doesn't matter if your
play test. It doesn't matter if your variables are all super clean and you're
variables are all super clean and you're think and every all your ducks are lined
think and every all your ducks are lined up in the road. This is something that
up in the road. This is something that you this is a crucible, a trial by fire
you this is a crucible, a trial by fire to make your game better. So, you can
to make your game better. So, you can improvise if uh if you you listen for
improvise if uh if you you listen for choices from the player. Um, allow them
choices from the player. Um, allow them to skip things that that you believe
to skip things that that you believe they could skip. And if they have a
they could skip. And if they have a smart suggestion, if they want to grab
smart suggestion, if they want to grab the mic and say, "Hey, this is what I
the mic and say, "Hey, this is what I want to do. Incorporate it into your
want to do. Incorporate it into your play. Just let it happen. Um, and see if
play. Just let it happen. Um, and see if it improves the game as long as it
it improves the game as long as it doesn't seem like it's going to mess up
doesn't seem like it's going to mess up the game too much. But whatever you do
the game too much. But whatever you do in those play tests, um, just note it so
in those play tests, um, just note it so that you know, so that you have a sort
that you know, so that you have a sort of log of those changes. So people are
of log of those changes. So people are polite. So have a third party uh ask
polite. So have a third party uh ask questions for you and also set aside
questions for you and also set aside time to review. Again, another really
time to review. Again, another really basic thing. So almost done here. Um so
basic thing. So almost done here. Um so once you've got all that, you've got
once you've got all that, you've got play test notes and you want to look at
play test notes and you want to look at the biggest problem with your prototype.
the biggest problem with your prototype. Is the goal unclear? Is it too hard? Uh
Is the goal unclear? Is it too hard? Uh is it are there dead ends in the
is it are there dead ends in the gameplay? Is it just not that
gameplay? Is it just not that awesome? This prototype, that's the nice
awesome? This prototype, that's the nice thing about the fact that you made this
thing about the fact that you made this thing in 3 days. It's disposable. Um,
thing in 3 days. It's disposable. Um, figure out some bold solutions to your
figure out some bold solutions to your problems, discard, kill your darlings,
problems, discard, kill your darlings, and try again. Um, so when you finally
and try again. Um, so when you finally achieve something that feels like a
achieve something that feels like a narrative outline that is interesting
narrative outline that is interesting and exciting to players, there's a
and exciting to players, there's a couple ways you can do go. You can
couple ways you can do go. You can expand that prototype. You can
expand that prototype. You can generalize because you're going to learn
generalize because you're going to learn a lot from having someone run that
a lot from having someone run that prototype on you. So that's a matter of
prototype on you. So that's a matter of getting the rules in sort of a really
getting the rules in sort of a really formal setup so that you can be a player
formal setup so that you can be a player of your game which will be useful later
of your game which will be useful later on. But you can also use this narrative
on. But you can also use this narrative outline. It's it's sort of this if if
outline. It's it's sort of this if if your collaborators and everyone all
your collaborators and everyone all feels like yeah this is the game we want
feels like yeah this is the game we want to make. This is an extraordinary
to make. This is an extraordinary production tool. Um you can bust it out
production tool. Um you can bust it out into asset lists into think about the
into asset lists into think about the animations and and all the pieces that
animations and and all the pieces that uh that you were sort of need to create
uh that you were sort of need to create as part of this game. And then you're
as part of this game. And then you're also going to see some areas where this
also going to see some areas where this narrative obviously where the uh
narrative obviously where the uh narrative outline this paper prototype
narrative outline this paper prototype you made really hasn't um where it where
you made really hasn't um where it where it's it's really not addressing issues.
it's it's really not addressing issues. So then shift your focus. Maybe it is
So then shift your focus. Maybe it is now time for that digital sandbox. Um so
now time for that digital sandbox. Um so go back and prototype the next big
go back and prototype the next big question in your game. So that's all a
question in your game. So that's all a lot of stuff. It's a lot of work. Even
lot of stuff. It's a lot of work. Even though it's disposable and quick, it's a
though it's disposable and quick, it's a lot to do. Why do I go through this
lot to do. Why do I go through this process? Why do I think about it this
process? Why do I think about it this deeply? Uh, basically because a
deeply? Uh, basically because a narrative paper prototype is going to
narrative paper prototype is going to help me save time and money. It helps me
help me save time and money. It helps me see if my premise, rules, and choices
see if my premise, rules, and choices are compelling to see if the piece if
are compelling to see if the piece if the pieces fit together coherently. It
the pieces fit together coherently. It helps me form a shared vision of this
helps me form a shared vision of this whole game with my collaborators as
whole game with my collaborators as early as possible. It shows me, of
early as possible. It shows me, of course, the player's perspective, but
course, the player's perspective, but most of all, because it can turn early
most of all, because it can turn early development, which can be very difficult
development, which can be very difficult and unsure, into a fun and empowering
and unsure, into a fun and empowering experience. Thank you.