[Music] Uh, can you everybody hear me in the
Uh, can you everybody hear me in the back? Ah, there we go.
back? Ah, there we go. All right. Well, thanks to all of you
All right. Well, thanks to all of you for coming out at 5:00, the last session
for coming out at 5:00, the last session of the day, uh, for the classic game
of the day, uh, for the classic game postmortem on the Oregon Trail.
postmortem on the Oregon Trail. [Applause]
[Applause] Enough of all this uh highlevel
Enough of all this uh highlevel technology stuff that the in the expo
technology stuff that the in the expo area it just boggles the mind. Uh we're
area it just boggles the mind. Uh we're going to have some fun. Uh I'm Don
going to have some fun. Uh I'm Don Rawitch uh co-inventor of the original
Rawitch uh co-inventor of the original version of the Oregon Trail and I'm
version of the Oregon Trail and I'm happy to be here to tell my story.
happy to be here to tell my story. First, a couple of announcements. Uh
First, a couple of announcements. Uh turn off your cell phones. Um and don't
turn off your cell phones. Um and don't forget at the end of the session uh
forget at the end of the session uh you're going to get to fill out an
you're going to get to fill out an evaluation form. You are um instructed
evaluation form. You are um instructed to check all the boxes on the the you
to check all the boxes on the the you know at the highest number level on all
know at the highest number level on all the questions.
the questions. And uh one more um announcement I was
And uh one more um announcement I was going to make. You're you're all
going to make. You're you're all familiar with the um the train jam that
familiar with the um the train jam that I've seen uh describe.
I've seen uh describe. People get on a train in Chicago and
People get on a train in Chicago and they have 56 hours to make some games.
they have 56 hours to make some games. We're considering that maybe next year
We're considering that maybe next year uh that we have a covered wagon jam and
uh that we have a covered wagon jam and we put put a bunch of people in covered
we put put a bunch of people in covered wagons to set them out from Missouri.
wagons to set them out from Missouri. And the the the cool part about that is
And the the the cool part about that is they'll have no excuse about quality
they'll have no excuse about quality because they'll have six months to get
because they'll have six months to get it right.
Uh okay. Uh what I'm going to do here over the next hour or so is to tell you
over the next hour or so is to tell you about uh the Oregon Trail game. um where
about uh the Oregon Trail game. um where it came from, how it got invented, who
it came from, how it got invented, who invented it, how it got into the
invented it, how it got into the schools, how it became so popular, and
schools, how it became so popular, and uh hopefully at the end uh a few
uh hopefully at the end uh a few suggestions that might be um of of
suggestions that might be um of of interest to uh today's game developers
interest to uh today's game developers uh lessons that we've learned from the
uh lessons that we've learned from the Oregon Trail game. And uh there I'm I'm
Oregon Trail game. And uh there I'm I'm hoping there'll be a little time for
hoping there'll be a little time for questions at the end. Um we are the last
questions at the end. Um we are the last session of the day so we have a little
session of the day so we have a little flexibility um maybe to extend if there
flexibility um maybe to extend if there are a lot of questions but we'll see how
are a lot of questions but we'll see how that goes. So let me just ask how many
that goes. So let me just ask how many of you have played the Oregon Trail?
of you have played the Oregon Trail? Okay.
Okay. And second question is how many of you
And second question is how many of you first encountered the Oregon Trail game
first encountered the Oregon Trail game when you were a kid in school?
when you were a kid in school? Okay. So, uh, that's that's typically
Okay. So, uh, that's that's typically the um the pattern. That's good. Uh, and
the um the pattern. That's good. Uh, and I I think because there probably were a
I I think because there probably were a few people who did not raise their hand,
few people who did not raise their hand, let's just take about two minutes to
let's just take about two minutes to review what this game is about. Uh, it
review what this game is about. Uh, it is a a simulation of an important event
is a a simulation of an important event in American history. Uh, as you probably
in American history. Uh, as you probably know,
know, uh, let's try to get that.
uh, let's try to get that. Okay, as you probably know,
okay, as we probably know, the computer always puts up question boxes
computer always puts up question boxes when you don't want one. Uh, the
when you don't want one. Uh, the country, what became? The United States
country, what became? The United States was settled on the east coast. Uh,
was settled on the east coast. Uh, people uh came and they they populated
people uh came and they they populated those states. But after a while it
those states. But after a while it became clear for some people this was
became clear for some people this was not where they wanted to be. And
not where they wanted to be. And explorers had pushed out across uh
explorers had pushed out across uh across this this land and uh determined
across this this land and uh determined that there was all kinds of of farming
that there was all kinds of of farming opportunities and and other
opportunities and and other opportunities for the future and spread
opportunities for the future and spread the word that uh uh if you want to um
the word that uh uh if you want to um really have a new start on life uh go
really have a new start on life uh go west is is the advice. And um so they
west is is the advice. And um so they did and uh that people started traveling
did and uh that people started traveling to the western part of what became the
to the western part of what became the US.
Right. Excuse me. Perhaps uh where is my um assistant? There is a box that keeps
um assistant? There is a box that keeps coming up that says rescue and recovery.
coming up that says rescue and recovery. And um that applies to me I can see but
And um that applies to me I can see but shouldn't be coming up on the computer.
Is it I may have gotten it to go away. Okay, cool.
Okay, cool. Thanks.
Okay, so how did they get to the west? Well, uh the explorers had uh mapped out
Well, uh the explorers had uh mapped out some trails over the the plains, over
some trails over the the plains, over the mountains, all the way to the the
the mountains, all the way to the the west coast, the Pacific Ocean. And
west coast, the Pacific Ocean. And perhaps the best known of those trails
perhaps the best known of those trails was the Oregon Trail. most heavily
was the Oregon Trail. most heavily traveled during the uh the middle of the
traveled during the uh the middle of the 19th century. And um how did you uh
19th century. And um how did you uh travel on the Oregon Trail?
travel on the Oregon Trail? You used the vehicle of choice, the
You used the vehicle of choice, the covered wagon. You put your belongings
covered wagon. You put your belongings in there. You got your family crammed in
in there. You got your family crammed in there. And for the next 2,000 miles,
there. And for the next 2,000 miles, this is how you traveled. Uh it was
this is how you traveled. Uh it was about a six-month trip. uh and uh this
about a six-month trip. uh and uh this this is what solidified the United
this is what solidified the United States as being the the land as large as
States as being the the land as large as it became. Uh and so this western
it became. Uh and so this western migration is seen as very important in
migration is seen as very important in American history. The Oregon Trail game
American history. The Oregon Trail game is a simulation of this trip, this
is a simulation of this trip, this journey, uh this hazardous uh adventure
journey, uh this hazardous uh adventure that these people went on. And it was
that these people went on. And it was popular on uh personal computers uh
popular on uh personal computers uh starting in about 1979 for about a
starting in about 1979 for about a decade and a half was its its um the
decade and a half was its its um the highest point of popularity. Uh it was
highest point of popularity. Uh it was arguably the best known school software
arguably the best known school software of that era and perhaps for many of you
of that era and perhaps for many of you this is the era which found you in
this is the era which found you in school and um traveling the Oregon Trail
school and um traveling the Oregon Trail on a computer. However, if we're going
on a computer. However, if we're going to um get to the story of where the game
to um get to the story of where the game came from, uh we have to go back almost
came from, uh we have to go back almost a decade. So,
a decade. So, sorry.
sorry. Uh so, we're going to go back to the
Uh so, we're going to go back to the 1960s and 70s when computers looked like
1960s and 70s when computers looked like the thing that you see up on the screen.
the thing that you see up on the screen. Uh they were huge. They required their
Uh they were huge. They required their own um rooms to be locked up and kept
own um rooms to be locked up and kept in. uh but this is how computers started
in. uh but this is how computers started coming into our society and they were
coming into our society and they were used in business and in research. It was
used in business and in research. It was inevitable that they would come to be
inevitable that they would come to be used in education. Uh and so a whole new
used in education. Uh and so a whole new um area of endeavor and of study uh
um area of endeavor and of study uh educational computing uh was born at
educational computing uh was born at this time. Now, most of the use of
this time. Now, most of the use of computers and education could be found
computers and education could be found at universities at that time, but there
at universities at that time, but there were some schools that uh had a local
were some schools that uh had a local university in town and they they found a
university in town and they they found a way to connect uh to the university's
way to connect uh to the university's computer and they started offering to
computer and they started offering to elementary and high school kids the
elementary and high school kids the opportunity to use a computer. Some of
opportunity to use a computer. Some of the larger districts had enough money
the larger districts had enough money they bought their own computer. Now,
they bought their own computer. Now, this was not the computer that they used
this was not the computer that they used to keep track of their finances, to keep
to keep track of their finances, to keep track of their student attendance, to
track of their student attendance, to keep track of the bus routes. These were
keep track of the bus routes. These were computers that were specifically um
computers that were specifically um designated as to be used for
designated as to be used for instructional purposes. Now, what did
instructional purposes. Now, what did people back at that time do with a
people back at that time do with a computer in a school? Typically, um in
computer in a school? Typically, um in in K12 education, the activity was to
in K12 education, the activity was to learn to to teach kids something about
learn to to teach kids something about programming computers. uh and uh the
programming computers. uh and uh the reason uh that that was the main
reason uh that that was the main activity is because there wasn't much
activity is because there wasn't much else you could do at the time. There
else you could do at the time. There were no software applications available
were no software applications available to schools that would allow them to do
to schools that would allow them to do things related to uh math and science
things related to uh math and science and social studies and so forth. Those
and social studies and so forth. Those applications were very scarce. Uh so
applications were very scarce. Uh so this brings us to the fateful year of
and three young men who were attending college at the time.
college at the time. Uh they were attending Carlton College,
Uh they were attending Carlton College, a liberal arts school in Minnesota. Two
a liberal arts school in Minnesota. Two of them, Bill Heinman and Paul
of them, Bill Heinman and Paul Dillenberger, were math majors and the
Dillenberger, were math majors and the handsome fellow on the right uh had
handsome fellow on the right uh had decided that he was going to be a
decided that he was going to be a history major. Uh, as a matter of fact,
history major. Uh, as a matter of fact, the first few years we were in college
the first few years we were in college together, we didn't really know each
together, we didn't really know each other. But coming into our senior year
other. But coming into our senior year in the fall of 1971, we were brought
in the fall of 1971, we were brought together by one thing we had in common.
together by one thing we had in common. We were all planning to become teachers
We were all planning to become teachers and uh because of that um we had to do
and uh because of that um we had to do certain things in our our preparation
certain things in our our preparation during our our college years.
during our our college years. So, uh, the kind of culminating, um,
So, uh, the kind of culminating, um, aspect of your teacher training when
aspect of your teacher training when you're in college is to do your practice
you're in college is to do your practice teaching. So, this is where you're
teaching. So, this is where you're assigned to a a school, you're assigned
assigned to a a school, you're assigned to a supervising teacher in that school,
to a supervising teacher in that school, and you get to um observe how schools
and you get to um observe how schools work, what teachers do, and eventually
work, what teachers do, and eventually uh get the opportunity to teach kids
uh get the opportunity to teach kids yourself, to take over classes, to uh to
yourself, to take over classes, to uh to do that. Uh and this was all to
do that. Uh and this was all to determine whether essentially whether
determine whether essentially whether you had the guts to stand up in front of
you had the guts to stand up in front of 30 adolescents day in and day out. So,
30 adolescents day in and day out. So, uh, we took advantage of a program that
uh, we took advantage of a program that allowed us to do our practice teaching
allowed us to do our practice teaching in the city of Minneapolis and, uh, we
in the city of Minneapolis and, uh, we got an apartment together and the three
got an apartment together and the three of us set out to determine, uh, what
of us set out to determine, uh, what teaching was all about.
teaching was all about. The Minneapolis schools was a fairly pro
The Minneapolis schools was a fairly pro progressive district at that time and
progressive district at that time and they had set up a computer for the
they had set up a computer for the district that all the schools in the
district that all the schools in the Minneapolis district could um connect to
Minneapolis district could um connect to and kids could have a chance to use
and kids could have a chance to use computers. Uh my two colleagues knew
computers. Uh my two colleagues knew something about computer programming
something about computer programming from their college studies uh given that
from their college studies uh given that they were in math. I knew absolutely
they were in math. I knew absolutely nothing about computers at that time. Uh
nothing about computers at that time. Uh and uh after we had after we had been um
and uh after we had after we had been um in our schools for a few weeks, my
in our schools for a few weeks, my supervising teacher notified me that I
supervising teacher notified me that I was going to in about two or three weeks
was going to in about two or three weeks uh ahead, I was going to teach a unit on
uh ahead, I was going to teach a unit on the western the westward migration
the western the westward migration and that I needed to prepare myself to
and that I needed to prepare myself to do that. So uh I thought to myself, well
do that. So uh I thought to myself, well now how am I going to put this this uh
now how am I going to put this this uh across this historical information in a
across this historical information in a way that kids are not going to fall
way that kids are not going to fall asleep at their desks. Uh and I knew
asleep at their desks. Uh and I knew that the one thing I needed to avoid was
that the one thing I needed to avoid was to assign them to read all about it in
to assign them to read all about it in their textbook because that's what makes
their textbook because that's what makes kids uh not like history so much. Um, so
kids uh not like history so much. Um, so I I thought to myself uh that I I had
I I thought to myself uh that I I had read about educators who had created
read about educators who had created games for the classroom. Not computer
games for the classroom. Not computer games because there weren't that many
games because there weren't that many schools that had computer access, but um
schools that had computer access, but um board games, uh paper pencil games,
board games, uh paper pencil games, things that that uh would would help you
things that that uh would would help you um uh understand a concept better. So I
um uh understand a concept better. So I thought, well, maybe I could do the same
thought, well, maybe I could do the same for the westward migration. Uh, I
for the westward migration. Uh, I created a a very large map of the
created a a very large map of the western US area. I drew in the Oregon
western US area. I drew in the Oregon Trail. Uh, I thought about uh uh the
Trail. Uh, I thought about uh uh the kids maybe were going to draw cards or
kids maybe were going to draw cards or roll dice. See, I I was I was um ahead
roll dice. See, I I was I was um ahead of Dungeons and Dragons on this thing.
of Dungeons and Dragons on this thing. uh and and so uh you know some way was
uh and and so uh you know some way was going to determine uh what happened to
going to determine uh what happened to them at each stage along traveling along
them at each stage along traveling along the trail and they'd have little wagon
the trail and they'd have little wagon uh markers that they could they could
uh markers that they could they could move. That that was my my vision. Uh so
move. That that was my my vision. Uh so I had all the stuff spread out in the
I had all the stuff spread out in the apartment uh living room. Uh one day I
apartment uh living room. Uh one day I was just getting into figuring out how
was just getting into figuring out how this might work and my two colleagues
this might work and my two colleagues came home.
came home. They asked um what I was doing and I
They asked um what I was doing and I explained to them what what it was I had
explained to them what what it was I had to teach and they thought well that was
to teach and they thought well that was a game was a pretty uh innovative way to
a game was a pretty uh innovative way to go at this. But the thing is that game
go at this. But the thing is that game would be a lot better on a computer and
would be a lot better on a computer and that was kind of the spark that got us
that was kind of the spark that got us going on this. Um we uh we had at that
going on this. Um we uh we had at that time 2 weeks to create something that
time 2 weeks to create something that could be uh delivered um on the computer
could be uh delivered um on the computer that was available to our schools,
that was available to our schools, especially my school since I was the one
especially my school since I was the one teaching history.
teaching history. And um so we set about uh on this task.
And um so we set about uh on this task. Well, what did it mean to put something
Well, what did it mean to put something on a computer in 1971?
on a computer in 1971? Well, the first thing is how do how do
Well, the first thing is how do how do you communicate with a computer?
you communicate with a computer? You use this device, a teletype, which
You use this device, a teletype, which is a kind of a typewriter on steroids.
is a kind of a typewriter on steroids. Uh it's a it's a very large and heavy
Uh it's a it's a very large and heavy machine, but it's got a keyboard.
machine, but it's got a keyboard. Doesn't have a screen. Uh you see the
Doesn't have a screen. Uh you see the roll of paper coming out above the
roll of paper coming out above the keyboard. So when you type things on the
keyboard. So when you type things on the teletype, they showed up on that paper
teletype, they showed up on that paper just like kind of like a typewriter. And
just like kind of like a typewriter. And when the computer communicated back to
when the computer communicated back to you, its messages also got printed out
you, its messages also got printed out on that that roll of paper. Uh it didn't
on that that roll of paper. Uh it didn't print very quickly and there were there
print very quickly and there were there was no screen, no graphics, no audio
was no screen, no graphics, no audio visual. Um well with one exception.
visual. Um well with one exception. Inside the teletype was essentially a
Inside the teletype was essentially a bicycle bell.
bicycle bell. And you were told when you bought the
And you were told when you bought the teletype that if you put a certain
teletype that if you put a certain string of code in your computer program
string of code in your computer program that when the computer got there, a
that when the computer got there, a message would be sent that rang that
message would be sent that rang that bicycle bell, thereby indicating that
bicycle bell, thereby indicating that something significant had just happened
something significant had just happened in your program. Um, that's that's about
in your program. Um, that's that's about all we had back then to um wake the kids
all we had back then to um wake the kids up.
up. So, uh that's the teletype. and you know
So, uh that's the teletype. and you know what a computer looks like, but how did
what a computer looks like, but how did you make the connection between the two?
you make the connection between the two? And to do that, we need a modem. Now,
And to do that, we need a modem. Now, today, I'm guessing modems are about the
today, I'm guessing modems are about the size of your fingernail, but back then
size of your fingernail, but back then they were about the size of a shoe box.
they were about the size of a shoe box. And uh you see on the right hand side uh
And uh you see on the right hand side uh what was known as an acoustic coupler.
what was known as an acoustic coupler. And this is the way that you could um uh
And this is the way that you could um uh connect the teletype through a phone
connect the teletype through a phone line to the computer. So, how did this
line to the computer. So, how did this work? Well, uh the you were given the
work? Well, uh the you were given the phone number that the computer that was
phone number that the computer that was attached to the computer in another
attached to the computer in another building uh that would would pick up
building uh that would would pick up your call. And um and by the way, uh
your call. And um and by the way, uh that round thing on the phone, that's
that round thing on the phone, that's called a dial for those not familiar. So
called a dial for those not familiar. So you dialed up the phone and you listened
you dialed up the phone and you listened and it you heard a high-pitched tone and
and it you heard a high-pitched tone and that that was the computer and then you
that that was the computer and then you took that handset and you thrust it into
took that handset and you thrust it into the acoustic coupler. So it ended up
the acoustic coupler. So it ended up like you see on the picture. Little
like you see on the picture. Little light came on and then the teletype
light came on and then the teletype started chattering. You had made a
started chattering. You had made a connection to the computer. You could
connection to the computer. You could now go. Um so that was state-of-the-art.
now go. Um so that was state-of-the-art. In 1971,
In 1971, uh we started working on the Oregon
uh we started working on the Oregon Trail and uh my friends had told me that
Trail and uh my friends had told me that we could get something done in two
we could get something done in two weeks. Um I think later I determined
weeks. Um I think later I determined they'd lied to my face.
they'd lied to my face. However, at the end of two weeks, we had
However, at the end of two weeks, we had a program. We had version 1.0
a program. We had version 1.0 of the Oregon Trail on a mainframe
of the Oregon Trail on a mainframe computer. And as near as we could tell,
computer. And as near as we could tell, the bugs were worked out.
the bugs were worked out. Uh so it it was time it was time to try
Uh so it it was time it was time to try it out. Now uh I started thinking about
it out. Now uh I started thinking about uh how I was going to do this in the
uh how I was going to do this in the classroom because even though the school
classroom because even though the school had a teletype for accessing the
had a teletype for accessing the computer, it only had one teletype
computer, it only had one teletype uh which I reserved for a couple of
uh which I reserved for a couple of weeks. It was put in my classroom next
weeks. It was put in my classroom next to the phone with the coupler. And uh
to the phone with the coupler. And uh and then I thought, but we can't have 30
and then I thought, but we can't have 30 kids trying to use this thing all at
kids trying to use this thing all at once. So I divided them up into small
once. So I divided them up into small groups and I created a a rotation of
groups and I created a a rotation of activities. So you could be playing the
activities. So you could be playing the game or uh maybe another group would be
game or uh maybe another group would be doing a map exercise, another group
doing a map exercise, another group would be reading something about the the
would be reading something about the the the trails and traveling west and so on
the trails and traveling west and so on until we got through the rotation and
until we got through the rotation and every every group had had a chance to
every every group had had a chance to play the game. So uh we we started doing
play the game. So uh we we started doing this
this and how did the students react?
and how did the students react? They were mesmerized.
They were mesmerized. With only one teletype in the school, I
With only one teletype in the school, I don't think many kids in the school had
don't think many kids in the school had actually had a chance to use it. So,
actually had a chance to use it. So, this was the first thing they'd ever
this was the first thing they'd ever seen, the first computer uh activity
seen, the first computer uh activity that they had ever witnessed. And I
that they had ever witnessed. And I think the other thing that probably um
think the other thing that probably um caught their imagination was, "Wow, this
caught their imagination was, "Wow, this wasn't math. We thought computers only
wasn't math. We thought computers only did math." No, you could do history as
did math." No, you could do history as well. You could do any subject. So, uh,
well. You could do any subject. So, uh, we we started out and and they, you
we we started out and and they, you know, they took to it like ducks out
know, they took to it like ducks out ducks in water. Uh, it it was just like
ducks in water. Uh, it it was just like today, the first time you hand something
today, the first time you hand something over to a young child and, you know, an
over to a young child and, you know, an hour later, they know how it works and
hour later, they know how it works and you don't. Uh,
you don't. Uh, um, they they really, uh, got into it.
um, they they really, uh, got into it. they seem to be absorbing information
they seem to be absorbing information from the program about this this western
from the program about this this western trek and um they couldn't get enough of
trek and um they couldn't get enough of it. my my friends who taught math made
it. my my friends who taught math made up flimsy excuses why their students
up flimsy excuses why their students should also try the program and uh and
should also try the program and uh and so they got that going and they came
so they got that going and they came home and they told me once we'd shown
home and they told me once we'd shown this to some students we now we now
this to some students we now we now experience at lunchtime and after school
experience at lunchtime and after school that a line of kids forms outside our
that a line of kids forms outside our classrooms because they want the chance
classrooms because they want the chance to come in and get on the teletype and
to come in and get on the teletype and play this name.
play this name. So we uh we concluded that we we had
So we uh we concluded that we we had come up with something significant uh
come up with something significant uh something that was teaching kids and
something that was teaching kids and also um engaging them and that was
also um engaging them and that was important.
important. So we we did this for a week or so but
So we we did this for a week or so but it was now December and um uh it's it's
it was now December and um uh it's it's almost the holiday time and the end of
almost the holiday time and the end of our practice teaching. Uh, and therefore
we printed out the code to the Oregon Trail program on the teletype. So it
Trail program on the teletype. So it came out on a like a scroll of paper,
came out on a like a scroll of paper, the sacred scroll of the Oregon Trail.
the sacred scroll of the Oregon Trail. Then because we were leaving the school
Then because we were leaving the school district and we didn't think we really
district and we didn't think we really had the right to leave our stuff on
had the right to leave our stuff on their computer, so we deleted the
their computer, so we deleted the program.
program. But we had the sacred scroll. And uh as
But we had the sacred scroll. And uh as we as we went back to finish up our
we as we went back to finish up our college senior year, I guess we all the
college senior year, I guess we all the three of us kind of wondered, would
three of us kind of wondered, would would we ever have a chance to get this
would we ever have a chance to get this thing going again?
thing going again? Uh before we move on to answer that
Uh before we move on to answer that question, let's take a little bit of a
question, let's take a little bit of a look inside the Oregon Trail version
look inside the Oregon Trail version 1.0.
1.0. So, the Oregon Trail, as you probably
So, the Oregon Trail, as you probably know, is is a resource management type
know, is is a resource management type game and a game that is played in uh
game and a game that is played in uh turns
turns uh as is true of many games. So, what
uh as is true of many games. So, what would happen is the teletype would print
would happen is the teletype would print out a date in 1847,
out a date in 1847, I think, and say you're you're ready to
I think, and say you're you're ready to start your your trip. You got some
start your your trip. You got some instructions. you um you bought some
instructions. you um you bought some supplies with some money that you had at
supplies with some money that you had at the start and uh the computer then at
the start and uh the computer then at the beginning of each turn gave you a
the beginning of each turn gave you a status h how many supplies you had left,
status h how many supplies you had left, how much cash, uh how much food, how
how much cash, uh how much food, how much clothing, how much ammunition,
much clothing, how much ammunition, all the stuff that you need to travel
all the stuff that you need to travel the Oregon Trail. And then it would
the Oregon Trail. And then it would offer you the opportunity to make a a
offer you the opportunity to make a a strategy decision or two, like, are you
strategy decision or two, like, are you going to keep going at this point? Are
going to keep going at this point? Are you going to stop to rest? Are you going
you going to stop to rest? Are you going to visit a fort where you could um uh
to visit a fort where you could um uh where you could use your money to buy
where you could use your money to buy extra provisions? Uh are you going to
extra provisions? Uh are you going to hunt? What are you going to do? And then
hunt? What are you going to do? And then the fateful question of how well are you
the fateful question of how well are you going to eat?
going to eat? If you didn't eat very well, you'd
If you didn't eat very well, you'd probably get sick. If you ate very well,
probably get sick. If you ate very well, your health would be great, but you'd
your health would be great, but you'd start running out of food faster. So,
start running out of food faster. So, you had to kind of balance that
you had to kind of balance that decision-making.
decision-making. That was then followed by the computer
That was then followed by the computer going into its collection of mostly
going into its collection of mostly calamities that could befall you to let
calamities that could befall you to let you know what had happened. Uh, your
you know what had happened. Uh, your oxen broke his leg, your kid got lost,
oxen broke his leg, your kid got lost, somebody got sick. Uh, well, you're
somebody got sick. Uh, well, you're probably familiar with uh many of these
probably familiar with uh many of these things. Uh, and so you then had to react
things. Uh, and so you then had to react to a number of them and uh and the
to a number of them and uh and the computer then moving you on to the next
computer then moving you on to the next turn would calculate what happened to
turn would calculate what happened to your resources and how how much you had
your resources and how how much you had to start the next turn. and on this went
to start the next turn. and on this went and each turn uh was set up to represent
and each turn uh was set up to represent two weeks in the trip. So the entire
two weeks in the trip. So the entire trip uh would take about 10 to 12 turns
trip uh would take about 10 to 12 turns um on the teletype.
um on the teletype. Now this is of course just the general
Now this is of course just the general overview but underneath that there was a
overview but underneath that there was a lot more going on.
Uh, and I know that you can't read the small print um from this um age-old
small print um from this um age-old diagram. Uh, that's why I've down the
diagram. Uh, that's why I've down the right hand side I've kind of annotated
right hand side I've kind of annotated in larger print.
in larger print. But um what I'm hoping to show here just
But um what I'm hoping to show here just visually is that the the the path that
visually is that the the the path that the player takes in each turn, this is
the player takes in each turn, this is one turn we're diagramming here, um
one turn we're diagramming here, um actually had many different options,
actually had many different options, many alternative routes, uh and many
many alternative routes, uh and many different things that could happen to
different things that could happen to you. So again, at the top, your
you. So again, at the top, your resources are totaled up. Your you make
resources are totaled up. Your you make some strategy choices. You could get
some strategy choices. You could get attacked by strangers. You could uh many
attacked by strangers. You could uh many many things in that big box are are
many things in that big box are are problems that could occur. You could get
problems that could occur. You could get ill. And the computer kept track of your
ill. And the computer kept track of your mileage. And when you reached mile post
mileage. And when you reached mile post roughly 950,
roughly 950, you were at the Rocky Mountains. And so
you were at the Rocky Mountains. And so mountain related problems started to
mountain related problems started to happen to you. And as you as you worked
happen to you. And as you as you worked your way down this this chart with the
your way down this this chart with the computer um using uh probability
computer um using uh probability statements to determine which things
statements to determine which things happened to you and how often when you
happened to you and how often when you when you went through all of that then
when you went through all of that then it would take you back to the top to
it would take you back to the top to start the next turn. So I I'm just
start the next turn. So I I'm just trying to make the point here that um
trying to make the point here that um well let me start that over again. I
well let me start that over again. I must confess to you, we did not create
must confess to you, we did not create the chart and then program to it. Okay,
the chart and then program to it. Okay, that that would have been too
that that would have been too deliberate. We started programming, you
deliberate. We started programming, you know, uh this is agile, by the way.
know, uh this is agile, by the way. We started programming and then uh and
We started programming and then uh and and it, you know, when we got it to
and it, you know, when we got it to working the way we thought it should,
working the way we thought it should, then I went in and and made this chart.
then I went in and and made this chart. So, you know, in the future, we'd
So, you know, in the future, we'd remember how how it actually worked.
remember how how it actually worked. Um, but, uh, as as it turned out, um,
Um, but, uh, as as it turned out, um, it's it, you know, it's a fairly
it's it, you know, it's a fairly sophisticated simulation model. And, uh,
sophisticated simulation model. And, uh, because of all the different routes that
because of all the different routes that the computer can take you through in
the computer can take you through in every turn, virtually no two trips to
every turn, virtually no two trips to Oregon ever, uh, were exactly the same,
Oregon ever, uh, were exactly the same, which means what? players will keep
which means what? players will keep coming back because they can't predict
coming back because they can't predict exactly what's going to happen. Now,
exactly what's going to happen. Now, another thing about the model is that
another thing about the model is that even though we set up some probabilities
even though we set up some probabilities for how often certain things would
for how often certain things would happen, we thought that the model would
happen, we thought that the model would be be more accurate if we pegged those
be be more accurate if we pegged those probabilities not just to time passing,
probabilities not just to time passing, but to the terrain of the trail. the the
but to the terrain of the trail. the the um probability that a certain thing
um probability that a certain thing might happen might be different at the
might happen might be different at the beginning of the trail uh or towards the
beginning of the trail uh or towards the end of the trail. So, how did we build
end of the trail. So, how did we build that into the program? Well, let let's
that into the program? Well, let let's take the um example of the fact that uh
take the um example of the fact that uh the pioneers that made this trip uh
the pioneers that made this trip uh often were um came into contact with
often were um came into contact with people they they didn't know, strangers.
people they they didn't know, strangers. Now, these strangers might be friends or
Now, these strangers might be friends or they may have mayhem on their mind. They
they may have mayhem on their mind. They may want to rob you of your supplies and
may want to rob you of your supplies and that kind of thing. Um, so you you had
that kind of thing. Um, so you you had to deal with this.
to deal with this. We figured that it was probably um more
We figured that it was probably um more likely that you would meet up with
likely that you would meet up with strangers,
strangers, you know, coming upon the trail at the
you know, coming upon the trail at the beginning of the trip rather than
beginning of the trip rather than towards the end because number one, you
towards the end because number one, you you weren't so far from civilization at
you weren't so far from civilization at the beginning. So these people could
the beginning. So these people could ride out, try to rob you, and then, you
ride out, try to rob you, and then, you know, go back to uh Independence,
know, go back to uh Independence, Missouri. Um, and also because the the
Missouri. Um, and also because the the geographic terrain at this point is very
geographic terrain at this point is very flat. It's the prairies. Uh, once you
flat. It's the prairies. Uh, once you get into the mountains, what
get into the mountains, what self-respecting thief is going to want
self-respecting thief is going to want to try to survive there, you know, for
to try to survive there, you know, for for the meager, uh, rewards he's going
for the meager, uh, rewards he's going to get for his um his evil ways. Um so
to get for his um his evil ways. Um so we thought that um a graph like this was
we thought that um a graph like this was a good depiction of the probability for
a good depiction of the probability for this this event as um mapped out against
this this event as um mapped out against the um the terrain of the trail. So
the um the terrain of the trail. So along the x-axis we have the mileage
along the x-axis we have the mileage from 0 to 2,000 and up the y-axis we
from 0 to 2,000 and up the y-axis we have probabilities from 0 to um uh 50%.
have probabilities from 0 to um uh 50%. The math boys then had to figure out how
The math boys then had to figure out how we could represent this mathematically.
we could represent this mathematically. So a formula
So a formula here is the formula.
here is the formula. So at the beginning of each turn, the
So at the beginning of each turn, the computer looked at the mileage you were
computer looked at the mileage you were at and plugged it into m in this
at and plugged it into m in this equation
equation and that that generates the uh
and that that generates the uh corresponding um y value uh on on the
corresponding um y value uh on on the curve. All
curve. All right. So, if you were at the um like
right. So, if you were at the um like the 400 mile mark, it might be uh a 50%
the 400 mile mark, it might be uh a 50% chance that you were going to meet up
chance that you were going to meet up with some of these riders. If you were
with some of these riders. If you were at the uh 1,600 mile uh mile post on the
at the uh 1,600 mile uh mile post on the trail, it'd be more like 5%. And so, by
trail, it'd be more like 5%. And so, by using this method, we would generate
using this method, we would generate different probabilities, not just based
different probabilities, not just based on what event are we talking about, but
on what event are we talking about, but also where we were on the trail. Now
also where we were on the trail. Now there's another another aspect that had
there's another another aspect that had to be dealt with and that is the use of
to be dealt with and that is the use of your firearm
your firearm because there was no images animation
because there was no images animation and so forth. So how do we do that?
and so forth. So how do we do that? Well, when it was time to use your
Well, when it was time to use your rifle,
rifle, which means you had just chosen to hunt
which means you had just chosen to hunt or because the computer said uh for
or because the computer said uh for example, riders are approaching you. So,
example, riders are approaching you. So, you pick up your rifle. The computer
you pick up your rifle. The computer would then quickly type out something
would then quickly type out something like type bang or type pow or blam,
like type bang or type pow or blam, something like that. And you, the
something like that. And you, the player, had to type that that phrase in
player, had to type that that phrase in as quickly as you could and press
as quickly as you could and press return.
return. So, how did the computer turn that into
So, how did the computer turn that into the results of using your your trusty
the results of using your your trusty gun?
gun? Well, if you made a typo in your haste,
Well, if you made a typo in your haste, then say for hunting, you got no food.
then say for hunting, you got no food. If you spelled the phrase correctly, but
If you spelled the phrase correctly, but you were kind of a slow typist, you got
you were kind of a slow typist, you got some food. But if you were a good
some food. But if you were a good speller and a good typist, good eaten
speller and a good typist, good eaten tonight, and your food supply was beefed
tonight, and your food supply was beefed up, if you pardon the expression, uh for
up, if you pardon the expression, uh for the next uh the next turn that you took.
the next uh the next turn that you took. So, um, we didn't have little, you know,
So, um, we didn't have little, you know, shooter guys running around with with
shooter guys running around with with guns and so forth, but we might make the
guns and so forth, but we might make the we might make the claim that Oregon
we might make the claim that Oregon Trail was the first firsterson shooter
Trail was the first firsterson shooter game in the history of games.
Okay. So, uh, so this this starts to give you an idea of how how this worked.
give you an idea of how how this worked. And again, uh, the kids were fascinated
And again, uh, the kids were fascinated and, uh, and we we were sure that that
and, uh, and we we were sure that that something could come of this if we could
something could come of this if we could just find a way to do it. Well, the the
just find a way to do it. Well, the the game sat dormant for a couple of years,
game sat dormant for a couple of years, um, until 1974
um, until 1974 when I um took a job with a newly formed
when I um took a job with a newly formed organization in Minnesota called the
organization in Minnesota called the Minnesota Educational Computing
Minnesota Educational Computing Corporation.
Corporation. Uh it was a public agency that had been
Uh it was a public agency that had been formed by the state of Minnesota to help
formed by the state of Minnesota to help schools come to terms with what it would
schools come to terms with what it would mean to bring computing into the
mean to bring computing into the curriculum and how to make that
curriculum and how to make that operational in the schools. Uh we we
operational in the schools. Uh we we take our hats off to Minnesota on that
take our hats off to Minnesota on that on this because no other state in the
on this because no other state in the country did something like this which
country did something like this which meant that the schools in the other
meant that the schools in the other states had a kind of a chaotic
states had a kind of a chaotic situation. How would they know how to
situation. How would they know how to make decisions about hardware to buy and
make decisions about hardware to buy and software? How would they train teachers
software? How would they train teachers and so forth? But motans
and so forth? But motans from their maybe from their Scandinavian
from their maybe from their Scandinavian background like to get things organized
background like to get things organized and so they created MECC mech
and so they created MECC mech to uh to help carry that out. Uh I took
to uh to help carry that out. Uh I took a job about four months after Mech
a job about four months after Mech started up its uh operation. And one of
started up its uh operation. And one of the things that Mech did was it operated
the things that Mech did was it operated one of those big mainframe computers to
one of those big mainframe computers to provide instructional educational
provide instructional educational computing to all the schools in the
computing to all the schools in the state no matter where you were located
state no matter where you were located by setting up a telecom network and and
by setting up a telecom network and and the mainframe computer.
the mainframe computer. Uh, I noticed when I arrived that in
Uh, I noticed when I arrived that in that mainframe computer there was a
that mainframe computer there was a library of applications that people had
library of applications that people had created, some good, some not so good.
created, some good, some not so good. And I remembered that I had one of these
And I remembered that I had one of these sacred scrolls. So I asked, would it be
sacred scrolls. So I asked, would it be okay if I added something to the
okay if I added something to the library? Oh, sure. They they needed all
library? Oh, sure. They they needed all that they could get.
that they could get. Uh, and so on one um long weekend, I
Uh, and so on one um long weekend, I typed in 800 lines of code from my
typed in 800 lines of code from my kitchen
kitchen uh at home uh to put the Oregon Trail
uh at home uh to put the Oregon Trail game back up on a computer and now it
game back up on a computer and now it would be not just available to a few
would be not just available to a few schools in Minneapolis, it would be
schools in Minneapolis, it would be available to the entire state. I
available to the entire state. I realized, however, that the Oregon Trail
realized, however, that the Oregon Trail 1.0 I know having been created in two
1.0 I know having been created in two weeks had not exactly gone through the
weeks had not exactly gone through the historical research that uh we would
historical research that uh we would probably want it to to give it uh
probably want it to to give it uh credence. So I went in and started doing
credence. So I went in and started doing some of this research. Um I checked out
some of this research. Um I checked out the geography, the mileage of the mile
the geography, the mileage of the mile posts and made sure that things were
posts and made sure that things were happening along the trail when they
happening along the trail when they should depending on the geography.
should depending on the geography. When we had built probabilities into the
When we had built probabilities into the game as to how often the various events
game as to how often the various events would happen, we were making educated
would happen, we were making educated guesses. But I found in the library that
guesses. But I found in the library that there were books in which were printed
there were books in which were printed the actual text from diaries of people
the actual text from diaries of people that made this journey in the 1840s
that made this journey in the 1840s and50s. And so I read through some of
and50s. And so I read through some of these diaries and kept score like how
these diaries and kept score like how many days out of the entire trip was it
many days out of the entire trip was it bad weather? uh how often did somebody
bad weather? uh how often did somebody get ill and so on and turn those into
get ill and so on and turn those into revised probability numbers
revised probability numbers um that uh would would make the uh the
um that uh would would make the uh the trip on the computer more in line with
trip on the computer more in line with what we know from history.
what we know from history. Uh and there was one other thing that uh
Uh and there was one other thing that uh needed to be dealt with and that was the
needed to be dealt with and that was the role of Native Americans. Uh because in
role of Native Americans. Uh because in in the 1970s and maybe even to today,
in the 1970s and maybe even to today, you'll know if you go to see a western
you'll know if you go to see a western at the movie that we've we've kind of
at the movie that we've we've kind of prolonged this stereotype of these uh
prolonged this stereotype of these uh these pioneers traveling in their wagon
these pioneers traveling in their wagon trains and the Indians coming down out
trains and the Indians coming down out of the hills and attacking them and uh
of the hills and attacking them and uh burning the wagons and so forth. Well,
burning the wagons and so forth. Well, it turns out from the diaries it it
it turns out from the diaries it it didn't it didn't work that way or at
didn't it didn't work that way or at least it worked it only worked that way
least it worked it only worked that way um a lot less than we might think from
um a lot less than we might think from watching those films. Uh and as a matter
watching those films. Uh and as a matter of fact, there were diary entries
of fact, there were diary entries showing that Native Americans helped the
showing that Native Americans helped the pioneers, helped them stay on the trail
pioneers, helped them stay on the trail to know where the trail was going,
to know where the trail was going, helped them understand the plants at the
helped them understand the plants at the side of, you know, the side of the road,
side of, you know, the side of the road, so to speak. this one is nutritious,
so to speak. this one is nutritious, this one will kill you. Uh it was kind
this one will kill you. Uh it was kind of helpful information to have and and
of helpful information to have and and they had it from years of experience. So
they had it from years of experience. So I made sure that there were events that
I made sure that there were events that came up in the game that reflected some
came up in the game that reflected some of those kinds of things. Uh and um also
of those kinds of things. Uh and um also I created a teacher guide. Do we have
I created a teacher guide. Do we have any teachers here? I should have asked.
any teachers here? I should have asked. We have a few. Okay. Um, well, as any
We have a few. Okay. Um, well, as any teacher will tell you, if you're giving
teacher will tell you, if you're giving me a new a new thing to use in the
me a new a new thing to use in the classroom, I've got to have
classroom, I've got to have instructions. I've got to have ideas. I
instructions. I've got to have ideas. I can't just do this from scratch. So, I
can't just do this from scratch. So, I created a booklet that uh Mech published
created a booklet that uh Mech published uh that that had information about the
uh that that had information about the game, about the model, about the
game, about the model, about the research, um a bibliography of uh of
research, um a bibliography of uh of books and and so forth that you could
books and and so forth that you could bring to the classroom. And that was we
bring to the classroom. And that was we did that at Mech for all of the
did that at Mech for all of the applications that we created and that's
applications that we created and that's what gave mech a good reputation with
what gave mech a good reputation with teachers uh for being educationally
teachers uh for being educationally sound.
sound. So for about five years
So for about five years um the Oregon Trail was the most program
um the Oregon Trail was the most program on the Minnesota statewide educational
on the Minnesota statewide educational system like by a long shot. We used to
system like by a long shot. We used to go into the this the uh airtight room
go into the this the uh airtight room where the computer was to look at the
where the computer was to look at the master console to see the number of
master console to see the number of times each application had been run that
times each application had been run that day. And so the the best ones had been
day. And so the the best ones had been run two or 30 hund times, but Oregon
run two or 30 hund times, but Oregon Trail had been run like 10,000 times. Uh
Trail had been run like 10,000 times. Uh so uh you know it was kind of becoming
so uh you know it was kind of becoming clear that that this was going to be a
clear that that this was going to be a popular thing. And after about five
popular thing. And after about five years, uh, something interesting
years, uh, something interesting happened. As you may recall,
happened. As you may recall, uh, I don't know, we were looking
uh, I don't know, we were looking through a, uh, Radio Shack catalog one
through a, uh, Radio Shack catalog one day and we found that this company was
day and we found that this company was selling computers.
selling computers. Computers you could buy for, you know,
Computers you could buy for, you know, less than $1,000 and put in your home.
less than $1,000 and put in your home. So, personal computers were coming to
So, personal computers were coming to the marketplace.
the marketplace. And uh we realized at Mech that that was
And uh we realized at Mech that that was going to cause a big change that schools
going to cause a big change that schools were really going to going to want to
were really going to going to want to buy these kinds of computers and
buy these kinds of computers and actually own their computing power, not
actually own their computing power, not in effect rent it uh from a big system.
in effect rent it uh from a big system. Um, and so we set up a team who took the
Um, and so we set up a team who took the best applications from that mainframe
best applications from that mainframe system and recoded them to work on the
system and recoded them to work on the Apple 2 and and then beyond that other
Apple 2 and and then beyond that other brands uh that uh survived the shakeout
brands uh that uh survived the shakeout of the market. Um, and as a matter of
of the market. Um, and as a matter of fact, uh, that led to in 1985 the
fact, uh, that led to in 1985 the release of a new and improved version
release of a new and improved version for the apple of the Oregon Trail, which
for the apple of the Oregon Trail, which is displayed in the the little image up
is displayed in the the little image up there. This may well be the one you
there. This may well be the one you remember from from school, the colored
remember from from school, the colored version, the one that played those tiny
version, the one that played those tiny songs on Apple's two-bit sound card. Uh
songs on Apple's two-bit sound card. Uh but uh but the one that um introduced
but uh but the one that um introduced you to uh traveling the Oregon Trail by
you to uh traveling the Oregon Trail by computer. And as the years went on, new
computer. And as the years went on, new versions were released, new technologies
versions were released, new technologies were dealt with.
were dealt with. And uh I put down at the bottom uh just
And uh I put down at the bottom uh just referencing that um in the 90s mech was
referencing that um in the 90s mech was uh purchased like other educational
uh purchased like other educational software companies by larger
software companies by larger entities, corporate entities um who now
entities, corporate entities um who now found themselves with educational
found themselves with educational content, but they didn't quite know what
content, but they didn't quite know what to do with it. And in the case of the
to do with it. And in the case of the company that ended up with the Oregon
company that ended up with the Oregon Trail, they had someone create an arcade
Trail, they had someone create an arcade type version for your uh tablet or
type version for your uh tablet or phone. Uh but this was not um not
phone. Uh but this was not um not designed uh with with the actual
designed uh with with the actual historical uh data in mind and so forth.
historical uh data in mind and so forth. So uh if you have run into this version,
So uh if you have run into this version, uh it's it's not it's a different kind
uh it's it's not it's a different kind of game. Uh not the same thing that we
of game. Uh not the same thing that we used to sell to schools.
used to sell to schools. So, what made Oregon Trail so popular?
So, what made Oregon Trail so popular? Well, for one, for many kids in the 80s,
Well, for one, for many kids in the 80s, uh, this is the first computer they'd
uh, this is the first computer they'd ever seen. And this was a very popular
ever seen. And this was a very popular thing that many schools owned that could
thing that many schools owned that could be used on that computer. And so, uh,
be used on that computer. And so, uh, you know, you you always you always
you know, you you always you always remember your first experiences best.
remember your first experiences best. Also, I think because we gave the kids
Also, I think because we gave the kids an environment that they could control
an environment that they could control or some of the time control that that
or some of the time control that that was something they really liked. They
was something they really liked. They didn't like always going to the computer
didn't like always going to the computer and getting asked to do their arithmetic
and getting asked to do their arithmetic facts or their spelling lists. Uh they
facts or their spelling lists. Uh they wanted to be part of something um that
wanted to be part of something um that that they could influence.
that they could influence. And we put them right in the middle of a
And we put them right in the middle of a first-person adventure. Uh, and when
first-person adventure. Uh, and when I've talked to game people in the
I've talked to game people in the present, um, uh, I believe I'm fair to
present, um, uh, I believe I'm fair to it's fair to say that that often the
it's fair to say that that often the point will be made if you don't have a
point will be made if you don't have a good story,
good story, you're not going to have the best game
you're not going to have the best game you could have. The story is really a
you could have. The story is really a key component. And here we gave kids a
key component. And here we gave kids a story to be a part of, which was um, not
story to be a part of, which was um, not very common um, back in the in the 80s.
very common um, back in the in the 80s. Uh and so uh what that means is it it
Uh and so uh what that means is it it was very popular in the schools in the
was very popular in the schools in the US and a few other countries. Um but
US and a few other countries. Um but that means that today, several decades
that means that today, several decades later, um Oregon Trail is well
later, um Oregon Trail is well remembered by people such as yourselves
remembered by people such as yourselves that used it back then. For example,
that used it back then. For example, about a year ago, I got on Reddit and
about a year ago, I got on Reddit and you may be familiar with their ask me
you may be familiar with their ask me anything feature. So I introduced myself
anything feature. So I introduced myself and uh co-inventor the original Oregon
and uh co-inventor the original Oregon Trail asked me anything.
Trail asked me anything. Well, in a period of about six hours,
Well, in a period of about six hours, uh, while I stayed at the computer, uh,
uh, while I stayed at the computer, uh, I got over 2,000 comments and, uh, these
I got over 2,000 comments and, uh, these comments were, uh, they were mostly
comments were, uh, they were mostly positive
positive [Applause]
[Applause] except for the losers who couldn't get
except for the losers who couldn't get to Oregon because they didn't figure out
to Oregon because they didn't figure out the strategy.
Uh but most uh the the most memorable thing to me is that there were there
thing to me is that there were there were more than a few comments that said
were more than a few comments that said I really enjoyed the Oregon Trail. Um of
I really enjoyed the Oregon Trail. Um of all the things we did in school with the
all the things we did in school with the computer, the Oregon Trail is the one I
computer, the Oregon Trail is the one I learned the most from and of course that
learned the most from and of course that was the purpose from the very beginning.
was the purpose from the very beginning. Um, I don't know if you watch uh network
Um, I don't know if you watch uh network TV, but there's a a great sitcom on you
TV, but there's a a great sitcom on you might check out on Wednesday evenings
might check out on Wednesday evenings called The Goldbergs. The Goldbergs is a
called The Goldbergs. The Goldbergs is a kind of a wacky family in the 1980s. The
kind of a wacky family in the 1980s. The young son, uh, the young the youngest of
young son, uh, the young the youngest of the two boys is a computer nerd and they
the two boys is a computer nerd and they often show him at his Apple 2 and in a
often show him at his Apple 2 and in a couple of segments, the camera swings
couple of segments, the camera swings around to show the screen. And what do
around to show the screen. And what do you think is there but the Oregon Trail?
you think is there but the Oregon Trail? So, uh, you know, we're kind of a part
So, uh, you know, we're kind of a part of the culture.
of the culture. Perhaps you're familiar with a tribute
Perhaps you're familiar with a tribute version
version to the Oregon Trail. And this is not a
to the Oregon Trail. And this is not a typo in the image there. This is the
typo in the image there. This is the Oregon Trail, which you may have heard
Oregon Trail, which you may have heard of. It's similar to the Oregon Trail in
of. It's similar to the Oregon Trail in that it involves a trip across the
that it involves a trip across the country. However, you take this trip in
country. However, you take this trip in a car and uh the setting is an uh
a car and uh the setting is an uh apocalyptic uh uh US that that's been um
apocalyptic uh uh US that that's been um you know destroyed a lot and your
you know destroyed a lot and your biggest um hurdle that you have to get
biggest um hurdle that you have to get by is all of the zombies that are
by is all of the zombies that are running around the landscape um looking
running around the landscape um looking for your brains. Um I met the young men
for your brains. Um I met the young men who uh who made this game. Um they're
who uh who made this game. Um they're sane. Uh,
sane. Uh, and to my knowledge, this has been a
and to my knowledge, this has been a kind of a popular thing. I mean, they
kind of a popular thing. I mean, they just launched it, you know, with with a
just launched it, you know, with with a little bit of funding, but um, I think a
little bit of funding, but um, I think a lot of people have played it. And, uh,
lot of people have played it. And, uh, perhaps uh, uh, most, uh, important to
perhaps uh, uh, most, uh, important to me is that we're in the Hall of Fame.
me is that we're in the Hall of Fame. [Applause]
[Applause] The uh Strong National Museum of Play in
The uh Strong National Museum of Play in Rochester, New York is a place that uh
Rochester, New York is a place that uh catalogs and displays all the stuff that
catalogs and displays all the stuff that kids have ever had fun with. It is an
kids have ever had fun with. It is an amazing place. You must go there. Uh and
amazing place. You must go there. Uh and a couple of years ago, the the Strong
a couple of years ago, the the Strong decided that uh they wanted to start
decided that uh they wanted to start emphasizing computer games as part of
emphasizing computer games as part of that fits in with play. uh and that um
that fits in with play. uh and that um to help emphasize that they created the
to help emphasize that they created the World Video Game Hall of Fame. So in
World Video Game Hall of Fame. So in 2015 they inducted six programs, the of
2015 they inducted six programs, the of course the iconic Pac-Man, Tetris, World
course the iconic Pac-Man, Tetris, World of Warcraft.
of Warcraft. uh last May. Again, they they do this
uh last May. Again, they they do this every year. And using their panel of
every year. And using their panel of experts and um nominations from the
experts and um nominations from the population at large, they enshrined six
population at large, they enshrined six more games uh computer games, and one of
more games uh computer games, and one of them was the Oregon Trail. And proud to
them was the Oregon Trail. And proud to say it's the only one of the 12 in there
say it's the only one of the 12 in there so far that was created with an
so far that was created with an educational purpose in mind. I'm sure
educational purpose in mind. I'm sure more will follow, but um I got to be
more will follow, but um I got to be there at the little ceremony that they
there at the little ceremony that they held and u it's is really a special
held and u it's is really a special time.
time. Um all right,
Um all right, when we invented the Oregon Trail game,
when we invented the Oregon Trail game, uh we had no guidance. We had no
uh we had no guidance. We had no examples. Nobody had written books on
examples. Nobody had written books on how to create effective educational
how to create effective educational games. Um
games. Um uh there were no uh university courses
uh there were no uh university courses in this. There was there were no
in this. There was there were no consultants to consult. Uh and so all we
consultants to consult. Uh and so all we really had was our instincts as uh
really had was our instincts as uh teachers as future teachers. Uh and
teachers as future teachers. Uh and fortunately it appears that we got a lot
fortunately it appears that we got a lot of stuff right that today you would know
of stuff right that today you would know from all of your background and
from all of your background and experience um are the right things to do
experience um are the right things to do with a game. So, just to quickly sum
with a game. So, just to quickly sum that up,
that up, uh we gave the player a degree of
uh we gave the player a degree of control. It wasn't all random. We put
control. It wasn't all random. We put the player in the middle of a story that
the player in the middle of a story that would engage him or her. It was a a very
would engage him or her. It was a a very simple game to use, but there was a very
simple game to use, but there was a very sophisticated model underneath.
sophisticated model underneath. Uh the resources were balanced well with
Uh the resources were balanced well with the obstacles. uh if you give kids uh
the obstacles. uh if you give kids uh something to do on the computer that's
something to do on the computer that's too hard uh they'll give up and if it's
too hard uh they'll give up and if it's too easy they'll get bored. So you have
too easy they'll get bored. So you have to have just the right balance so that
to have just the right balance so that it continues to be a challenge and they
it continues to be a challenge and they come back time and time again.
come back time and time again. When we talk about an educational game,
When we talk about an educational game, uh I I like to point out that the game
uh I I like to point out that the game becomes much more um valuable uh and
becomes much more um valuable uh and much more successful if you have
much more successful if you have multiple layers of learning. So just to
multiple layers of learning. So just to to give my examples, what do kids learn
to give my examples, what do kids learn from the Oregon Trail? Well, one thing
from the Oregon Trail? Well, one thing they learn it's a game. And so um you
they learn it's a game. And so um you learn a strategy by playing the game and
learn a strategy by playing the game and replaying the game. It's a it's a
replaying the game. It's a it's a thought process. Uh, interestingly
thought process. Uh, interestingly enough,
enough, this actually is another reflection of
this actually is another reflection of what actually happened historically.
what actually happened historically. When the first settlers took the trail,
When the first settlers took the trail, those that survived when they got to the
those that survived when they got to the west wrote back to the uh the family in
west wrote back to the uh the family in the east, you know, Pony Express or
the east, you know, Pony Express or however they got a letter back there,
however they got a letter back there, and they said, uh, if you're going to
and they said, uh, if you're going to come and join us out here, here's what
come and join us out here, here's what you need to do because we know from, you
you need to do because we know from, you know, being in the first wave, here's
know, being in the first wave, here's the clothing, here's the the cash,
the clothing, here's the the cash, here's the thinking about the food and
here's the thinking about the food and so forth. Um so the more that people
so forth. Um so the more that people made the trip the more information was
made the trip the more information was built up that would help them be
built up that would help them be successful. The mortality rate started
successful. The mortality rate started to come down. Um uh so that that is a
to come down. Um uh so that that is a reflection I think of what happens when
reflection I think of what happens when you when you play a game and uh uh and
you when you play a game and uh uh and it's it's the kind of thing that that
it's it's the kind of thing that that that keeps uh kids interested in it. You
that keeps uh kids interested in it. You learn about topics, you learn something
learn about topics, you learn something about history, you learn about
about history, you learn about geography, you learn about resource
geography, you learn about resource management. Uh these are things that can
management. Uh these are things that can be matched to the standards that schools
be matched to the standards that schools are now uh being held to um in their
are now uh being held to um in their programs.
programs. And then there's another thing that I uh
And then there's another thing that I uh experienced watching kids play this game
experienced watching kids play this game in uh in the early days when because of
in uh in the early days when because of the teletype shortage, you had to play
the teletype shortage, you had to play as a group that there were things that
as a group that there were things that happened in that group activity uh that
happened in that group activity uh that that were very interesting. The kids
that were very interesting. The kids kids figured out uh pretty quickly that
kids figured out uh pretty quickly that there were going to be lots of decisions
there were going to be lots of decisions that they had to make in playing this
that they had to make in playing this game. And so, how do 10year-olds,
game. And so, how do 10year-olds, 8-year-olds make decisions when they
8-year-olds make decisions when they have a group?
have a group? They yell at each other. I want it my
They yell at each other. I want it my way. I want it my way. Well, the kids
way. I want it my way. Well, the kids that that I saw playing this game
that that I saw playing this game eventually looked up at the clock in the
eventually looked up at the clock in the classroom and realized if they didn't
classroom and realized if they didn't get this to be um a more um organized
get this to be um a more um organized process, they were going to run out of
process, they were going to run out of time, they'd never find out if they got
time, they'd never find out if they got to Oregon. So, what did they do? They
to Oregon. So, what did they do? They invented democracy. They invented taking
invented democracy. They invented taking votes. Okay?
votes. Okay? Uh, forget the hanging chads. They they
Uh, forget the hanging chads. They they took votes. All right? And so, um, they
took votes. All right? And so, um, they they realized that if they had one
they realized that if they had one person designated to run the voting,
person designated to run the voting, they could take a vote, majority rules,
they could take a vote, majority rules, that's what we're going to do. We'll get
that's what we're going to do. We'll get to Oregon, uh, in time. Uh, another
to Oregon, uh, in time. Uh, another thing they invented which to me harks
thing they invented which to me harks back to um, Henry Ford about a century
back to um, Henry Ford about a century ago is division of labor. So in the
ago is division of labor. So in the early Ford plant, you know, one person
early Ford plant, you know, one person made the wheels and one person made the
made the wheels and one person made the transmission and one person made the
transmission and one person made the seats and then they, you know, they they
seats and then they, you know, they they put them all together. They were very
put them all together. They were very efficient at making cars. So the kids
efficient at making cars. So the kids realized there were lots of there's lots
realized there were lots of there's lots of stuff to do with the when you're
of stuff to do with the when you're playing the game and everyone was trying
playing the game and everyone was trying to keep track of everything until they
to keep track of everything until they decided, okay, first of all, the best
decided, okay, first of all, the best typist in our group needs to be the one
typist in our group needs to be the one sitting at the teletype so that they
sitting at the teletype so that they don't do typos and we don't miss out on
don't do typos and we don't miss out on our hunting. Someone else watched the
our hunting. Someone else watched the map, someone else watched the budget,
map, someone else watched the budget, somebody else kept track of the voting.
somebody else kept track of the voting. uh th this was this was all done in the
uh th this was this was all done in the minds of these kids. Uh and to me is a a
minds of these kids. Uh and to me is a a level of learning that in in some in
level of learning that in in some in some respects transcends just picking up
some respects transcends just picking up content and um and uh strategy
content and um and uh strategy suggestions. So if you're making games
suggestions. So if you're making games for the education market, the more
for the education market, the more levels of learning you can put in there,
levels of learning you can put in there, the the more successful the product can
the the more successful the product can be.
be. And finally, I'm a big fan of a
And finally, I'm a big fan of a collaborative design um efforts. Uh I've
collaborative design um efforts. Uh I've always thought that if we had put 10
always thought that if we had put 10 computer programmers in a room and said,
computer programmers in a room and said, "Make a game about history," we never
"Make a game about history," we never would have gotten the Oregon Trail. If
would have gotten the Oregon Trail. If we'd put 10 historians in a room and
we'd put 10 historians in a room and said, "Make a computer game," we never
said, "Make a computer game," we never would have gotten the Oregon Trail. But
would have gotten the Oregon Trail. But we had uh two math guys, one of one of
we had uh two math guys, one of one of whom was well into computers, and one
whom was well into computers, and one history guy. and that that collection of
history guy. and that that collection of backgrounds brought forth all the
backgrounds brought forth all the questions, all the new ideas, all the
questions, all the new ideas, all the suggestions that made um Oregon Trail
suggestions that made um Oregon Trail successful. So, if if you're forming a
successful. So, if if you're forming a team to make a game, uh make sure you've
team to make a game, uh make sure you've got diversity on that team. Speaking of
got diversity on that team. Speaking of team, here they are 25 years after the
team, here they are 25 years after the invention of the game, which was about
invention of the game, which was about 45 years ago. Uh that is myself, Bill
45 years ago. Uh that is myself, Bill Heinman, Paul Dillenberger, Bill holding
Heinman, Paul Dillenberger, Bill holding one of these sacred scrolls that was
one of these sacred scrolls that was printed off the teletype. He I I found
printed off the teletype. He I I found out recently that he still has that
out recently that he still has that scroll and that at one point his son
scroll and that at one point his son asked him, uh, "Dad, because I I realize
asked him, uh, "Dad, because I I realize how valuable this thing is, would it
how valuable this thing is, would it would it be okay if if I took over the
would it be okay if if I took over the sacred scroll?" To which Bill replied,
sacred scroll?" To which Bill replied, "No.
So anyway, um uh a great great pair of colleagues to have
a great great pair of colleagues to have um gone through this and the Oregon
um gone through this and the Oregon Trail of course has stuck with us now
Trail of course has stuck with us now for over four decades.
for over four decades. uh which um uh you know kind of means
uh which um uh you know kind of means that for all the learning that people
that for all the learning that people got out of the Oregon Trail about
got out of the Oregon Trail about uh history uh I learned some things
uh history uh I learned some things about life from the Oregon Trail from
about life from the Oregon Trail from from the Oregon Trail game and some of
from the Oregon Trail game and some of these things may apply to your own your
these things may apply to your own your own efforts in uh creating games. So
own efforts in uh creating games. So let's just say
let's just say plan ahead. There's danger out there.
plan ahead. There's danger out there. Be patient.
Be patient. The journey is long.
The journey is long. If you persevere, you'll find your green
If you persevere, you'll find your green valley.
valley. And even if the water's deep, sometimes
And even if the water's deep, sometimes you just have to your wagon and
you just have to your wagon and head out from shore. Thank you very much
head out from shore. Thank you very much everybody. Appreciate it.
Thank you.
Uh we do have a few a few minutes uh and we can take some questions and I believe
we can take some questions and I believe there are microphones in the aisles uh
there are microphones in the aisles uh that could be used if anyone has a
that could be used if anyone has a question that they're willing to say
question that they're willing to say publicly.
publicly. Hi. Uh what was I'm right here. Um what
Hi. Uh what was I'm right here. Um what was the most surprising thing to you um
was the most surprising thing to you um with the kind of explosion of popularity
with the kind of explosion of popularity from Organ Trail?
from Organ Trail? Well, um
I I I guess I kind of struggle with that because um you know, I had I had nothing
because um you know, I had I had nothing to compare it to. I I was happy to see
to compare it to. I I was happy to see that people liked the game and the fact
that people liked the game and the fact that schools started um ultimately
that schools started um ultimately purchasing the game from Mech in in its
purchasing the game from Mech in in its um you know Apple versions and so forth.
um you know Apple versions and so forth. Uh it just seemed like kind of a natural
Uh it just seemed like kind of a natural thing. But um I I I will say that uh if
thing. But um I I I will say that uh if something surprising might be that at
something surprising might be that at the time that Mech was um bought by an
the time that Mech was um bought by an investment group to take it over, Oregon
investment group to take it over, Oregon Trail, I think accounted for about
Trail, I think accounted for about onethird of Mech's annual revenues. So
onethird of Mech's annual revenues. So uh the the mech group over the years uh
uh the the mech group over the years uh developed about 250 to 300 products and
developed about 250 to 300 products and this one product was uh bringing in a
this one product was uh bringing in a third of the money. Wow. Thank you.
third of the money. Wow. Thank you. Yeah, you're welcome. Uh yes sir.
Yeah, you're welcome. Uh yes sir. Amazing talk. I just wanted to say thank
Amazing talk. I just wanted to say thank you for the experience of asking my
you for the experience of asking my teacher what dysentery was
teacher what dysentery was and the following. If I may clarify,
and the following. If I may clarify, dysentery was not brought up in version
dysentery was not brought up in version 1.0.
1.0. That was the uh that was the Apple
That was the uh that was the Apple version where the team added it. Yes.
version where the team added it. Yes. Thank you for the fascinating peak into
Thank you for the fascinating peak into history. What are some educational games
history. What are some educational games from modern times that you think are
from modern times that you think are doing it right and why?
doing it right and why? I'm sorry. I'm I'm getting a kind of an
I'm sorry. I'm I'm getting a kind of an echo, so I'll yell. Is that better?
echo, so I'll yell. Is that better? What are some modern educational games
What are some modern educational games that you think are right and why?
Well, uh let's see. First of all, um I may not be as up to-date as uh as
may not be as up to-date as uh as necessary, but um uh one thing that I'm
necessary, but um uh one thing that I'm that I'm fascinated with is that perhaps
that I'm fascinated with is that perhaps the most popular educational game today
the most popular educational game today is um
is um Okay, I'm drawing a blank. What what's
Okay, I'm drawing a blank. What what's what's the one that looks like you're
what's the one that looks like you're digging through all the bricks and
digging through all the bricks and making
making Minecraft? Thank you. I'm sorry.
Minecraft? Thank you. I'm sorry. Uh I've seen I've seen um uh notices on
Uh I've seen I've seen um uh notices on the internet where you can buy
the internet where you can buy curriculum guides for the use of
curriculum guides for the use of Minecraft and suggestions for activities
Minecraft and suggestions for activities in the classroom that you can do with
in the classroom that you can do with Minecraft. So that that's been kind of
Minecraft. So that that's been kind of surprising. Um but my um my sense is
surprising. Um but my um my sense is that that if there if there was a golden
that that if there if there was a golden age of educational software in terms of
age of educational software in terms of making making programs that that were
making making programs that that were deliberately teaching a particular part
deliberately teaching a particular part in the curriculum. Uh I I think that
in the curriculum. Uh I I think that that that was a little bit in the past
that that was a little bit in the past and that in uh since then there's been a
and that in uh since then there's been a lot more use of the internet by schools
lot more use of the internet by schools and um and and various tools that help
and um and and various tools that help kids be creative and make their own
kids be creative and make their own their own videos, their own productions,
their own videos, their own productions, uh their own um science experiments and
uh their own um science experiments and so on. Um so a a particular game doesn't
so on. Um so a a particular game doesn't come to mind for me, but those are some
come to mind for me, but those are some of the things that are going on. Thank
of the things that are going on. Thank you.
you. kind of as a follow-up question. With
kind of as a follow-up question. With modern technology, how would you design
modern technology, how would you design ordin today?
ordin today? Okay. U come forward. I'm sorry. I'm I'm
Okay. U come forward. I'm sorry. I'm I'm getting the modern technology. How would
getting the modern technology. How would you design today? Oh, okay.
you design today? Oh, okay. Well, the first thing we need is virtual
Well, the first thing we need is virtual reality.
But, you know, uh but I have another answer to that question. It's not really
answer to that question. It's not really related to the technology, but if we
related to the technology, but if we were going to um create something like
were going to um create something like Oregon Trail today, I would create the
Oregon Trail today, I would create the Native American version.
Native American version. What was it like to be on the other side
What was it like to be on the other side of, you know, the other side of the
of, you know, the other side of the wall, so to speak? Um uh that that would
wall, so to speak? Um uh that that would be that would be kind of fascinating,
be that would be kind of fascinating, especially if they could um uh you know,
especially if they could um uh you know, somehow uh communicate with each other.
somehow uh communicate with each other. I I will I'll bring up one other thing
I I will I'll bring up one other thing and and maybe this would be um today's
and and maybe this would be um today's technology would make it easier. Uh Mech
technology would make it easier. Uh Mech experimented at one point with a version
experimented at one point with a version of Oregon Trail that was aworked version
of Oregon Trail that was aworked version so that you could have multiple uh
so that you could have multiple uh travelers and that the decisions they
travelers and that the decisions they made would affect each other. Um that
made would affect each other. Um that and that was that was not an easy thing
and that was that was not an easy thing to pull off uh in the with the
to pull off uh in the with the technology of the 80s. Uh but but maybe
technology of the 80s. Uh but but maybe uh today it could be done a lot better
uh today it could be done a lot better and that would be kind of interesting to
and that would be kind of interesting to be in a wagon train with with people you
be in a wagon train with with people you don't know maybe and to see what the
don't know maybe and to see what the what kind of social dynamics would come
what kind of social dynamics would come out of that.
You're very welcome. Um, I grew up in Minnesota and I I played uh Oregon
Minnesota and I I played uh Oregon Trail, Old Lake, Number Munchers, all
Trail, Old Lake, Number Munchers, all these games. And somehow I never knew
these games. And somehow I never knew that they were made in Minnesota. You
that they were made in Minnesota. You know, there was any kind of computing
know, there was any kind of computing stuff going on there. And I'm really
stuff going on there. And I'm really interested to hear about what MET was
interested to hear about what MET was like specifically was the fact that it
like specifically was the fact that it was stateun publicly owned corporation.
was stateun publicly owned corporation. that make it easier to experiment with
that make it easier to experiment with educational software versus maybe a
educational software versus maybe a profit orientated company.
profit orientated company. Uh okay, let's see. There were a number
Uh okay, let's see. There were a number of questions there. But the first thing
of questions there. But the first thing that I might say is you know why people
that I might say is you know why people say well why did this happen in
say well why did this happen in Minnesota?
Minnesota? And the thing that that uh perhaps
And the thing that that uh perhaps people are not so aware of is that
people are not so aware of is that before Silicon Valley there was a
before Silicon Valley there was a Silicon Valley in Minnesota
Silicon Valley in Minnesota that during the 60s and 70s companies
that during the 60s and 70s companies like IBM, UNIVAC, Honeywell, Control
like IBM, UNIVAC, Honeywell, Control Data
Data um and uh Burroughs uh some some I can't
um and uh Burroughs uh some some I can't remember either had their national
remember either had their national headquarters in the Twin Cities or they
headquarters in the Twin Cities or they had large installations there. Um, and
had large installations there. Um, and so Minnesota was kind of the computing
so Minnesota was kind of the computing capital of the country right up until
capital of the country right up until the day that um, you know, Waznjak
the day that um, you know, Waznjak developed something that didn't require
developed something that didn't require a big room to put it in. Um, so uh, it
a big room to put it in. Um, so uh, it it it's kind of logical that that that
it it's kind of logical that that that you know it would have grown up there.
you know it would have grown up there. Um, now let's see what what was another
Um, now let's see what what was another aspect.
aspect. Oh, what was Mech like? Yeah. Well,
Oh, what was Mech like? Yeah. Well, Mech's the only place I've ever worked
Mech's the only place I've ever worked that I would have paid them
that I would have paid them because um I mean in addition to working
because um I mean in addition to working with a with a a crew of incredible
with a with a a crew of incredible educators, you know, former teachers who
educators, you know, former teachers who came to do this. Um
came to do this. Um uh there there just was a uh was a
uh there there just was a uh was a spirit and a camaraderie there. And what
spirit and a camaraderie there. And what was so exciting about it was we were
was so exciting about it was we were inventing something that that hadn't
inventing something that that hadn't been invented before. we were the the
been invented before. we were the the first wave of people that worked in the
first wave of people that worked in the educational computing uh you know
educational computing uh you know business quote unquote. Um so
business quote unquote. Um so uh it it's a it's an experience that uh
uh it it's a it's an experience that uh that most people who worked at mech uh
that most people who worked at mech uh would say you know they they will never
would say you know they they will never forget.
Okay, it's a little after 6. Thank you so much for coming. I'll stick around if
so much for coming. I'll stick around if you want to talk.