[music]
Center. Center.
Sound hardware initialized. This program will install Command and
This program will install Command and Conquer to the following directory.
Conquer to the following directory. If you wish to install to another
If you wish to install to another directory and or drive, please type it
directory and or drive, please type it in below.
Thank you. Installing. Please stand by. While you are waiting, please fill out
While you are waiting, please fill out your registration card and send it in.
For last minute changes and notes, please examine the readme file.
Walking was not exactly, but it seemed more like
installation complete.
We are going to have to act if we want to live in a different world.
to live in a different world. Heat.
[music]
Heat.
[music]
Heat.
[music]
Beautiful.
[music]
[applause]
All right, I need my mic, I think. So, as Frank said, everybody, Frank Le
as Frank said, everybody, Frank Le one more time,
one more time, [applause]
welcome to the welcome to the CNC classic game postmortem. Um, I got to
classic game postmortem. Um, I got to tell you, I knew that was going to be
tell you, I knew that was going to be really hard to follow, but at 10 o'clock
really hard to follow, but at 10 o'clock in the morning on Thursday, we got to
in the morning on Thursday, we got to wake everybody up a little bit, you
wake everybody up a little bit, you know, excited. Plus, we want everybody
know, excited. Plus, we want everybody in the other rooms to go, "What the hell
in the other rooms to go, "What the hell is going on in there?" So, um, you know,
is going on in there?" So, um, you know, I'm Lewis Castle. I'm the co-founder of
I'm Lewis Castle. I'm the co-founder of Westwood Studios, the company that
Westwood Studios, the company that created Command and Conquer. And, um,
created Command and Conquer. And, um, when I was, uh, every year I'm on the
when I was, uh, every year I'm on the game developers, uh, the board, the
game developers, uh, the board, the conference board, and every year we talk
conference board, and every year we talk about doing class post of class post,
about doing class post of class post, sorry, classic postmortems. We talk
sorry, classic postmortems. We talk about CNC. And the problem that I always
about CNC. And the problem that I always had with CNC is that we've got some
had with CNC is that we've got some folks that, um, aren't in the games
folks that, um, aren't in the games industry anymore. Um, and we've got
industry anymore. Um, and we've got other folks that just don't want to be
other folks that just don't want to be on stage and talk about it. They're
on stage and talk about it. They're really important and pivotal to Command
really important and pivotal to Command and Conquer. And so, uh, I just I just
and Conquer. And so, uh, I just I just always said, "No, I just really don't
always said, "No, I just really don't think it's right." But this final this
think it's right." But this final this this year and kind of serendipitously,
this year and kind of serendipitously, um, they I finally just said, "You know
um, they I finally just said, "You know what? I have a way of doing this. I
what? I have a way of doing this. I figured out what we're just going to do
figured out what we're just going to do is we're going to go record all of these
is we're going to go record all of these folks on the ones that we can visual
folks on the ones that we can visual video and wells audio and we'll put it
video and wells audio and we'll put it all together into something um, and
all together into something um, and that'll work." So, um, it's a different
that'll work." So, um, it's a different format. You guys probably never see a
format. You guys probably never see a GDC talk like this. If I had proposed it
GDC talk like this. If I had proposed it to myself, I'd probably refuse it
to myself, I'd probably refuse it because it's too many people too
because it's too many people too complicated and really a live guitar.
complicated and really a live guitar. That's crazy. So, um, so, um, on the
That's crazy. So, um, so, um, on the stage, oh, sorry. On stage, uh, myself,
stage, oh, sorry. On stage, uh, myself, Lewis Castle, Frank Leak, we've already
Lewis Castle, Frank Leak, we've already talked about, we have Steve Weather is a
talked about, we have Steve Weather is a technical director for Command and
technical director for Command and Conquer, and Eric Yo, who is a lead
Conquer, and Eric Yo, who is a lead designer.
designer. [applause]
So, as I already said, this is going to be a little bit of a different format
be a little bit of a different format for a talk. Um, like most great games,
for a talk. Um, like most great games, Command and Conquer, um, it really
Command and Conquer, um, it really wasn't made by any one person. And, you
wasn't made by any one person. And, you know, we have this, um, cult of
know, we have this, um, cult of personality that we build in our games
personality that we build in our games industry around our our heroes. And
industry around our our heroes. And there are certainly some creative
there are certainly some creative directors that without them, the games
directors that without them, the games could never be made. But, we can't
could never be made. But, we can't forget the fact that so many people, so
forget the fact that so many people, so many people like everybody in this
many people like everybody in this audience, put their hearts and souls
audience, put their hearts and souls into the products that we build. And
into the products that we build. And it's when all that stuff comes together,
it's when all that stuff comes together, when so many people put it together that
when so many people put it together that it makes it work. So these are the
it makes it work. So these are the people that I was able to um both con
people that I was able to um both con into putting themselves on video for me
into putting themselves on video for me and get them to do a recording. And um I
and get them to do a recording. And um I I will point out right on the front um I
I will point out right on the front um I recorded this all in Frank's um little
recorded this all in Frank's um little cassita, which is like an audio
cassita, which is like an audio recording booth. So this is not
recording booth. So this is not professional video. This is uh very much
professional video. This is uh very much like Command and Conquer. It's just a
like Command and Conquer. It's just a bunch of people who are passionate um
bunch of people who are passionate um just throwing something together to try
just throwing something together to try to entertain people. So, I hope that you
to entertain people. So, I hope that you appreciate the authenticity of it and
appreciate the authenticity of it and you know, don't don't review it badly
you know, don't don't review it badly because the AV uh production is is not
because the AV uh production is is not terribly great, right? But it's more
terribly great, right? But it's more important about what people are saying.
important about what people are saying. Um, so on the on the video, you're going
Um, so on the on the video, you're going to have Brett Sperry, who's the uh
to have Brett Sperry, who's the uh co-founder of Westwood Studios, and and
co-founder of Westwood Studios, and and he's definitely the creative director
he's definitely the creative director behind Command and Conquer. Uh Joe
behind Command and Conquer. Uh Joe Cukin, who played Kane, who many people
Cukin, who played Kane, who many people may not realize was actually a video and
may not realize was actually a video and um uh video director also. So, he
um uh video director also. So, he actually cast and directed all the
actually cast and directed all the talent. Ed Del Castillo who is our
talent. Ed Del Castillo who is our producer. Um Eric Gu one of the many
producer. Um Eric Gu one of the many artists that contributed to the videos.
artists that contributed to the videos. Um Maria Del Delmare McCreaty Le who is
Um Maria Del Delmare McCreaty Le who is um the engineer who did all the
um the engineer who did all the introduction sequences to all of the
introduction sequences to all of the Command and Conquer games all the way up
Command and Conquer games all the way up to Renegade. I thought it was really
to Renegade. I thought it was really cool to get her on there. And uh Ted
cool to get her on there. And uh Ted Morris who was our first community
Morris who was our first community manager. Um Bill Randolph who was um one
manager. Um Bill Randolph who was um one of our uh lead designer or lead coders.
of our uh lead designer or lead coders. And then um Kaia Montgomery who was Kaia
And then um Kaia Montgomery who was Kaia Huninger at the time who is the voice of
Huninger at the time who is the voice of Eva. So that's who you're going to hear
Eva. So that's who you're going to hear from today. Uh again, uh this many
from today. Uh again, uh this many people in this talk, um I'm going to be
people in this talk, um I'm going to be moving pretty quickly because there's a
moving pretty quickly because there's a lot to get through. So um I guess
lot to get through. So um I guess without further Oh, oh, sorry, I don't
without further Oh, oh, sorry, I don't forget this too. Uh and that actually is
forget this too. Uh and that actually is just a very very small sample of all the
just a very very small sample of all the people that contributed to Command and
people that contributed to Command and Conquer. In fact, these are the credits,
Conquer. In fact, these are the credits, the official credits from the original
the official credits from the original just the development team for Command
just the development team for Command and Conquer. And this is 1995 when many
and Conquer. And this is 1995 when many games were only made by four or five
games were only made by four or five people. So it was quite a large group of
people. So it was quite a large group of people. And the the bold names are the
people. And the the bold names are the ones that you're actually going to be
ones that you're actually going to be hearing from today. You can see it's
hearing from today. You can see it's just a small sample. And I would really
just a small sample. And I would really be remiss um I hope they're watching or
be remiss um I hope they're watching or they'll watch it on the vault. Um if I
they'll watch it on the vault. Um if I didn't thank all the folks at Virgin uh
didn't thank all the folks at Virgin uh from from a series of things maybe we
from from a series of things maybe we can get to in the Q&A. Uh Virgin put so
can get to in the Q&A. Uh Virgin put so much effort behind the Westwood Games,
much effort behind the Westwood Games, especially Command and Conquer. And
especially Command and Conquer. And without all the effort they put into it,
without all the effort they put into it, um I don't know that any of you would be
um I don't know that any of you would be here today and I don't know that it
here today and I don't know that it would have been a success. It's
would have been a success. It's impossible to tell because um when so
impossible to tell because um when so many people contribute so much, how do
many people contribute so much, how do you set how do you sort it all out? It's
you set how do you sort it all out? It's just like a big bowl of spaghetti. Um,
just like a big bowl of spaghetti. Um, and that's how I've always felt about
and that's how I've always felt about it. Um, you'll see that, um, I'm not in
it. Um, you'll see that, um, I'm not in the credits, actually. Uh, although I
the credits, actually. Uh, although I did a lot of stuff on the compression
did a lot of stuff on the compression and a bunch of other things. Um, at that
and a bunch of other things. Um, at that time I was working on, um, on, um, oh
time I was working on, um, on, um, oh gosh, Lion King and Bladeunner and
gosh, Lion King and Bladeunner and Monopoly and a bunch of other stuff,
Monopoly and a bunch of other stuff, too. And there's a bunch of folks in the
too. And there's a bunch of folks in the f front row here that contributed to
f front row here that contributed to Command and Conquer, but also not in the
Command and Conquer, but also not in the credits. So, it's it's actually only a
credits. So, it's it's actually only a small sampling of the people that were
small sampling of the people that were kind of on it from the beginning all the
kind of on it from the beginning all the way to the end and really drove the
way to the end and really drove the vision of the game. So, I I guess
vision of the game. So, I I guess without uh further ado, um let's hear
without uh further ado, um let's hear from Eva.
from Eva. Tell us what inspired Command and
Tell us what inspired Command and Conquer.
Conquer. Oh, Command and Conquer. It came about
Oh, Command and Conquer. It came about as a result of um
as a result of um years and years of me thinking about
years and years of me thinking about what kind of game I wanted to do next
what kind of game I wanted to do next and a little bit of the Zeitgeist, the
and a little bit of the Zeitgeist, the spirit of the time, and also a uh kind
spirit of the time, and also a uh kind of a bet that I made with another
of a bet that I made with another industry executive about um real-time
industry executive about um real-time strategy games. And uh the basic bet
strategy games. And uh the basic bet went something like this. He said,
went something like this. He said, "Nobody wants to play strategy games."
"Nobody wants to play strategy games." And I said, "Well, no offense, but the
And I said, "Well, no offense, but the reason why nobody wants to play your
reason why nobody wants to play your strategy games is because they're
strategy games is because they're really, really boring and you're not
really, really boring and you're not doing anything new. You're not pulling
doing anything new. You're not pulling anybody into the the real meat and the
anybody into the the real meat and the guts and the fun of what it's all
guts and the fun of what it's all about."
about." Um, and that's Brett Sperry, of course,
Um, and that's Brett Sperry, of course, the um creator of Command and Conquer.
the um creator of Command and Conquer. And um I think uh the next thing I would
And um I think uh the next thing I would like to hear from is Frank because I I
like to hear from is Frank because I I don't know if you guys have picked up on
don't know if you guys have picked up on this or if you remember, but this the
this or if you remember, but this the music of Command and Conquer was like
music of Command and Conquer was like nothing else anybody's ever heard. So
nothing else anybody's ever heard. So Frank, if you could tell us a little bit
Frank, if you could tell us a little bit about what installed the what inspired
about what installed the what inspired the style of CNC music and you know
the style of CNC music and you know where you got your inspiration from and
where you got your inspiration from and what what kind of guided your choices.
what what kind of guided your choices. Yeah, so um basically at the time I was
Yeah, so um basically at the time I was uh 20 years old
uh 20 years old and uh it was a new kind of thing. we
and uh it was a new kind of thing. we were uh technologically moving from uh
were uh technologically moving from uh what at the time was MIDI playback only
what at the time was MIDI playback only through sound chips and whatnot from
through sound chips and whatnot from sound cards and we were going into
sound cards and we were going into streaming audio. Uh Command and Conquer
streaming audio. Uh Command and Conquer was one of the first games to do that.
was one of the first games to do that. So I was using, you know, synthesizers
So I was using, you know, synthesizers and live guitar for the first time in a
and live guitar for the first time in a soundtrack that was going to be used
soundtrack that was going to be used that way. So the kickoff meeting went
that way. So the kickoff meeting went something like this. I gotten uh Paul
something like this. I gotten uh Paul Mudra, who's the audio director, uh went
Mudra, who's the audio director, uh went into his office with Brett Sperry, and
into his office with Brett Sperry, and the three of us sat around and just had
the three of us sat around and just had a listening party basically with a
a listening party basically with a stacks of CDs, compact discs. Uh and we
stacks of CDs, compact discs. Uh and we shared uh different music influences
shared uh different music influences that we thought would be fun to include
that we thought would be fun to include into the game. The only problem with
into the game. The only problem with that was it was all over the board. It
that was it was all over the board. It was everything from movie soundtracks,
was everything from movie soundtracks, orchestral stuff to heavy metal, techno
orchestral stuff to heavy metal, techno music, hip-hop, uh you know, and
music, hip-hop, uh you know, and anything between ambient moody stuff.
anything between ambient moody stuff. And so the takeaway from the meeting
And so the takeaway from the meeting was, okay, well, we figured out we like
was, okay, well, we figured out we like a lot of these different elements from
a lot of these different elements from all of these things. Why not try to put
all of these things. Why not try to put them all together and see what sticks?
them all together and see what sticks? So, it was a big experiment really. And
So, it was a big experiment really. And the cool thing about this process was
the cool thing about this process was that I was allowed to be experimental
that I was allowed to be experimental and have creative freedom to kind of do
and have creative freedom to kind of do what I wanted with that. So that ended
what I wanted with that. So that ended up being what CNC became, which was a
up being what CNC became, which was a variety of styles put into that game
variety of styles put into that game that were all allowed to coexist
that were all allowed to coexist together and somehow made that
together and somehow made that environment work in that capacity. And
environment work in that capacity. And then the other cool thing we added to
then the other cool thing we added to that of course was the jukebox mode
that of course was the jukebox mode which uh allowed players to select which
which uh allowed players to select which tracks were their favorites that they
tracks were their favorites that they wanted to go and annihilate their enemy
wanted to go and annihilate their enemy to. So that was another uh another fun
to. So that was another uh another fun tidbit.
tidbit. Thanks Frank. Um and we're going to hear
Thanks Frank. Um and we're going to hear from Brett now a little bit more about
from Brett now a little bit more about the Command and Conquer universe. Um
the Command and Conquer universe. Um just one little riff because it's not in
just one little riff because it's not in the presentation but I still remember
the presentation but I still remember when Brett said hey you know we've got
when Brett said hey you know we've got to have the full screen audio video for
to have the full screen audio video for Command and Conquer. And I was working
Command and Conquer. And I was working with Steve and some other folks on the
with Steve and some other folks on the video compression because new technology
video compression because new technology that was built on some stuff I had
that was built on some stuff I had written way back in the past and um and
written way back in the past and um and I go I don't know Brett you know that
I go I don't know Brett you know that that if you look at data entropy and the
that if you look at data entropy and the conversion rate I I just there's no
conversion rate I I just there's no video codec that can play on a single
video codec that can play on a single speed CDROM at 44 kHz full screen audio
speed CDROM at 44 kHz full screen audio and video it just doesn't exist. He goes
and video it just doesn't exist. He goes oh Lou you're just being lazy. So on to
oh Lou you're just being lazy. So on to Brett
Brett CNC and the CNC universe was developed
CNC and the CNC universe was developed very very slowly over a long period of
very very slowly over a long period of time. Um partly [clears throat]
time. Um partly [clears throat] it it was created by
it it was created by u fiction that I had [clears throat] in
u fiction that I had [clears throat] in my brain about some kind of future world
my brain about some kind of future world and this central character who we call
and this central character who we call Cain and the rise of a global defense
Cain and the rise of a global defense initiative as the various armies of
initiative as the various armies of earth um countries as it were were kind
earth um countries as it were were kind of starting to fade away and there's the
of starting to fade away and there's the rise of sort of a new world order. I
rise of sort of a new world order. I have to remember this was in the late
have to remember this was in the late 80s and early 90s when I was thinking
80s and early 90s when I was thinking about all this kind of stuff and then
about all this kind of stuff and then working with team members and saying
working with team members and saying well hey I want to do this and I want
well hey I want to do this and I want this central theme and I want this
this central theme and I want this central character and here's this
central character and here's this massive backstory you know that I've
massive backstory you know that I've been thinking about for a long time and
been thinking about for a long time and so you know they would contribute parts
so you know they would contribute parts and and pieces to that whole thing but
and and pieces to that whole thing but um yeah it took like a lot of good
um yeah it took like a lot of good stories and a lot of good uh backstories
stories and a lot of good uh backstories you know the foundation upon which the
you know the foundation upon which the the game fiction was built on took many
the game fiction was built on took many many years of just just quiet
many years of just just quiet contemplation and notes and thinking
contemplation and notes and thinking about how this can uh make sense also
about how this can uh make sense also where is the intersection between the
where is the intersection between the fiction and the game play
fiction and the game play and so um Eric could pet you up next
and so um Eric could pet you up next then why don't you tell us a little bit
then why don't you tell us a little bit about um developing Command and Conquer
about um developing Command and Conquer and what did the world mean to you and
and what did the world mean to you and what are your favorite memories of the
what are your favorite memories of the development process?
development process? [clears throat] Well, the world world
[clears throat] Well, the world world was really interesting at the time and
was really interesting at the time and it was rife with inspiration which was
it was rife with inspiration which was really helpful. There was a lot of stuff
really helpful. There was a lot of stuff going on in the world at that time, but
going on in the world at that time, but [clears throat] I think you know as
[clears throat] I think you know as Brett noted there's there was a lot to
Brett noted there's there was a lot to draw from from the backstory that he and
draw from from the backstory that he and Joe Bostic had been created. So that was
Joe Bostic had been created. So that was a big inspiration and trying to work
a big inspiration and trying to work with the writers and
with the writers and meld the the story that was being built
meld the the story that was being built into the missions and then back out
into the missions and then back out again uh was interesting and difficult
again uh was interesting and difficult but also really really fun. Um, but I
but also really really fun. Um, but I think that was one of the more
think that was one of the more interesting parts for us was trying to
interesting parts for us was trying to find that intersection and and trying to
find that intersection and and trying to merge the two pieces together.
merge the two pieces together. Yeah. And um, a lot of folks have asked
Yeah. And um, a lot of folks have asked in the past too, where do we get the
in the past too, where do we get the visual in you visual inspiration stuff?
visual in you visual inspiration stuff? And at the time there's like Soldier of
And at the time there's like Soldier of Fortune magazines, all that stuff. There
Fortune magazines, all that stuff. There was there was no real internet. We're
was there was no real internet. We're talking pre-195 before before uh, you
talking pre-195 before before uh, you know, Windows put browsers into the
know, Windows put browsers into the operating system. So you couldn't just
operating system. So you couldn't just go Google it. Um, you know, you had to
go Google it. Um, you know, you had to go find stuff. So we had uh we they
go find stuff. So we had uh we they probably thought we were ready to go do
probably thought we were ready to go do some great takeover of the government or
some great takeover of the government or something because we had all these
something because we had all these subscriptions to um magazines that would
subscriptions to um magazines that would bring in all these new technologies and
bring in all these new technologies and and we were trying to really be fans of
and we were trying to really be fans of of what's happening in the world and
of what's happening in the world and what might be being done by the
what might be being done by the government. So Command and Conquer was
government. So Command and Conquer was always meant to be a near future um
always meant to be a near future um version of the world and we're going to
version of the world and we're going to hear from Ed Del Castillo next who is
hear from Ed Del Castillo next who is the produ producer.
the produ producer. I think my favorite memory revolves
I think my favorite memory revolves around
around those [clears throat] things that we did
those [clears throat] things that we did that were unexpected and unasked for
that were unexpected and unasked for that push that product above and beyond
that push that product above and beyond to be the success it was. So I'll give
to be the success it was. So I'll give you one example of that and for me
you one example of that and for me that's uh the mission briefings. So, you
that's uh the mission briefings. So, you know, we were on a path of doing mission
know, we were on a path of doing mission briefings that were going to be straight
briefings that were going to be straight teletype, you know, just,
teletype, you know, just, you know, just spitting text out slowly
you know, just spitting text out slowly across a screen to tell people what they
across a screen to tell people what they needed to do. And, you know, the the
needed to do. And, you know, the the team was so enthused about the game and
team was so enthused about the game and was so in love with the game that that
was so in love with the game that that just didn't seem like enough for us. And
just didn't seem like enough for us. And so we came up with this idea to uh kind
so we came up with this idea to uh kind of take at the time it was really early,
of take at the time it was really early, but take television style graphics and
but take television style graphics and put them on top of a video briefing to
put them on top of a video briefing to produce a a briefing that was something
produce a a briefing that was something people hadn't seen before. something
people hadn't seen before. something that, you know, the story we had come up
that, you know, the story we had come up with was that there was this interactive
with was that there was this interactive panel between the player who was this
panel between the player who was this remote general commanding uh armed
remote general commanding uh armed forces from afar, and the guy giving the
forces from afar, and the guy giving the briefing, be it Kane or be it uh General
briefing, be it Kane or be it uh General Sheepard, and that that interactive
Sheepard, and that that interactive screen could be touched by the briefing
screen could be touched by the briefing giver, could be could have graphics
giver, could be could have graphics thrown up onto it, could have, you know,
thrown up onto it, could have, you know, all sorts of wonderful things done to
all sorts of wonderful things done to it. And so one day we kind of we went
it. And so one day we kind of we went into the studio, you know, we just did
into the studio, you know, we just did this really really really bootleggy kind
this really really really bootleggy kind of demo. We spent the we did it on a
of demo. We spent the we did it on a weekend so we weren't pulling away from
weekend so we weren't pulling away from company time. We edited the whole thing
company time. We edited the whole thing using Lightwave and and you know the the
using Lightwave and and you know the the guy I was doing it with Felix was was
guy I was doing it with Felix was was really good. We had come from New Tech.
really good. We had come from New Tech. He knew Lightwave and we just kind of
He knew Lightwave and we just kind of spent that whole weekend. I mean, we
spent that whole weekend. I mean, we barely slept putting graphics onto a
barely slept putting graphics onto a briefing and making it so that, you
briefing and making it so that, you know, it was it was me doing the
know, it was it was me doing the briefing. It was I was throwing maps out
briefing. It was I was throwing maps out onto a screen between the player and the
onto a screen between the player and the and the and the briefing giver. Um, we
and the and the briefing giver. Um, we were showing, you know, I would open my
were showing, you know, I would open my hand and a world appeared in my hand. I
hand and a world appeared in my hand. I pointed at the world and Angola got
pointed at the world and Angola got highlighted and zoomed [clears throat]
highlighted and zoomed [clears throat] out. I mean, we did all of these really,
out. I mean, we did all of these really, really cool things and no one had asked
really cool things and no one had asked that of us.
that of us. One of my favorite memories from the
One of my favorite memories from the first Command and Conquer was when the
first Command and Conquer was when the user interface worked as well as I had
user interface worked as well as I had hoped, the refinements and some of the
hoped, the refinements and some of the additional changes that came as we kept
additional changes that came as we kept perfecting it more and more and more.
perfecting it more and more and more. you know, I would play the game and and
you know, I would play the game and and see the interface that Joe and some of
see the interface that Joe and some of the other guys had come had put together
the other guys had come had put together for for me along the lines of what I was
for for me along the lines of what I was really really hoping for. And then when
really really hoping for. And then when it worked so well finally because it
it worked so well finally because it took a lot a lot a lot of it iterations
took a lot a lot a lot of it iterations in the precursor to CNC and CNC itself
in the precursor to CNC and CNC itself that when it finally came together you
that when it finally came together you just had this I had this great heartfelt
just had this I had this great heartfelt this is it finally what it really really
this is it finally what it really really wants to be and it was a lot of fun and
wants to be and it was a lot of fun and it was so elegant and smooth and it
it was so elegant and smooth and it allowed you to just play the game in a a
allowed you to just play the game in a a whole new way. In fact, you got to focus
whole new way. In fact, you got to focus more on playing the game than in
more on playing the game than in controlling the game, which was one of
controlling the game, which was one of the DNA components of the CNC universe.
the DNA components of the CNC universe. Um, one of my favorite stories about
Um, one of my favorite stories about Command and Conquer was actually about
Command and Conquer was actually about Joe Bostic. a group of us had decided to
Joe Bostic. a group of us had decided to go skiing and we were sitting I think at
go skiing and we were sitting I think at dinner and I looked over at him and he
dinner and I looked over at him and he had this notebook out and he was working
had this notebook out and he was working on something and I asked him what are
on something and I asked him what are you doing and he said oh I'm working on
you doing and he said oh I'm working on command and conquer and I was just so
command and conquer and I was just so struck by how dedicated and passionate
struck by how dedicated and passionate he was here we were trying to have a
he was here we were trying to have a vacation and he was just living and
vacation and he was just living and breathing command and conquer was really
breathing command and conquer was really like that for everybody on the game was
like that for everybody on the game was truly an amazing experience.
My favorite moment my my favorite moment from Command and Conquer development uh
from Command and Conquer development uh was uh something I always just kind of
was uh something I always just kind of remember was the the way that we could
remember was the the way that we could all provide input into the game
all provide input into the game experience and the development. Um I was
experience and the development. Um I was a community guy. I was a customer
a community guy. I was a customer service guy at the time.
service guy at the time. my my my
my my my input into the game wasn't as great as
input into the game wasn't as great as other people obviously, but the great
other people obviously, but the great the nice thing is that we all got to
the nice thing is that we all got to play in the evenings and we would play
play in the evenings and we would play multiplayer and then we would all submit
multiplayer and then we would all submit ideas into it. And because the game team
ideas into it. And because the game team was so small, we all had a really
was so small, we all had a really valuable voice into the into the game.
valuable voice into the into the game. And so things that I would suggest got
And so things that I would suggest got in there. Things that other people would
in there. Things that other people would suggest got in there. And it was very
suggest got in there. And it was very quick because we were such a small team
quick because we were such a small team at the time. So, you know, I would
at the time. So, you know, I would mention something to Joe Bosik and then
mention something to Joe Bosik and then like an hour later he said, "Okay,
like an hour later he said, "Okay, there's new build and your ideas in
there's new build and your ideas in there." I was like, "Oh, that's
there." I was like, "Oh, that's awesome." You know, and so it was uh it
awesome." You know, and so it was uh it was really fun to to play a even a small
was really fun to to play a even a small part in the development of of the
part in the development of of the original Command and Conquer. It was
original Command and Conquer. It was just it it felt like it felt like a very
just it it felt like it felt like a very small and dedicated team and we were
small and dedicated team and we were just so uh involved in every in every
just so uh involved in every in every way uh in making it better because we
way uh in making it better because we just loved it so much.
just loved it so much. But it was people going above and beyond
But it was people going above and beyond because they love the product and they
because they love the product and they really really really wanted it to be
really really really wanted it to be better than even expectation.
My favorite memory was uh I think it was Mike running into my office with one of
Mike running into my office with one of the PC games magazines and it was awards
the PC games magazines and it was awards and Command Conquer of course was nom,
and Command Conquer of course was nom, you know, was nominated. But in the
you know, was nominated. But in the corner was this little block that said
corner was this little block that said we should have a special category for
we should have a special category for installations because this one was so
installations because this one was so awesome. And that just made me feel so
awesome. And that just made me feel so good because somebody, you know, the
good because somebody, you know, the audience out there, the players
audience out there, the players appreciated all the effort that went
appreciated all the effort that went into it. So that that was a really good
into it. So that that was a really good moment for me.
moment for me. Um, one of the interesting things that
Um, one of the interesting things that CNC did was this idea of kind of
CNC did was this idea of kind of telecast or broadcast interruption. We
telecast or broadcast interruption. We even did it during the uh installation
even did it during the uh installation of Command and Conquer and that was
of Command and Conquer and that was really, really fun where the game play
really, really fun where the game play actually began at a space that it
actually began at a space that it normally didn't begin. And the idea of
normally didn't begin. And the idea of course given the limits of you know
course given the limits of you know technology then and the graphics was oh
technology then and the graphics was oh there's this kind of interruption like
there's this kind of interruption like it's a it's a signal a video syn signal
it's a it's a signal a video syn signal coming from somewhere it's encrypted
coming from somewhere it's encrypted it's actually breaking onto your onto
it's actually breaking onto your onto your game screen. So that was really
your game screen. So that was really really fun and the idea of continuing to
really fun and the idea of continuing to use cinematics and outtakes and things
use cinematics and outtakes and things like that just felt right. It made sense
like that just felt right. It made sense for the time and the place and the game
for the time and the place and the game and to create this this immersion, this
and to create this this immersion, this larger than life sort of strange mythos
larger than life sort of strange mythos that only you, the game player, you were
that only you, the game player, you were being talked to directly. It's kind of
being talked to directly. It's kind of like a secret agent commander sort of
like a secret agent commander sort of thing. It was a lot of fun.
thing. It was a lot of fun. It started really with the art because I
It started really with the art because I would get all the art of what they
would get all the art of what they wanted the whole thing to look like and
wanted the whole thing to look like and then I had to have them break those
then I had to have them break those animations down into pieces. Then I used
animations down into pieces. Then I used the last image of each animation as my
the last image of each animation as my background because some of them already
background because some of them already had built in where they wanted all the
had built in where they wanted all the gadgets to be. So, I had to basically do
gadgets to be. So, I had to basically do my gadgets on top of that background and
my gadgets on top of that background and fill it in. Sometimes they had invisible
fill it in. Sometimes they had invisible backgrounds, sometimes not, just
backgrounds, sometimes not, just depending on what they wanted to do. But
depending on what they wanted to do. But that way, uh, we got through in pieces
that way, uh, we got through in pieces and sections. And as soon as that
and sections. And as soon as that information was gathered, we play the
information was gathered, we play the next animation and seamlessly go into
next animation and seamlessly go into the next sequence.
the next sequence. Um, so there's a lot of things that I I
Um, so there's a lot of things that I I won't remember. [laughter]
won't remember. [laughter] Uh, but I'll do my best. So, in putting
Uh, but I'll do my best. So, in putting together the the video sequences, what I
together the the video sequences, what I recall was that it was relatively
recall was that it was relatively peacemail. And it feels
peacemail. And it feels now like we made a lot of stuff up as we
now like we made a lot of stuff up as we went along. There were things that were
went along. There were things that were being written and then rewritten. I I I
being written and then rewritten. I I I remember doing some writing myself on
remember doing some writing myself on some of the the monologues and some of
some of the the monologues and some of the scenes because um uh you know, we
the scenes because um uh you know, we had hired a screenwriter to come in who
had hired a screenwriter to come in who was completely unfamiliar with the
was completely unfamiliar with the genre. I I guess as unfamiliar with the
genre. I I guess as unfamiliar with the genre as any of us were because it was
genre as any of us were because it was such a brand new genre, but um
such a brand new genre, but um I remember doing a lot of rewrites. I
I remember doing a lot of rewrites. I remember sort of doing a lot of things
remember sort of doing a lot of things uh peacemail. We were in a smaller space
uh peacemail. We were in a smaller space at at at this point. Westwood was um we
at at at this point. Westwood was um we were growing and we were soon to move to
were growing and we were soon to move to our larger space and the and the big,
our larger space and the and the big, you know, 40x40 um green screen and then
you know, 40x40 um green screen and then the back lot and the sound stage that we
the back lot and the sound stage that we had. But that hadn't happened yet. So,
had. But that hadn't happened yet. So, what we had done is we had rented
what we had done is we had rented another space in the same complex, but
another space in the same complex, but it was, you know, it was a quarter of a
it was, you know, it was a quarter of a mile away across three parking lots and
mile away across three parking lots and and upstairs.
and upstairs. So, when it was time to record, you we'd
So, when it was time to record, you we'd go over to the studio and we we we'd
go over to the studio and we we we'd hike ourselves over there and and
hike ourselves over there and and everything was upstairs. Now, you know,
everything was upstairs. Now, you know, all of these were shot with a like this
all of these were shot with a like this on sticks with a with a you know, a dead
on sticks with a with a you know, a dead hung camera, but any sort of movement
hung camera, but any sort of movement across the stage, you know, we were sort
across the stage, you know, we were sort of bouncing on a suspended floor. Um,
of bouncing on a suspended floor. Um, like it it feels very primitive in
like it it feels very primitive in recollection and uh I don't think it
recollection and uh I don't think it felt that way at the time. I think it
felt that way at the time. I think it felt very new and um uh you know on
felt very new and um uh you know on guard and exciting and and uh envelope
guard and exciting and and uh envelope crushing and brave new world envelope
crushing and brave new world envelope pushing and brave new world and all
pushing and brave new world and all that.
that. When we first started out with our
When we first started out with our videos it was so seat of the pants. It
videos it was so seat of the pants. It was kind of hilarious. Um, I don't know
was kind of hilarious. Um, I don't know if you remember, but we had rented a
if you remember, but we had rented a separate building where we were where we
separate building where we were where we were shooting our videos initially and
were shooting our videos initially and it was just sort of this big empty
it was just sort of this big empty warehouse and I had gone to a carpet
warehouse and I had gone to a carpet store and bought a roll of lenolum
store and bought a roll of lenolum flooring, brought that back and we
flooring, brought that back and we stapled that to the wall and and we
stapled that to the wall and and we didn't even have chroma key paint. I
didn't even have chroma key paint. I just went like to our hardware store and
just went like to our hardware store and said, "I need some green paint."
said, "I need some green paint." [laughter]
[laughter] and then uh painted that and that was
and then uh painted that and that was our first green tree.
So um Eric, why don't you tell us a little bit about um the design process
little bit about um the design process of CNC? Uh how did how did we work? How
of CNC? Uh how did how did we work? How did you guys work with the technical
did you guys work with the technical team and how did you come up with the
team and how did you come up with the missions and and the you know deal with
missions and and the you know deal with the AI and all those things?
the AI and all those things? I think um for me it was probably one of
I think um for me it was probably one of the most collaborative games I've ever
the most collaborative games I've ever worked on. Um as other people have noted
worked on. Um as other people have noted the tech team was really approachable.
the tech team was really approachable. So you could walk into Joe's office or
So you could walk into Joe's office or talk to Steve and go, "I've got this
talk to Steve and go, "I've got this idea." And then they'd look at you
idea." And then they'd look at you crosseyed and and say, "Oh, we'll figure
crosseyed and and say, "Oh, we'll figure it out." And inevitably they would. And
it out." And inevitably they would. And one one of the really great things was
one one of the really great things was you could ask Joe for something and
you could ask Joe for something and you'd get it really quick and it would
you'd get it really quick and it would be like 90% right. You know, there
be like 90% right. You know, there wasn't this high iteration back and
wasn't this high iteration back and forth where you had to go, "It's not
forth where you had to go, "It's not really what I wanted and this and that."
really what I wanted and this and that." And and he'd add his stuff on top of
And and he'd add his stuff on top of that. So you get this really great
that. So you get this really great collaboration
collaboration of pieces parts. So that process was
of pieces parts. So that process was really seamless and it wasn't
really seamless and it wasn't necessarily by design. It was just we
necessarily by design. It was just we had such a good group of people that
had such a good group of people that worked really well together and uh it
worked really well together and uh it the whole process felt like lightning
the whole process felt like lightning had kind of struck. You know, we had the
had kind of struck. You know, we had the right people working on the right
right people working on the right product at the right time and it just
product at the right time and it just felt good. I don't I don't remember any
felt good. I don't I don't remember any of the process being by design. It was
of the process being by design. It was just a group of people that had an idea
just a group of people that had an idea and wanted to make it work. And as
and wanted to make it work. And as others have noted, we did a lot of stuff
others have noted, we did a lot of stuff just unasked for and just because it
just unasked for and just because it sounded cool at the time.
sounded cool at the time. Thanks. Um and so Steve, why don't you
Thanks. Um and so Steve, why don't you tell us a little bit about um your
tell us a little bit about um your favorite memories and maybe some of the
favorite memories and maybe some of the technical challenges uh and things that
technical challenges uh and things that you guys might have run into.
you guys might have run into. Yeah. So favorite memory for me is
Yeah. So favorite memory for me is around the multiplayer.
around the multiplayer. And you know, many people over the years
And you know, many people over the years have told me that they played Command
have told me that they played Command and Conquer in their dorm room. And um
and Conquer in their dorm room. And um it's always great to hear that and I
it's always great to hear that and I think there was a sort of a viral aspect
think there was a sort of a viral aspect to that too because there were two discs
to that too because there were two discs with the game. You had the nod disc and
with the game. You had the nod disc and GDI disc so you could play with a friend
GDI disc so you could play with a friend with [clears throat] one copy of the
with [clears throat] one copy of the game and I think that actually benefited
game and I think that actually benefited us but um the thing about it is you know
us but um the thing about it is you know as a player you don't see how the game
as a player you don't see how the game is created. You know the multiplayer
is created. You know the multiplayer obviously was evolved over time. And so
obviously was evolved over time. And so for me, um, I I remember the first, uh,
for me, um, I I remember the first, uh, the very first time you could play
the very first time you could play multiplayer. And the only thing you
multiplayer. And the only thing you could build were rocket soldiers. That
could build were rocket soldiers. That was the only thing you could build. And
was the only thing you could build. And so, you know, you had four guys would
so, you know, you had four guys would jump in. You'd all build your horde of
jump in. You'd all build your horde of rocket guys, send them over to the other
rocket guys, send them over to the other guys horde of rocket guys, and, you
guys horde of rocket guys, and, you know, and try and win. It's very, very
know, and try and win. It's very, very primitive, but it was the the baseline
primitive, but it was the the baseline for the tech. And then that over the
for the tech. And then that over the coming days and weeks after that, we'd
coming days and weeks after that, we'd add more and more units. The buildings,
add more and more units. The buildings, the tech tree, all got into the game.
the tech tree, all got into the game. And so the memory for me is sort of a
And so the memory for me is sort of a realization moment that, you know, every
realization moment that, you know, every night after work, basically the whole
night after work, basically the whole company was staying behind to play
company was staying behind to play multiplayer. And there's tons of
multiplayer. And there's tons of excitement in the office. You know, what
excitement in the office. You know, what new new unit got added to the game
new new unit got added to the game that's in the commando is in the game
that's in the commando is in the game today. You can blow buildings up, you
today. You can blow buildings up, you know, that kind of stuff. and uh lots of
know, that kind of stuff. and uh lots of excitement using the company phone
excitement using the company phone system intercom for the real-time
system intercom for the real-time communications. So, you know, you're
communications. So, you know, you're going to form an alliance with your
going to form an alliance with your friend and get the other guys, all this
friend and get the other guys, all this kind of stuff. And the realization was,
kind of stuff. And the realization was, wow, we're actually building something
wow, we're actually building something that's pretty freaking special. And it
that's pretty freaking special. And it kind of hit me at that point that, wow,
kind of hit me at that point that, wow, we got something very unique on our
we got something very unique on our hands. So, that's my favorite memory.
hands. So, that's my favorite memory. Um, in terms of technical challenges,
Um, in terms of technical challenges, there were a lot, you know, there was
there were a lot, you know, there was multiplayer, talked about that. Um, but
multiplayer, talked about that. Um, but I think the thing that stands out is the
I think the thing that stands out is the sort of computation limits that we ran
sort of computation limits that we ran into. And I'll explain what I mean. So I
into. And I'll explain what I mean. So I think there were three components of
think there were three components of that. The first one is all of the 3D
that. The first one is all of the 3D animations that became like a signature
animations that became like a signature part of the game. All of the mission
part of the game. All of the mission briefings, all the tanks and planes and
briefings, all the tanks and planes and all this action going on. And of course
all this action going on. And of course the artists wanted to render out these
the artists wanted to render out these animations and it was prohibitive. It
animations and it was prohibitive. It took hours to render, you know, seconds
took hours to render, you know, seconds of um animation. And so at the time
of um animation. And so at the time Autotodesk came out with their network
Autotodesk came out with their network render uh functionality so you could
render uh functionality so you could have a farm of machines which we did. So
have a farm of machines which we did. So we we set up 10 20 30 40 machines in
we we set up 10 20 30 40 machines in racks and it got bigger over time. I
racks and it got bigger over time. I think we got up to over 100 machines
think we got up to over 100 machines eventually something like that
eventually something like that and but we started out with these
and but we started out with these machines and so the artists could then
machines and so the artists could then submit their animation jobs and get
submit their animation jobs and get reasonable turnaround times. So so the
reasonable turnaround times. So so the compute cost in that respect was solved.
compute cost in that respect was solved. But the next problem was of course uh we
But the next problem was of course uh we have all this live action and we're
have all this live action and we're going to do this compositing with the
going to do this compositing with the the 3D videos and we have all this video
the 3D videos and we have all this video we have to play in the game. So we came
we have to play in the game. So we came up with our own as Louis mentioned we
up with our own as Louis mentioned we had we built our own video tech. So the
had we built our own video tech. So the real time part of that was fine. You
real time part of that was fine. You know we could play back at a reasonable
know we could play back at a reasonable frame rate you know glorious 15 frames
frame rate you know glorious 15 frames per second uh 32200 which was fine for
per second uh 32200 which was fine for the time and it fit on a CD but again
the time and it fit on a CD but again the compression times were crazy. it
the compression times were crazy. it would take hours and hours to render a
would take hours and hours to render a couple of minutes of video. So, um, one
couple of minutes of video. So, um, one of the lead engineers at the time, Bill
of the lead engineers at the time, Bill Randolph, said, "Hey, I think I think I
Randolph, said, "Hey, I think I think I can fix this." And so, he spent some
can fix this." And so, he spent some time and he came up with a way of using
time and he came up with a way of using the render farm to to batch out the
the render farm to to batch out the video compression. So, he had these
video compression. So, he had these machines and we could, you know, use
machines and we could, you know, use them for the 3D rendering, could use
them for the 3D rendering, could use them for the video compression. But of
them for the video compression. But of course the artists wanted to render
course the artists wanted to render their movies and we wanted to also the
their movies and we wanted to also the video guys wanted to compress the the uh
video guys wanted to compress the the uh their movies and there weren't enough
their movies and there weren't enough machines. So to solve that we came up
machines. So to solve that we came up with a policy and we we basically
with a policy and we we basically realized that when people went home in
realized that when people went home in the evenings there was a machine sitting
the evenings there was a machine sitting there doing nothing. So we came up with
there doing nothing. So we came up with this policy where when you left for the
this policy where when you left for the day you ran your machine in VQ slave
day you ran your machine in VQ slave mode. So we went from 50 machines to 100
mode. So we went from 50 machines to 100 machines and you know we're able to get
machines and you know we're able to get decent turnaround time on the movies
decent turnaround time on the movies that way.
that way. Um so the third thing though we we sort
Um so the third thing though we we sort of uh ran into code complexity issues.
of uh ran into code complexity issues. So we were using C++. Uh we were
So we were using C++. Uh we were learning C++ and using every feature the
learning C++ and using every feature the language has. And so the build time
language has. And so the build time started to increase. And we were talking
started to increase. And we were talking about an hour plus build time which was
about an hour plus build time which was crazy for us. So again, Bill Randolph, I
crazy for us. So again, Bill Randolph, I think it was said, "Hey, I think I can
think it was said, "Hey, I think I can fix this." And he came out with a way of
fix this." And he came out with a way of using the render farm and the slave
using the render farm and the slave machines to do distributed builds. So,
machines to do distributed builds. So, we got the build times. We could build
we got the build times. We could build in parallel and it and it brought the uh
in parallel and it and it brought the uh build times down dramatically. And a
build times down dramatically. And a sort of interesting footnote to that, I
sort of interesting footnote to that, I was talking to the Petetroglyph games
was talking to the Petetroglyph games guys the other night and you guys may
guys the other night and you guys may have heard they're doing the uh CNC HD
have heard they're doing the uh CNC HD remasters
remasters and uh so it's come full circle.
and uh so it's come full circle. Petroglyph is basically the the sort of
Petroglyph is basically the the sort of uh
uh uh continuation of Westwood. I guess the
uh continuation of Westwood. I guess the co-founders of Petroglyph are from
co-founders of Petroglyph are from Westwood, Mike, Joe, and Steve. And I
Westwood, Mike, Joe, and Steve. And I was talking to Steve and I said, you
was talking to Steve and I said, you know, I'm going to be talking about the
know, I'm going to be talking about the buildtime problems we had. And he said,
buildtime problems we had. And he said, oh yeah, we're we're working with the
oh yeah, we're we're working with the original CNC source code and it takes
original CNC source code and it takes five seconds to build.
So I guess that's 25 years will do that, right? [laughter]
right? [laughter] That's awesome. Um, just a bit off
That's awesome. Um, just a bit off script here, too. The thing was really
script here, too. The thing was really funny. Eventually, we had hundreds of
funny. Eventually, we had hundreds of these Pentium 90s in racks, gorilla
these Pentium 90s in racks, gorilla racks, all lined up, and they were
racks, all lined up, and they were sitting in an area that was kind of a
sitting in an area that was kind of a common area. And what was happening was
common area. And what was happening was the we got toward the it was fine in the
the we got toward the it was fine in the winter in Vegas, but it was started
winter in Vegas, but it was started getting toward the summer. Um, these
getting toward the summer. Um, these were basically little BTU farms, and
were basically little BTU farms, and they were driving the heat up in the
they were driving the heat up in the building. We were like, we were
building. We were like, we were basically cooking ourselves with our
basically cooking ourselves with our computers. And so, we created our our
computers. And so, we created our our own zero pressure room by taking a small
own zero pressure room by taking a small room, closing it all off, having a big
room, closing it all off, having a big uh air conditioning unit added to the
uh air conditioning unit added to the roof. It was like a 15 ton air
roof. It was like a 15 ton air conditioning unit and having only little
conditioning unit and having only little slits at the door at the bottom of the
slits at the door at the bottom of the door with a brush was the only way for
door with a brush was the only way for the air to get out. So you would
the air to get out. So you would actually open the door and we you feel a
actually open the door and we you feel a pop, you know, and that cold air would
pop, you know, and that cold air would come in and cool off the whole room and
come in and cool off the whole room and it had no return air. Mike Leg, no
it had no return air. Mike Leg, no return air. So um anyways [laughter] um
return air. So um anyways [laughter] um we have a little bit more from Brett. We
we have a little bit more from Brett. We played every single night and um as you
played every single night and um as you can imagine probably already got a sense
can imagine probably already got a sense of Brett's personality. Um, so, uh, I
of Brett's personality. Um, so, uh, I wanted to conclude this little clip here
wanted to conclude this little clip here because he talked a little about, um,
because he talked a little about, um, his play sessions at night.
his play sessions at night. I know it sounds like bragging, but I
I know it sounds like bragging, but I could beat almost anybody headto-head
could beat almost anybody headto-head playing any side anytime. Every
playing any side anytime. Every [clears throat] time there would be this
[clears throat] time there would be this argument because I had this big um, I
argument because I had this big um, I had these strong feelings about what
had these strong feelings about what makes a game balance and what made our
makes a game balance and what made our game really, really balanced and fair.
game really, really balanced and fair. And so, every now and then somebody
And so, every now and then somebody would challenge me and say, "Hey, you
would challenge me and say, "Hey, you know, NOD is stronger than than GDI or
know, NOD is stronger than than GDI or this is this unit's better than that."
this is this unit's better than that." And I said, "No, you're just
And I said, "No, you're just you're not taking the unit on its own
you're not taking the unit on its own merits and watch him just play
merits and watch him just play headtohead." And so he would beat
headtohead." And so he would beat everybody every time
everybody every time to be overlord.
to be overlord. [laughter]
[laughter] I think
I think Brett's very overlord. Yeah.
Brett's very overlord. Yeah. Memory's a little fuzzy. I think
Memory's a little fuzzy. I think it might be a little fuzzy.
it might be a little fuzzy. Brett Brett does have his own version of
Brett Brett does have his own version of reality that is uh it's very very cool.
reality that is uh it's very very cool. [laughter]
So, uh, Steve, um, why don't you tell us a little bit about the technical
a little bit about the technical challenges that you, Joe, and the team
challenges that you, Joe, and the team faced? Um, I think there was actually
faced? Um, I think there was actually two of them. There's the networking
two of them. There's the networking stuff because there were multiple
stuff because there were multiple networking layers and then there was
networking layers and then there was pathfinding stuff.
pathfinding stuff. Yeah, the networking was interesting. It
Yeah, the networking was interesting. It was uh pre- internet. So, we had local
was uh pre- internet. So, we had local area network play with IPX. Then we
area network play with IPX. Then we supported modem and null modem
supported modem and null modem connections. So, you know, the latency
connections. So, you know, the latency and bandwidth characteristics of those
and bandwidth characteristics of those are very different. and we would uh add
are very different. and we would uh add a bunch of stuff that worked great in
a bunch of stuff that worked great in the local area network and then poor
the local area network and then poor Dave Demo was doing the modem connection
Dave Demo was doing the modem connection stuff. He's like there's too much data
stuff. He's like there's too much data it will never work. Yeah. So we spent a
it will never work. Yeah. So we spent a lot of time with um trying to figure out
lot of time with um trying to figure out ways of minimizing the amount of stuff
ways of minimizing the amount of stuff that was sent over the wire. And
that was sent over the wire. And unfortunately that one of the things
unfortunately that one of the things that we didn't get into the game that we
that we didn't get into the game that we wanted to get into the game was internet
wanted to get into the game was internet play. But uh that would follow in Red
play. But uh that would follow in Red Alert. We figured that out.
Alert. We figured that out. So yeah, some interesting challenges
So yeah, some interesting challenges there with the networking and the
there with the networking and the pathflining stuff. I was actually it was
pathflining stuff. I was actually it was a challenge.
a challenge. I was generally pretty pleased. I mean
I was generally pretty pleased. I mean you could select you know 50 100 units
you could select you know 50 100 units and they behaved in a pretty solid
and they behaved in a pretty solid manner and would path around each other
manner and would path around each other and there were there were no practical
and there were there were no practical limits on how many units you could
limits on how many units you could select and they would behave
select and they would behave predictably. Uh except maybe for the
predictably. Uh except maybe for the harvesters, which uh sometimes had a
harvesters, which uh sometimes had a mind of their own.
mind of their own. Me and Steve Weather and Jonathan Laneir
Me and Steve Weather and Jonathan Laneir were pulling an allnighter uh trying to
were pulling an allnighter uh trying to find a bug. And we left the office
find a bug. And we left the office around 2 a.m. to go get donuts to try
around 2 a.m. to go get donuts to try and keep us awake because we thought
and keep us awake because we thought donuts would keep us awake, I guess. And
donuts would keep us awake, I guess. And I had this car that I'd inherited from
I had this car that I'd inherited from my dad. It was a really hideous car, but
my dad. It was a really hideous car, but it was the car I drove. So, we hopped
it was the car I drove. So, we hopped into the station wagon and drove to the
into the station wagon and drove to the doughnut place and it was 2 a.m. and uh
doughnut place and it was 2 a.m. and uh we were leaving and I I got lost in the
we were leaving and I I got lost in the parking lot and I couldn't find the way
parking lot and I couldn't find the way out. And so, one of the guys says, "What
out. And so, one of the guys says, "What are you, a harvester driver?" And from
are you, a harvester driver?" And from that moment on, that car became known as
that moment on, that car became known as the harvester.
the harvester. [laughter]
[laughter] How did the cast of CNC get assembled?
How did the cast of CNC get assembled? So, casting was uh
So, casting was uh kind of a challenge. I you know I had
kind of a challenge. I you know I had come from a um theatrical background. My
come from a um theatrical background. My my um the entirety of my career was
my um the entirety of my career was spent either in teaching or directing in
spent either in teaching or directing in theater in in Las Vegas. And so I had
theater in in Las Vegas. And so I had some access to uh to actors, but um a
some access to uh to actors, but um a great many of them were were community
great many of them were were community theater actors. They were hobbyists,
theater actors. They were hobbyists, people that were bankers during the day
people that were bankers during the day and actors at night. So sort of reaching
and actors at night. So sort of reaching out into the professional acting
out into the professional acting community of Las Vegas. uh another brave
community of Las Vegas. uh another brave new world for me. So I talked to the
new world for me. So I talked to the talent agencies in town that I was
talent agencies in town that I was familiar with and we set up auditions
familiar with and we set up auditions and we started bringing people in and we
and we started bringing people in and we found pretty quickly that you know we we
found pretty quickly that you know we we started getting access to some of the
started getting access to some of the performers on the strip that were
performers on the strip that were looking to expand and and do some
looking to expand and and do some things. Um Eric, I can't remember his
things. Um Eric, I can't remember his last name played Shephard. He was
last name played Shephard. He was actually a um one of the Blues Brothers
actually a um one of the Blues Brothers impersonators back in the day when
impersonators back in the day when Imperial Palace was doing uh
Imperial Palace was doing uh impersonator shows. So he came from from
impersonator shows. So he came from from that that call. Uh a lot of the
that that call. Uh a lot of the performers were people that I knew and
performers were people that I knew and truth be told a lot of the performers
truth be told a lot of the performers were people that were in or around
were people that were in or around Westwood at the time because it was just
Westwood at the time because it was just easier um to snag somebody once a script
easier um to snag somebody once a script had been finished and bring them over,
had been finished and bring them over, you know, to to the studio for a quick
you know, to to the studio for a quick recording session.
recording session. Joe Cooken was in my office one day and
Joe Cooken was in my office one day and we were talking about some shots that
we were talking about some shots that were coming up because we we rendered
were coming up because we we rendered our own background plates and then after
our own background plates and then after we shot green screen we would drop that
we shot green screen we would drop that footage into those plates. So, we're
footage into those plates. So, we're talking about plates and Joe said
talking about plates and Joe said something like um and that's when we see
something like um and that's when we see Seth and then he stops all of a sudden.
Seth and then he stops all of a sudden. He's like, "Oh crap." I'm like, "What?"
He's like, "Oh crap." I'm like, "What?" He said, "We forgot to cast Seth." And
He said, "We forgot to cast Seth." And I'm like, "Who's Seth?" [laughter]
I'm like, "Who's Seth?" [laughter] And he looks at me, goes, "You could be
And he looks at me, goes, "You could be Seth. Do you want to be Seth?" So, I
Seth. Do you want to be Seth?" So, I said, "Uh, yeah, sure." So, that's how
said, "Uh, yeah, sure." So, that's how Seth started.
Seth started. Well, I was working at Westwood at the
Well, I was working at Westwood at the time. I believe I had been uh the
time. I believe I had been uh the receptionist for a while and so my voice
receptionist for a while and so my voice was on all the uh away messages and
was on all the uh away messages and voicemail messages for Westwood. And one
voicemail messages for Westwood. And one day Paul Mudra came to me and asked me
day Paul Mudra came to me and asked me to record some holder lines, place lines
to record some holder lines, place lines for Command and Conquer. And we went
for Command and Conquer. And we went into this little tiny room basically. It
into this little tiny room basically. It was I think a closet that he had put up
was I think a closet that he had put up a whole bunch of soundproofing and he
a whole bunch of soundproofing and he had me read the lines from there and so
had me read the lines from there and so I did and I think the team you know
I did and I think the team you know liked what I had done and so they
liked what I had done and so they decided that they wanted to use me going
decided that they wanted to use me going forward. So a lot of uh other people at
forward. So a lot of uh other people at Westwood had done various voices for the
Westwood had done various voices for the game. I was super excited. It was my uh
game. I was super excited. It was my uh first time doing something like that and
first time doing something like that and uh I was just tickled pink that that he
uh I was just tickled pink that that he liked what I had done and that they
liked what I had done and that they wanted me to do even more. So I was
wanted me to do even more. So I was super super happy.
super super happy. Yeah. And it was the closet. It was the
Yeah. And it was the closet. It was the janitor's closet that used to be
janitor's closet that used to be attached to the k the bathrooms which we
attached to the k the bathrooms which we turned into our server farm which we
turned into our server farm which we later got sued for.
later got sued for. We bought an orangutang and we shaved
We bought an orangutang and we shaved the orangutang down. Uh, and we we put
the orangutang down. Uh, and we we put the orangutang in front of the the
the orangutang in front of the the camera and we hang that we put a
camera and we hang that we put a whiteboard with his with the cane lines
whiteboard with his with the cane lines over the orangutang and so that you know
over the orangutang and so that you know we would change and wipe them off and
we would change and wipe them off and change every line. Um, but when we put
change every line. Um, but when we put when we compressed all that down into
when we compressed all that down into the the game uh you couldn't read the
the the game uh you couldn't read the lines at all. The orangutang was great,
lines at all. The orangutang was great, don't get me wrong. Everyone loved uh
don't get me wrong. Everyone loved uh everyone loved the orangutang. I think
everyone loved the orangutang. I think his name was Sparky or Yeah, Sparky. Uh
his name was Sparky or Yeah, Sparky. Uh anyway, everyone loved the Orangutang,
anyway, everyone loved the Orangutang, but we couldn't read his lines. So, um I
but we couldn't read his lines. So, um I went in and I dubbed all of the uh
went in and I dubbed all of the uh orangutang's lines and uh we had um a
orangutang's lines and uh we had um a guy in in a green screen glove come in
guy in in a green screen glove come in and moved's mouth like this. Just move
and moved's mouth like this. Just move his lips while I would say the lines and
his lips while I would say the lines and then we took out of course the green
then we took out of course the green screen glove. Uh but that wasn't very
screen glove. Uh but that wasn't very convincing either. So, finally we looked
convincing either. So, finally we looked around and we said, "Who looks the most
around and we said, "Who looks the most like a shaved orangutang?" Uh and it was
like a shaved orangutang?" Uh and it was me. So, I
uh because of my and if you look at the original game, a lot of people don't
original game, a lot of people don't know this. If you look at the original
know this. If you look at the original game, a lot of those sequences, we have
game, a lot of those sequences, we have used some of the frames of the
used some of the frames of the orangutang and just switch me out really
orangutang and just switch me out really quickly and it's nearly impossible to
quickly and it's nearly impossible to tell the difference. It was really
remind us what it was like to work on CNC.
CNC. [laughter]
[laughter] actually that I'm really really really
actually that I'm really really really demanding and I'm in everybody's
demanding and I'm in everybody's [clears throat] little details and I'm
[clears throat] little details and I'm very very specific about what I want. So
very very specific about what I want. So it can be uh at times a little bit um
it can be uh at times a little bit um challenging but you know what in the end
challenging but you know what in the end that's how we kind of got to create this
that's how we kind of got to create this amazing amazing game.
amazing amazing game. You know the meetings where we would all
You know the meetings where we would all get together with bread at the head of
get together with bread at the head of the table. [clears throat]
the table. [clears throat] Yeah. You know, we used to some of us
Yeah. You know, we used to some of us used to call those uh the our the
used to call those uh the our the Savannah meeting because because the way
Savannah meeting because because the way we the the way we would say the way we
we the the way we would say the way we would say it is there was this hungry
would say it is there was this hungry lion who would come into the room and he
lion who would come into the room and he was always looking for the slowest
was always looking for the slowest moving gazelle.
moving gazelle. And it was everybody's job not to be the
And it was everybody's job not to be the slowest moving gazelle because the lion
slowest moving gazelle because the lion was going to eat. No matter what which
was going to eat. No matter what which day it was, what meeting it was, the
day it was, what meeting it was, the lion was going to eat. It was just a
lion was going to eat. It was just a matter of who he was going to eat.
matter of who he was going to eat. The dinosaur levels came about through
The dinosaur levels came about through this odd way where um Joe Bostic
this odd way where um Joe Bostic introduced a little bit of code and
introduced a little bit of code and there was a little bit of art for a
there was a little bit of art for a couple of dinosaurs and I learned about
couple of dinosaurs and I learned about it when I stumbled across this in the
it when I stumbled across this in the code and I asked him about it and he
code and I asked him about it and he told me, "Yeah, this is a little Easter
told me, "Yeah, this is a little Easter egg we're putting in, but Brett Sperry
egg we're putting in, but Brett Sperry doesn't know so you can't tell him." So
doesn't know so you can't tell him." So I said, "Okay." Um, but then the art
I said, "Okay." Um, but then the art guys made a big art plate for the
guys made a big art plate for the sidebar that was an homage to the
sidebar that was an homage to the Jurassic Park logo and they made more
Jurassic Park logo and they made more dinosaurs. And then the sound guys got
dinosaurs. And then the sound guys got involved and made sounds. And then the
involved and made sounds. And then the video guys got involved and made a whole
video guys got involved and made a whole video. And at this point, Joe and I
video. And at this point, Joe and I realized Brett still didn't know about
realized Brett still didn't know about this. And when he found out, we didn't
this. And when he found out, we didn't know what was going to happen. And we
know what was going to happen. And we were both really scared about what what
were both really scared about what what was going to happen because we were
was going to happen because we were ending up using company resources on
ending up using company resources on this dumb little toy. So, uh, one day in
this dumb little toy. So, uh, one day in QA, a bug caused that sidebar art to
QA, a bug caused that sidebar art to reveal and suddenly the sidebar became a
reveal and suddenly the sidebar became a big dinosaur head and Brett was there
big dinosaur head and Brett was there when it happened. So, he and some QA
when it happened. So, he and some QA guys showed up in our office and they he
guys showed up in our office and they he was pretty mad. He pulled Joe into his
was pretty mad. He pulled Joe into his office and they closed the door and I
office and they closed the door and I don't know what all was said but when
don't know what all was said but when Joe came out he looked pretty shaken and
Joe came out he looked pretty shaken and I said, "Joe, what what happened?" And
I said, "Joe, what what happened?" And Joe said, "We're pulling it all out.
Joe said, "We're pulling it all out. We're taking it all out. It's just gone.
We're taking it all out. It's just gone. It's over." And I'm like, "What?"
It's over." And I'm like, "What?" And so we gave Brett some time to cool
And so we gave Brett some time to cool off and I I went into his office, I
off and I I went into his office, I think in the next day or two, and I
think in the next day or two, and I begged him to keep this stuff. I just
begged him to keep this stuff. I just pleaded with him and and he basically
pleaded with him and and he basically said, "Okay, but you have to do it all
said, "Okay, but you have to do it all yourself and you have to do it all in
yourself and you have to do it all in your spare time. cannot impact the game
your spare time. cannot impact the game with this. I said, "Okay."
[laughter] And you know, Command and Conquer, I
And you know, Command and Conquer, I didn't know it at the time. We were
didn't know it at the time. We were creating such a a big and amazing game.
creating such a a big and amazing game. Um, I had no idea how much it would move
Um, I had no idea how much it would move the needle in in game development itself
the needle in in game development itself and how many people would uh quite
and how many people would uh quite liberally, directly take and copy
liberally, directly take and copy elements of our interface, our gameplay,
elements of our interface, our gameplay, etc. But it created this huge wave of of
etc. But it created this huge wave of of um of other games and admirers and
um of other games and admirers and things like that and and so that was a a
things like that and and so that was a a form of it was a little frustrating
form of it was a little frustrating sometimes when the copying was so direct
sometimes when the copying was so direct and then other times it was very very
and then other times it was very very flattering to see that people were
flattering to see that people were building on our work and sometimes even
building on our work and sometimes even taking it to the next level a little
taking it to the next level a little bit. So,
bit. So, one of the things I'd really love to
one of the things I'd really love to leave people with is the idea that just
leave people with is the idea that just because something's hard or just because
because something's hard or just because you don't like the way something's going
from it and that you won't become better for it. You know, there were there were
for it. You know, there were there were a lot of unforgiving days in CNC. There
a lot of unforgiving days in CNC. There were a lot of days when I walked home
were a lot of days when I walked home feeling incredibly defeated, like I did
feeling incredibly defeated, like I did not accomplish what I was supposed to
not accomplish what I was supposed to for any number of reasons, right?
for any number of reasons, right? Whether whether my boss was saying that
Whether whether my boss was saying that or I was feeling that, it doesn't even
or I was feeling that, it doesn't even matter. But I would go home feeling
matter. But I would go home feeling defeated. And
defeated. And what pulled me through that was not
what pulled me through that was not quitting. was just the the idea that I'm
quitting. was just the the idea that I'm going to stick this through and rather
going to stick this through and rather than having the situation dictate me,
than having the situation dictate me, I'm going to dictate that situation. I'm
I'm going to dictate that situation. I'm going to learn and I'm going to be
going to learn and I'm going to be better. And I can say today that I have
better. And I can say today that I have never had a more challenging time than
never had a more challenging time than when I was at Westwood. And I can also
when I was at Westwood. And I can also say today that I never learned more from
say today that I never learned more from any institution than when I was at
any institution than when I was at Westwood.
Westwood. It had everything that that I wanted. It
It had everything that that I wanted. It It met every every goal that I wanted to
It met every every goal that I wanted to set out. It was fun to play. Had lots of
set out. It was fun to play. Had lots of replay. It was balanced really really
replay. It was balanced really really well. I like the graphics. I like the
well. I like the graphics. I like the effects. I like the story. It came
effects. I like the story. It came together beyond my wildest imagination.
together beyond my wildest imagination. So, it was it was incredible.
So, it was it was incredible. So, um that's the end of the material we
So, um that's the end of the material we have. We're going to move to Q&A. But
have. We're going to move to Q&A. But before we do, give me a round of
before we do, give me a round of applause for all the people that worked
applause for all the people that worked on Command and Conquer. So they hear
on Command and Conquer. So they hear this
this [applause]
and um [applause] I I as a as a good uh as a good advisory board member, I
as a good advisory board member, I always like to leave a little bit of
always like to leave a little bit of time for questions. So, we have about
time for questions. So, we have about five minutes because there's a special
five minutes because there's a special thing we want to close with just before
thing we want to close with just before the end. So, if there are any questions,
the end. So, if there are any questions, uh there are microphones. Some people
uh there are microphones. Some people have already figured out they can stand
have already figured out they can stand up to them and we'll be happy to answer
up to them and we'll be happy to answer those um to the best of our ability.
those um to the best of our ability. Thankfully, we don't have to worry about
Thankfully, we don't have to worry about lawsuits anymore, so we can be pretty
lawsuits anymore, so we can be pretty candid. [laughter]
candid. [laughter] Uh hi, I just wanted to say to Frank,
Uh hi, I just wanted to say to Frank, your song Mechanical Man is incredible.
your song Mechanical Man is incredible. And uh as you may know uh World of
And uh as you may know uh World of Warcraft, you know, released a take or
Warcraft, you know, released a take or riff on that song, I'm a medieval man,
riff on that song, I'm a medieval man, which was a lot of fun. Uh I wanted to
which was a lot of fun. Uh I wanted to know what you thought of that and are
know what you thought of that and are you planning on releasing a riff to
you planning on releasing a riff to their riff? [laughter]
their riff? [laughter] Uh thank you for that, first of all. Um
Uh thank you for that, first of all. Um yeah, that was a popular theme for sure.
yeah, that was a popular theme for sure. And I I did hear the medieval man
And I I did hear the medieval man version and I actually met the composer
version and I actually met the composer of that uh at a video games live show a
of that uh at a video games live show a few years back and so we we had a a fun
few years back and so we we had a a fun chat about that. Um, yeah, it's just,
chat about that. Um, yeah, it's just, uh, you know, it's just one of those
uh, you know, it's just one of those things where, you know, you just come up
things where, you know, you just come up with a a a fun idea and you make a song
with a a a fun idea and you make a song out of it and it ends up in the game and
out of it and it ends up in the game and and it catches on. You know, it's uh
and it catches on. You know, it's uh same thing with uh, you know, like the
same thing with uh, you know, like the main theme to Red Alert, like Hell
main theme to Red Alert, like Hell March. Everybody just caught on to that.
March. Everybody just caught on to that. It's still a video meme for so many
It's still a video meme for so many people to this day. So, um, it's a fun
people to this day. So, um, it's a fun homage. So, thank you for that.
homage. So, thank you for that. Appreciate it.
Appreciate it. Thanks. Uh, we got to both sides so we
Thanks. Uh, we got to both sides so we get everybody. Go ahead. Yeah. Um,
get everybody. Go ahead. Yeah. Um, during development, were there any
during development, were there any expectations uh of what would be more
expectations uh of what would be more popular, single player versus
popular, single player versus multiplayer? And were you guys surprised
multiplayer? And were you guys surprised by reactions to it?
by reactions to it? Take that one for design.
Take that one for design. Yeah, sure. Um, I think at the time
Yeah, sure. Um, I think at the time multiplayer was still pretty new, so we
multiplayer was still pretty new, so we didn't have a lot of expectations on it,
didn't have a lot of expectations on it, but as people noted, uh, people were
but as people noted, uh, people were staying late every night to play, which
staying late every night to play, which made my job balancing the game really
made my job balancing the game really easy because I just wander around the
easy because I just wander around the office and lurk over shoulders and and
office and lurk over shoulders and and get ideas. Um, so I think going into it
get ideas. Um, so I think going into it we didn't know it would be as popular as
we didn't know it would be as popular as it was, but we did get a sense of that
it was, but we did get a sense of that before it came out because people were
before it came out because people were literally staying 10, 11, 12 at night to
literally staying 10, 11, 12 at night to play on their own time, on their own
play on their own time, on their own dime essentially.
dime essentially. Cool. Thanks.
Cool. Thanks. So for for me, the first uh RTS was
So for for me, the first uh RTS was mostly uh Dune 2, which I was surprised
mostly uh Dune 2, which I was surprised wasn't mentioned at all during the talk.
wasn't mentioned at all during the talk. I don't know if there's a specific
I don't know if there's a specific reason for it.
reason for it. No, none none whatsoever. Dune 2 was
No, none none whatsoever. Dune 2 was absolutely the first of the style of
absolutely the first of the style of games that I recognized as RTS's and it
games that I recognized as RTS's and it had animated sequences. They just were
had animated sequences. They just were on a single floppy. So they weren't uh
on a single floppy. So they weren't uh they weren't full screen and video and
they weren't full screen and video and all that. Uh Postmort is about Command
all that. Uh Postmort is about Command and Conquer but you're absolutely right.
and Conquer but you're absolutely right. That's the very first also made by Joe
That's the very first also made by Joe Bostic and he was a principal um
Bostic and he was a principal um designer as well as coder on that
designer as well as coder on that which was amazing. Uh thank you for
which was amazing. Uh thank you for that. I was wondering if uh if um
that. I was wondering if uh if um because for uh one of the biggest
because for uh one of the biggest additions was being able to move
additions was being able to move multiple units at the same time which
multiple units at the same time which was a huge pain in the ass in Dune but
was a huge pain in the ass in Dune but uh did you take other inspirations? Did
uh did you take other inspirations? Did you try to improve on what was done with
you try to improve on what was done with Dune? Because yeah, multiple people
Dune? Because yeah, multiple people worked on both games, right?
worked on both games, right? Yeah. I mean I I don't want to I
Yeah. I mean I I don't want to I mentioned earlier there's some folks
mentioned earlier there's some folks that just don't like doing public
that just don't like doing public speaking. So I'm not going to Okay.
speaking. So I'm not going to Okay. I'm not I'm gonna hit poor Joe. He is
I'm not I'm gonna hit poor Joe. He is here, but I'm not going to make him do
here, but I'm not going to make him do that. So, I'll answer for him and he can
that. So, I'll answer for him and he can correct me if I was wrong later. But we
correct me if I was wrong later. But we absolutely got inspiration from all
absolutely got inspiration from all sorts of games. Um, everything from
sorts of games. Um, everything from Horox VI to um Sitron Masters. There was
Horox VI to um Sitron Masters. There was three games. There was um Rescue
three games. There was um Rescue Raiders. Oh, Populace 2 Rescue Raiders
Raiders. Oh, Populace 2 Rescue Raiders um Military Madness. Military Madness
um Military Madness. Military Madness and I can't remember the third one, but
and I can't remember the third one, but there were these three games that um mil
there were these three games that um mil military madness on the NEC. and they
military madness on the NEC. and they they had this um sort of feeling about
they had this um sort of feeling about them of being able to do strategy games
them of being able to do strategy games at the time were thought to have to be
at the time were thought to have to be turnbased so you had time to think and
turnbased so you had time to think and these all these games um had a way of
these all these games um had a way of putting you under pressure and making
putting you under pressure and making you have to think and move at the same
you have to think and move at the same time and so there was lots of inputs
time and so there was lots of inputs from all that and I have to say somebody
from all that and I have to say somebody mentioned it earlier for the songs. Um
mentioned it earlier for the songs. Um in the beginning there was some tension
in the beginning there was some tension between Westwood and um Blizzard. I can
between Westwood and um Blizzard. I can tell you all about this some other time
tell you all about this some other time why that was. But once the team started
why that was. But once the team started really deviating um the products and
really deviating um the products and there were they were clearly
there were they were clearly distinctive. Um I always found that it
distinctive. Um I always found that it was really inspiring and having another
was really inspiring and having another company out there that was trying to one
company out there that was trying to one up the game really made you work a
up the game really made you work a little bit harder and I think um healthy
little bit harder and I think um healthy competition uh is really important in
competition uh is really important in any medium and it's it's great to have
any medium and it's it's great to have somebody like Blizzard that you know
somebody like Blizzard that you know kept us on our toes and each time we
kept us on our toes and each time we would want to outdo each other. Um, and
would want to outdo each other. Um, and obviously you see where they've gone as
obviously you see where they've gone as far as quality is one of the most
far as quality is one of the most revered and rightfully so game companies
revered and rightfully so game companies in the world. So, uh, yeah, we took
in the world. So, uh, yeah, we took inspiration from all sorts of places.
inspiration from all sorts of places. And I don't know if you guys want to add
And I don't know if you guys want to add any.
any. Yeah. Uh, if I remember correctly, I I
Yeah. Uh, if I remember correctly, I I could be misremembering, but I think
could be misremembering, but I think early on with CNC,
early on with CNC, um, we wanted to make it so you didn't
um, we wanted to make it so you didn't have to sort of repeatedly click on the
have to sort of repeatedly click on the sidebar to the actions. So, I think
sidebar to the actions. So, I think early versions of the games, you could
early versions of the games, you could click a unit and move it, but you could
click a unit and move it, but you could not drag select. And the drag select was
not drag select. And the drag select was added. It's like, hey, what if it wasn't
added. It's like, hey, what if it wasn't sort of a design, it wasn't sort of,
sort of a design, it wasn't sort of, hey, we will do massive drag select.
hey, we will do massive drag select. Well, we experienced the same pain that
Well, we experienced the same pain that everybody else was experiencing.
everybody else was experiencing. Yeah. It was like, you know, we want to
Yeah. It was like, you know, we want to move a lot of stuff at once.
move a lot of stuff at once. So, I I kind of have this memory of
So, I I kind of have this memory of staying late one night and sitting with
staying late one night and sitting with the engineers and it's like, what if we
the engineers and it's like, what if we just try drag select? And we just put it
just try drag select? And we just put it in and it seemed very natural and we
in and it seemed very natural and we went with that obviously. So, yeah, but
went with that obviously. So, yeah, but I think initially we had, you know, it
I think initially we had, you know, it was more context driven way. You could
was more context driven way. You could click on a unit and then click move, but
click on a unit and then click move, but it still didn't feel quite right. And so
it still didn't feel quite right. And so the drag select I think made it a lot
the drag select I think made it a lot more fluid.
more fluid. Absolutely. Thank you very much.
Absolutely. Thank you very much. Um here,
Um here, thank you all. And uh I got to say that
thank you all. And uh I got to say that Command and Conquer had a big influence
Command and Conquer had a big influence on not only me but also my entire family
on not only me but also my entire family and our go-to is always Red Alert. Um,
and our go-to is always Red Alert. Um, so in uh if Red Alert came out, as I'm
so in uh if Red Alert came out, as I'm just sort of double checking, Red Alert
just sort of double checking, Red Alert came out in 1996, but you mentioned that
came out in 1996, but you mentioned that making Command and Conquer, which came
making Command and Conquer, which came out in 1995, took a long time. Can you
out in 1995, took a long time. Can you talk a little bit about the the uh sort
talk a little bit about the the uh sort of the transition into the second game
of the transition into the second game and what was easy to easy to redo and
and what was easy to easy to redo and what wasn't easy to redo?
what wasn't easy to redo? You want to take?
You want to take? Yeah, I think and again, you know, it's
Yeah, I think and again, you know, it's been 25 years, so my memory is hazy as
been 25 years, so my memory is hazy as well. Um, as I recall, Red Alert was
well. Um, as I recall, Red Alert was originally going to be an add-on to
originally going to be an add-on to Command and Conquer. That's right.
Command and Conquer. That's right. And it just kept growing and taking on a
And it just kept growing and taking on a life of its own and eventually became
life of its own and eventually became its own product. But um yeah, originally
its own product. But um yeah, originally we were just going to do a release for
we were just going to do a release for the 50th anniversary of World War II or
the 50th anniversary of World War II or something.
something. Yeah, I think it was supposed to be like
Yeah, I think it was supposed to be like a four month project.
a four month project. Actually, I can I can add a little bit
Actually, I can I can add a little bit because um the original one was supposed
because um the original one was supposed to be I told you earlier the inspiration
to be I told you earlier the inspiration a lot of discussions with Brett about
a lot of discussions with Brett about the near future um technology that was
the near future um technology that was just around the corner that was command
just around the corner that was command and conquer was supposed to be just
and conquer was supposed to be just beyond reach. We could imagine it
beyond reach. We could imagine it existing today. Um and so uh Red Alert
existing today. Um and so uh Red Alert as we were doing historical research
as we were doing historical research came up quite a bit that there was a lot
came up quite a bit that there was a lot of stuff like the Philadelphia
of stuff like the Philadelphia experiment and um most of the stuff in
experiment and um most of the stuff in the original in fact everything in the
the original in fact everything in the original Red Alert was actually somebody
original Red Alert was actually somebody thought that would work right so that
thought that would work right so that was the fun of it was like the attack of
was the fun of it was like the attack of the 50oot woman the the 50s where
the 50oot woman the the 50s where science was kind of like magic anything
science was kind of like magic anything could happen um that was actually
could happen um that was actually inspiration and it was like hey after
inspiration and it was like hey after after covert operations which were
after covert operations which were really just hard versions in the dino
really just hard versions in the dino missions let's do something that's more
missions let's do something that's more thematic around this this sort of
thematic around this this sort of historical um almost magical kind of
historical um almost magical kind of technology, this magical re revering of
technology, this magical re revering of technology. And um as it started getting
technology. And um as it started getting bigger and bigger, it was pretty clear
bigger and bigger, it was pretty clear that it just had a different sense to
that it just had a different sense to it.
it. Um and it was uh certainly in the early
Um and it was uh certainly in the early days people always ask this, you know,
days people always ask this, you know, was it part of the Command and Conquer
was it part of the Command and Conquer universe? In the early days, it was
universe? In the early days, it was undecided. It was intentionally not
undecided. It was intentionally not forced to be one thing or the other. And
forced to be one thing or the other. And that's actually why Kane shows up in
that's actually why Kane shows up in there and everything. That's more about
there and everything. That's more about Kane's backstory than it is about Red
Kane's backstory than it is about Red Alert.
Alert. And it was fun, too. just we we ended up
And it was fun, too. just we we ended up asking some what if questions about a
asking some what if questions about a lot of it to determine what would
lot of it to determine what would happen. And one of the questions was,
happen. And one of the questions was, you know, what if Einstein had invented
you know, what if Einstein had invented a time machine? No, he's too smart. He
a time machine? No, he's too smart. He would never have actually used it. He
would never have actually used it. He knows the repercussions. Well, maybe he
knows the repercussions. Well, maybe he would remove Hitler from history. So
would remove Hitler from history. So then that led to a lot of other ideas
then that led to a lot of other ideas and it just kept going and going and
and it just kept going and going and going until it was out of control and
going until it was out of control and had to be its own product.
had to be its own product. So we got one time for one more
So we got one time for one more question. Got two minutes because then
question. Got two minutes because then we have a special thing to end this
we have a special thing to end this with. Okay.
with. Okay. Hi. Uh, my question for each of you four
Hi. Uh, my question for each of you four is GDI or not. When those Tiberium
is GDI or not. When those Tiberium crystals crash land on our planet and
crystals crash land on our planet and kick off the eternal war, who will you
kick off the eternal war, who will you swear your allegiance to?
swear your allegiance to? Brotherhood, unity, peace. [laughter]
Brotherhood, unity, peace. [laughter] Brotherhood, unity, peace. You know, I
Brotherhood, unity, peace. You know, I can't take sides because then it
can't take sides because then it Hey, if I had taken sides, one side
Hey, if I had taken sides, one side would have been way out of balance.
would have been way out of balance. [laughter]
[laughter] It wouldn't have been fair and everyone
It wouldn't have been fair and everyone would would have complained about how I
would would have complained about how I favor GDI over not.
favor GDI over not. Yeah, in my mind I want to say GDI, but
Yeah, in my mind I want to say GDI, but I suspect in real life I might be
I suspect in real life I might be tempted by the knots. [laughter]
tempted by the knots. [laughter] Well, I wore the knot jacket at Magfest,
Well, I wore the knot jacket at Magfest, so I think that, you know, that's been
so I think that, you know, that's been an appearance.
an appearance. [laughter]
[laughter] So,