We uh have some amazing speakers on this panel this morning.
Um
Oh, I gotta say I can.
So we're gonna tie together
comics and games,
whether that's working for a better known IP and all the negotiations that entails.
Uh myself and Mike Rogers
uh are gonna cover both the writer and publisher sides of that.
And then we have uh Evan Narcis
and Kim Bellaire speaking about the finer points of the craft.
And then finally, son, m is going to show us how to take charge of our own IP
uh across both comics and games. So it can grow in both mediums.
And I feel like that's the talk. I, I need to hear the most
so to get things rolling, I'll start things off with everything.
Uh I think you need to know for a successful comic book adaptation
when it isn't your IP.
Uh At least as much as I can tell you in uh
roughly eight minutes if I speak as fast as I can.
Uh
So my name is Jill Murray
and I've been in games since 2011
on everything from AAA to Indies.
And most often I've been in narrative roles on things like
Shadow of the Tomb Raider uh
sub
NAA
below zero and Assassin's creed, liberation and freedom cry.
So I've adapted a lot of IP
and most often I've adapted myself to it.
And most recently I was creative director
and narrative director for Invincible Presents,
Adam Eve,
which is based on the comic books
by Robert Kirkman, Cory Walker and Ryan Otley
and is now a series on Amazon Prime.
So
much like comic book writers and artists often are I was a gun for hire on these
uh on this project contracted by Skybound Games who placed me in the studio,
terrible posture games. And then
once the game wrapped up, we all
went in our merry ways.
The game is an episodic visual novel with animated comic book panels,
turn based combat and an RPG system.
And you play as Adam Eve,
a powerful young superhero who can transform matter with her mind,
but he struggles in her personal life.
I was not already a fan of invincible when I was hired to work on this game.
And I'm not usually a fan of anything I work on before I work on it,
which may sound strange. But
have you noticed how many IP S there are
and how long it takes to make a game
and how suddenly game devs can get laid off?
I,
I had a joke here about
how having the same taste as your boss
isn't actually a skill.
OK.
But I think that what this talk is really about
is that even if you are a fan of the IP, that you're working on,
I want you to notice
the skill involved in adapting it
because it involves analysis
and curiosity.
So we train writers who can figure out how the franchise
and characters work and how the fans connect to it.
Um And we need creativity and collaboration.
So we look for writers who can work with the team and also figure
out how to transform their own voices into the voice of the IP.
And finally, synthesis,
we developed the advanced skill of putting
it all together to find new opportunities
in what might be already well known material.
So once hired, I
need to find out all the basics,
budget and scope who's going to make it the definition of roles and chain of command,
uh tech resources and tools who approves things and how
um if you work all the time in one studio, this might seem obvious.
But like if you're working as a, a consultant,
this can change radically from studio to studio.
So once I know who I'm working with, I can dive into the IP.
On Adam Eve,
I had three volumes of comics, a special issue for the character,
a season of a show to watch
and scripts to read.
And then we also had fan wikis
which are kind of a lifeline because they're indexed.
Uh even if they're not always 100% reliable,
I got out my sticky notes
and marked atomy of scenes and I made lists for anything listable powers,
limitations, heroes, villains, locations, sound effects,
et cetera.
Now, the show and the comics use a lot of the same story beats
but not in the same order.
And our game had to go deeper into the emotional side of the characters and choice
and then also show story moments that the audience hadn't already seen.
So I cross referenced every story, the individually by location and character.
Um And this extreme pedantic level of detail worked very well
for us uh on an IP with so many moving parts,
but IP knowledge on its own
is just a bunch of facts. It has to resonate with someone to matter.
Uh So the next thing I always want to understand is who is the game for?
Because if it's an established franchise, it already has fans
and built in fans have built in expectations.
However,
the publisher probably also wants the game to bring new fans
to the IP.
So then
the game needs to be classic and fresh. At the same time,
I cannot tell you how many times I've heard this. It is like every project.
Um
I'm gonna have to say something potentially uncomfortable here
because I know we don't always have a choice,
but I think you need to do your own gut check
on whether you're on board with what's being asked of you.
Because if you're credited as writer,
the fans are gonna connect the new and fresh thing
and the classic thing
with you
and it's going to follow you through your career.
The only way I know of
to manage the risk of that and plan for success is to
define exactly who your audience is and make that person happy.
So for Invincible Presents, Adam Eve, we were
all in agreement.
Thank goodness
that our number one target player
was people who would see in the Amazon series.
Uh They probably played games
sometimes or even pretty often, but didn't necessarily identify as gamers.
Um So they would be in it for the experience,
uh super interested in character and story.
Uh They liked action,
they like some challenge,
but they weren't probably looking for a punishing skill test.
Um So this became our guiding light
and allowed us the freedom to use all of our game systems combat
and RPG as much as the visual novel to tell a good story,
it could be really easy to lose yourself in all of this.
Uh But if you don't bring your own heart and point of view to adapting the IP,
it's probably going to feel like something is missing.
Uh So even though I said before
that I didn't start out a fan of Invincible, I did find my own connection
to the characters in the project.
So in particular,
I found a lot to relate to in Adam's
frustrations as a character, hiding her best skills,
facing pressure to disown her true nature
and risking alienation. Anytime she uses her powers,
knowing what I cared about
helped me talk to the IP holder.
Uh Mike is gonna have a lot more to say about that relationship between writer
and IP.
But I do want to mention that if you have
amassed all of this knowledge and the skills and are doing the work,
everything should be a discussion.
It could be so tempting to just want to
please your IP holder by doing everything they ask.
But that's not actually why they need you.
Sometimes the best thing you can do is let them know why you see things differently
or what you're not able to do
so that you can look for new opportunities together.
I'm getting towards the end of my talk now.
Uh So I keep wanting to use the word finally on this slide.
Uh But of course, this isn't really final, it's iterative.
So the last type of knowledge
I'm always hoping to collect comes from play, testing and Q A.
So you need to play, test the game with different groups of people,
but especially those who correspond to your target audience.
And I know that sounds painfully obvious at G DC where we spend
all day, every day talking about best practices.
Uh But somehow it was always less obvious under time and budget pressure
uh when people need you to get things done
and
uh time is slipping away.
But understanding how your work lands and whether it's actually
doing the things you set out to make it do
and hitting the targets you intended will give
your project a much greater chance of success.
So, thank you very much for listening.
Good luck in all your projects
and like
uh
Adam's friends, don't forget to look up.
I will leave you now in
Evan's capable hands. Thank you.
Uh Good morning, everybody. Thanks for coming out.
Um
That was
amazing what Jill just said.
I uh
I guess I'll start by introducing myself. My name is Evan Narcis.
I'm a recovering game journalist um who has transitioned into comics,
um writing comics and games.
Uh
uh This is the title of my talk. Um
Yeah, who the hell am I?
That's not loading.
There's, there's a little CV reel of uh my projects, but I've done stuff like right,
Rise of the Black Panther from Marvel Comics.
Um uh
The History of The Black Panther is backup series and the W Condom mini
series.
Um I've written uh Gotham Knights Gilded City,
a prequel to the Gotham Knights game for DC.
I've written um
static uh
a Nazi team up uh uh featuring the characters of the mouse on media imprint.
Um If you don't know about mouse on media, you should look them up.
So the subject of my talk is going to be
life is not advancing. So,
yeah. OK. So um I'm gonna be talking about uh
the kind of uh
craft similarities between working in comics and games,
you know, in terms of processes,
uh comics and games are similar and that both
forms ask creators with new skills to collaborate.
Both forms have particular idiosyncrasies that
make them tricky to learn and master.
And both of them happen on assembly lines with different
disciplines coming together to create a complete entertainment experience.
Comic books demand that creators play with the presentation of
chronology and storytelling progression in specific ways.
Um One thing I always like to say is that in comics, you can't describe a full motion.
You can't say that Superman looks up at the sky, sees the giant meteor and,
and flies off to smash it.
Comics cannot
um articulate motion. What you have to do in comics is freeze moments in time.
So you've either got to break up an action into the uh its
component parts or you gotta pick one component part and kind of uh intimate
between panels what happens as as the scene progresses.
So,
um you know, in video games,
it's almost the opposite, right?
The the storytelling progression happens at the player's pace
and they give players narrative agency that other storytelling forms don't.
So one of the rules I've learned about working in these uh
two different media which are vastly different in what they do.
And how they do it.
But one of the things I've learned is, um
people don't always want to read everything you write.
Um,
you know, uh brevity is the soul of wit.
I think that's a Shakespeare quote and it's
very much true in these two different mediums.
Um, you know, they can be really far away from Shakespeare.
But, uh you know, when I was first learning to uh write comics,
I loaded up the page with too many panels per page
and too many um word balloons
page.
Uh The editors who,
who assigned me my first work gave me a rule of thumb six
panels to a page and sent me back to redo that script.
What I learned from that moment was that too many panels on a page um
That isn't designed for them can look like just so many thumbnails,
you won't get the room to focus on facial expressions, body language or even action.
Um in video games,
writers and narrative designers also face a number of unique considerations.
For example, you might be working with a main character,
doesn't have sp spoken dialogue
and only expresses themselves who grunts
mos or display text.
You always have to be thinking about the fact that
the player isn't necessarily there to interact with your words.
One of my
worst experiences in this regard is back when I was
a games journalist and um I was the CEO of the
outlet that I was working for was playing uh Batman
Arkham Asylum and kept clicking through all the cut scenes.
I'm like, this is a juice. What are you doing?
And um uh he's like, I don't care, I just want to beat people up. I'm like, but
his parents
um
so, uh yeah, you know, players aren't always gonna be there to like,
do the thing that we most
deeply associate with as writers, which is like,
they're not gonna be there to be to hear your sentence craft. They're not gonna be
there to like, OK, wow, this guy is really articulate.
They're gonna be like, OK, no, what do I need to do next? Where do I need to go?
So um
in closing on that beat,
you really can't be precious about dialogues and sequences.
You always have to be thinking about scope with regard to other disciplines.
You know, as a senior writer, I can write, you know,
uh a mission brief that feels tight and uh uh executable,
but you hand it to a level designer or um an art designer and they're like, yeah, no,
we can't do this.
So you always have anything about the cross-disciplinary
come
to life,
you know,
asking an artist to draw too many panels on a page is kind of like
asking a level designer to drop dozens of points of interest in a mission.
You just slogging things down, let's get to the juice and some people might skip it
Um
So, like I said, you know, both comics and games are multidisciplinary. So, um
what do you have to do when you're working with people across disciplines?
You got to collaborate.
Um
you know, in comics, when you're lucky,
you can sync up with an artist on an assignment and figure out what they like to draw,
what are their strengths and that's not always the same thing,
what they like to draw in their strength, maybe two different things.
And then there's what the story needs.
Um the same goals for level designers and
other disciplinary uh crafts folk in video games.
So what are their design goals? What are their capabilities?
How can you approach as a writer and a designer
amplify those goals and capabilities? But also, you know, uh narrative tends to be
seen as support for mechanics in video games,
as a writer, you should always approach your work with your own design goals.
For me,
it's always reaching for a fuller manifestation
of black humanity in all its complexities.
This uh transitions to my work.
That's a little bit uh of my process on this one milestone project.
That script, that's the initial layouts
and then that's a a final page. You won't be able to see it. But
the script page actually calls for six panels.
And when I gave it to the artist, the artist came back with eight. So
they actually made the choice to break up the action further
and you don't have final call of that as a writer that's, you know,
what winds up uh executing on the page artistically is always in the artist's hand.
So you have to be flexible and in this case, it turned out much better.
But um you know, sometimes you just have to be like, OK,
the process is inherently collaborative.
That's one thing I always remember.
So, moving on to my work,
um Miles Morales
when I uh
was asked to pitch a quest line um for the game,
um I was given these clear goals uh feature at least one Marvel character,
Bill Miles is a tantric to Harlem, take the player outside of Harlem.
Um With that guidance,
I was able to tap into my lifelong knowledge
of the Marvel Universe and Fold in Easter Eggs,
that gesture that other, other elements from Marvel Comics.
Um
Did we
miss that
one?
Oh Yeah, this is one of them.
Um This uh these are tickets for a concert that Miles and
um his best friend Finn went to when they were younger,
featuring Alison Blair,
who if you know Marvel is also the X men you uh known as Dazzler.
She's not in the game, you don't see her but like, hey, this is like, OK, we, we,
we know why you're here.
Like Jill was saying before you're here to experience uh
this story, but also um the
reservoir of energy that, that, that story springs from. So um
when uh I
worked on the time capsule missions, Time capsule and Neighborhood quest lines,
uh
I used the Neighborhood quest lines, both of them,
the time hack capsule and Neighborhood quest lines to
uh build Miles's attachment to
uh the, his new home of Harlem in the Game.
Miles moves from Brooklyn to Harlem and he feels
kind of out of place in this new neighborhood.
So those quest lines
uh have clear mechanical goals.
It is of sending across the city like the prompt, but also like, hey,
the stuff he picks up the people he talked to in the course
of the mission makes him feel more bonded to his neighborhood of Harlem.
I also call it my own lived experience of figuring out where I fit
in another kind of blackness different than the one my parents came from.
I'm a Haiti, a
child of Haitian immigrants.
So acculturating to Black Americanness was something that my mom didn't,
wasn't always able to make sense of.
I used that life experience to parallel
miles' experience of moving to another neighborhood and
figuring out how he fit in just as he's kind of coming on to his own
um
in
own expression of the Spiderman mantle.
Um
And a little bit more of my work on the game was focusing on
how do we represent Miles metaphorically as a character who symbolically has
generated a whole lot of power and attachment from a new generation of fans.
Um You know,
I focus a lot of on theme in my work
because most of that work happens in commercial context.
Because of that, I try to hone in on a sense of purpose for each project
other than the need to make money. Why does this need to exist? Who can it reach?
Um the text up?
There is an excerpt from an interview I did
with uh the New York Times where I talk about
how I suggested a specific visual moment that would tie back to our themes.
Um This is uh after a pivotal fight on the bridge um early in the game.
And you know, one of my directions or suggestions was like,
let's have miles of skin showing through the costume.
Um At this point, a box,
a bunch of uh corporate rock song goons have their guns drawn on him.
He's saying I didn't do anything. Everything that happened was kind of an accident.
Um
So I thought that the skin,
the the choice to show my skins for a costume
would kind of charge the scene with metaphorical power.
But also from a storytelling perspective from story logic.
If you're in a city where Spiderman is fighting a guy,
an old guy with vulture wings in the city,
you know, like uh well, if there's a new spiderman could be his son, little brother,
a clone.
This choice lets you know this is not the same
as Spiderman and then we had some other mechanical decisions um
under the hood, excuse me, that you know,
different banks of dialogue would fire in Harlem from
the people who lived up there cause like,
hey, he could be one of us, let's respond to him in a certain way.
Um
You know,
uh
So even while
the actual scripting of these scenes was lots of the
other people in Insomniac who I loved working with.
Um it was my job as an outside consultant
to make sure the uh games themes weave through different disciplines. So,
you know, when I would go to Insomniac and work on this game,
I wasn't only talking to the narrative uh division.
I was also talking to people in art
um and uh level design because knowing how the whole thing works,
holistically gives you the tools to weave the themes and
the storytelling um goals throughout different parts of the game.
Um So, uh
that's everything I have to say.
Um You can reach me here.
Um And I will now leave you in the capable talented hands of Kim Beer.
Hello. Uh I'm Kim Blair. I'm the CEO of Sweet Baby Inc.
Uh We're a narrative development company working across a lot of different games.
Um
In terms of my own experience, I've worked on probably about 40 to 60 projects.
Um And a lot of them have been in IP, a lot of them have been
holding a lot of cannon and So that's what I'm talking about today.
It's uh my work on Spiderman two specifically
uh and Canon and how it influences creativity because
I think as anyone, especially on this panel is well aware of
the canon is, is a huge facet of what people understand.
And to that point, um I want to define Canon here
as it's a collective truth, right? Canon is what
other stories have existed, what has been in the past.
But beyond that, it's also like a cultural understanding of what it is.
And for me, that's almost more relevant, right?
A lot of the time, it's not what is,
it's not having to every single issue and watch
every single show and know every single fact.
It's the collective gut that we all have the way that a character feels.
We know the way that Batman should feel, the way that Spiderman should feel,
the way that Aquaman should feel.
However, whichever character we wanna name, we have a sense of them in our culture.
And so in working with any of these kinds of characters, Canon can create a
great foundation for our work, right? It creates this foundational truth.
But I think that as Jill has, has made clear,
the real trick is kind of how do we be additive to that?
How do we actually tell new stories in a world where there's so much Canon?
Because the canon, right?
It gives us foundations, it gives us assumptions,
it gives us expectations and things that people want to happen,
that they expect to happen.
And I think that the Spiderman Canon, for example, tells us who he is. But
what I think is interesting about thinking about the canon less as just
like a factual truth and more as something shifting in a cultural understanding
is that the Canon also leaves a lot of room for who Spiderman can be.
And so when we think about the Canon of the Games,
um the amazing team at Insomniac has its own canon,
but they draw from an existing lore as Evan just kind of explained
and they draw from that same cultural understanding.
The Peter and Miles that we meet in the Spiderman Games is Peter and Miles,
it is a new Peter and Miles unique to Insomniac,
but it is also the classic Peter and Miles that we know we should recognize them,
we should resonate with them.
And so to kind of make this work, it requires more than just storytelling.
It requires a sense of narrative design because
narrative design for me is,
is where we align with the character with
the the players understanding of the world.
When we align with their expectations, we try to get in their heads and,
and kind of play a game
with them to say like, well, here's what you expected, here's what you didn't,
here's how we subvert that.
And so the question that I always think about just when I'm
advising on anything is how do we turn Canon expectations into wins?
Like how do we get people excited about that
while also subverting expectations to achieve surprise and excitement?
Uh And to me that, that
took, you know, looking back at the Canon
in addition to reading a lot about Spiderman,
watching a lot about Spiderman throughout my entire life.
Um Looking back on the games at Insomniac
Spiderman 2018 is a hugely successful translation.
I think of Spiderman uh Peter Parker Spiderman into the game play space.
We feel like him,
not just because of the mechanical way that we interact with him,
not just because it feels really, really good to swing through New York,
but because this is the guy, we know he's a bit of a mess,
he's in a specific place in his life and
we feel him because we know who Peter Parker is and we always have
in 2020 Miles Morales uh brings miles to the fore uh and
his canon abilities and his personality
undergo that similar translation from kind
of canon and lore into the pure storytelling and gameplay space.
But
the question and where I started consulting with that team
was when we bring the two together for Spiderman two,
how does the canon and how does our existing
knowledge affect the way we tell that story?
And I think what's particularly interesting to
me about Miles Morales as a character and
I'm sure that most folks in the in this room know that or have seen
Spider Verse or just experienced him in comic books. But
Spiderman and Mile Spiderman as Miles is about change
like e Evan, I think elucidated it really well.
Like this is a different Spiderman, it has to be.
And he's positioned kind of as somebody who not only breaks the rules of what
it is to be a Spiderman or kind of changes or evolves those rules,
but also kind of deliberately quote, breaks the canon.
We know from the
classic refrain with great power comes great responsibility that
Spiderman, a Spiderman's life is one that will be marked by loss, that will,
that will counter that kind of heroism, right?
Spiderman is very aware of the sacrifices that he has
to make to hold the power that he does.
And I think it's something that weighs very heavy on him
and that for us kind of forms a rule about Spiderman, right?
It becomes not just a something that we say, but it becomes
an understanding of how we tell his story with
great power comes great responsibility has to be a truth
that we hold in some way.
But if players expect that, right?
If players always know that that's going to be the case, how do we,
how do we tell stories that surprise
for me,
it came down to kind of trying to get a take about it because the team at Insomniac,
they know Spiderman, they know Spiderman very well.
They've worked with Spiderman for many, many years.
And so what I wanted to do coming in to kind of talk about that was think about,
ok, what does that mean for me? Who are Peter Parker and,
and miles Morales as
not just as individual Spidermans,
but who are they when they come together to be Spider
Men together? They, what does it mean that they're a team?
Because thinking about a team, like
team is not like two of the same guy ideally,
right?
And the story that Insomniac is,
is telling here is one of people from different worlds, different communities,
different backgrounds, different ages,
but they're facing the same crucial problems.
They, they have to come together around a lot of those problems.
And so how is miles different from, from Peter? Really?
And how do we apply that meaning in the story?
And for me,
the answer came by looking back into the canon by understanding one
that Miles has to be something of a subversion in himself,
that he has to be somewhat different in himself.
But beyond that, you know,
looking back at the work that Insomniac and Evan specifically did
on the Harlem missions and making that into a real space,
a real community, a real place that Miles Fields held
it really, really gave me some insight that I was able to apply. And
that really just led my thinking not just on you know,
specific story elements because
there's gonna be some great talks about those specific story elements.
At least one on Friday talks about the story.
Um lead, the lead writer John Paquette is gonna be delivering that.
So I'm I'm staying away from spoilers in this talk, but
I still want to talk about the fact that like
coming into this project,
I wanted to think about what that difference was and give it a rule,
give it a framework that I could operate from.
And so I was thinking
with great power comes great responsibilities is, is that rule, right?
It, it's the thing we know about Peter
because Peter Parker as a guy, he is burdened,
I think in every iteration that we've ever seen of him,
this guy cannot get his life together respectfully to him.
He seems to have, he seems to have it all.
But he's, he's,
he's always got something that he has to give up in order to get a win somewhere else.
He's also somebody who is self isolating
in the canon, whether that's whether that's true in, in an individual story.
But just canonically, Peter Parker is a guy who's lost a lot of people.
He's lost a lot of himself. Sometimes he's lost a lot of the people who care about him.
And so he's kind of become someone who self isolates a little bit
because he knows that every new connection is a potential loss and,
and that's something that scares him.
And so in that way, he's very fearful of loss,
but he's almost accepted it as a truth of himself.
With great power comes great responsibility is, is an acceptance that he has made.
And so
Peter's power ultimately weighs heavy where his friends are, are at risk.
He loves them, but they are also liabilities and he must protect them.
He is afraid to love and he is afraid to lean.
You know, we see him always working on his relationship with MJ.
But we also kind of understand why sometimes she's like, hey,
can you figure yourself out just a little bit?
But in
thinking about miles for me, what really opened my,
my my mind up was thinking about those Harlem missions, was thinking about
miles entering these environments and
not just being held up as a hero in these spaces in Harlem. Right?
But being held up as a member of the community, he is part of this,
of this group and he has had a
very different upbringing and very different experience therefore
than Peter.
And so what, what it came down to for me was, well, what if I just flip it around
with great responsibility comes great power
because Miles Morales is a hopeful character and
I think he's hopeful because he has gotten to
come of age a little bit with a spiderman.
Existing spiderman has been able to give him a little bit of hope. And that means
that he's not going to start at the same place as Peter Parker.
He's not going to feel his burden.
There's going to be a sense of excitement and fun there.
The other thing about him is that he's community focused, right?
He, he knows the guy at the Bodega, he knows his neighbors, he helps,
he helps his friends walk home, he knows how to be a real person in the world.
I think a little bit more sometimes
than Peter does and he's had to.
And I think that the other thing that is,
is real and that I think Evan Illustrated as well with the rock song comment is that,
yeah, Miles.
Miles has been through it
as a marginalized person.
Miles has a different expectation around loss and around the the
things he's going to encounter and he's always gonna come into that
he's still fearful of it,
but there's a different take on it than he's gonna have versus a Peter.
And so in thinking about that
Miles is an empowered character, but to me, Miles isn't just empowered on his own.
He is empowered by his community,
his community is his strength and he has to protect it,
but he's empowered and not afraid of his ability
to love and to lean on those around him.
And so thinking about that, I come back to it and I think, yeah,
Miles has a lot of responsibilities and he's always
gonna be adding them he's always got more people,
he wants to be attached to people and more attachments is always gonna be more fear,
but that's where his power comes from.
It's his ability to protect and stand up against that.
And so putting that together real quick.
Um, when Miles doubts himself, right, Peter believes when Peter loses hope,
Miles can hold on when Peter loses himself as he does through venom in this game.
And, and, and through the Black Suit Miles remembers.
And so when all seems lost for both of them, ultimately, they are stronger,
together,
their responsibility to one another is what gives them great power.
And that works.
It doesn't necessarily have to be something we say, we don't have to have,
you know, Miles, you can flip my slogan around.
We instead,
we just,
it works because we understand and we feel it and
we understand who they are because of who they've been.
And that for me, that's canon. That's how the Canon can affect our thinking on it.
finally, before I go, I want to say a quick thing about Craven.
Uh
because one Craven was actually the character that I was most excited about,
about talking about, but it wasn't as clear an example that I could come up with.
But
the thing that I've always canonically loved about Craven is
that Craven has like a shape to his cannon.
I have uh I think in, in any call that I was ever in, I would talking about Craven.
I was like, ok, so Spiderman's path is like a straight line.
He's gonna fight whatever villain he's fighting. He's, he's, he's going through it
and then Craven comes out of nowhere and just cuts through it.
The guy just loves to show up.
He likes to be like, I don't know what you're up to,
but I'm going to hunt you and I'm gonna do it really, really hard and as fast as I can.
And so he is that single minded like one man spider hunting killing machine.
But
the trick of it is that in a video game,
you can't just have it be Craven. He has to become a faction of people.
There have to be a sea of followers that Craven
has I guess agreed to, to work with.
And I think that this was achieved in the
game by actually keeping the shape of Craven's Canon.
He still gets to cut into that story, his single mindedness and his purity,
the purity of his character is still maintained
and
eventually through a spoiler,
we come to understand that like there is a reason
that the Craven that we know from the Canon,
the solo guy,
the reason that he has a following,
the reason that he's working through all these people.
And so
we don't compromise his character by making this decision. We instead have
the player understand his compromise and the way
that he has made that decision himself.
And so thus we retain who he is and, and what he does,
despite the fact that he's gone from one man to many, many people,
he still feels entirely like himself.
And I think that's really cool.
I also wasn't sure what the front on the slide I had like meow or daddy, but
I thought,
I thought that like that was like the one that was the nicest
um or the most fun, but
just to close. Um Yeah, to, to kind of just wrap up my, my thinking on canon.
I think that the canon for storytellers and for narrative
designers especially is best used as a source of resonance,
right?
It should get to the heart of the people who know the canon,
but it should still be felt even by those who don't they.
And that's to me the power of a lot of these superhero stories,
we feel those big moments even if we don't know the whole story.
And so a storyteller is contributing to like one small part
of a huge IP or a franchise or a canon.
I think the Canon gives us the foundations that we need
to build on and the shape that we're building from.
But the way that we really win is by building away and off from the canon.
And that's how we tell great stories.
We tell the great stories that are new and feel different despite the audience
and their their vast education and knowledge on the subject,
creating people who know how it always goes
and that's it.
Thank you to everyone.
Uh and
appreciate it.
Thank you. And I will pass it on to Mike Rogers.
That's me,
everybody.
I'm Mike Rogers,
the senior creative director of Skybound franchises at Skybound Entertainment.
Uh That means I oversee any games that are based on anything that sky bounds,
uh that sky bounds, ip uh Invincible, the Walking Dead.
Uh Anything else in our comics library?
Um Also a writer, a narrow designer vo director
um wrote on a game called Escape Academy
uh that uh coin crew games uh developed.
Um Also got the pleasure of working with Joel Murray
on the Adam Eve game that she talked about earlier
and most recently worked on an Invincible experience inside of Fortnite Creative.
Uh Today, I'll be talking about
constructing creative publisher partnerships
or the importance of caring
because I like, like a subtitle
uh
Jill touched on a lot of this earlier
um which is fantastic. Uh ingesting an IP and understanding its parameters.
That is uh one of the most important things that you can,
you can do when working with a publisher.
What I really, really want to talk about today is the importance of collaboration.
Uh and the importance of working
not just um
not just uh as a publisher and a license or, and an IP holder as sort of this like
person standing on the other side of the room, like watching you and
telling you exactly what you can do as a writer with their characters.
But the importance of collaborating and working together through that
um that all starts with becoming an expert and becoming
a knowledgeable person on the IP that you're working on
uh devour everything, everything possible.
Um
You saw all the Sticky Notes in Jill's uh in Jill's book.
Um that's uh that's the way to do it
uh on Invincible, which was the property we were working on together.
Uh There are comic books. Um There are uh other adaptations and video games.
There are um
obviously the Amazon series.
Um and you got to absorb all that.
You've gotta, you've gotta look at everything that's created.
You've got to understand all the angles and, and every,
everything everyone else has done with this
character and with this franchise and IP
um so that you can uh take your own take on it.
Uh
The first thing you need to do after you do that is to inject your passion in it.
Passion really makes a difference.
Um That can be
an existing passion,
uh that can be an acquired passion.
Um For me, it was an existing passion.
So I uh I want,
I came to work at Skybound because I was a fan of
Invincible and because I was a fan of the Walking Dead.
I like the applause. Look at that. Um
uh so that passion was like, I,
I didn't even really know I wanted to work in
video games until I came to work at Sky Bound.
Um
For many of the writers that we work with,
uh they may be familiar with the property, they may not.
Um but once you absorb everything,
once you've like read everything and injected all of that into your veins,
uh it's gonna become an acquired passion and you really need to treat it that way.
Um
And uh if you treat it that way,
that will sort of feed uh back to you.
Um One thing that we do at the publisher on the publisher side is we create IP guides.
Um There are a couple of different kinds of these, there are,
there are the more traditional like brand and marketing
guides that will tell you what colors to use and
font and whether it's
R in the circle or ATM.
Um But the Lour guides are really what I think is most important.
The Lour guides are, are sort of those guides to characters.
Um The,
the things that tell you about the story and the personality
and what's really important and key to each of these characters,
sometimes those things don't exist.
Um So as a writer, sometimes you're asked to create those things,
um sometimes just asking whether or not they exist is enough to
have uh kind of kickstart a publisher to create those things.
So
um I think it's really important to inquire, especially about war guides.
Um And uh if you do, you'll, you'll,
you'll start the sort of collaboration that I've been talking about,
which is the next thing I want to talk about story collaboration.
Um I think it's the most important thing to
uh
have publishers be treated as your partners, not sort of as obstacles.
Um I think, you know, all too often in, in a traditional setting,
uh It can come off a little bit in the opposite way. But for me,
um II, I sort of see myself as a storyteller first.
Um And,
and I think taking that angle uh allows me to work with writers in sort of a unique way.
Um And I think, uh if, if writers approach
their license orders or their IP holders or, or whoever they're working with
in whatever team um as a partner,
it's a really good uh starting point because everybody
likes to feel like they're in that role.
Uh ee even if they, even if they don't have the background of that, right?
Um But publishers should understand how to tell a story.
Uh that that is part of, especially when you're a license or you're an IP holder.
That's part of why you're here, right?
You're here to tell great stories to create great games.
Um And uh sometimes you might need a reminder of that, right.
It's um
it's a lot of fun to,
to create these things and uh when you're creating so many of
so many games and so many different things all the same time,
especially when you're working on multiple projects.
Uh It can get really exhausting. But if you as a writer sort of feed that passion to
the publisher, they, uh I, I like to think it sort of reignites fires uh within them.
And uh
yeah, I think that's, that's a great thing to do.
Um
Like I was just saying,
you let your passion for a property feed theirs and vice versa.
I, I felt like Jill and I worked on,
I got this really good sort of working relationship where
I, I've always loved Invincible and I've always loved Adam Eve.
She's always sort of been my favorite character.
Um and Jill who had not been, you know, abandon the property before working on this.
I felt like Jill just captured this voice
and captured who Adam Eve was so strongly and so succinctly that,
like, I was excited to read what she was, what she was sending in
and I was excited to,
to note it and even if it was like 11 pm
and I'd been working on like 13 other projects that day.
Um I was like, I was waiting for this and I was excited about it.
It was a good way to cap the day.
Um Talked a little bit earlier about
Rules to an IP and Rules to a franchise.
Um
sometimes those rules are meant to be broken.
And I think part of being a partner and going on that journey of story together
is figuring out what rules can be broken
and how they can be broken. I think
for me, when things really clicked, uh writing the Adam Eve game uh
was when Jill would push back against me.
Uh when and push back against rules, even if it was small things, even small,
small character details or like, oh, this guy likes hash browns.
Well, maybe he doesn't like hash browns because this scene is
something else. I think there was a, there was a moment where we wrote in um
Eve
ordering some sort of uh vegetarian dish
and there was a big discussion on the publisher side of I, I don't even know if she'll,
knows it about like does Eve ever eat vegetarian food?
And the answer was why not? Like this is, this is great. Let's do it.
Um And, and discovering
like as soon as you realize that things can be broken,
it's like, well, what else can we break? What else can we?
Uh
and, and I guess bend is really the better word for it, right?
Because you need to bend things in a way that still feels true
to the IP but puts that sort of like new spin on it
and uh
vegetarian food, not a real important rule to be broken because it just works.
Um part of the challenge and sort of great opportunity that comes with
the newer IP and uh is working with living creators.
So, first off hooray, the creators are live, that's awesome.
Uh You know, in, in some of these more established uh I like properties from, from
longer amount of time like Marvel and DC.
Uh these creators have, have passed on sadly, but when you're getting to work with,
with living creators, it puts a whole new sort of spin on things and,
and fresher properties mean
that the rules are evolving and the world's evolving and changing.
Um
You get to sort of balance what's important to different stakeholders
and that might mean that uh what's important to
you as the writer, what's important to the license or what's important to
sort of the,
the business end of the publisher and what's important to
the creator of the comic or the IP that you're,
you're adapting from
may all be different things.
Um So
embracing sort of nuance
and tiny details and tiny things that are important
to specific stakeholders,
I think is a really good way to sort of make everyone happy.
Um I love that Jill was talking about how to make the players happy.
A lot of my job on the publishing side of things is how to make sure that
as we're making these players happy and as we determine, OK,
this is the best thing to do,
how do we make sure that everyone else involved is also happy and
feeling like their input and their vision for the game uh is,
is, is also intact.
So,
um
I, I love, uh I love that they're, they're like,
not always the same things that you think are important to
an IP that is like super important to uh a creator.
Um There may be like very small details and a lot of my job with a living creator.
Um You know, I work really closely with Robert Kirkman, Corey Walker and Ryan Otley
and being able to ask Robert very specific things like
this guy's back story is never explained.
Does he wear a silly rubber suit or is it a containment suit
and being like, mm,
well,
you can go either way or and then like
giant like paragraph of like back story right here.
Like that's just a really like sweet nugget of,
of story goodness that you get out of a living creator and,
and it just makes it a lot of fun.
Um And it, and it, it goes back to that whole collaboration.
So I just wanna talk quickly about a couple other
examples of uh of uh projects I worked on,
I worked on a project called The Walking Dead Last Mile with Terrible Posture games.
Um In this one,
the publisher actually ran point on story and characters uh from the beginning.
So we worked with a guy Sean Kittleson.
Uh He used to run creative, um I worked really closely with him
and uh he actually kind of
built out character um character descriptions and sort of the main story and
then Terrible Posture ran with that story and built on it and,
you know, created the, the uh the narrative um of the game.
Um It was sort of an interwoven approach to writing where
um both teams were working very closely together
um in terms of the actual writing duties.
Um And that's very different from what we did on invincible guarding the globe,
um which was a, a mobile game we put out with Ubisoft.
Um the publisher.
Uh So, in this case, uh actually Ubisoft is a publisher in this case,
but we were the licenser.
Um but we worked really closely with Ubisoft to hand pick a writer.
Um Sean Ryan wrote the game, he's from the comics world, some of you may know him.
Um And uh traditionally,
a lot of publishers will just meet with the one production sort of point of contact.
Um I think it's really important to, to
make sure that publishers and writers and licensers
and writers actually meet together all in a room
um or all in a
uh And that's, that's what we were able to do uh with Sean and with Ubisoft.
Um And then there's sort of a whole totally opposite angle um We did on Invincible doc
seismic attacks, which is built uh in Fortnite
um using their UEFN uh engine
um in this model, uh
the publisher, which was Skybound, uh worked with the developers at house of how,
who didn't have any writer attached to.
Um And so
uh we had the um the game director
basically lay out a story outline of what
beats would happen from a gameplay standpoint.
And then uh myself uh I worked with, with Matt host who was the uh the game director.
Um I wrote the script um based on Matt's sort of sequence of events and outline.
And uh yeah, we took that approach. So
no matter what approach you take and no matter like
what angle and what sort of specific needs your uh
your game will uh will have. Um It's all about teamwork.
I think working together and thinking together,
uh thinking of each other as collaborators is the
most important thing when you're telling a story,
um foster those creative relationships and develop mutual respect.
Uh that respect will feed back and forth the same way that passion will
um and uh
expect and encourage publishers to meet your level of passion for the IP.
Um
All too often people are burnt out
uh when you have passion and you're not burned out and you're excited about things,
it's gonna light a fire and, and I think that goes back and forth.
So,
um I try to uh kind of embody that value as a licenser um And as
a publisher and uh I really appreciate what writers do because uh if you're excited,
I'm excited and that's partially because of an,
an empath.
But uh also because I it, it's just fun when you're doing that together.
Um So, yeah, thanks for uh for listening to my publisher side of things.
And uh you can follow me at Mary Mike Rogers and uh I'm excited to introduce some,
my shoelaces were untied and that was a dangerous game getting up the stairs.
So
I'm gonna talk about something a little different
and it's my hubris,
which is that I think I can do anything that anyone else can do
and therefore I can do all the comics and I don't need any help to do it,
which is a problem, but I'll explain
so really quick. I
just want to introduce myself.
I'm so m I am the co-founder of Perfect Garbage studios.
I'm also a narrative designer who have worked with multiple AAA studios
in AA and I'm also a writer for a bunch of comics,
particularly horrors.
So don't go looking into that if you don't like that space,
I'm gonna warn you right now.
Uh And I,
yeah, that's it.
That's really it.
So I want to talk about comics
being made based off games.
I'm sure everyone has kind of noticed this growing trend.
I like to argue, it starts around 2021 where it really started booming,
but games are making comics which is great and sometimes not great,
but we're not going to debate that today.
I'm really into the Devil May Cry manga. I think they hit it.
I would argue about Bloodborne.
Um
It doesn't matter, the aesthetics are what pull you.
And so what I want to bring to the table is talk about how as indie game developers
or people who are making indie studios or people
who are trying to develop their own stories.
Why can't you do this?
Uh Why can't you make your own comics?
Um
Yeah, and so I just wanted to kind of highlight,
it's been really growing in this space.
Tons of indie games have been making connections with publishers,
making connections with fans, crowdfunding kicks, starting
all of these good things to bring supplementary material, new stories,
new dynamics with these characters into spaces that
are different than the video game store,
which is your local comic book shop.
Uh It's so funny because when I was preparing this presentation,
call to the lamb literally went on Kickstarter
like a week ago. So it's there.
Um And this is exciting because this is a
new way to kind of express the storytelling or
the characters or even aspects of gameplay that are
narratively tied to a genre that is actually a
one way conversation.
So, and I'll talk a little bit more about that too,
but it's just a great way to bring people into the space of indie
games or introduce people into new IP that they might have never come across because
there's just like Jill said,
I don't know if you've noticed there's 1000
of games coming out all the time everywhere.
So how do you develop games with multimedia kind of perspective in mind?
It's really important to understand that by building a world,
you want to be able to transform it into other material, you also need to keep in mind
in awareness and the appeal of that media that you're aiming for.
Comics are very different than film are very different than games.
They have different audiences, they have different expectations.
And so learning what was required of comics and what is necessary to tell
a story in comics is a huge part of understanding what matters to you.
Also in game development.
I really love what Evan mentioned,
which is that storytelling and writing in comics when you write a script in
comics is inherently different than how you would write a script in games.
You have motion, you have control of cinematics versus in comics.
You oftentimes have to break things down into very fundamental levels so
that you can interpret or tell what's happening within the scene without having
6000 panels on a page, which is also my hubris.
Uh I have a lot of those.
You also want to understand what it means to make supplementary content.
What does it mean to have space in your game,
to tell other stories that you might have
not gotten a chance to within game development.
I think with Indies, we oftentimes think our games are our magnum
opus.
Like every game has to be the most important
thing we've ever made in our lives and also
has to carry every aspect we want to tell in this story in that moment at that time,
which is wrong.
Don't do this for yourself.
Um So leave yourself avenues to tell interesting stories.
Uh leave yourself spaces to have characters that maybe weren't as fleshed out in the
game because it wasn't necessary for the
components to have longer stories and supplementary materials
and also understand who comics are for.
Um
audiences for comments are also vastly different from one another.
Uh just like genre fiction as a whole or just like genre films.
Sometimes they don't cross, you know, folks who are really into, I'll,
I'll use manga as an example,
like Shoja manga versus folks are really into the western horror comic scene.
Sometimes they do not inter lap sometimes they do.
Uh But I think it's important to understand that when you're
approaching comic readers or you're approaching people who read comics,
they're not going to fall for maybe the same pitch styles that we would with games,
they'll be interested in kind of the history of comics,
how storytelling is told in comics.
What is this doing in relationship to comics? Why does this have to be a comic?
There's a lot of questions about why this has to be a comic.
And I think that's really important in
understanding when you develop this project.
So what are the appeal of comics?
I think the biggest thing is strong characters and interesting worlds.
We can argue day and night about like the nitty gritty specifics and we
can have Alan Moore come up and show us all his detailed panel work,
but
it's important to understand,
at least on the basic level when
getting started that strong characters in interesting
worlds are some of the biggest hooks to get you going into a comic.
Um And these are core parts of games.
And so how do you can engage in con
readers uh with comic readers is understanding
the language shift from games into comics
and that it comes with understanding that comics are
all about bringing dynamic moments to the page.
And the only requirement from the reader as
opposed to the player is turning that page,
you need to convince them to keep reading in a similar
way that you need to convince someone to keep playing.
And I think that
I think Indies are great at that because we have a very short amount of time to
get you really hooked on a project by a very specific unknown team in like 10 minutes.
So using that energy to bring yourself towards comics,
the first three pages getting you hooked is super, super important.
And that's why it's important to understand your supplementary content.
And it's also important to understand your audience.
So developing in games with comic potentially means
is that you have to consider the importance
and the space needed for strong world building.
What are the unique elements within your game
that won't be explored too deeply in gameplay?
Uh Can there be supplementary
material for these unique elements? Can that be a comic?
I really keep bringing this up because sometimes it can be a
novel and maybe it shouldn't be a comic and that's OK,
maybe you don't want to write it. I'm in that position all the time.
And that's also OK, maybe comics aren't the answer.
But I still think they're a great way to approach
kind of a new understanding of what you've been working on
and also what are your character arcs?
Are there further things that need to be flesh out
other beloved side characters have yet to be explored?
This is the great part about fandom wikis and other forms
of like contact with connections with you in your community.
Listen to your community, if you run Discord servers, if you have
x.com, uh
uh if you have other forms of like social media connections,
live journals that doesn't exist anymore.
Reddit, reddit exists, see what's on Reddit
at your own peril. Um And kind of listen to the community and what they're enjoying.
And I think that often times it's a great guide to be like,
oh we really need to explore something new
also. Are you building a next game?
I know that sounds cheesy, but I really love comic tie ins to next games.
Uh I think that they're a great space because I'm sure everyone in here knows
games take a solid 2 to 3 years if you're lucky uh to make.
And sometimes as like people who are involved in communities
and people in these spaces who are engaging with the
stories that you're making comics really help fill that gap
and really help engage and keep that community alive,
leading up towards the next project.
And even if that next project is different, people love Easter eggs.
And I um I gave a talk last G DC where I talked about how important it is to have a studio
that you develop, that represents kind of what you want to put out.
And I think comic tie ins can carry the vein of your games even
if they're not all like in the same universe or the same stuff.
Why do you even wanna make comics? Well, let me just tell you go
to the lab, just went on Kickstarter
and it did really well.
Um
But uh you wanna make comics because you want
to engage with your audience in a new way.
And just like, I think our wonderful, like,
folks who've spoken before me said it's a great way to
bring people who would never have processed IP into that.
Ip.
Um,
folks who maybe never played Cult of the Lamb will
see this in store shelves think the characters are cute
and there's nothing wrong with it and we'll probably pick it up and give it a read.
And I think that again is a personal choice, but you've brought something new
and I think that's just showing up more and more in games.
So,
Tales Of Kin Zara offers a comic when you preorder the game
uh venture for the Vials and wonderful indie game that's coming up,
did a Kickstarter anthology of different comics within the universe.
There are great ways to help promote your game and share what you're working on,
but also engage in new audiences and new spaces.
And
I personally think in indie games,
a wonderful way of marketing that is definitely personal to the
studio that maybe won't exist in kind of other forms of maybe
types of marketing.
Um
So pitching comics,
I really want to briefly explain what that's like because I think that
just like pitching indie games, it's a bit of a mystery if you haven't explored it.
Um
The big thing is that
uh you can approach making a comic through multiple ways,
you can make a collaboration with an artist or a team.
If you're the writer,
maybe if you have your own in-house artist and
you wanna work together things of that nature,
there's tons of ways to approach indie comics,
not everything has to be the most polished comic in the world.
By the way, Zine culture is still very much alive and very much powerful.
I was a judge on the mini
comics awards for 2024 which is a pure
to just support less than 30 pages of mini
comics that have been made over 350 submissions.
All ranging from beautifully published work to I
sketched this one night and I loved it
and it was good. Um And so
how do you approach this space? We have our much more traditional publishers.
You met a wonderful folk from Skybound today.
Um They're great folks to work with to get comics out.
They love
and
hell
correct. We have
wrong but they love existing IP.
So building a game,
having a game released is a great stepping stone
to kind of pitch comics within that game.
But if you don't want to work with a publisher, because again, my hubris
is incredibly strong.
Uh Wait before we get there, actually,
there's another step between that and that's indie publishers.
I shouldn't skip them. Uh Who I love. So I use Vault Aftershock. There's tons more.
These are publishers that will work more closely with your studio,
maybe uh have much more smaller teams that
to releasing your comics.
There is web comics which is a crazy, great space.
I think that web tends to pass, let you post for free.
Um Honestly, people still use tumblr.com.
So it's a great resource reddit, ironically enough too. Websites.
Uh But my favorite is you do it yourself, you kickstart it.
I think that having
the power to kind of create your own comics,
just like how we have the power to create our own
games is really amazing and learning the process through doing it yourself
is phenomenal.
And it's also a great, like I said,
great marketing tool to kind of bring people to the work that you're creating.
Um we are out of time, but
this is me.
Uh I love working games and I love working in comics and I think that anyone has
the power to kind of create things for themselves
or learn how to create things for themselves.
And so don't risk that opportunity when you're making a game for like 8000 years,
sometimes you can make a little thing and it's nice and wonderful.