Well, hello.
Thank you all for being here.
Thanks to the staff, uh especially Juno and Matthew for all the help with this set up.
special thanks to Aaron Smith, my co-founder at building better games.
He created this accountability model with me and to Jenna
Spangler who guided me through the G DC submission process
to make this possible.
I would not be here talking to you honestly, if it wasn't for them. A
quick reminder, silence things with the potential to beep.
Ok. My name is Benjamin Cars.
I am a former army captain and then game producer.
I started building better games with Aaron Smith four years ago.
So we could help leaders in game dev build better games at least
partially because we love playing great games and wanted to do more of that
today. I want to talk about accountability.
Accountability is a word I've heard tossed around quite a bit,
both in the military and in gamed.
The usual scenarios are as follows and here's something like I wish people
were more accountable or I wish there was more accountability around here.
Another one comes up a lot. Why does no one take accountability anymore.
And usually after something goes wrong, who's accountable for this.
In all of these scenarios,
there's an underlying idea that accountability is
something we want more of and don't have
in nearly all situations where accountability is being brought up.
It's because something has gone wrong.
Also, in nearly all of these situations, accountability is poorly understood
and seems linked to blame and punishment
when accountability is seen primarily as the potential to
be blamed and punished after something has gone wrong.
I'll admit my lack of surprise at how uncommon it seems to be.
So people don't know what they mean sometimes when they say accountability too.
And that's another part that can be confusing with this.
Often people think of accountability and ownership and responsibility,
even culpability.
All of these might be the same thing depending on where it's heard
to avoid us being confused.
I'm going to state what I think accountability is agree or disagree.
This is what I mean by accountability. In the context of this talk,
I view accountability as having two parties involved.
One is the person who will be holding accountability or holding someone to account.
And the second is someone who is being held to account,
the person or group holding accountability needs
to have the resources to create consequences
for whatever happens and must have expectations of what they want to see.
The person or group being held to account, needs to
not do too much actually.
And this will cause some problems down the road which we'll get to
the ability of one party to create
consequences and have expectations over another party
is all that's needed for a very basic and toxic accountability to exist.
Said another way,
accountability involves judging or evaluating someone or a
group and establishing consequences based on their actions,
behavior or outcomes,
regardless of fairness, knowledge or evaluator, identity,
meaningful consequences hold individuals or groups accountable.
I want to deconflict accountability from responsibility. Here.
Those are the two I most often see confused.
They are similar, but they're not the same thing.
The biggest difference between the two. Accountability is external.
Someone else holds you accountable, responsibility is internal.
You take on and then feel responsible for something.
Practically I can hold someone accountable
through consequences based on my expectations,
but I can't force them to be responsible.
They can always refuse to care about my expectations and consequences.
If you want more info on responsibility,
I recommend checking out Christopher Avery's work on the subject.
He wrote a book called the Responsibility Process.
It's worth it's worth a look for this talk.
We're going to be focusing on accountability.
So a couple of anti patterns emerge whenever accountability comes up,
I kind of referenced a few of them earlier.
Let's talk about those first.
We have this idea,
I've already mentioned that accountability is
directly connected to negative consequences.
When this version is all, you know,
accountability means knowing who to blame or who to punish in
systems where this is true.
The motivation to set up accountability is near zero.
The only thing I do by being accountable
or holding others accountable is blame and punish.
Since most people don't like to be blamed or punished
or blame and punish others either out of kindness
or because if I'm doing it to someone else,
someone else might do it to me too.
It's just not going to be something anyone prioritizes
this view does appropriately attach consequences
to accountability but only negative ones.
It ignores all positive consequences
like giving someone credit for doing a great job
or rewarding someone because they achieved what was needed.
A quick story on the idea of negative consequences.
I remember a large business unit of an org. I was working with hundreds of people.
They were struggling to produce value
that would help the rest of the company and the audience.
It was incredibly expensive and disappointing and went on for a long time.
But how did no one pull the plug or look into it?
Well, every year or so, sometimes even months,
it seemed like the senior leaders found someone who
was accountable for the failures and fired that person.
I'm not going to go into the details,
but I am highly doubtful that they were practicing healthy accountability.
It seemed more as though a scapegoat was needed,
declared accountable
and then fired.
I don't doubt that some of you have seen similar situations.
Accountability in this case had purely negative consequences
and it led to a large part of an
org where everyone ran from accountability as fast as
they could and hoped it didn't catch them.
I want you to raise your hand.
If you've heard of accountability operating
with this anti pattern where basically
the only thing that happens if
accountability is present is negative consequences,
just raise your hand.
Ok? You got a decent number of hands there.
Raise your hand.
If you've seen accountability operating this way
at a place you've worked personally.
Ok?
Now raise your hand.
If you've experienced accountability operating this way,
accountability is pure negative consequences,
still a decent number of hands. OK?
So you guys are are familiar with this anti pattern,
the tld of it.
If accountability just means that something nobody wants to happen happens,
don't be surprised when that thing doesn't exist.
Second anti pattern. That is super common.
We claim we want accountability,
but we don't tell anyone what they are accountable for.
It seems we care about accountability, but in reality,
everyone is left in the dark about what it means to be successful or fail.
And if that's unclear, then accountability will be at best useless
and at worst, it might end up toxic as I mentioned earlier.
If you want effective accountability,
you have to tell people what they are accountable for.
Here's two contrasting stories from my own experience as a
game producer at Riot working on League of Legends.
Story number one,
I had been hired by Riot and already shifted managers once I was working really hard,
but I didn't know much about Game Dev.
At the time,
I kept asking the leaders around me, including my manager, how I was doing.
They kept saying things like fine or good or solid,
whatever else means generically. Ok,
competent without any details.
It was terrifying.
I felt I couldn't get a clear answer. Where was I failing to meet expectations?
Where was I ever doing it? What could I do better?
I admit that some of this was probably my own insecurity.
Perhaps no answer would have satisfied me.
But the vagueness of their answers certainly wasn't helping.
It seemed like my entire job was to do a good job
and I had to figure out the rest for someone who had never been a game producer before.
This led to a lot of fear and anxiety.
OK. Second story, four or five years after that one,
I was placed in charge of a team of teams
responsible for the technical sustainability of League of Legends.
This was a super exciting role for me, even as it took me away from the art and design,
heavy teams that I've been working on for so long.
When I stepped into that role, I asked the leaders around me what they wanted.
They were super clear,
they wanted the group I led to become more predictable.
The work from the team was great. The people seemed solid.
There was good product thinking and alignment to the bigger league vision,
but everything seemed to be unpredictable and as we know,
unpredictable usually means late,
they didn't tell me how to specifically accomplish more predictability.
But at that point in my career, I'd been leading for a while.
I had the tools to work through the rest.
They didn't just tell me to do a good job.
They didn't tell me just to do my best.
They had a specific problem they wanted solved and they were clear,
they wanted me to solve it
over the course of the next year.
I took that group from the least predictable to one of the most,
if not the most predictable teams working on league,
they had set clear expectations had they not,
I might have focused on other problems and failed to solve their primary concern
with how powerful, clear,
clearly setting expectations is.
It's a huge missed opportunity that we don't do more of it in our industry.
Ok. So now raise your hand, if you're familiar with this, if you've heard
of accountability, but nobody ever sets clear expectations.
Anybody heard of that?
A lot of hands again? Ok.
Raise your hand. If you've seen this at a place you've worked.
Ok,
and raise your hand. If you've experienced accountability operating this way,
almost everybody. All right.
TLDR of this anti pattern when expectations aren't clear accountability
won't work like you want it to.
So the lessons of these two anti patterns
for the first rewarding and praising people for succeeding is
as important as punishing and rebuking people for failing.
If you want to create real and effective accountability,
both are a part of what good looks like
for the second, expectations must be communicated
if you don't communicate what you want. Don't be surprised when you don't get it.
All right,
we've covered what accountability is and is not and looked at some
of the biggest anti patterns that I think pop up around it.
It's time for the model.
So four steps to healthy accountability there, you have it.
Number one set expectations, number two, negotiate, number three, commit
and number four, hold accountability.
Well, I guess I finished early. Any questions?
Just kidding.
If you've already learned anything about me, it's that in any given scenario,
I've probably got more to say
if you haven't learned that yet, you're about to.
So let's start with setting expectations.
First step.
Setting expectations is the clear communication of what you want to be done.
It could be specific tasks, it could be ownership of some aspect of a product,
it could be improving something like predictability from the story I told earlier,
if you're someone leading something or have some type
of oversight as a stakeholder or manager or whatever,
you should have expectations of the people are things you have oversight of
the setting expectations step is just the articulation of those expectations.
This first step fights clearly back against the second anti pattern of
never communicating what you want by actually communicating what you want.
It also gets people who perhaps haven't thought clearly
about what their expectations are to think about it.
I honestly think that's one of the biggest reasons the second anti pattern exists.
It's not anything malicious.
It's just busy people not putting time into thinking about what the
heck they'd want out of the team's group or people they lead,
it gets lost in the busyness of work and I'm going to go meta for a second.
One of the reasons there is so much work to get lost in
is because no one has told them what is expected of them either.
So they are like so many of us trying to do everything at once.
So what happens if you don't set expectations when you skip this?
Well,
the first outcome is the chance you get what you want
from the people you lead or manage goes way down.
Second,
those you leader manage are likely to be a bit confused about what's important,
feel some anxiety about their own performance
and generally have an emotional burden to carry around.
And third, when you attempt to hold the people you lead or manage accountable,
it is likely to feel surprising random and unfair.
I remember a story with someone I'd worked with. I was no longer with the company
they'd quit recently.
And I was really surprised they were incredibly hard
working and had seemed very passionate about this space.
They explained why for the last half a year or so,
they'd absolutely crushed it doing all kinds of work for the role they were in.
They were in discipline development and they
built out training expectations for roles.
A ton of other work, it went really well.
They were feeling like forward progress could be made in an
area that had felt blocked for years at that company.
They went to their performance review excited
you already kind of know what happened. Huh?
The manager gave them pretty average marks.
The person I'd worked with asked why they felt that way.
And the manager explained that some big things hadn't been accomplished
when the person pushed back saying all that they had done,
the manager said something like, oh yeah, that was, that was good.
But it wasn't what was most important nice that you did that stuff though.
So one of the harder workers I've ever encountered in the product space
didn't even realize they were working on something
their manager considered a nice to have or bonus
and that they were not accomplishing what their manager
felt was the most important work to do.
Expectations had not been set.
The result was a great employee leaving the company pretty frustrated
and feeling set up or even betrayed by poor leadership.
A couple of more advanced notes on setting expectations.
So the first setting expectation can also include what is not expected
is a prioritization of what matters most.
This will fight the idea that all the work that could possibly be done should be done.
There is nothing down that path
but burn out grunt and despair
and focusing on what you want done.
You are saying there are other things that don't need to be.
The second note,
setting expectations is ideally done by both the person being
held accountable and the person being held to account.
Excuse me, I'm the person holding accountability.
Why do we not just care what the boss thinks though?
Well, your manager may have a good handle on what you're doing,
but they don't see everything that you do.
You may have realized things that need to be
done that are outside of your manager's visibility.
If so,
thinking about what expectations you believe the company team or
boss should have of you is a really useful tool.
OK?
Setting expectations.
This is about articulating the vague internal thoughts both
people have about what the future might look like.
It's about being able to state what you want. And when
so someone can act on that desire or fail to
setting expectations is the second most common part of the four step model.
And I think it's not common at all.
Once you've set expectations, you move on to the next step, negotiate
negotiate is, well, we didn't really get really creative with these step names.
It is what it sounds like.
Negotiation is between the person holding accountability and
the person who will be held to account.
It's where we look at what we thought would be
expected and start refining those expectations to match what's reasonable.
My manager might expect me to get the team going 10 times faster.
Many of my managers wanted that
that might not be a reasonable ask
during negotiation. I get to bring this up.
Now, I'm not going to lie to you and tell you this is a meeting between peers.
It's not accountability in a business context,
almost always implies hierarchy and a power differential.
But that doesn't mean negotiation is pointless
unless you've got a really problematic
person holding accountability and if that's
the case attempting to negotiate will inform you of that problem.
So you can start looking elsewhere or find a new manager
I mentioned during set expectations that it works best.
If both people set expectations.
If you did that, this is where it comes together.
The two parties get to look at their different
lists and see what matches and what doesn't.
If you're a manager,
you might realize that there's some incredibly important
things that your direct report is doing.
You didn't know
if you're the direct report,
you might realize you were with the best of intentions
going to focus on things your manager doesn't care about
in both cases,
this helps create clarity because negotiation is not just about exchanging lists,
it's about aligning on a final set.
This might take some time to work through
and the person who holds the other accountable,
the boss or manager or leader,
they will have the final say.
But the goal is to reach a place where both parties
feel good about the final set of goals and expectations.
Skipping negotiation is really common,
as mentioned, accountability typically involves hierarchy.
And if you see the boss's job as to give work to the direct report,
then once you set those expectations as the boss,
you just tell the direct report the expectations and you're done
but not negotiating will lead to a few problems. First.
As the boss,
you don't get to see what your direct report thought
was important and gain a better understanding of their situation.
It's possible they're barely holding things together right now and
you've just completely overloaded them with a bunch more expectations.
It's possible they are focused on the wrong things and it's a great time to teach them
or share the vision and get aligned or whatever it is,
you're going to miss that opportunity.
If you don't have this conversation
second,
you don't know how well they understand anything
because you haven't had a conversation about it
while I feel like it's been said a lot in the modern world.
I'm going to say it again,
sending someone an email a list of items or some text messages on Slack,
heck even a voice or video message on Slack
is not going to create the clarity you probably want and perhaps even expect
if clear communication is important conversations are how you get there.
There's just too many ways to misinterpret written
messages no matter how carefully you word them.
This means that if you don't negotiate
about the expectations,
you are less likely to reveal the misunderstandings
and more likely to be disappointed in either direction
down the road.
Third problem,
if you don't negotiate,
you remove agency and in so doing disempower your direct report,
this is crucial and should impact what negotiation looks like
if negotiation is just a conversation to help us get clear on what the manager wants.
The direct report to do,
that's not negotiation. It's just clear direction
which don't get me wrong is better than unclear direction,
but we can do better
if you want people to become responsible all on their own.
And you do,
you have to let them impact question and challenge what you expect of them.
It doesn't mean you have to compromise every time.
It doesn't mean you can't hold boundaries regarding what matters most.
It does mean if you never give them the ability to influence what's expected of them,
they will become disheartened and lose energy and passion over time.
Remember that story where my manager and others told me to create predictability.
I challenge that I have a bias
against predictability being the most important thing.
Yes, it matters.
And I'm a producer.
I know it matters, but it's, I don't like it when it's like at the top of the list,
I saw other issues on the team that I felt were more important
to focus on such as the development of the leaders and general support.
And when I did, we got into a conversation
debate about why they were asking what they were asking.
And was it just because we wanted pretty roadmaps to
report up the chain or was there something more?
Well,
it turned out there was something more because the team
was doing foundational technical work on the league code base,
having unreliable releases and other teams that wanted to bank on
what particular improvements or tools or build systems would be made
and were using that to make their own plans. They had to do a ton of guess work
and they often got blocked.
The priority wasn't predictability because we liked nice burn down charts.
It was negatively impacting teams across the studio that we didn't have it.
I still did invest time in what I thought was important around developing leaders.
But after that negotiation,
I put right at the top of my list predictability
because I was able to understand why they wanted it a
couple more notes on negotiation.
Number one,
both parties don't have to have a set of expectations
to bring to the table though that does work best.
But even if the manager or just the direct report brings expectations,
you can use that as a starting point for the conversation to reach alignment.
Second note, don't try to do this in five minutes at the end of a one on one,
it's going to take time and that's ok.
Book a separate meeting if you need to.
Third note,
this isn't just negotiating what a direct report or the party
being held to account by another will be expected to do.
Another piece of this is what and how
much support the manager or party holding accountability
will be providing.
Let's talk about that for a second.
So providing support, look, managers are not just here,
we're not just here to set expectations, we are here to provide support.
If we have the power to create consequences,
we also have the power to help our
direct report succeed through our organizational influence and relationships
that can look like a myriad of things
and maybe backing your direct report up
in a conversation with another senior leader.
It may be helping them find a great mentor.
They may be approving their purchase of a course that they need to grow their skills.
They may be personally investing time to go over the most
important deliverable you expect because they've told you in negotiation,
they don't know how to do that and need
more guidance than your one on ones will provide
whatever it means for a manager to provide support
that is also on the table in negotiation.
If you want your direct report to move heaven and earth to get something done,
but you aren't willing to talk to your boss to get
them $300 a year to get a piece of software.
That's going to be a huge help. What are you doing?
I'm not going to go deep into what good people management looks like.
This is a talk about accountability.
I will say that if you're doing a good job as a people manager,
it means you are creating an environment and providing the
help when needed for your direct reports to succeed.
You are not responsible for their success.
They are,
but you should feel responsible for setting them up in
a place where success is possible or even probable.
All right, back to negotiation. Step two here,
negotiation is where we bring our lists of expectations together
and form one list we can agree on
as well as discussing support and sketching out possible consequences.
It is the second most forgotten step in the process that I see out in the wild.
So this leads into step three commit.
So you've set expectations and shared them.
You've negotiated a modified or perhaps an entirely new set of expectations.
Now it's time to clearly commit.
The commit step is unique in that the person being held to
account rather than the one holding
accountability is primarily responsible for it.
Only they can commit
to commit is to sign on the dotted line.
It's to communicate to the person who will be
holding accountability that to the best of my ability,
I will do these things.
And if I don't, something went wrong,
I'll also throw this out there. You don't technically have to have this step.
But it's really helpful.
It goes a long way in moving
someone past external accountability and to internal responsibility
in some ways. It's the simplest step. It's the shortest.
But I think it's also the hardest
if I go back to when I was talking about how much we all say we want accountability,
but how much we don't create healthy systems that would lead to it.
I think this step is why
to commit is to expose yourself someone who has committed to meet
a set of expectations can be accused of failure if they don't.
And the person doing the committing usually has less organizational power,
they're less protected
by default. I hate this step personally.
I lived for a long time trying to keep expectations for
myself as low as possible in all areas of life.
So it was hard to fail and relatively easy to succeed.
And it kind of worked.
I had rarely been considered a failure, but it also limited my upside
when I got more aggressive with what I'd take on,
it forced me to grow my capability and expertise I had to become better than I was.
Because the me of today,
whatever I looked like wouldn't solve the problems of today that I had
committing is uncomfortable.
And by the way,
if you've ever been in toxic organizations where
incredibly high performers can be given impossible expectations
are then expected to accept them
and then get burned at the stake for nearly inevitable failure.
You can see why this is uncomfortable.
You are vulnerable. Once you've committed,
it's frankly easier to leave everything vague.
And that's why so many organizations don't have
the culture of accountability they claim they want
because all the way up the chain,
no one trusts that if clear expectations are negotiated and committed to
that, that won't end really badly for them.
It's better to sit in the fog with plausible deniability
except it's not
the lack of commitment,
hinders growth for the people being held accountable.
It hinders managers actually following through on supporting
teams and people as they try crazy things,
it stops us from being clear about what's important.
And that's why this is the least seen step of the four steps while
I negotiate, which I think is well behind set expectations.
So how do you get people to commit?
Well,
this comes back to that first anti pattern
I discussed above that accountability means negative stuff.
Consequences are just blame judgment punishment.
Why on earth would I want to commit to anything?
When the only thing I ever see happening to people who do is neutral,
they met the expectations and so did their job
or negative, they failed and got blamed, judged and punished.
You introduce positive consequences and you create
trust that harsh negative outcomes aren't that likely
because they shouldn't be.
It's time to talk about consequences,
the good, the bad and the unknown.
So without consequences, accountability doesn't exist
if we fail to meet someone's set expectations and nothing happens
and that keeps going.
Everything is just business as usual,
we're not going to be concerned about
meeting or not meeting expectations moving forward
and neither will anyone else
consequences create stakes.
If someone knows,
consequences are headed their way based on what's happened in the future,
most people will care more.
I'm going to split consequences into three buckets, negative,
positive and adaptive,
negative consequences matter whether present or absent.
Remember that leader leading hundreds of people and consistently
failing to create good outcomes and meet expectations.
The senior leadership of the organization is on the hook to resolve that.
If the failure is consistent over time,
the consequences might be changing the failing leader's role or
removing them from the team or even the company.
If no one deals with it though,
you are teaching everyone that the company
doesn't take consequences and accountability seriously.
This will hurt studio morale long term,
especially if accountability seems more absent at
senior layers of the org than elsewhere,
negative consequences. You tend to see them in a couple of different buckets.
I kind of mention them there's punishment, there's blame, there's judgment.
These, sometimes
I am appropriately to blame for something I've done wrong.
Sometimes it is appropriate to punish someone and remove
responsibilities, whatever that might be.
And sometimes it's appropriate to have higher scrutiny on what they're doing
based on how
things have turned out.
That's a part of being a manager and part of running a company as well.
Ok, enough on negative consequences
of the labor.
Let's talk about positive consequences.
As I've mentioned, these are too often absent
and I've talked about some of the reasons why.
But there are more if you agree to some type or scale of positive consequence.
When the person you had expectation of expectations of meets the bar,
you are now obligated to honor your agreement.
If you don't have the power agency to create positive consequences,
this can put you in a real bind.
For example,
let's say you challenge a producer working on a team to deliver
a key piece of value three months earlier than originally planned.
It seems impossible, but the game needs that bit early.
And so you told the producer, they would get a promotion and a raise if they succeeded
while beating the odds, the producer did it
only now,
you realize you never cleared anything with your boss and you are limited to
a 3% raise for average performance and a 5% raise for exceptional performance.
Also,
the company has put a freeze on production promotions as a cost cutting measure.
Whoops,
gosh.
If I have positive consequences,
I as a manager now need to handle the
reality that if my people blow away my expectations,
they should get them
similar to negative consequences.
This is much easier for managers to want to leave in the fog.
Because what if my employee keeps overperforming for their role?
Now,
I've got to keep convincing my boss and boss's boss that
this person who is totally crushing it should be promoted.
How annoying
do you realize how backwards but common this thinking is
I had an experience once that was incredibly frustrating.
I had a manager who was a super nice guy. Great game Dev, I think a great producer,
he was pretty overwhelmed in the role. And as a manager at
one point during a private feedback session,
I basically told him the truth of how I felt
without mincing words.
I said,
I feel like your job is to keep me doing as much
work as possible as cheaply as possible for as long as possible.
Without me quitting.
That was a hard conversation
to his credit. He didn't just fire me and attempt to blacklist me. Some might have.
So I don't recommend you have that conversation if you feel the same way,
but it sucked. And if you're there, it sucks.
I felt like I was doing good work. I just wasn't getting rewarded.
This is one reason why so many people prefer to hop
companies instead of trying to get promoted where they are.
It's easier to convince someone else that you are
capable of more than to fight the system.
You currently sit within that without it ever being
the intention ends up locking you in place.
And when I had my first direct report,
I got to experience this reality from the other side.
She was amazing,
just crushing it brand new on a huge team and she was just getting so much work done.
It was mind boggling hard worker, perhaps the best culture builder I've ever seen
and able to call out while simultaneously maintain
a good relationship with the leaders around her.
I loved how well she performed. It also stressed me out like crazy
because I knew that at least twice a year,
she would be coming to me with her list of accomplishments saying how she was
doing and being clear that she felt a raise or promotion was in order.
And when I looked around at her peers and pay,
the problem was she was right,
which meant I had to go advocate for her again,
to a bunch of people that were kind of getting sick of my stories about high,
how high her performance was.
Again. Do you see how backwards this is?
Is it any wonder we struggle to retain the best talent and
we treat them as if they are the lowest common denominator.
We treat them as if they're average.
Is it any wonder
we don't like to think about positive consequences?
Ok, let's talk about what positive consequences can look like.
I think everyone here defaults to raises and promotions and
I just mentioned them a lot so fair enough,
but there's a lot more that can be a reward for a job well done
and to understand what motivates your direct report.
You need to talk to them about what they want and value.
Here are a few ways to positively reinforce people besides raises and promotions.
One, open up opportunities for them in an area they are interested in.
Maybe they've always worked on tech teams but really want
to try to work in a more narrative space.
Two, praise them publicly
that can mean a lot to people.
Three, give them additional responsibilities that they are excited to take on.
Don't skip the last part or they're just going to become frustrated.
Give them more attention
to help them improve faster.
Five, bring them into leadership conversations that they wouldn't usually see.
Six, ask and value their opinion about how the larger org should proceed.
Seven, give them more freedom and agency in their work.
Eight give them management responsibility,
huge boost for learning and career development to
make sure it's a path they're interested in.
And then there's some that are cheaper than
raises and promotions but do cost some money
like giving them an opportunity to go to conferences such as this one,
send them to advanced training, give them external coaching
to help them grow.
Now,
I'm not saying you do these things instead of
giving them raises and promotions if they deserve them.
But I am saying, don't feel limited to just those things.
And again,
if you don't know what besides raises and promotions they are interested in,
ask them
if you are creative,
you and the direct report can come up with a ton of things
you can probably do to reward them in their role and career.
This is especially valuable if you are working within hr systems,
that may be dramatically restricting your ability to increase salary or title.
If they truly are a high performer that you trust even
talking to them about the limits of what you can do
can lead to an understanding and a willingness to work through it.
Positive consequences are a crucial part of healthy accountability.
If your people are crushing it,
you should be excited to reward them fairly for all the value they are generating.
If you create a culture where positive consequence is normal,
you'll see more people stepping up to
solve big nasty problems and unlock amazing opportunities
because they know that the org is interested in rewarding them for their efforts.
OK. Last type of consequence, adaptive
so adaptive consequences are consequences that happen as a result
of all the stuff we didn't expect to happen.
That did
when you had a clear goal to deliver 15 fin characters by June and in the middle of May,
the outsourcer doing the final texturing suddenly stops working
for you because someone else bought out their company,
you are likely to fail to meet the goal.
If you're the manager,
you can go ahead and swing the negative consequences of that around.
But if you're paying attention at all,
the best outcome might be a failed goal in that situation because
emergency hiring a new and unvetted outsourcer just isn't worth the risk.
The right call was to accept the failed goal rather than
chance wasting a ton of money on work you can't use
now, that might seem like an extreme case. But things like this happen all the time,
adaptive consequences are actually a great initial go to
as you're building trust with a direct report.
When you first start having conversations about expectations,
negotiating and committing, you are likely to get those expectations wrong.
Some of that will be due to inexperience
by either of you. Some of it will be due to outside forces.
In either case, adaptive consequences.
Look at how well people responded rather than holding the strict letter of the law.
But wait, I hear you saying,
doesn't this invalidate the entire point of negotiation and commitment?
No, not at all.
If things stay largely the same,
that commitment and any consequences involved should follow.
But let's face it our plans are living plans. Our goals should be living goals.
If stuff changed a lot,
we look to learn and grow and encourage our direct reports to learn and grow.
That's adaptive consequences.
It's pointing out where learning should happen,
what we could do differently and how we want to respond better.
Next time,
a very influential boss I had in the military,
then Major Chandler once told me he didn't care if I failed the same mission twice.
He cared if I failed it
twice. For the same reason
that was unacceptable.
He was enforcing learning
growth is what we want. It's what we encourage.
It's a key part of how we nurture our direct reports towards higher performance
and better outcomes for their teams.
Adaptive consequences allow us to not be stuck in the binary of
either throwing a party hat or a punishment bat after outcomes happen,
they are about teaching and growing your people
by the way, even if there is no crazy Black Swan event that messed everything up.
I still prefer to use adaptive consequences instead
of negative consequences for the first few mistakes,
someone makes it will build trust
and you'll get to see if your direct reports thrive
or struggle when given feedback and an opportunity to improve.
Ok. There you have it consequences.
Negative,
positive adaptive having all three on the
table will help you create healthy accountability.
Getting back to that commit stage.
If the person you are holding accountable,
knows that positive and adaptive consequences are out there,
not just negative ones, they will be more willing to commit.
Once your direct report has committed,
we're on to the final step of the process.
Holding accountability. Ok? We stated expectations.
We've negotiated to a line on a final set and the person being
held to account has committed to those
expectations with an understanding that consequences,
positive and negative can happen.
They also understand how they'll be supported on their way.
Now it's time to hold accountability
this whole step, it's not about stopping anything.
It's holding accountability as in someone being held to account.
This is where you enact the consequences based on what has
happened versus the expectations that were set and agreed upon.
I want to call this out holding accountability is the only
truly necessary step for some version of accountability to exist,
but it's not going to be healthy
if you're in a position of authority over
someone and just use the hold accountability step.
It technically works.
They are held accountable.
They are also confused.
Remember, accountability is an external force.
This is why the whole step is the most commonly seen step.
Often in the absence of any of the others,
people are held accountable based on expectations.
They had no idea existed
rarely. This leads to surprise rewards
for exceptional work. More often than at its worst. You get punished,
blamed and judged based on invisible criteria,
leaving you confused and frustrated
the hold accountability step also completes our list of
the most to least common steps of healthy accountability.
Hold is the most common setting expectations I think is second,
negotiating expectations is third and committing to
those expectations is the least common.
I'm going to say this again, looked at through this lens. No one should be surprised.
Healthy accountability systems are rare.
OK? How do we go about holding accountability?
Well,
a basic way is to have an expectation to have something done by a particular time.
And when that time arrives,
you check to see if it's done and then consequences happen based on the outcome.
This actually works. All right, especially if you've done the first three steps.
Well,
imagine you and your direct report established a three
month set of goals or 90 day plan or whatever
it was negotiated and committed to at the end of the time period,
you took a look through the goals, you evaluated what was done, what wasn't,
what was learned and then you enact the consequences based on that.
I just say you are way above average for creating healthy accountability.
So kudos to you,
but I want us to do even better.
I want us to take a look at what hold really
looks like in the constantly changing world of game dev.
The first thing I want to call out our work and reality as Game devs is complex.
There's a lot of uncertainty and unexpected things happen regularly.
We never get through everything we wanted to get through.
No matter how well we plan it up front.
There will be unexpected events to react to things we learn
that require us to adjust course and stuff that frankly
takes way more time than we thought it would.
So imagine,
I get together with my direct report to create a
90 day plan and we walk through setting expectations,
negotiation and committing,
well, we've just prioritized what matters most.
But it is common for that prioritization to
change sometimes dramatically over the next 90 days.
So instead of waiting till the end of that time,
I make it a regular part of our weekly or maybe biweekly,
we're not want to check in on how we're progressing towards the goals.
What's happened that we didn't expect?
What are we realizing we forgot to put on the list?
What will we take off to make space?
How can I provide
my direct report better support to achieve their goals
by checking in often?
And as part of this hold accountability step, you're going to do three things.
One you allow for the adaptation of expect expectations to match reality.
So we aren't punished because the world changed around us
did half your team just quit to form a new start up.
Well, that's going to adjust what's possible, adapt to your new reality.
Don't pretend our original goals still make sense.
Second thing it'll do,
you're going to create many more opportunities for
your direct report to improve their approach,
be corrected.
If they're going down a bad path
or tell you you're not showing up with the support they were expecting
they and you get more chances to iterate on their way towards the goal.
Third thing you do,
you're going to build trust with your direct report.
You didn't just send them into the wild and walk back to your management,
Ivory Tower.
You care about the moment to moment progress and you
want to continue to set them up for success.
This means a lot to the people you're managing. If you don't believe me, ask them
note that when I say checking in here,
this isn't some status report where you go through the goals and they yell out green
or red for each item and then you give them a score and walk away.
This is a continued conversation about how the
expectations are or are not being realized.
It's unbelievably valuable.
Seriously.
If one of your direct reports knew that one of their goals that
you were relying on them to get done had just become impossible.
Would you want to know now
or at the deadline?
So the whole step actually becomes this ongoing conversation.
This also means that when you do meet the deadline,
it's not surprising to either of you both in terms
of what actually results and what the consequences will be.
Another thing to quickly cover with hold,
especially as I make this more of a an iterated continuing conversation.
Well, what, what should be the broad container? What's the timeline for this?
There is no one answer to this question.
It depends on the rate of change of your environment.
If everything is changing every week, having a threemonth plan is pretty useless.
But if things are relatively stable going through this loop
on a monthly basis might be a waste of time.
So I would take a look at the rate of
change in your environment when selecting my broad guideline,
not a rule
would be somewhere between two weeks for the really
pretty darn chaotic environment up to maybe 90 days.
I know we tend to do performance reviews in six months and 12 months cycles,
but going for 12 or even six months is a long enough time that
the odds that most of the expectations you set are still relevant are low
at minimum, you're going to be reprioritizing
more likely you'll be discovering entirely new
things and throwing out what's become irrelevant
regardless of the big cycle. Though,
I still recommend doing those weekly or biweekly check ins
before moving on. I want to dive a little bit more into trust for a moment in
systems with healthy accountability.
Trust is something that is constantly being
nurtured between a direct report and their manager
without trust. None of this matters without trust, no one will want to commit.
No one will trust what anyone commits to and generally
everyone will stay as far from accountability as possible.
But if you're following this model, it will build trust
and it will build it bidirectionally
an ongoing hold step that runs continuously with your direct reports teaches you
which ones you can give more leeway to and with higher confidence,
it teaches you how much you can expect and trust them
for the direct report. They are going to see you providing the support.
You said you would
and staying present with them as they hit bumps in the road,
they will also see you going to bat on their behalf
with others.
They will learn, they can trust you,
ok?
Because the whole step is an ongoing one.
You'll not just see the final outcome,
which is often the result of a whole host of different variables.
You'll get to see how they made decisions along the way.
You'll get to see your direct reports, exercising discernment.
You'll get to see and provide subtle or blunt
force direction to help them succeed as they're going.
They're off course.
And it will also mean that if you want to promote
someone and have to convince others that it's a good idea,
you're going to have a lot more ammunition in those conversations.
This makes positive consequences much easier.
I want to put this all together.
So let's look at what this actually looks like and
how we do this practically not just as abstracted steps.
Imagine you're a lead designer,
managing a mid-level designer,
they are working on a combat team and they're looking for the
compelling core game loop that you're going to build your game around.
First,
you provide your direct report with a timeline
that overall that cadence in this case,
we're clearly early in development.
We don't have a core game loop, right?
So we're picking a tighter cadence of one month.
there's probably a lot of change happening.
Second,
you ask them to create a list of expectations to bring to your next one on one
where you'll kick off a lining on what you
both hope they will achieve within that month.
You also create your list of expectations.
Third, you meet in the one on one and share lists,
there will probably be some overlap.
If you've worked together for a bit,
it might be totally different if this is the first time.
That's ok, regardless your job as the manager is to now lead the conversation,
negotiating towards something you can both get behind.
There are three categories you'll want filled out
one you want both have a clear and prioritized
list of what they will be attempting to accomplish.
Two.
You want to know what support they will be expecting of you
and how you plan to pave the way for them to succeed.
Three as much as possible, you want to be clear about consequences.
Do they expect a promotion if they succeed
and is that reasonable
if they fail?
Does that mean you'll need to step in more
directly to make sure the game stays on track?
Again, I lean towards adaptive consequences here. Early on
focus on the learning,
focus on the growth and focus on praising good decision making.
By the way, if we're talking about a month,
this should be a pretty short list.
A month goes by fast in game dev
fourth,
you ask them to commit if they are willing to do that, great,
if not ask about why and what would need to change,
renegotiate a bit.
See if you can reach a compromise here
and at minimum seek to understand their concerns.
They don't have to commit.
I mentioned that earlier but it does make everything a lot easier
many times they don't want to commit because as I mentioned,
commitment is scary and they've seen it abused in the past.
People pick up a lot of scars in our industry,
be willing to shoot low with your negotiated expectations first
to build trust.
Fifth,
talk about how and when you'll be touching base with them about how things are going.
If the time period you're evaluating is only a month long.
I might go for weekly sinks
sixth. Follow through on having those ongoing hold accountability
iterations
while I recommend a live conversation even a quick but scheduled
set of questions in Slack would be better than nothing.
Here's three to get you thinking one,
these are from the manager to the direct report.
How confident are you feeling about meeting the goals? Two?
What's taken more time or surprised you so far? Three,
how can I the manager provide you the direct report,
better support to meet those goals?
Be sure to ask that.
Third one,
some version of how you can help too many managers skip this step and fail to
realize that the power differential in the relationship
makes it hard for their direct report to ask
seventh
at the end of the month run through what's happened, set up the consequences,
positive, adaptive or negative, depending on what's happened,
then repeat the cycle.
OK?
What causes this model to fail?
You've seen the steps,
there are ways to mess this up.
There are things that will hamstring it.
There's a few things. So first, I want to talk about lack of transparency.
If either party is not transparent, healthy accountability becomes really hard.
If a direct report is concealing things or
worried about talking about what's actually happening,
it means we're not able to talk about what is real.
This happened to me once as the direct report,
I knew I was expected to get a content pipeline on track
and I also didn't want to fail. So I was
constantly reporting optimistically about how things were going when I was
in fact underwater with bigger problems than I knew how to solve
my manager might have been able to help me.
But I was so worried about people knowing that the problem was
bigger than I was letting on and bigger than I could handle.
I never said anything
when things didn't go. As I'd optimistically hoped,
I realized how unwise it was to not be fully transparent.
It delayed me moving to a different project I
really wanted to be on for probably six months.
We've covered this extensively already.
But on the other side,
if you're the manager and you're not open about what's happening in the org,
you're not talking to your direct report about what you
see that will blow up their efforts to meet expectations.
I'm not saying you have to tell them everything.
You know, some stuff is confidential, that's ok,
but you should be providing them insight
into how they're doing from your perspective
and informing and helping them work through the
big upcoming changes that will impact their work.
You have better, better visibility of those than they do.
Second, if trust isn't present,
the system won't work. So first transparency, second thing is trust.
I've just talked about this. I'm not going to belabor it.
Trust is essential without it.
Neither party can rely on the other
and both end up suspicious and protecting themselves
which causes trust to get worse.
If you've got trust problems that are, that are bad,
these four steps won't matter even if you execute them perfectly
because whatever is discussed isn't real
very similar to transparency.
OK.
So first, transparency, second trust, third,
the model will fail but not immediately if either side
fails to follow through, actually, not either side but mostly the manager.
If the manager fails to follow through,
if you do all the work to set expectations, negotiate the goals, support
probable consequences and then either party gets
too busy or pretends that happened.
Accountability is going to break down.
It's just going to be another process we did to
check a box without any real meaningful long-term cultural change.
Now,
if the direct report fails to follow through the
system still functions overall and can be broadly healthy,
it will probably lead to negative consequences at some point.
And if that continues long enough, for removal of the direct report,
that doesn't care about the expectations of the org
and their boss.
This is pretty rare.
I think usually if this breaks down, it's because both parties abandoned it
or the boss got too busy to follow through on their commitments and actually
continue the steps.
So maintain transparency,
build trust and honor what's been committed to and this is highly likely to work
objections. I get. All right. So
for managers, especially
all these wonderful ideas are great,
but you know what we are, that organization, it's toxic, it's unhealthy.
There's no good accountability here.
Well, the great thing about this model,
it's not dependent on anything outside of the relationship
you have with the people you hold accountability for.
Yes, I admit it is easier if the broad org understands and supports these efforts.
But even if they don't, you can create a local space of healthy accountability.
You have to be honest about where the limits of what you can do are.
Again,
imagine an environment where raises are locked by rigid
rules or promotions aren't allowed something like that.
But this doesn't stop you from building a healthy system for your direct reports.
Using this model,
it just limits some of the consequences you have at your disposal.
All the steps can work.
Even if you never tell your boss or anyone else, you are doing it.
Nothing we've described requires organizational buy-in.
And if you set this up and it helps you and your direct report succeed,
you might get asked how you did it and then you might get to spread the value around.
OK?
But what if you're the direct report?
You think this model is great but it's not up to you,
your manager and other senior leaders hold you accountable and
they don't know about the model or use it.
This is a problem.
Uh but it's not as actually as bad as you think.
I want to do a thought experiment. Many of you are probably managers.
If you're not imagine you are
now,
I want you to raise your hands.
If you would be really upset to have one of your direct reports,
one come talk to you to align on their expectations and goals.
Two negotiate what things are most important to you in the org
and three agree to provide you regular updates
on how they are progressing towards those goals.
So all those people would be really upset.
Yeah,
nothing. All right. Well,
I personally would be thrilled in my experience.
Most managers would be entirely not disappointed by this. It would help them
even if I as a manager already did a great job of communicating expectations.
Having a direct report show the initiative to come
and engage me in a conversation to create alignment.
This is everything I'm trying to train them to do. I would, I would be so excited
if you're a direct report and you want to use this method, suggest it
worst thing that could happen is they say no,
even if it's rejected, my guess is the initiative will be appreciated.
And if it is accepted
now you've shown that they,
that you value what they expect of you and that you
are interested in fulfilling the needs of the broader org,
not just doing whatever you want.
There's very little downside
as we close up.
I wanna talk briefly about people management because there is a huge
opportunity for healthy accountability to add
value in the relationship between managers
and their direct reports.
Some of you may be frustrated with how management has
failed you in the past or may be failing you.
Now,
I want to expose some numbers on management
according to some articles I found on the internet. So take this with a grain of salt.
85% of new managers do not get any training prior to becoming a manager.
That's the vast majority.
When I was a manager,
I got some training on it and I understood just how rare
and valuable it was because it was years after I became a manager
that I got trained as well as many others.
Out of curiosity in this room, how many people became a manager
uh before they receive any training on it?
Ok. So basically everybody,
how many people have never been trained to be a manager but are one
so a decent number of hands? Ok.
Yeah.
So
even if those of us that did get trained at some point,
can you vouch for the quality of the training?
I certainly can't.
Is it all about filling out employee time cards,
preparing performance reviews and properly rating employees in a nine box?
I wouldn't be surprised.
It is therefore no surprise to me that 59% of managers feel unsupported
and some of those managers probably didn't want to be managers in the first place,
but there was no career progression outside of that.
I know a lot of us think it's silly that orgs still work that way,
but it's really common, very, very prevalent in many industries
on the flip side though I want you to know that 84% of
us workers say that poorly trained managers create unnecessary work and stress.
Are you shocked by that? Because I'm not,
we as managers may be untrained and we
may feel unsupported in our role simultaneously.
It is easy for us to cause a lot of pain for a lot of people.
Something I say about leaders is when you're a leader and you make a mistake,
other people pay the price,
not just yourself.
Look, I'm not going to say creating healthy accountability will solve all of that,
but it will make it better than it is today.
So if you're a manager, engage in the process and effort of healthy accountability,
you may be surprised at how helpful it is
to those you need.
All right, that wraps us up. Thanks again for coming.
I want to give a final thanks to my wife Lara who supports me in more ways than I could
have imagined and also God for all the opportunities and
skills he's given me that I did not deserve.
If you want to reach out, I'm happy to chat.
You can contact me via email or the building better games website or feel
free to hit me up on linkedin and let me know you saw this talk
um right before we go into Q and A I, I've been told,
make sure you if you get the the scorecard thing for this talk, fill that out.
Let me know how I did, let me know,
let, let G DC know uh about that as well.
Um And so with that, we'll go to Q and A with our remaining
nine minutes.
Hi. Um Gr great talk.
Um I guess uh my question would be, where do you begin with this process?
So if you have a team that
has had managers and they have kind of direct
communication and stuff and provide a line of sight,
but there's never been like a full framework for this.
So that responsibility and accountability has always stayed on
the management side versus the direct report side.
So where would you first begin in order to
-- kind of make it a full more wholesome -- framework?
Are you
in the, are you the direct reporter or are you the manager in this case
manager?
Ok.
So,
oh yeah. Um
let me see.
How do you set this up in a system where and correct me if I'm wrong
there this system hasn't existed and all of the responsibility
for expectation setting has always just been on the manager.
Um How do you set up this, this frame this like a healthy accountability?
So,
um
for me and depending on how many people you manage,
I might try it out with one, I might try it with all of them.
I have a conversation and say, hey,
I have a model. I want to try to use.
It involves these four steps.
We're going to start with setting expectations, negotiating, committing,
and then I'm going to hold accountability and what I'm hoping we get out
of this is an aligned set of the most important goals for you.
And also an understanding of how I can support you
how we can create positive consequences and learn as you go forward,
how we can grow you.
Um
And
from that point, you kind of like the practical example I gave where you just,
you just start, start that process, say OK, cool.
So next time we have a one on one
set, the time frame, think about what that is,
you know, 90 days a month, whatever, whatever makes sense in your context
and say, can you bring what you think you're supposed to be doing in the next month
or whatever and then I'll bring what I think you're supposed
to be doing and we can have a conversation about that.
The places where this would be hard uh as I said are where people have a lot of scars.
Um So this has gone really badly for them in the past.
Um And that's where I,
I encourage managers initially to shoot low on what they actually, you know,
hold people to
um let people like ex excel and reward them and let them know that like this is,
this is actually what I want to see.
I want to see more of us. And then,
and that if you do
take on very aggressive goals and you fail to meet them.
It doesn't mean I'm going to punish you for that because maybe
they were really aggressive goals and I'm really excited that you tried.
And so again, things like adaptive consequences come into play,
um, rather than jumping to negative. Does that answer your question?
Ok.
Next question over
here.
Hi.
Uh Sorry if this is a bit long winded. But
uh I've known a lot of developers that struggled quite a bit
to break into the industry as we know it's very competitive.
Um
And when they finally get here
for them, the negotiation step seems to be
the one that's most out of reach.
For example, I've had colleagues that like are on work visas and
they are stuck in the position that you mentioned, which is like
working as hard as possible for as low as pay as possible without quitting.
They're kind of just there
for a person who might be in a position
where they don't feel they have the negotiating power
to question authority
or to
even question the tasks or the or, or bringing them to a reasonable conclusion.
What would you recommend a person in that position?
Do or take steps or like how could they
have be part of this healthy accountability process?
And this one is from the perspective of the direct report, correct? OK.
So this is the question is if you were a
junior person who's just joined the industry
and there may be outside constraints making it
very difficult for you to challenge your manager.
How would you go about trying to create a system for healthy accountability,
sort of from the bottom up?
I would
think about what expectations you want.
And then I would think about the four step model here
and I would suggest it and bring your expectations with you to your manager.
They may say, no, I'm, I'm not going to lie in that situation.
Like I said,
there's a power differential and what you're actually describing
where I can't talk to you about this.
The implication for me there is that there's not trust and as I said,
that will undermine this.
So even if we're going through the steps without trust, it's pretend.
Um So I would, I would get your expectations like, OK,
I think I need to get this done
in the next 90 days.
Let me bring that to my manager.
Maybe they're like, I don't care about that. I tell you what to do.
OK, guess what?
You're probably not going to have trouble setting up this model, right?
In that environment. They may be like, hey, your list is awesome.
I'm going to make some modifications to it. Well, great.
You, you just started on step one and step two.
And so talking to them about it, just introducing it.
If you have enough trust to do that, you can see how they respond.
I, I urge caution. Right. Because you can get burned.
I had that conversation and I don't recommend other
people have that conversation that you alluded to.
That guy didn't punish me for what I said to him.
And I know that there are people that would have, like, if I'd said that
if I'd had that conversation with someone in the military, it would not have gone.
Well.
Uh, so, so, yeah. Is that a good? Yeah. Yeah, absolutely.
And just really quick as from the manager's perspective, how do you
to make sure
that someone in that position
doesn't feel like they're in that position?
That's hard. It's over time. So that again comes down to that idea of trust.
You know, I once had a manager expose,
I, I already trusted him quite a bit.
He exposed to me some information that was relevant to me,
but he didn't have to tell me about it and I won't go into the details of it.
It wasn't, he wasn't like breaking any rules or anything,
but I think a lot of managers would have just skipped it. And he let me know that.
And what was interesting about that is it built my trust in him
that if something was going on that I needed to be aware of,
to be successful in my job,
my manager had my back. Right.
And that if, if I didn't know about it, it wasn't because he wasn't willing to tell me,
it was probably because he didn't know either.
And so over time you will develop as you prove
that you are a person of integrity that you follow
through on what you say you're going to do,
which is very important as a manager.
Um
as you demonstrate your integrity,
they are likely to trust you more and more and then this
system will become more and more valid because like I said,
I mean, I was totally in this situation
um where
uh you know,
I had that trust and I still was
optimistic
about what was going on to my own detriment and the detriment of the team.
I was working with
-- Makes Sense. Thank -- you. Sorry about the two
part question.
Uh I manage a team of volunteer moderators
in terms of like this model,
does it like change any in the face of
like a volunteer position as opposed to compensation?
And
how would I better set up like positive consequences when like I can't like,
give them money for the job?
So, um yes, it does change one of the things with any sort of volunteer organization.
And I've had some people talk about like they're doing a rev share dev project where
there nobody's getting paid and there's stuff like that,
look at some level and those you're going to
be relying a lot more on people being responsible.
So taking that internal side rather than you holding them accountable.
Um
I don't know what your consequence range
is in the environment you're describing where you're
working with volunteer moderators
but
whatever that is, think about. OK, cool.
These are the consequences, negative, adaptive and positive I can provide.
These are the ones I can't
and then talk to them about what they're, what, what might be valuable to them.
Right. Again, you don't, you don't have money to give,
but maybe there's other things that they would really like to,
that that would be a good reward if they were doing a really great job.
Um So kind of trying to figure out what your consequences are.
If there aren't any consequences,
then you're not actually operating in a
power differentiated business type of accountability.
You're more just having a conversation between people, either of which could
not care and walk away and there's nothing you can do about it
and, and that's ok like those, those exist um that there's nothing wrong with that.
Uh It's just not quite what you'd be doing here. All
right.
Thank you.
I think we're out of time. Yep. Ok.
I'm getting the nod. I'm out of time.
So, um thank you all for coming. I will be heading over to the alcove
right back here.
Um And if you want to follow up with more questions,
I'll be there for as long as people have.
I think I have it like the next couple of hours. So
uh thanks a lot for attending. I really appreciate it.