Tara Voelker: First off,
I want to thank all of you for coming.
It is the first session of the day. If you are like me,
you are super tired. I appreciate that you took the time
to be here because if it weren't my talk, it would be hard pressed
to get me somewhere at 9:30 in the morning.
Hello, everyone. I am Tara and today,
we are going to be talking about Evolve: An
Adventure in Accessibility Retrofitting. Basically I always say,
and I tell people this over and over, you should always consider accessibility
from the very beginning of a project. But what happens when you don't?
That is what this session is about.
If you want, you can also follow me on the Twitter.
It is right down there at the bottom (@LadieAuPair)
in case you have a question we don't get to, and you want
to ask me later. Fair warning, my Twitter account is mostly
pictures of cats and beer.
[Laughing]
About me, I have worked on some stuff. I always think these
slides are kind of silly because it is like saying, "Why you should listen
to me on this subject!" Basically, I have been in the video game industry
for about nine years mostly
working at AAA studios on stuff like
Saints Row II, obviously Evolve,
Bioshock Infinite, and Red Faction: Guerrilla.
I have also been in game accessibility for eight years,
starting with Able Gamers, and later becoming the chairperson of
the IGDA Game Accessibility SIG where I championed
some cool stuff. Then,
just last Monday there was the first ever Game
Accessibility Conference #GAConf. I was the
co-chair or co-director, or whatever you want to call it
of that conference.
I have done work in this video. Just trust me. I promise,
I am not lying to you.
In this presentation, what are we going to be talking about today?
Step one was how did we evaluate
our accessibility after the fact?
What did we eventually do to make our game more accessible?
What did we learn during this process? Then, we will talk about how you can
take what we did, use that knowledge to make your projects better,
and not make the same mistakes we did.
Obviously, the first question was how well did we do?
Something interesting about asking that question is,
you have to have a benchmark to grade yourself against.
We didn't actually have one. Although there are plenty of guidelines out there
on how you should develop an accessible game,
there isn't really a scorecard to check your game against.
That is where we started. We made one.
We took the guidelines that were published at
GameAccessibilityGuidelines.com, the Includification
Guidelines by AbleGamers, the SpecialEffect wishlist,
and then all of the recommendations by the IGDA
Game Accessibility SIG, and we combined them into a giant
feature list. Of course, we removed duplicates because
there were some. We kind of started off that.
In the end, we had about 150 unique accessibility
action items that we could check against
to see if we had done it or not.
Once we basically had this giant list of features,
we know not all features are created equal.
We evaluated each feature for a few different things. Number one was
its reach, or the number of people it would benefit. The next one
was the impact, which is the difference it would make to the
people it reached. And then, the cost. Now when we considered the cost,
we did that in the amount of effort that would
have been needed if we had done it originally. Not what the cost
of retrofitting it was, but if we had planned for it from
the beginning, how hard would it have been to
get this implemented? It was really convenient to get this list
together and organized in that fashion because
most of the list, particularly the Game Accessibility Guidelines
and Includification Guidelines, are kind of already bucketed
in the same way. Based on this information, we placed
each of the different features into a tier and we
assigned it a point value. Something basic would be
like subtitles. Just having subtitles
is a really basic feature and really easy to do would be 3 points.
But having subtitles that have optional letterboxing, multiple
size values, or repositioning options is a lot more work,
but makes the subtitles a lot better is 10 points.
It was kind of like, how much work did you put in for this?
We went through item by item, and we awarded points
for fully met goals, partial goals for
partial implementation or sub-par implementation.
This is like technically we meet this requirement, but it is not a good
user experience. Zero points for just not having anything,
or marking it as not applicable if it didn't work for us.
For example if there was a guideline in how to do
voice activation, we didn't have that so we weren't going to ding us
for not having something related to that.
What was our overall score? We ended up having like 64%,
so that is a D.
Not exactly a great score.
Some would say it is near failing actually.
[Laughing] Obviously we had a lot of room
for improvement.
We needed to figure out where to start.
We started going through the report card
and looking for those basic items first
to see where to start and what could be an
easy win. The key points we were looking to see,
like I said, were if any of those basic features were missed.
Then we went through and started collecting player
feedback. One of the areas we looked for was
in our forums and seeing what players were already
saying that they wanted, and kind of cross-checking those two things to see
if there was something that would be easy and it is already
something that players are requesting a lot.
Once we identified the list of features, we started scoping
out the work, and set our plan into motion.
What was the first thing we did? Actually, one of the most
requested features for game accessibility was amazingly simple,
and it had next to no cost. Gamers with disabilities often do not
know if they can play a game until they buy it,
bring it home, and open it. This is due to the
lack of information about the accessibility features
contained within the title. This information normally
isn't made public. Again, it puts these gamers with disabilities
in the situation that they have bought something that now they are stuck with,
because they can't return it. I guess you could trade it into Game Stop
for like $5, but that is not exactly a great value proposition.
All of the references, every list we looked at
just asked for this. We grabbed the game accessibility icon.
This little controller wheelchair guy,
which is available from One Switch for
Creative Commons use as long as you are denoting
game accessibility information.
We made a simple online post, and we also posted this in our forums,
that was just a factual list. We state
what features we had, the options associated with those features,
and we were honest about what our title didn't
have. Pretty early on, we decided that
we would rather be open about our game's features. And if we
didn't have something, be honest about it, and hope that in the
future we could be better. And maybe even deter someone from
buying our title in some cases, rather than having them
buy it and go through that experience where they just spent
their money on something they can't use. I was talking to one of the
co-founders, Phil, and advocating on why we should do this.
He was like, "Yeah, we need to put that information out there.
Not doing it would just be shitty." It was very nice
to get that kind of buy-in. I don't know if you guys have ever
been at a studio like that where you don't say anything
that could stop someone from buying your title. It was very
refreshing to be someplace that was honest and
didn't want to have the gamer buy something they couldn't use.
The next feature we actually got as one of the number
one requested things out of the forums, and it also fell into the
basic category on our list, was being color blind friendly.
One of the things we quickly realized was
we had a lot of UI elements that were using
color only to identify the state of things.
One example was our ping system, which used
red or green circles based on what you were pinging or marking.
The fix for this was really simple, and it actually inspired
us to make the ping system much more useful.
We ended up using a series of symbols
to denote what wildlife was what. You can see on
the example on the left, instead of a red circle, the Monster
now has a paw print icon. This plant that is going to eat you now has
an exclamation mark. I don't remember what
I was pinging on the far right, but that was something friendly so it just has
the less scary paw print icon. We were able to make
things more recognizable, give people more information, and
all of a sudden this section was now color blind friendly.
Something else that we noticed was in our game if
you were looking at player names, that was how you could
identify what class someone was in if you just didn't know the
characters. We realized that the names
were just colors. If you can't tell the difference between the colors,
you don't know what class that person is in,
unless you are super knowledgeable about the game. With that one,
we ended up doing something really simple. We ended up
just placing all of the icons
above the names so if you had Colorblind Mode turned on,
these icons would appear and you could tell the difference.
But we actually had some larger problems.
Now, I know this screenshot is probably a little blurry,
but I liked it because it showed one of our larger problems.
We had several in-game visual effects that
would either display the state on color, which was one problem,
but it was compounded with this problem.
Some visual effects were just getting lost in-game completely.
Here for someone who is red-green color blind, this red icon
in the green swamp would just get lost.
We knew early on that adding a
color filter was not the right answer.
Number one, color blind issues only apply to certain visual effects:
not everything, not the entire game. Furthermore,
adding a color blind filter could fix the problem,
but it would also make the game really, really ugly, and it could
potentially shift other colors that weren't a problem
into a problem state. We knew that was not going to be what
we wanted to do, but we still had to deal with this in some way.
This was obviously still a problem.
What we ended up doing was making an additional three
versions of the visual effects that the player
would select before loading into the game.
I mean, yeah. Let that sink in. That's right. For the features
we found causing issues with color blindness,
we ended up with four separate versions of that effect:
the one we shipped with, and then three additional ones
for the most common types of color blindness.
Obviously, the cost of retrofitting
Colorblind Mode for us was extraordinarily high. It literally
quadrupled the work of some of the visual effects.
But we knew this was something that
we needed to be aware of going forward, and we kind of
made it our internal goal to not introduce
anything new because we were still releasing Hunters and Monsters.
We didn't want to introduce a new character that would
need to be hooked up into the system.
In my screenshot here, I really like this screenshot
because you can see that
when we turned on Colorblind Mode, it is not
changing everything in-game. It is only changing these
problem visual effects. The only things that are different are the
footprints on the left, and the targeting red cue
in the middle. This is really important. There are people who do
Colorblind Mode wrong all the time.
Just let this soak in. Absorb it. If you learn something about
Colorblind Mode today it is please don't do a filter,
just address the problem areas.
Like I said, we ended up being smart.
Basically starting at the concept phase,
we would tell if a visual effect was going to be a problem
in Colorblind Mode. If a gun had two different states,
like charging and ready-to-fire, but the concept art
looked the picture on the left. We knew that wasn't going to fly,
and we would just send that straight back.
But if it had another visual
difference besides color, a second way of displaying that information
like the one on the right, we knew
that was going to work. That was good.
We could use that one, and then we would actually go about
building the visual effect. In the end, we did have
several additional updates to Colorblind Mode after the initial patch
that contained it. We updated even more UI elements.
We caught things such as in-game outlines
to make them also part of the system.
The class icon fix that I mentioned previously
ended up being so popular, we had non-color blind players
using Colorblind Mode so that they could see that icon.
In the end, we actually pulled that out of Colorblind Mode,
and made it is own toggle that was on by default.
That just goes to show accessibility features will be
used beyond your core player base,
and makes games better for everyone.
The next one we decided to tackle was remappable controls.
Although we had remappable keyboard controls on PC,
we didn't have anything for the controller,
meaning that console players were left completely
without the ability to remap. This was a highly
requested feature and incredibly helpful for gamers
with various impairments, or if they were using a specialty
controller that didn't work with our out-of-the-box control schemes.
It was interesting for me personally while I was digging
into this feature and pushing it to get made, I learned
at one time, this feature had actually been in development
but it ended up being cut. Although there were a couple
of people who had championed it previously,
they had kind attempted to simply duplicate the system that
was on PC onto console. It led to a kind of buggy design.
In the end, the result was a system that really wasn't
worth the effort, and so it got cut.
Once we decided that no, we are going back and we are going to
do this right and it is something we need to tackle, we actually
took inspiration straight from a previous GDC talk of mine, which
I am sure you all saw. [Laughing] No More Excuses,
Your Guide to Accessible Design. We implemented the button swap method.
Although I'm sure you all saw it, let me go ahead and
refresh your memory on what that was. We offered the player
different preset control schemes.
Evolve actually shipped with five different control schemes for Hunters,
and four for Monsters, that the player could choose from.
The next part of this process is making sure the
control schemes group different actions together.
If you look at this one, you can see Action/Reload
is grouped together on the left. Then on the right,
Action/Use Cover is grouped together. That is what I am talking about
when grouping things together differently. This mixture
of actions and not just rearranging the buttons
allows the player more customization
when they are trying to remap their controls.
Once a player decides on what control scheme they want, the player is simply
just given the option to switch what is mapped between two buttons.
Everything that is with that button goes with it.
It is not like I want Use Cover
to move with Action, but Reload stays there. No, you would
have to find another control scheme that offered that pairing.
I know a lot of people say, "But Tara,
why does my button do like six things?"
Just have everything that goes with Y
move in this method.
For getting this in and tested on Evolve, it was actually
really easy. We avoided a lot of the pitfalls of remappable
controls because we already had a remapping system
on PC. So our UI was already set up
to be able to update. We already had the UI
elements for all of these icons already available.
We had one small thing where like a Monster scheme and
Hunter scheme had something that was shared on controller,
but we just had to split that. That was pretty much all
we had to do. The largest loss of work was the first time
someone tried to do it, and it actually got cut.
Now, this was a system for us that had very little
overhead in terms of getting it implemented.
But as I was saying previously, if we didn't already have a PC remapping
available and we didn't already have all that art ready with UI,
this could have been something that would have been
way more expensive to add in after the fact.
These two features were the first accessibility patch
that we actually got launched.
Sorry. Excuse me.
We decided that we were just going to roll out the accessibility
features in chunks as they were ready, rather than waiting for
the game to be 100% accessible because that will never happen anyway.
In our weekly live stream, we took time to educate
our audience first on the idea of what game
accessibility is, and why it was important.
Not just why it was important to us as developers,
but to us as gamers. We showed off all the features
and told players how they could provide additional
feedback and requests. We really opened the door
for accessibility conversations with our players.
We wanted it to be a dialogue. The accessibility portion
of our live stream lasted over 30 minutes of Evolve's
weekly live stream on the Twitch channel, which has over 23,000 followers.
It was also hosted by the Turtle Rock Twitch channel.
I got to be on there; I was really excited.
There aren't many live streams that highlight accessibility.
For me personally, it was a big day.
But obviously we didn't just stop at
two separate features. Around this time,
we were actually getting ready for the launch of
Evolve Stage 2, which was the free-to-play re-launch of the game.
We wanted to make the game
even more accessible.
We ended up having a big update on our visual effects.
One of the things that became very apparent was there were a lot,
like a literal shit ton, of things happening in our game.
There were four different guns that could be fired.
There were area attacks, Monster attacks, and there was wildlife.
Some of it was very, very obtrusive and often happening
simultaneously. To be honest, a lot of these
visual effects were not only making it difficult for
players with visual impairments, it was just hard for players in general.
We took this approach of overhauling
the visual effects. We updated almost half of them with
the goal of clarity, less noise, and defined borders.
If you look at this example, this is Hyde firing
his flamethrower in a toxic grenade cloud.
The before and after effect is drastic.
On the left, you don't even know what he is firing at.
Obviously, these were big changes.
These changes were across the board.
If you look at this screenshot, you can see the
before and after of Kraken's aftershock.
Before, it was a completely fuzzy vortex. But after
the redesign, it had a well-defined and high-contrast
edge, that allowed players to know where the
end of this was and what was the hit zone.
This actually helped relieve a major problem
that we had been experiencing. Only players who played
against Kraken all the time and were really experienced,
knew how far you had to dodge to avoid getting hit.
You just had to know before these changes went in.
Now that it had a defined border in a
clear outline that was easy to see,
all players (even new players) knew where they needed to go
to get out of the way.
As I mentioned previously, we often had
multiple complex visual effects happening
simultaneously. Sometimes they would stack and stick.
Another thing we did
to help this was develop a unified language for all of our
visual effects to make them similar so you had a better idea of
what was happening and where it was going to happen,
so we didn't have too much happening in one place. Much like
with the concept art in dealing with color blindness, we had a very
similar approach to making sure we weren't doing things that
were going to be too busy, or might cause new conflicts,
and become a problem going forward.
One thing that also became clear to us was, although
our tutorials allowed for a safe space for the
player to learn the controls without dying, it wasn't a good representation
of seeing if a player actually understood the game,
the cues around them, or even just how to play.
Originally, we only offered Goliath
and Markov tutorials. Later, we expanded them
to include these hunt tutorials which were basically
advanced tutorials. Each one catered to a
specific character in that class, who was determined sort of as
the best starter character for that group, the one that was normally
the easiest to use. These tutorials allowed for everyone to get a better
grasp of the basics before moving on, and it was a space where
the player could take their time and adjust to any class
without pressure and with helpful guidance. In our original
tutorials, let's say we had a gamer with a specialty controller
who was trying to see if they could
use their controller to play. They couldn't learn that
from our original tutorials, because it wasn't
really playing. It was "You are here. Press A
to jetpack there". Not a very good representation.
With these advanced tutorials, it was much better
for someone trying to understand if they could play,
or trying to learn to play. Now, these tutorials were actually
one of the most complex things we ended up retrofitting.
It was a great experience for us as developers though.
Not only did we have to see if we first actually understood
how to play our game, we had to teach others how to play.
We ended up actually having to to develop a new audio
cuing system to ensure the most important VO, which was the voice over
from Abe and Caira who are leading you through this tutorial,
was heard above other noises.
We also had to develop a priority system for the
subtitles because we also didn't want them to get
stomped out by less important systemic lines.
If Caira was telling you something important about how to fight this Monster,
we didn't want Hank saying "Reloading!"
to push her subtitle off-screen. This was also
heavily scripted and just required
a lot of man work to get done. This was something that
doing it after the fact and trying to teach players
how to do this afterwards, required a lot of time.
Another one of our largest efforts
was actually updating our in-game UI
and having it match the existing visual effects.
Basically, there could be a disparity. A UI element
could be a blue bar on a Health property, but a
green cross in the world. So you may not realize that was
telling you the same information twice.
We also found out that we had a ton
of in-game occurrences that were either sound based
and sometimes so subtle that players even without
hearing impairments just didn't know that they existed.
Or the UI was so subtle or lacking contrast,
that they were overlooked infrequently and unused.
We took efforts to double-down on communicating
a lot of this information. This included being poisoned,
healing, and the defense matrix shown here.
Previously if someone was being shielded, they would have
a little bar on top of their Health bar.
Here as you can see, the visual effects are
right on top of the character. It is a lot easier to see.
If you had a defense matrix on you...
I should have gotten a better screenshot now that I think of it.
On the left, you can see you have that same icon
showing up for you. It looks the same.
The visuals are the same. They are bolder and a lot easier to see.
We also did this for shielding and fire damage.
Beyond this, we also took steps to
make a lot of other things visually clearer.
There are visual tells like dead carcasses. If a Monster
killed a wildlife and went on his way, that carcass
would be there to let you know the Monster had gone this way.
If you couldn't notice the carcass, obviously that is not helpful.
We ended up putting outlines on them, so you could
see them more clearly. We also did the same thing for
elite wildlife. They had like a tower of light because they offered you
buffs if you kill them. You want to kill them,
but if you can't find them, it doesn't do you any good.
We also added new UI for a major gameplay events
such as teammates dying, being revived, and that kind of thing.
Of course, you can't add
UI elements for everything. That would be terrible.
We also decided to put an in-game announcer, who was capturing
a lot of these events. If something was there visually but maybe
not strong, and wasn't something we thought should have a UI element,
the VO of the announcer could help reinforce
that and display that information in a second way.
Like I said, we just kind of went crazy.
We got all sorts of new UI things.
We had the ping that changed.
Now all of a sudden if you are harpooned,
you get an icon for that. Again, it is stuff that we had a lot of
things we just kind of expected players to figure out.
Like at one point, we updated how Behemoth's armor worked.
No one knew what was happening, so we ended up adding  information
for that. We are telling you when your drop ship is coming.
Really, there was a lot of information we realized
that if you just didn't know it, then
you are not going to get it from in-game anywhere.
That was a lot of what we were doing.
But one of the other things we realized, and I think that kind of
goes in tandem, is that Evolve had a difficulty problem.
We found that our gameplay was frequently inaccessible.
If one player was
"underperforming", as it were, it could ruin
the entire team and put them in a situation where they couldn't recover.
It was creating this extraordinarily
toxic "git gud"
kind of community, which obviously what we wanted.
One of the things we did was change our gameplay
to more evenly distribute these gameplay tasks
and make it so that more people could
take a chance at doing some of this stuff.
It meant that if there is a struggle for a certain player
with a particular class, the team could balance it out and still have
a chance at winning. We wanted to create gameplay that was inclusive,
where a whole team could work together rather than punish
new or inexperienced players, or a player who was struggling
because they weren't good at a particular class.
We ended up changing a lot. We
reworked three of the major class abilities,
which were kind of like staples in the game.
For me, the best example of this is the
mobile arena, or as players just called it: the dome.
It originally could only be thrown by the Trapper.
The Trapper would have to throw it to where
they thought the Monster was going to be.
For some players, such as myself, being a Trapper
was legitimately stressful. I, personally, lacked both
the skill and reflexes to capture the Monster. I was known
for throwing domes and catching absolutely nothing in them.
It had a significant recharge time. Once I threw that dome,
I missed the Monster, and then we all have to hang out for another
two minutes until I get to try again. At which point, I would
probably still miss the Monster. We changed it for Evolve Stage 2,
so that all classes could throw the dome.
Even better, when you went to throw the dome,
it came down automatically over the Monster. So now, anyone could throw it,
and you were guaranteed to capture the Monster.
We had to make some changes to how the dome worked
once you captured the Monster because of that. But it was still
so much better. For myself and a lot of other people,
the class went from something we literally dreaded, to something
that was new and exciting to explore. Some of
the characters even got more than one class change.
With Behemoth, we actually took time to not only redo his abilities,
we also fixed tons of long-standing bugs.
He basically got a full re-factor.
We did some other stuff like tinkering with
how our aim assist worked, and changing our
controls for the sensitivities on our controller
to make it better. I mean, we just went like ham.
I have never worked on another project that basically took
so many core tenets of gameplay and were like, "Fuck it!
Doing it live! Again! Patching every week.
We are crazy people." But it was all better
and it made a lot of improvements.
As I mentioned earlier in many cases, gamers with disabilities
don't know if they can play a game until after they buy it.
At which point, they will find out it doesn't work.
That is why it was so important for us to publish
that list of game accessibility features that we had.
In-game after we went free-to-play, we had a similar problem.
Now anyone could download the game, anyone
could play for free, but you could still spend either
real money or in-game currency to
unlock new characters, unlock new perks, etc. Again,
we really had no way for any particular player
to know if they liked that character or if they could even
use that character or that perk without
that initial investment. Again, we
wanted to give the players this information. For us, we figured
the best way to do this was just remove the problem by implementing
a try before you buy system for all characters and perks.
The player is actually able to go into single-player,
and play anything, any of the characters, and any of the perks
as much as they wanted for no cost to them. They could
go in and see if they liked it before they spent their money.
Obviously, playing in single-player isn't quite the same
as playing in multiplayer. So we also offered
free characters on rotation every week so that players
could try these new characters that they didn't own
in multiplayer as well as single-player.
Something else that was really fun was for
Global Accessibility Awareness Day, which is in May every year,
we saw Uncharted 4's awesome video that they
released about their game accessibility features as part of
Global Accessibility Awareness Day. Basically, I got super
jealous because I was like, "We've done accessibility work.
This isn't fair! Why does Naughty Dog get an awesome video?"
[Whispering] So I was like, "We should do something. We should do something
right now." So literally right then we were like,
"Well, what can we do? We can do a stream!"
We didn't even go to our
streaming area with a proper green screen and all that stuff.
We didn't even do that. We rocked a whiteboard up
behind my desk and erased it, put a camera on my desk, and we were like,
"We are doing it here. We are doing it right now."
Yeah, we just did a Global Accessibility Awareness Day stream
about Evolve just straight from my desk in the office. On the stream,
we talked about some of the changes that were due to be released
in our next big update. These were some of the things that
I have kind of talked about up to this point.
We talked about some other changes that were going to be
coming up as well. What was really great
was the amount of people who showed up to the stream,
and very few of them were actually gamers with impairments.
They were gamers who were excited to learn. The stream was also a
great opportunity for us. Again, our low-budget at my desk
stream with a whiteboard as a background got picked up by a few blogs
who were rounding up the news for the day for
Global Accessibility Awareness Day. So we got exposure
through accessibility, that we wouldn't have otherwise gotten.
We also announced two other features that, at the time,
didn't have a cemented ship date that were still in the works.
Now, one of these features was closed captions.
This was a feature we actually started developing
way back at the same time as remappable controls and Colorblind Mode,
but it didn't get done in time for the first patch.
Although hooking up the system to give the
options of subtitles or closed captions was done
really quickly without many issues, the major
stumbling block was actually what sounds should be triggering a cue.
What sounds do we have in-game that are
actually really important to gameplay?
Along with the engineer who built the system,
I took a stab at making a first draft list of what sounds
I thought were important and should be triggered with the system.
Once I had the list, I brought it over to our
balance group. Our balance group was comprised mostly
of QA that we had hired out of the competitive community
that would make sure when we made changes,
we weren't breaking our game at a super high level.
They knew how to properly utilize every cue in-game,
so I brought it to them. Here is
an accurate rendition of how our conversation went.
"Hey guys, look. I have this list of awesome game accessibility
things that should trigger sound. Can you give it a once over?
I'm sure it is perfect."
"Uh Tara, you left Spotters off the list."
"I have no idea what you are talking about."
"Tara, don't you know? Spotters make a noise when they hear the Monster."
"No, I didn't know that."
[Laughing]
Although I will admit I don't have the best hearing, I had no
idea that sound was even in-game. That was just one of the
many sounds I learned were in-game that meant
something, that I had no clue about.
This, kind of coupled with the UI changes I mentioned earlier,
were just another way we had information that
wasn't getting to not just our core players,
but especially those who had impairments.
What ended up happening with this was at the same time
we were trying to identify the sounds, we had started making
a lot of these crazy gameplay adjustments.
We ended up holding off until after the adjustments
were made and seeing what new UI we were adding before we went to
put sounds in the closed caption system,
so we could kind of wrap our head around what wasn't being
reinforced in some way. Unfortunately, this was a feature that
never shipped. It was still in progress when Turtle Rock's
contract ended with 2K for Evolve.
It was something that I was personally really excited about, so
I was pretty bummed when it didn't get out.
The other one was the comm wheel.
One of the things that had become very,
very apparent was if you weren't using a mic,
or couldn't use a mic, our game was
really impossible to play. Communicating with your
teammates and other players was key. Sure, on PC
you had in-game text chat. Number one, that wasn't
always fast enough. If you are in the middle of a fight,
hitting Enter to type stuff is not
very efficient. There wasn't actually any way
to chat on console at all. If you were on console, there was
no way for you to talk to your other players if you didn't have a mic.
We started developing a comm wheel.
This is the original concept art. Unfortunately,
I wasn't able to get an in-game screenshot of
what it ended up looking like.
It was fairly true to this. Basically, our goal was to identify
the most important things you need to tell your teammates.
I'm down. We should group up.
That kind of stuff like heal me, blah, blah, blah.
Once you triggered it,
it would have some sort of in-game visual effect.
For example if you wanted to say group up here,
a little visual effect popped up in the world
to show you where you wanted to group up.
Honestly, the largest problem we encountered was
trying to have a comm wheel that nicely integrated
with both platforms, in terms of controlling it.
Since we used so much real estate, on the controller particularly,
already for everything that you could do; we had
playtested it, were still kind of tweaking it to
make it a truly great usable experience,
and also around that time was when our contract ended with Evolve,
this was another thing that was in progress that didn't get to ship,
but we were pretty excited about it.
What should you learn about
Turtle Rock and Evolve's adventure in accessibility
retrofitting? Some of the things we implemented weren't
that much work to add them in after the fact. But some things
that should have been stupid simple, like Colorblind Mode, ended up
being huge endeavors. But none of this stuff would have been
that difficult or hard if we had just thought about it early in development.
If one person had mentioned it or kept track of it,
maybe we wouldn't have made so many mistakes to begin with.
I know this doesn't sound like an actual lesson,
but apparently it is worth repeating. Pre-production
is the time to think about accessibility.
Doing accessibility from the beginning is not expensive.
Retrofitting accessibility can be incredibly costly. Please don't do it.
The other thing we learned is you know your game.
You know how your game works.
But to really understand how players engage your game, you need
playtests with people who do not work on your project.
At minimum they should be on a different project, friends or family,
or people from outside your studio who don't
know your game like you do.
Get some user research up in there, up in that business.
We knew how to play our game, but we needed to see
if other people did. One of the things that I
was also really jealous of.. This talk should be subtitled
"Tara, Jealous of Naughty Dog." [Laughing]
We didn't have the resources to do it, but one of the things that Naughty Dog
did when they were putting in their game accessibility features
was they actually had gamers with different
physical impairments come in and test it.
That was something I would have loved for us to have
the time and resources to do. If you get that chance, do it.
Another thing was a lot of the changes that were
massively beneficial to gamers with disabilities,
weren't always even proposed for accessibility reasons.
They just happened to have a huge impact for these gamers while
improving the experience of the core audience.
Most accessibility features fell into this category.
We didn't implement a single accessibility feature
that "hurt" the core audience.
That is something I have to fight all the time. I get told, "Oh, but
no one will use this. Core gamers won't like it."
That is just absolutely not true.
Don't think that, that is bad.
Lastly, our accessibility efforts
wouldn't have been nearly as successful if we had not
told people about them and gotten buy-in from our community.
We shared this information on our live streams,
our forum, our social media accounts, and we created
a dialogue with our players. We created an avenue
to get feedback from them. We became
more connected with our player base.
Really, the coolest thing about this was
we created our own little army of accessibility
advocates out of our players. Users in our forum
were helping other players find what they need.
The forum members were tagging devs and saying, "Hey,
did you see so-and-so's request? I think this falls under accessibility."
Or in some cases, they would want a feature and ask us,
"Hey I was interested in this. Would this also help someone with an impairment?"
That is awesome. They were getting
empathy for these other gamers.
Even today, they still tweet at me cool
accessibility stories. Or if they see it in the news,
they share it with me, and they are excited about
helping more gamers game. I actually have
something to back this up. One of the coolest
things that happened was SHARA, which is
Shane and Tara (really official)
sponsoring #GAConf
or the Game Accessibility Conference that happened for the first time
last Monday. At Turtle Rock, the
now Community Marketing Manager, Shane and I,
we would just stream us playing video games and
making mixed drinks after work on Tuesdays.
Collectively, we became known as Shara. Shane and I
were both working at the Game Accessibility Conference and
at the time, we were still doing fundraising for the conference.
We decided it would be awesome to try and raise money
to become a bronze level sponsor on our
goofy-ass Tuesday Twitch stream. So we brought it up one day,
and within an hour we had raised the funds.
These names on the right are
just Twitch users, with the exception of MommieAuPair who is my mom,
who decided that they loved games
and they want everyone to be able to play games.
They put their money towards the cause.
By talking about accessibility with your community,
they will grow as people, they will get empathy,
and it comes down to gamers want to play games.
Gamers want other people to be able to play games.
For us, like I said, they literally put their money
behind us to help us teach other game developers
how to become more accessible and help everyone.
You may be interested, at this point, on doing your own
accessibility adventure. I was going to go ahead and
go over, in a little bit more detail, what
we used to make our report card.
The first one is Includification, which is done by
a really popular charity for disabled gamers here
in the US called AbleGamers.
You can download it as a .pdf, or they have their website.
For me, what is really nice about this is
it gives you empathetic stories.
They will be like, "Hey, here is a feature."
Then, they will also either give you a real life scenario like,
I see that you are trying to ban
this type of third party feature in your game.
Well, let me tell you a story of how because another
studio was doing that, this girl with cerebral palsy
was no longer able to play her game because it was
flagged as cheating software. It gives you lots of
heartfelt examples on
why some of these features matter. It also has some
great letters from the community and
other game developers. If you need
emotional validation on why the work you are doing is good,
this is a great list.
The other one we used was the Game Accessibility Guidelines.
This is actually the one I prefer because I don't need that stuff.
I just want a straight list of do you have this,
who did it best, who did wrong, etc. Let me learn.
This is at GameAccessibilityGuidelines.com.
It was put together by tons of
different accessibility advocates
that, like I said, worked together. It is a living document.
They update it fairly regularly with either new examples,
new cases, new best case examples, etc.
Like I said, this is
one that I reference all the time.
The other one was the IGDA
game accessibility special interest group.
They have a set of guidelines. This one is
a little bit more... The other ones
have been more recently updated, but it is still really good.
What is really awesome about the IGDA game accessibility website
is they have an awesome resource page that links out to
tons of places to get additional information.
You can also just email
anyone on their email list. If you have a question like,
"I want to do this. I am not sure how,"
you will get like 10 responses within two days from other
accessibility people who will either point you in the right path,
give you the resources you need, or tell you how to do it.
It is a great tool to find
people who can help you.
The other thing I did, was if you go to this
terrible, long URL... [Laughing]
Sorry this is what Google did when I published the
document. You can actually go and download the
scorecard that we used, if you want to have your own scorecard.
It is pretty easy. On the left, we have the item.
If I could link easily to one page, I did.
We have the available points, what type of
limitation you had, the awarded points, a dozen formulas,
and then it spits out a number at the end.
I will leave this up for another second so you can take
a screenshot because that URL is terrible.
That is really it. I am going to
take some questions. I am also going to remind you right now to please
fill out your surveys and tell everyone how great I was.
There is a microphone right here.
If anyone has questions, you can come up and ask.
Let's take some questions. What do we got?
Come on. Here we go.
Attendee: What feature did you most want to put in
that for whatever reason either time, budget, or whatever and
you just couldn't? Tara: I think, for me personally,
it really was the closed captions.
Especially since
Turtle Rock did the original Left 4 Dead, and it had closed captions.
It was one of the first games that was kind of recognized
by the accessibility community as having closed captions.
That was one that I was always really sad didn't go out
because Turtle Rock had kind of set this benchmark of
"hey, we have closed captions". Then unfortunately, Evolve didn't.
It was both needed and I had like an emotional investment
of wanting to get it out, so I was sad that it didn't.
Attendee: Hi. First time caller, long
time fan. [Tara laughing]
Attendee: What can platforms be doing and what can middleware
be doing to help make this process
of adding accessibility to your titles easier?
Tara: I was actually just talking with some of
my friends at Ready At Dawn at the Oculus party last night.
They came up to me and they were like, "Tara, I really, really love
that there is the backup of platform level remapping,
but they want an easy way". So if a
player does want to remap their controls, they would love to have
a way to basically read some sort of API or something.
This player wants their controls remapped to be like this
and then the game will be able to look at that file and load it up,
and do it that way. I think there is a craving for a
"hey, if they are using these accessibility features on
the console level, let me as a game look at that stuff,
or look at that stuff more easily so that I can mirror
those same choices they are making at a platform level, in my game."
Yes, what do we got? Attendee: In terms of convincing
your studio to make good choices about accessibility, did you have a really
compelling source of stats or anything about player accessibility needs or
disabilities? Tara: Yeah, I did and it was
actually really funny. With Turtle Rock,
when I went to convince them that we should be doing it,
I had a whole presentation together. 22% of Americans have an impairment
that could affect the way they game.
I did. I had all these stats ready.
A low-ball estimate is 9% of players are color blind.
I put together like a 20 page deck. I was like,
"We got this." I was on like slide two
and Chris and Phil were like, "We just want to be good people
and have people play our game." I was just like, "No, but I
worked really hard." [Audience laughing] "I've got transitions;
can we just like go through it? I have this star wipe in here I am really proud of."
Attendee: You used a star wipe. You are so lucky, I have to say.
Sometimes you need to convince them basically.
Tara: Every other time I have gone to have that battle...
I think the fact I called it a battle shows
how it went, which was why I prepped this
whole talk before I even went to talk to them. I assumed
I would have to go in and say, "Here is the business case. Here is why
it makes sense. Here is how we can reach a broader audience,
and improve our core players' experience."
Turtle Rock were just like, "No, we are good people; let's not be shitty."
Attendee: What? Yeah, that is great. Any source that you
would use if they were harder to convince? Where would you go
to find good player disability stats on platform from now?
Tara: Ian Hamilton's Twitter account. Attendee: Hey, Ian.
I have been looking for him actually. Ian Hamilton: We used to work together.
Attendee: We worked together doing stuff. Tara: Yeah, just ask Ian. [Audience laughing]
Attendee: No, I am too intimidated by him. Thanks.
Tara: Yeah, but I think you can also get a lot of that information
in the guidelines that I mentioned earlier. They are kind of peppered
throughout. The IGDA website does
have some of that basis information. Or like I said,
@IanHamilton_ on Twitter. He just posts relevant articles
all the time. There you go. Follow Ian on Twitter.
Attendee: Hi. I was wondering how did you balance making...
You have all these UI elements for accessibility,
but how do you balance having an
intimidating UI versus an accessible one?
Tara: Yeah, that was something that was hard for us.
It wasn't so much intimidating for us,
as cluttered because we had a lot of things happening.
For us, the big question really became
does this need to be UI? Or is there another way
that we can reinforce this?
Sometimes instead of a UI element, it became a visual effect.
Sometimes it became something we would add a sound for,
but ensured that it was captured in subtitles.
We did kind of go about the process of identifying
key things that were being missed,
and then adding them first. Then for stuff more on the
periphery we really looked to see does this need to be UI?
Or, can we give this information in a different way?
And just playtesting.
Is this too much? Is this too intrusive? Do players understand it?
That kind of thing. Attendee: Thank you.
Attendee: Hi, did you make any changes based on
players with epilepsy by chance?
Tara: We did, actually. We cut the intro trailer.
We found out after we had shipped.
This was only for Evolve Stage 2 since it didn't get brought over to consoles.
We actually got contacted by
(I am blanking on her name)
a woman in the UK who,
I don't know how it happened, but she
had run parts of Evolve through
the test that shows
if you have patterns that could trigger epilepsy. We found out
in the very beginning sequence that Markov with his lightning gun,
actually hit that pattern. We just cut it,
which worked out great anyways because we were like, "We need a lower install."
Great, here! Let's get rid of this video anyway.
It could cause seizures.
After that, it was definitely something that we were more aware of.
I am going to be honest, even as an accessibility person,
I frequently forget to consider epilepsy.
That was the main change that we made.
For some reason, the in-game version wasn't hitting the pattern.
It was something about this pre-rendered cut scene
specifically that could cause problems with epilepsy.
Attendee: Thank you.
Attendee: Thanks for the talk. My question
is beyond subtitles and UI. Were there any
other common feature requests from deaf gamers?
Tara: The comm wheel was the other big one.
The fact was that there wasn't a way to communicate with other
players if you couldn't hear them on console. Like I said, on
PC it wasn't so bad because there was the text chat.
In the event of quick action
it is not like, "Oh my god, there is a Monster!
Let me hit Enter and start typing." That is not as good.
Which was why we wanted to get the comm wheel out so bad,
so we could allow for quick communication for people
who couldn't hear or even talk
with other players. So really, the comm wheel.
Attendee: Okay. So there wasn't much feedback in terms of
game flashes or base sounds?
Tara: No, but I think it was
because like I said, there was so much information that
even core gamers didn't realize were being transmitted by sound.
People didn't know that they didn't have the information,
so obviously deaf gamers weren't hearing about
things they didn't know because the core gamers didn't know.
This is a problem in and of itself.
I think if more players had realized how much
more information we had been given by audio alone,
I think there would have been an increase.
You could hear the Monster sniff,
if the Monster was looking for the Hunters. If you are a Hunter, you
can hear that. It was so quiet. That was another thing where I was like,
"Oh, that's an audio cue we have in-game? I had no idea."
Like I said, I think if more core gamers
had known the kinds of sounds that gave information, I think the
deaf gamers would have been more aware that they were also missing it.
We were so bad at just letting people know to begin with that
there weren't a lot of requests. Attendee: All right, great. Cheers.
Attendee: Hi, thanks for your talk. I am interested in
kind of the conflict between engaging your high-skill cap
players and the introduction of accessibility
features, which could potentially be called "dumbing down" the game.
How do you resolve that? A good example that you spoke about
would be the mobile arena. How does that balance come into play?
How do you resolve that desire to provide a
high skill cap for certain players?
Tara: I worked a lot with the balance team directly. What we ended up doing
was we started thinking about
the range of our skilled players.
If you think about this as your range
of skill available to players, for us
step one was bringing up this bottom bubble.
You can still play up here if you want.
You still have to know, or be faster,
etc., than these players down here.
We wanted the base level to be a little bit higher up.
That was really when we started thinking
how can we bring this bottom level up, while keeping
people with super fast reactions or super great timing,
and allowing them to climb up to the top.
For example when we changed the
global arena so that anyone could capture the Monster,
that was when we realized now we have a different meta-game
that is happening within the dome. We needed
to provide an opportunity for the Monster to be able to get out of it now
because he would always get domed, where before he would
dodge. If you were a good fighter,
you could get out of the dome quickly.
Like I said, really for us,
it was about bringing up the bottom players while letting
the top players stay up there without taking away.
If we took something away from them that would boost them up higher,
then we would give them something to replace it essentially.
Attendee: Thanks. Just as a kind of follow up,
because no one is waiting, is there like a communication
aspect to that out to your community?
When you made those changes, did you receive any negative feedback from people who
perceived this as a negative change? How did you address that? Tara: Oh, yeah. Tons.
Attendee: Exactly. Tara: We ruined our game! We hate gamers.
We hate our game. We are ruining it. We know nothing about our game.
We know nothing about how to play.
It was really interesting. There were like two camps.
There was the first camp that was like, "Oh my god, this is great!
Now I can play with other set of friends, and all this other stuff."
There are still people today who are like,
"I am loading up the Evolve beta branch because classic Evolve is better."
[Audience laughing]
There are always going to be people like that. For us, we worked
really hard to communicate the changes and why we were doing them.
We were able to win over a lot of people
by just having a dialogue. I think
if we had just been silent, like we are making these changes and we are not
talking to you about it, it would have gone over super, super poorly.
Especially because a lot of the times, we would try to
explain things to them before they actually saw it.
We would warn them. "Hey guys, we are going to make this change.
This is why we are going to make this change."
[Shouting] "Oh my god I hate you; stop ruining Evolve!"
We were like, "No, we swear it is making it better."
[Audience laughing]
Then we would do stuff to back that up.
We were public with our telemetry. We were like, "Hey guys,
so we are changing this Monster because
this Monster is just not very good right now. [Shouting] "That Monster is
the best Monster! That Monster always wins." "Ok, well looking at the telemetry,
that Monster only wins 16% of the time. Maybe you are just really bad?"
[Audience laughing]
We put that information out there so that they could see it.
Like I said, we were explaining why we were doing things. Most of the time,
we got buy-in. Of course there were some grumpy Guses, but they are always
going to be vocal anyway. Attendee: Okay, thank you very much.
Attendee: Hi. What were you doing about accessibility
for players that don't really have a disability,
but are really bad with observation and awareness?
I think a lot of the changes we were making...
For example, the announcer was something like that.
I know I got really self-involved
when I would play as Bucket.
I would frequently not pay attention if my teammates were dying
because I was too busy having fun shooting rockets.
Being able to have the announcer there saying,
"Your teammate has died". And you are like, "Oh, shit
I should have been paying attention."
Like I said, we increased different
cues and more prominent UI elements
to really put the stuff that you should pay attention to
in your face. We tried put it
subtly over here on the right. [Whispering] Hey, someone is down.
There is a little arrow over here that is pointing that someone is down.
No, no one saw that. A giant thing in the middle of the screen
that says "So-and-so died!" It was like, "Oh, ok.
I can't miss that because it is right here." For us, it was really identifying
what should people not miss? What do they have to know?
Just put it in their face. They have to see it.
Attendee: Thank you. Tara: I think I have time for one more question,
if there are any more questions. All right.
Attendee: Just a simple one. You mentioned that there was a Colorblind Mode.
Where did you put that in terms of
selecting it, and why did you put it there? [Laughing]
Tara: I think we ended up putting it under...
Visuals? I don't think...
[Laughing] So apparently number one, I don't remember.
I don't think we thought that hard about it.
Sorry, that is not a good answer.
But if I had to go back,
I would love for Evolve just to have had
an Accessibility menu. Again, this talk should be
subtitled: Tara, Jealous of Uncharted.
For example, the latest Uncharted (Uncharted 4) just has
an Accessibility menu where all of these accessibility features are in there
so you can go look, and find them in one place. You frequently do need to
to use them together. So if you are low-vision
and you need to up contrast, you are
probably also going to want to have your aim assist cranked up
a little bit. Putting all of those in one menu would make it really
easy to get to in your one-stop shop. So if I had to go back,
I would love for an Accessibility menu. That is it.
I am out of time. I will be drinking a tea for like
10 minutes over in the wrap-up area, if you have any questions you are
dying to ask me. Otherwise, you can follow me on Twitter @LadieAuPair.
Please, please, please fill out your speaker surveys
and let everyone know that I was awesome. Thank you.
[Audience applauding]