So welcome everyone.
This is uh
a movie game
called uh Avatar Front is a Pandora. So naturally, this talk is a sequel
to the talk that I did in 2020
which was finding space for sound,
the environmental acoustics of uh Tom Clancy's division two.
Uh I have a couple of caveats to point out one
of them is I will use the term emitter a lot.
And what that is
in Snowdrop engine world
is a virtual render context that has a position and an orientation
that may or may not be used by the sound designers.
And uh all of the videos I've made are in stereo fold
down. So unfortunately, you won't get the full benefit of object mixing.
So just imagine in your mind when you're hearing the stereo, how great it would be
if it was an atmos, but it isn't
other spatial audio systems are available.
So
my name is Robert Benton. My pronouns are they then
and my job title is
Snowdrop Audio architect. Uh What does that mean?
I'm an audio programmer by trade.
Uh I steer the roadmap for the audio tech within the snowdrop pipeline
and snowdrop of course is a uh an engine within
Ubisoft that we use for making lots of different games.
My background is in MPEG Codex originally music tech and cinema, audio
and this year is my 10th year in the games industry.
So to summarize what we're going to be talking
about today are two things bubble space 2.0.
In the last talk, we talked about bubble space.
I just want to show some things that have happened in the last five years.
It might be interesting
and slap
back 4.0
So to be clear
what we shipped with division two was slap,
slap back 3.02 other versions before that
never got shipped to the light of day.
So I'm keeping track in case you're wondering,
I don't remember there being a three or a two Y you heard three.
OK. Let's get started. So bubble space 2.0
uh
What is it?
So what we're doing is is that we are
devising a system for finding the free air around the player.
So in analogy like this with a division player,
it's finding the best fit cylinder in a 3d space.
And that's the version we shipped in 1.0 was shipped in division two.
Um
The tightest fit cylinder is about the
azimuth plane
and the height of it is from above the player's head.
Uh and it uses ray
casts, it uses them radially and
above the player's position.
Uh so how it did that and I did have a very sort of simplified diagram here.
It would do out three radially and then find a new position,
do another three and another three and another three.
And then it would rotate round. So it's kind of like a
radar.
Uh that way you can do effectively 12, but you're doing it over four frames which aids
in mitigating the CPU cost.
And then whilst it does these measurements, by the way, these dots,
the green dots are a ray
cast to hit nothing and a red dot is a ray cast to hit something.
So that gives you an idea and the outer circle is the maximum range of the ray
cast.
And this is a planned view
of a typical
American city like uh Washington DC for instance.
And of course, that means that when the player moves around the world,
the green circle is shrinking and expanding constantly.
And from that, we can do some intelligent mixing.
So here's a video
uh this is like pre shipping,
I guess it was a year before we shipped division two of it working.
So there's some examples there,
what you were seeing there was controlling weapon tails.
So each bullet has the initial hit and then spliced onto it's a tail,
it has some reverb
into it and it was switching sizes of tails depending on the size of the environment
and also mixing in some kind of like local ping pong delays,
maybe when you're in an alleyway,
mixing out large ambiences that were in the streets, that kind of thing.
So what do we do with bubble space 2.0?
the thing that we did before we still do as an option,
it's called the minima asim myth estimation.
And I call that the blue ring. So if you look here,
the red dots are a recast hit
and the green one is where it's hit nothing and the yellow ones is where they both hit,
but it's going to ignore one of them.
And the reason why is, is that whenever you have three hits, it's sorting and showing
the two shortest distances. So the furthest one at the end of that sort gets ignored.
So it's only averaging
the two shortest ones.
Uh And then the overall effect is this uh blue circle. So that would have been our ASIM
estimate for, for bubble space back then
and it works great except that sometimes when you're
getting into cover or going up against the wall,
it shrinks very, very small
and sometimes you become at strings very, very, very large.
In some cases you want that
sometimes in some cases you don't.
So,
uh I had a look into it. Like can we have a less aggressive,
um Azimuth
estimates? So we came up with this thing called the Maxima one.
So what's the difference? The difference is, the sorting order is reversed.
So it's exactly the same calculations. But now we're
looking at the two largest points in averaging them.
So in that case, the two red ones are being used and the green one is being ignored.
In the yellow case, the yellow dots, one of those is being used
and the red ones being used, if you look there,
the actual circle is larger,
but it's actually more like the average between in a situation where you're in a,
in a large rectangular space.
If you look at the total distances, the average P
needs to, it's more, it's more close to that rectangle than the other one was.
The other one's more like
closer to the, the minimum width. This is more like the average width.
So it turns out this is preferable for outdoor environments where you're coming in,
out of a cave, you're out in the forest and
uh it's less extreme and it means obviously that
problem when you got into cover doesn't occur.
So here's an example,
I forgot to mention also a lot of these videos look kind of
ugh because I often put the graphic settings right down. So I don't get GP U bound.
So if you're wondering why does the game look so ugly, that's why.
But you should be losing your ears anyway. So who cares?
So uh
that's the
auth estimation done. So we have two modes and it's basically the same calculation.
So depending on how you sort Oh, hi.
Um, depending on how you, you, you sort them, you can, you can get the,
the two largest or the two smallest.
And that's it.
Um, for the zenith estimation,
what we were doing originally was we were taking three ray
casts going straight up
and we were taking the, the ones that agree the most.
The reason why you need to do that is you might be standing under
satellite dish,
lampposts or something. If you had one ray
cast,
you might get a really weird edge case where suddenly
it feels like the whole world has come down,
but it's just cos you're standing under a lamppost.
So the idea of doing three is this gonna make it a bit more
democratic.
One of the things about it is is that the minimally the
two heights have had to marginally grieve there to affect change.
So once it takes a measurement,
uh two ray cars have to agree again for it to change. So you don't get sudden changes.
It basically everything has to agree before uh something happens.
It's an intelligent mix makes it a bit more stable.
And the tolerance is based on the sample area
above the player.
So that that actual radius distance is what gives you the tolerance,
the wider the tolerance, sorry, the wider the radius,
the less tolerant it is to things that it measures above it. So
imagine in this uh in this room here,
everything would agree because it's a flat ceiling.
But maybe if we were in a cave
or in a forest canopy,
they'd be constantly changing. So
if you make a smaller radius, they're more likely to agree in a larger radius,
they're less likely to agree.
So that, that was how we controlled the tolerance.
And of course, edge cases are easily dealt with, as you can see here
with this hypothetical block hovering in the air.
So what do we change?
So it it kind of got interesting because the
Zen of estimation now has a variable tolerance.
This is something that Dave Osako
asked me about. He said, look, I want to be able to
fly one of those flying lizards called iron
under like a a stone archway, these huge bridges.
Uh But I want it to kick in and out the, the, the sparkly sweetness of the rain
immediately if you fly on the bridge. But if you're
50 m below, don't kick in immediately. And in fact, at some point, maybe
for the perspective of the rain, the bridge is kind of out of focus.
So maybe don't change anything at all.
So the sample area
can get smaller or larger with height. That's how we deal with that.
Therefore, the intolerance can taper off with increased height.
So I have a diagram here. So imagine that you start recasting with a radius like that
and then you taper them in
the further you go up, the more they tend to agree.
So eventually you get to a situation where they will always agree
and that's how you deal with that. If you want to have a tolerance,
be very, very tolerant,
high distances, but that's not actually what he wanted.
He wanted the opposite of that,
which is fine because we can taper the other direction,
we can go from out,
wider and wider in this situation.
They're more likely to agree closer to the player's head
and less likely to agree further away.
Uh And of course, uh therefore, you can then have the idea of the rain,
not the main rain, but like the sparkly high frequency stuff,
mid frequency stuff may be
cut in and out just as you clip under that, that bridge,
like when you're driving a car on the motorway when it's raining,
but if it's really, really high up, don't really notice.
So here's a video showing that.
So hopefully notice the fact that when you were just clipping under the bridge,
it kicks in quicker and then lower down hardly makes any difference.
So the summary conclusion for this is with the bubble space is
that having both minimum and maximum estimates makes it more useful.
And the variable
zenith
tolerance is very cheap to do because all you're doing is really tapering those ray
casts, right?
You're not actually adding any extra calculations
and it's very easy to do with a coned radius
uh which is much more applicable for a planetary scale type stuff, large organic
uh uh landscapes and so on and the weird things you find on Pandora.
There we go. So let's get into slap back 4.0
what is slap back.
So,
picture of Elvis Presley
slap back was originally this uh
delay for a sing, single short repeat echo effect.
And it was simulating essentially the immediate
echo from a hardware near a loudspeaker.
So when you had, we were playing in a speakeasy, you might have had this effect.
And then when you went to the recording studio,
it's gone and you were used to hearing that.
So they simulated it.
It was popularized in the 19 fifties with singers such as
Elvis and so on.
Uh So the slat back system in snowdrop started out doing something vaguely similar.
So that's the name stuck basically. And we're still calling it that.
And in fact, there's other variations like Mountain slap back and stuff like that,
which is sometimes used in movie sound design.
So we'll have some of that in a moment.
So in the inception,
the version 3.0 as I said was the one that was development came out with division two.
It was enabled a few months into the initial launch of the
game because we had some problems
with memory fragmentation with delay line calamar
actually.
And this is what it aims to do. I stole this from a textbook,
I didn't make this up.
So what you're doing is you're imagining the source position.
And then you're essentially creating a phantom image
of where the mirror image would be.
And then you can re render the sound at that distance and direction at
the propagation delay, flip the phase and then effectively,
you have a very simple idea of an effect.
Additionally, of course, if you know the material of that wall,
you can add some filtering to the delayed version
if it's rock or concrete or wood or earth.
And then it starts to sound like the material that it's bouncing from.
Uh in division two.
What we were doing was we were ray
casting in uh six directions.
It's data driven, but we could choose six.
And then what it was doing is the ray casts hits which are the red ones,
green ones is where it hits nothing.
They have a surface normal.
And then from that surface normal,
you can calculate where the phantom image would be.
So it wasn't,
the ray carts themselves are kind of like feelers working out where
they're because you don't really know where the materials or surfaces are.
So you have to kind of guess and then you can extrapolate from there.
Um
And then what it did was it placed emitters around the player.
Remember the word emitter I used earlier
and the placement uh the ray casting was using this Phantom image technique.
And what we did was in order to avoid
having to do piercing ray casts that very expensive.
We had our own physics world.
So this image here, which was taken from the last talk is very small,
but just because it's not that important,
the left side is basically the render view.
What the player sees the right hand side is what the audio ray casts would see,
which is as you can see a much more simpler geometry
uh and cheaper because you're just doing a single hit rayas,
you're not having to pierce, you only see the materials you care about.
So what you would do is you'd mark up these materials as
acoustically A uh A P
and then when they
came into the world,
they would get added into this, into this uh physics world.
And it would also shut down when the player was indoors because
we had another system for indoors with our procedural reverb system.
And also because the echoes were very, very, very
close. You get sort of a flaming effect when they're very close. It's,
it's accurate, but it's not cinematic.
Um
So what we did was we select audio from the player
and route them to affect device driver.
And then what we do is we feed back from the device driver back into the mix matrix.
So it's like a
which is a loop back system essentially.
And at that point, you can add on the delay and you can spatial,
you can move the direction
and you can also compute the um uh attenuation of distance and all that good stuff.
And the transit delay was added with a bespoke DS P
effect because we wanted to have a delay that you could change
as it's playing.
So here's a little demo of that,
imagine how great that would sound in Atmos.
So
the overview of set
back 4.0 was we wanted to extend the system.
So a more versatile system,
we wanted to be able to tackle landscape and natural phenomena
and weird stuff that you get in the world of Pandora.
It works in two functional layers with distinct behavioral differences,
which I'll explain what they are in a moment.
And it allows for both early and late reflection effects.
What we were seeing,
seeing doing before was just doing early reflections first order.
And now we're having kind of that plus
some pseudo late reflection effects.
And uh we also implemented the material I DS for filtering which actually
filter always the the delay effect always had filters in it,
but they weren't doing anything now.
They are.
Uh So here's a demo,
I'm gonna show the system off firing the gun randomly in the forest system on.
And then a more realistic thing where you're running in and
out of a building firing its stuff at random and you'll hear
the echoes uh between the early and late reflection balance change over time.
That's
off
fun fact. What you saw there was an exploding barrel.
Why was that part of the slap back system?
The reason was it's being mixed into it.
Does that make any sense?
Well, think about it like this,
the further away it is the quiet it is so it will be pick up less than the system.
The closer it is,
the closer it is the player position and therefore more accurate the echoes.
So it's kind of a,
it's kind of a cheat, but I think it works great. That's why I put that in there.
So in order to achieve this, you need several things.
First of all, you need to have a Rayas
emitter manager
that places reflection points
on designer set rules.
You want an audio signal router for capturing source
sounds and playing them back through multiple emitter positions.
You need some DS P digital signal processing in case you forgot what that means
at each emitter destination that handles uh
flexible delayed times and uh filter EQ.
And for the late reflection effects,
the emitter destination needs to be routed through an
environmentally defined Revo generator with no pre delay.
I'll explain how that works in a moment.
So let's look at reverb as you might have noticed, I stole that from the audio
kinetic website, but it is a good diagram of what reverb can look like. So the red
spike is the initial source excitation.
The green ones are the early reflections,
the ones you get from the immediate surfaces.
1st, 2nd, 3rd order,
and then the blue stuff is after it starts bouncing repeatedly
and starts becoming this late reflection diffuse
reb
effect. OK. So what is early reflections? Let's just define it,
immediate echoes, echoes of echoes and so on
distinct phase.
And they can interfere with each other both constructively and destructively
so very chaotic
and collectively, they have quite irregular attenuation of distance.
Uh So here's the thing
when you're calculating
uh a room space, designing room space like this,
they talk about things like the direct field and
reverberant field and figuring out that critical distance to make
sure that people are sitting in the reverberant field because
then it's easier to predict what they're gonna hear.
But when you do those calculations with the formula you got from college,
you might get the wrong distance.
And the reason is,
is because you're not taking into account the
early reflections being like their own sources.
So not just these speakers, but if imagine if these walls were hard,
they would also have to be like additional
sources and that pushes back the critical distance.
So therefore,
I will say that since we're not ever in games in an ideal
acoustic acoustic space,
that the early reflections,
especially first order ones are really part of the direct field,
the late reflections
uh N order echoes, you know, echo, echo, echo, echo stuff,
uh the diffuse largely phase in variant kind of like noise really.
And they have very predictable loudness at any generation of a distance.
So quite different behavior
and therefore they're part of what we call the reverberant field.
So everything beyond the critical distance,
the reverberant field.
So for instance, right now, probably a guy there is in the direct field
and
the G DC staff are in the urban field for sure. Hey,
um
So let's look at it like this.
If you were to capture that, if you made that impulse response yourself with an omni
mic, what are you getting?
Uh You're actually getting a bunch of different
reflections coming at different angles and they're being
recorded equally and then they're all summing together.
So if you were to place that
in a volume that you go into and have that reverb, it would sound very, very good.
The only problem is it doesn't change as you move around, it's very static.
So how do you,
how do you avoid that? Well, the way I figured was you break it up,
so you're components
parts of that reverb.
So rather than going with the final impulse,
you're breaking up into smaller chunks and then when they re some
as you move around the world, they do change.
And in fact, even if you make a lower quality reverb than a very expensive
impulse response that you've licensed from Penguin Audio, somebody
uh the fact that it's moving around,
it actually makes it much more satisfying and in
many ways probably is superior because it's reactive.
So
I'm going to define reverberation time. T 60 OK.
Defined as the time it takes the reverberant sound pressure level
from the impulse to four by 60 decibels.
Uh Interestingly enough, a tiled bathroom can have,
can have the same T 60 as a gothic church.
They're quite different in size. So what, what's happening there?
Clearly, the church is a much larger space. So why is the T 60? The same?
Well, distance reflections, how much energy is being dissipated?
Uh So
how your brain estimates the scale of of
errant space is from processing the times of the early reflections.
You learn this as a baby growing up,
you start to recognize the early reflections are super important.
That's how you know you're in a bathroom.
What if you're blindfolded compared to being in a gothic church or in
train station? Concourse, for example,
therefore, the delay times in the direct field are critical to immersion.
That's my point. That's why it's worth mentioning.
So the late reflections are essential for colored noise that indicate
what the surfaces are made from and that kind of thing.
So they know the difference between marble and wood and that kind of thing.
So stone or concrete versus wood or carpet, as I said here,
they're clearly very different materials.
So the Ray Cas and Emitter Management, we have two Ray Cas
functional
working independently.
The ray CASS
have a minimum distance radius.
So rather than going straight from the, the, the oops sorry,
rather than going straight from the, the center of the player position,
they can be a little bit further out.
Uh This is needed for a thing that I call the ring of local origins.
Uh I'll have a diagram for this in a moment.
Reflection points
are rendered via emitters, of course,
and the layers have different emitter cannibalization behavior.
So what you're doing is you're, you're you're budgeting your emitters
for these two layers and how they cannibalized and
decide to go to a new reflection point changes because
for what you want for early reflections and what
you want for late reflections can be quite different.
So the early reflections layer was optimized
around response enough to oncoming geometry.
So what's happening is is because you're moving around,
it's they're moving quickly, quickly,
quickly and whatever they were playing a moment ago,
they keep playing in the new position.
The late reflection stuff is optimized around long tail fidelity.
So what will happen instead is a new point will start forming,
the other one will start fading out
because it still has reverb in it. So you don't want it to cut out immediately.
And if you move to the new position, it might might sound weird.
So that's how we get around that you can actually change the um the
the fade out times.
And this is how you tackle the direct field versus the reverberant field stuff. OK.
So
I'm gonna use a division character again,
cos there was no clip art available for Avatar.
It's player centric.
So it only happens to the actual player and not to any of the other characters. Yet,
mathematically, it still only performs first order reflections.
So that thing I showed you before hitting off the walls, it still does that.
So for the azimuth ray
casts, if you imagine you ray casts out readily,
what it's doing is it's hitting like an imaginary surface
and then you can work out where the phantom image is.
And if it duplicates, then, you know, well, they're duplicates.
So in this case, from three hits, we go OK, well, two of them are the same as the other.
So don't just kill them off. And then if you end up with one,
uh and also we can do things like we can have an asthma height offset,
which we can then correct for
when we resolve the uh position that might
be handy for not accidentally hitting things that are
just outside of your minimum distance, but they're still too close,
maybe a wall cover, you know,
video games, right,
and then upwards or downwards.
So depending on the layer for the early reflections, we, we ray
casts upwards because we want to hear sailing stuff.
And when we're in the air flying,
we want to hear the late reflections from the ground.
So we ray cast down for the uh
for the for the uh late reflection layer.
So
here's some maths but visualize graphically don't panic
reflection points are derived from the ray
cart hit positions and the surface normals.
So reflected images can be positioned either by the full 3d Phantom image.
you start off with the white circle, you ray casts down, you get your ray
casts hit it's red.
And from there you have a position and a normal.
And then what you do is the reflected distance scale is two times the
dot product of the direction vector from P to Q that ray casts.
OK.
Then the reflection vector
I can move my mouse somewhere. Where is my
point to go?
The reflection vector is in the surface
normal multiplied by the reflected distant scale.
And then you can then shift
across.
So from the extruded position,
if you subtract that from the original source position,
you get the blue dot That's your uh phantom image position.
Uh You can do it fully 3D, you can lock it in the horizontal plane if you want to do that.
Um
is the same in terms of like looking
uh uh overhead.
And interestingly enough, there was another mode that Alex asked for,
which is like what if we don't bother with that at all?
And we just double the distance.
So we call this distance only. That's another mode you can do
interestingly enough, it's less correct. But it's more stable.
Usually actually, cos you think about it, if you're running along the side of a
mountain wall,
those reflections are gonna be constantly shifting around where if you
want something stable that's always at the right kind of distance,
maybe that's better to just do distance only super cheap, right?
Uh So here we go, this is what the ring of local origins is about.
This is how we got a minimum distance. So we have the player position,
we have a radius around it,
which is the minimum distance we recast from a local origin around that radius.
When we get our hit,
we then calculate the rest of the stuff you just saw as if it came from the center
record the hits and they would compute the reflection points
accordingly.
And so you get the same
calculation, but in this example, you would have completely missed
that little wall on the right there,
which is what you want for something that is further out.
So without having to do any kind of additional
calculations by literally just moving the origin away,
you're getting later reflection points.
And of course, if you do the distance only you get that effect,
so let's focus on the early reflection layer
as old reflection points invalidate emitters
move immediately to the new position.
Uh reflection DS P affects play interrupted uninterrupted.
So if you happen to be firing a gun at that time
where gunshots still playing out just move to the new position,
delay time of filter settings are updated
to the reflection point on the fly.
This is why it's important to have a delay time that can move
as you're rendering and filters that can move stably whilst you're rendering.
So you don't hear any weird pops or glitches.
OK. Let's take it through step by step.
So imagine we are in a some kind of gully as a plan view.
The player position is the black dot
It'll ray cast out to say the right there.
Find those, those two hits, realize it's the same position so it will
cannibalize one of them and then you end up with that blue dot That is our
position. Ok?
If the player moves forward.
Oh, sorry, I did the wrong thing.
Player moves forward.
What it'll do is it'll make a new position,
but he realizes it's close enough to the old one to just shift the point.
So it just keeps playing moves immediately like that.
Uh Keep moving again.
It's going to find a new position,
which is not strictly correct because as you can see the wall isn't there anymore.
You could actually sanity check that if you re
recast that position and realize you're not getting the same information,
you could kill it completely, but
video games.
Um
And then when you go up to here, you get another position over there,
but it's so far away from the last one that decides that it's gonna kill off
the older one. Now.
No others moving it, it's gonna tail,
it's gonna fade that out and start a new one over there.
Ok. And that's how we deal with early reflections,
late reverberation.
So here we're going to do something a bit different
as old reflection points invalidate,
they fade out and new reflection points can then begin in new positions.
There's always a kind of a fade happening.
Uh It allows for long reverb tales to play out. So if you've already committed to a
rather than cutting that off, that would sound disturbing, right? Let it play out
and then fade.
So um he uses the ring of
ring, ring of local origins quite extensively.
Cos you really want to have that minimum ray
casts radius quite a far bit out
to prevent hitting valid materials too soon. That's really what it's for.
Uh it's much more efficient than using a piercing ray casts.
So what you could have done is decide to do a piercing
ray casts and then walk the number of hits he got back,
just
keep shimmering down that um array until he found one that was a favorable,
favorable distance,
but super expensive this, it's just one ray
casts and you're done
and then you add reverb
to the delay line.
So the reverb engine is working normally, but it's given a super delayed copy.
Uh And therefore when you hear it back,
you're getting it specialized at that distance with
the reverb that's defined by the environment.
And therefore the shift you see here, the yellow line
is varying with the delay time. That's what you're shifting.
So it's the pre delay on that reverb is what's affecting.
And it's happening in all these different positions around your player's head.
So let's look at the the same gully situation.
But with this wider ring of local origins, let's start here.
So now the players stood there and you have
uh bottom, left,
top, right, bottom right, three ray cast.
And therefore we have these phantom image positions,
we move forwards,
they invalidate and they start to fade out
because they're invalid and new ones are found.
So momentarily, you actually have more
uh more emitters playing
than, than you've actually budgeted for.
So that's what you have to kind of like double your budget for this
and then you move again.
And then the other ones that were just started to fade out again
and the new ones start further on
and that's it.
So in terms of like filtering,
I did some research and got some real acoustic data back about what happens in,
in different environments.
I have a chart here from
somewhere in the Pacific Northwest
and it's the different plants that someone's
found the acoustic absorption spectrum for.
And I use this information for the clouded forest.
Uh Don't panic, baby tears is a plant, not actual baby tears.
Let me to clarify that because when I showed this to somebody, they panicked,
they went.
No, it's
so what you do then is is that this is the absorption spectrum.
So to make the EQ, you just basically flip that it is power based.
And then once you add the logarithms, you get a kind of decibel shape.
So that's all the EQ settings I base upon
based on that.
And I don't think they ever change. I think, I think Alex was happy with them. So cool.
Um
So every value reflection point has a material ID
and we take the material ID, whatever that material is.
And then we have a list of known EQ settings and we apply it
materials are mapped to filter parameters. So we use the raw filter parameters
and then we send those in to wires through real time parameter controls.
And that's what the reflection effect is getting
for every single emitter.
And of course, they can be different for every emitter, right?
Um
So this is a, this is a little bit of a window screenshot from uh snowdrop.
So it's kind of small, but basically there's a couple of materials there
and basically you can decide to have there's two types of filter in the delay,
you can have one of them on both of them on whatever.
Uh If one of them is off, it doesn't, it just disables and it's not part of that.
It doesn't take part in the processing.
So you have this idea of uh center frequency and gain and
um
some kind of balance.
And this is because the filters uh have different um uh profiles.
One of them is a peaking filter.
So therefore, we can change the cutter frequency
and uh the gain
I set the key factor to four
just so I don't have the key factor changing constantly.
Um The other one is a high low shelf kind of filter.
We can move the the center frequency like that.
So you create a list of materials that you want to target.
And if the material is not on that list, it just ignores it filter turns off.
So therefore, it's just completely flat frequency response for each material.
It links material ID used in the game.
So it's for game specific now, right,
uh enable each parametric band
crossover filter as as required.
And these values are posted to the slat back emitter
as it moves or is reactivated,
any unlisted materials disable the filters
when they are encountered.
So, and one other thing I want to bring up,
we're sending the
propagation distance, but the sound designers choose the delay.
So here is an example of one of the the curves they used.
If you think about it, 450 m should be about two seconds and it's not,
it's about one second.
That's because it sounds cool that way.
Entertainment,
the signal routing stuff,
the guts of that is essentially that we have
this broadcaster system very similar to the one in,
in uh the red engine funnily enough
uh where you're taking each time that the Wise engine is doing its render pass,
you get a call back, there's two buffers and they're switching constantly.
So
you imagine after the second call back, the next one will look like the top image,
you either have one buffer recording and the other one playing.
But they never, they never meet,
we can actually have up to eight of these. So they are broadcast channels.
And inside of those, they have up to eight audio channels.
Uh So think of it like a digital tape loop.
If you ever use one of those, you have a recall head and a playback head
and a loop gets moved on
from a call back. We register within a rendering chain.
So we know when it's happened,
it does add latency though.
So by doing this, you're adding an extra buffer of latency.
So if you're rendering a 1024 samples,
by rerouting it. This way, you're adding 1024 samples, which is
21.33 milliseconds
at 48
kertz sample rate. However, we're gonna delay even more. So it's fine.
Um
So the recording side, we have basically the sender sync plug in in wise,
which is a fake audio device
wise,
doesn't know that it's not an audio device it's actually writing to a common memory
and uh it sends the audio always to the record head. He doesn't know which one.
Every time it writes, it gets whichever one the broadcaster tells it to remember,
cos they're switching
uh and it controls what the broadcast channels using
and how many audio channels is allocated.
So you might, if you're, if you're deciding to make a game like Xian
where it's only stereo, there may reduce the allocation to two channels
uh called once at the end of each render pass, as I said.
So every time it renders call back switch
uh from the playback side, we have a receiver source plug in
and that just takes whatever's
from the recorded in the last pass, right?
Because that will be there on the playback buffer
and that's triggered by a play event.
So the emitter needs to know there's a play action
and then it will start reading from that buffer.
Uh It's faded out by the stop event.
So we always have a stop event say faded out um as I said before.
But,
but depending on whether it's early or late reflection that
fade out might be very short or quite long.
Uh And it controls what the broadcast channel it reads from.
So you can actually have a one to many relationship.
So if you record once to one channel, you can read many,
many times from that same broadcast channel.
Um
it gets its actual audio channel layout. So
specifically whether it's 7.1 or 5.1 or whatever it is,
it gets that from the sender sync plug in.
So that's defined by the actual fake audio device,
which it actually gets from the properties set up by the playback engine.
And it's called once at the beginning of each render pass. OK.
The filtering parts,
each reflection point receives a receiver instance. OK.
Then we add the delay.
So why is this playing a source plug in with a single parameter,
the broadcast channel and then
the audio signal from the source plug in needs delaying and filtering, right?
We need to get that propagation delay in there.
We need to filter according to materials.
So how it works is it's kind of like this, you have a circular buffer
and the record pointer is spinning around constantly.
Imagine it's going to the right and when it gets
to the end goes back to the start again.
Uh The output side
is gonna be behind it.
And the difference between those two positions is the actual delay that you hear.
Now,
if you shift that audio position suddenly it will hear
a click or a pop or it'll not sound good.
So what we do is is that we actually
uh create a nice power complementary cross f
between the old delay and the new delay.
This is not actually
the high fidelity delay with dot
You would expect what's actually happening is it's just
editing,
uh that way you can get around unnecessary Doppler depends how fast you're running,
I guess.
But, um, if you're in a car, you would definitely hear that in a racing game, right?
But this is it, we're now jumping to the new part of the delay buffer
and doing it whilst removing any kind of weird artifacts.
And then we do phase control,
which is just basically flipping the phase and then we do the filter EQ
and that's the output sample.
So
uh do I need to? Yeah, basically, I've just said all this stuff, haven't I?
There we go.
So let's have um
some kind of like technical points in case it comes up,
you need specialized memory management to do this because you're constantly
needing these delay lines and they're half a meg in size,
right?
Why half a meg? Well,
four bytes per sample is 131 72 samples or 2.73 seconds at 48
KHZ sample rate.
Why does it need to be up to two seconds?
Because that's the size of the world we're dealing with.
Those are the kind of delays you might have to deal with
the speed of sound and air is typically 340 m per second
in Pandora.
They never told us we never have found out
what the speed of sound in that atmosphere is.
But let's say
it's like air.
Therefore, the maximum transit distance could be 928 m.
The uh you need to have multi threaded access
because this is being rendered in multiple threads.
Uh and you want to be able to prevent memory fragmentation.
So therefore, we need specialized memory management, right.
the first filter looks like this.
If you're a DS P programmer, you should recognize this.
This is called the bi quadratic filter direct form two.
Uh And what happens is you change five multiplies
and you can get lots of different filter effects.
In this case, we're just using a purple formula for those coefficients.
Uh We're not doing any kind of musical modulation type stuff.
So this is actually not a very stable filter for that kind.
Don't use this if you're trying to do something
you know
D jing don't.
But uh as I said,
the key factor is fixed to four that makes it
simpler to do the calculations of the coefficients actually.
And then
you can then do things like you can attenuate or it can boost,
you can move the frequency left to right.
And this is the kind of the overall range of that filter works at. OK.
That's our bode plot
for the other filter. This is a little bit more unexpected for some of you.
I would guess
the crossover filter part looks like this.
So if you look at the inner core of that,
that is a low pass filter modeled on
a capacitor resistor time constant that discharges exponentially.
And
the K value that multiplier is one minus E to the minus omega T.
That big T is actually the, the sample rate inverted. It's a time of one sample,
the E to the minus omega T.
If you calculate it exactly like that, it's kind of expensive.
So you don't do that,
you do a polynomial fit because that's obviously
a very good candidate for simm optimization.
Then
anyway, the outer line is the same input that's subtracted
from this output. And then you get like a high pass characteristic kind of.
And then at the end here we have a voltage divider.
And if it's exactly in the middle,
they will perfectly cancel each other out and be completely phase linear.
If you don't believe me,
there you go.
So
the inner core part,
as I said that that time constant low pass filter is the blue line.
And then when you subtract that from the input, you get the orange line
with a bit of a bump, but don't worry about that.
And then when you sum them together completely phase linear,
so you can have this on and not hear it.
But of course, you can then change
the offset between the two and so you can get things like this, so you can boost it,
uh you can boost the other way.
So therefore you get your high, low shelving
in a nice efficient way. That sounds very natural.
Are you ready for? What noise test?
All right, here we go.
Here are the filters in action just with some white noise, you can hear them working.
Why
you,
here we go.
How are your ears?
Hopefully that's, that tells you how the filters are working, right?
So this is when we, when we're taking the echoed sound, we're filtering it.
That's how it's being applied.
So the combined results, I put this all into one picture. Let's go back to that gully.
So what we're actually getting, if we're in that position, we're getting
two early reflections.
One of them is quieter than the other because it's further
away and we're getting four late reflections with the reverb applied.
It's defined by the environment with different filtering.
And because of their angles, they spat at
different angles around the head
and different distances mean they have different pre delays. There we go.
Does that picture make sense?
This is the, this is the decomp
pois version of that nice impulse response you saw at the start.
Um
And then
I want to show an example where it's realistically in the game.
The one other thing that's missing from
this is uh obstruction inclusion tests because
sometimes you'll have uh phantom emitters that are behind a wall and you want them
to be filtered that way, right?
So here's an example in game very chaotic. But because of the
um
propagation system, you
can therefore control what you hear depending on the geometry around you.
Thank
you
all soldiers see R
there we go.
So let's summarize.
Then the reflection point cannibalization needs to be different.
You need to have different modes for that to
optimize around the requirements of early or late reflections,
right?
That direct field reverberant field
ray casting and the ring of local origin is really useful.
It just incentivizes doing something where you're maximizing
amount of information and minimizing the CPU cost
uh filtering materials is a big win obviously,
because it sounds you got lots of variations, much more natural sounding.
OK.
And you need robust memory management.
Uh I did a more elaborate description of that in the 2020 talk.
So if you're curious, you can go back to that. It's on youtube
and one last thing uh some people will think
we should hire an audio program and do this.
So I want to explain to you how big the
team is that's working at stand up reference branch right now
in Sweden. We have me, Martin Vallin,
who's the lead.
We have Martin LGN,
who did the emitter manager, Catherine
Seder
Kunis, who did the amazing propagation system that works in the GP U.
We have hang zone. We also have Dave Driggers in Stockholm
in Germany. We have Hannah Kriegler
who's working on rapid prototyping stuff. And we also have in Canada.
We have Oliver Snead and Andrew Smith.
Neither of whom are Canadian, but for some reason they live in Toronto.
So what I'm trying to say with this picture is as well as credit where credit is due.
You don't need an audio programmer. You need a platoon.
Thanks for listening.
So I guess some of you have some questions.
Thanks for that was a buffet of delicious ideas for
audio
program.
I had a question about the
the ring of local emitters. So is that based on bubble space at all?
-- Or is that just a completely separate -- thing?
So the ring of local origins is just like another circle that I just
in my head to be specifically the bubble space thing.
The reason why I call it that is because when I originally drew it out on paper,
it looked like lots of bubbles on the page.
It's not really bubbles, it's cylinders. But anyway,
um the ring of local origins is just
a,
imagine a radius you've created in your system
where you then create these origins you were cast out from and
then you use the original position for doing the Phantom image technique.
That's all. So it's just a mathematical concept to avoid hitting things too soon.
OK. Can I ask a quick follow up question?
Do you
do any slewing over time for the bubble space
calculations as
well?
Lots of smoothing going on
again. There's a better description of that in the last talk 2020.
So I won't repeat it here.
That's why I didn't put it in this talk because it seemed like money for old rope.
But
yes,
so there's lots of smoothing going on and that's why you can avoid weird glitches,
like walking past a bunch of pillars in the train station
because it will pick them up. But they won't be
uh there won't be enough coherency for to take effect to the overall calculation
which happens actually over 16 frames.
Thank you.
Hey, thanks for the great presentation.
Um You mentioned that it was always player or listener based,
all these systems
so
you could do it listener based.
OK. You could do that.
Um
What I found was is that because of the way we make games,
listener is usually the camera position
or something close to it.
Maybe some people you interpolate between player and camera position. But
guy doesn't like that. We had a whole chapter about why that's a bad idea.
Don't do that
because
we do that in division two.
So anyway,
so
what it turns out is is that if you base it on the player position, it's less correct.
But what you can do is is that you have a
threshold for when you start making the calculations happen again,
you're not doing it every frame.
If you're standing still, you do the calculations once and you've stopped
and then you have a threshold and you should set that in data.
But let's say it's half a meter you move half
a meter and then he does the calculations again.
If you were to do that with the listening position,
you'd be probably be doing lots and lots of
extra calculations and just be heavy on the CPU.
-- So that's the trade off. -- So
it wasn't actually my question. Sorry,
it was.
Did you ever find a situation where
you would have liked to have emitter?
So another emitter agenda player position to also have its calculations.
-- And are you considering that for the future? -- We have lots of, OK, 10 minutes to go.
tried a lot of different things and some of it sounds really cool,
but it's just very expensive.
And if you remember, we were originally targeting xbox one and PS four.
So this is why it ended up with the way that it is now.
However,
now we're in the next generation and we're using the GP U and stuff like that,
the lots of possibilities.
So we will see maybe in a couple of years they'll do
another talk and I'll remind you of this question and go,
hey, look, guess what we did.
-- So we'll see, I look -- forward to it.
I thank you for the talk. And I have a question about geometries and
I was wondering who is simplifying the geometry
for
audio and how,
-- how -- is the geometry simplified
that's actually done by technical artists?
So what they do is is that they start off with the random mesh
and if it turns out to be too complicated, they simplify it.
So if you get like a fallen down tree trunk, they might turn that into a box.
That's what ends up in that physics world. And that's what we see with the ray
casts.
-- Does that make -- sense? It hard for them to do or
it's just in the data?
Uh
I had the same question. So great.
You have another question.
Um
Antony,
just a quick question about the late reflections.
Are they rendered
-- like I RS or are they some sort of -- dynamic thing?
Here's a funny thing when you have a environmentally defined reverb,
you can be whatever you like.
So uh in this case, we have a lot of nice impulses.
Uh you could use FDN reverb or something else. Something algorithmic.
That's the part that doesn't matter. That's the modular part of it.
So that's up to you to decide
and maybe it's,
you could have more reflections,
more and more elara type late reflections with a cheaper algorithm perhaps
if you wanted to do that. But that's
I purposely avoided talking about that because that's not part
of the system that is decided further down the,
it's actually the environment element manager
in snowdrop that actually defines that,
right. OK. Thank you.
Uh With having the,
the uh reflections be driven by this uh
kind of like
ring buffer kind of thing.
Uh
was that uh sink plug in where you were collecting the delay line? Was that,
did you have just like one of those or did you put them on multiple different buses?
-- I'm -- wondering about like, so the sink plug in parts is one per exit destination.
If you come to the audio Kinetic Booth at 115, I will show you that slide.
But yeah, so the idea is, is that they are completely.
So you have, you have one per send.
So if you want to have,
you want to characterize different types of
broadcaster doesn't have to be about delaying.
But you can have different categories.
I think at one point, we were experimenting with a
plant that repeated what you did.
It didn't end up in the game. But it was a nice idea,
but I think it just didn't quite work.
But yeah, that would have been a separate channel.
And so therefore we have a different device and then a different auxiliary send
and therefore
you read it off uh a different channel on the
way back again and then do something else with it.
Uh
Thanks for your talk.
I think in your system, all the diffraction and light reverberation
is fully
three
depressing. But
isn't the light reverberation should be a more omnidirectional.
-- So what was the last part of the question? A late -- reverberation should be
omnidirectional if non.
So it's a good point. So the question is, is if you're positioning these emitters
and they are being specialized when you're adding reverb to them.
How does that affect it?
Well, in actual fact,
the reverb in of itself is working already to render out channels.
So what you're sending to that already been
specialized in some ways you've already worked
out the distribution based the meta position,
the delay
and then however, that reverb chooses to do its work,
that's what ends up going to the channels.
So they're actually completely decoupled.
-- Ok, -- thank you.
Uh Did I exhaust all the curiosity in the room?
Should you go get a coffee?
Alright, thanks very much.