[Music] It is now 120. Yes, I shall
It is now 120. Yes, I shall begin. So, this is from Indie to Fable
begin. So, this is from Indie to Fable and back. 30 years of wisdom. You'll
and back. 30 years of wisdom. You'll note the inverted commas. As Ramy said
note the inverted commas. As Ramy said yesterday, all advice is bad advice. And
yesterday, all advice is bad advice. And I'm sure this will be no different. Uh
I'm sure this will be no different. Uh my name is Dean Carter. I'm the managing
my name is Dean Carter. I'm the managing director of Fluttermind LLC. Uh at
director of Fluttermind LLC. Uh at Fluttermind, imaginatively. Uh, and I've
Fluttermind, imaginatively. Uh, and I've had the genuine pleasure of being in
had the genuine pleasure of being in this industry professionally for 33
this industry professionally for 33 years. I've been writing games since I
years. I've been writing games since I was 14 years old. Uh, that was back in
was 14 years old. Uh, that was back in 1984 for those who can't be bothered to
1984 for those who can't be bothered to do the maths, which I quite understand.
do the maths, which I quite understand. It is after lunch after
It is after lunch after all. So, without further ado, um, before
all. So, without further ado, um, before I start, I need to mention a basic
I start, I need to mention a basic housekeeping thing. So, please turn off
housekeeping thing. So, please turn off your mobile phone ringers. Don't stand
your mobile phone ringers. Don't stand up and have loud have loud
up and have loud have loud conversations. Don't throw things. Um,
conversations. Don't throw things. Um, and please fill in the online review
and please fill in the online review form thing so the people who run this
form thing so the people who run this know not to book me again next year.
know not to book me again next year. That'd be very much
That'd be very much appreciated. So, 33 years. What have I
appreciated. So, 33 years. What have I done with that time? Justify your
done with that time? Justify your existence. Um, I created a game called
existence. Um, I created a game called Druid on the Commodore 64, which did
Druid on the Commodore 64, which did relatively well, which is kind of second
relatively well, which is kind of second from top left. Uh, I was part of the
from top left. Uh, I was part of the core team on the original Dungeon
core team on the original Dungeon Keeper, which is sort of top right.
Keeper, which is sort of top right. There's some very old people in this
There's some very old people in this audience. Uh, I started the Fable
audience. Uh, I started the Fable franchise with my brother Simon and Ian
franchise with my brother Simon and Ian Love It, who are both down there. If you
Love It, who are both down there. If you want to throw things at them, it's fine.
want to throw things at them, it's fine. That is allowed. Uh, I wrote Incaboto,
That is allowed. Uh, I wrote Incaboto, which is game bottom middle, uh, which
which is game bottom middle, uh, which did really well and, um, I loved making
did really well and, um, I loved making it. And my current project is a game
it. And my current project is a game called Warden Cliff, which is bottom
called Warden Cliff, which is bottom right over there with the weird bunny
right over there with the weird bunny thing. Uh, you'll see the bunny theme
thing. Uh, you'll see the bunny theme revisited several times during this. So,
revisited several times during this. So, I've worked in companies of all scales,
I've worked in companies of all scales, tiny, solo, bedroom 80s, indie things,
tiny, solo, bedroom 80s, indie things, you know, those nerdy pictures you see
you know, those nerdy pictures you see from that period of time. Um, and all
from that period of time. Um, and all the way up through AAA to kind of EA,
the way up through AAA to kind of EA, uh, and
uh, and Microsoft.
Microsoft. Uh, and so I've kind of seen it all
Uh, and so I've kind of seen it all several times in one form or another.
several times in one form or another. Um, but before I go on, I'd actually
Um, but before I go on, I'd actually like to ask the audience a few questions
like to ask the audience a few questions so I get to know you all a little
so I get to know you all a little better. Uh, how many people here have
better. Uh, how many people here have released a game professionally?
released a game professionally? How many people have released a game
How many people have released a game here
here unprofessionally? Yeah, it's a more
unprofessionally? Yeah, it's a more difficult one to ask. Yeah, I'm I'm
difficult one to ask. Yeah, I'm I'm both. Um, how many of you would
both. Um, how many of you would self-define as
self-define as artists? Okay, the stoned well-dressed
artists? Okay, the stoned well-dressed ones,
ones, right? How many of you would define
right? How many of you would define yourselves as coders? People who tap
yourselves as coders? People who tap away at key. A lot of you. Good lord.
away at key. A lot of you. Good lord. Yeah, you're the you're the pale,
Yeah, you're the you're the pale, precise ones, right? And how many of you
precise ones, right? And how many of you are solo developers? People who don't
are solo developers? People who don't let anybody else into your life because
let anybody else into your life because you're complete control freaks. Yeah.
you're complete control freaks. Yeah. Okay. Yeah. They're the lonely, haunted
Okay. Yeah. They're the lonely, haunted looking ones. I feel your pain. Um
looking ones. I feel your pain. Um that's me nowadays. Okay. Thank you for
that's me nowadays. Okay. Thank you for that. This talk isn't like a lot of
that. This talk isn't like a lot of other talks. It's not how to make lots
other talks. It's not how to make lots of money. It's not a survivor bias the
of money. It's not a survivor bias the opera or whatever else somebody's doing
opera or whatever else somebody's doing down the road. Uh it's just a collection
down the road. Uh it's just a collection of weird stuff I've learned along the
of weird stuff I've learned along the way that I kind of wish I'd known a
way that I kind of wish I'd known a little bit earlier and would have made
little bit earlier and would have made my life a little bit easier. Uh, so with
my life a little bit easier. Uh, so with that, let's take a look at the first
that, let's take a look at the first thing I
learned. So, start as you mean to go on. That's what I say. Uh, my first game,
That's what I say. Uh, my first game, Rockman, made $7,500 for two weeks of
Rockman, made $7,500 for two weeks of work. Yay. 1985.
work. Yay. 1985. I worked out that I could make 26 games
I worked out that I could make 26 games a
a year, which was
year, which was $195,000 or kaching
$195,000 or kaching $438,077 in today's money. Good lord.
$438,077 in today's money. Good lord. See, my takeaway really should have been
See, my takeaway really should have been I was a complete idiot because even in
I was a complete idiot because even in the 80s, making games profit profitably
the 80s, making games profit profitably was nearly impossible. I really should
was nearly impossible. I really should read these sentences and then write
read these sentences and then write them. Um, even the best 80s developers
them. Um, even the best 80s developers only got 12 to 14% royalties for a
only got 12 to 14% royalties for a finished game. That is literally you'd
finished game. That is literally you'd end up with a situation like
end up with a situation like this. Hello, Mr. Publisher. I've got a
this. Hello, Mr. Publisher. I've got a game. Have you finished it? Yes, I'll
game. Have you finished it? Yes, I'll have that then. I'll give you 12%. Thank
have that then. I'll give you 12%. Thank you. And that was it. That was your
you. And that was it. That was your relationship. You had no control over
relationship. You had no control over covers. Absolutely nothing. It was very,
covers. Absolutely nothing. It was very, very hard to make money. And so that's
very hard to make money. And so that's why a lot of people of my age who come
why a lot of people of my age who come from my background kind of went stuff
from my background kind of went stuff this and went did something more
this and went did something more profitable instead. Everything is cyclic
profitable instead. Everything is cyclic and I know a lot of developers here are
and I know a lot of developers here are struggling again to make money. It's
struggling again to make money. It's nothing new. But this time you've got a
nothing new. But this time you've got a larger audience. You've got more
larger audience. You've got more distribution channels and you have
distribution channels and you have decades of development to learn from.
decades of development to learn from. Decades of mistakes I have made and
Decades of mistakes I have made and people like me you can avoid making
people like me you can avoid making them.
them. So again I should have practiced the
So again I should have practiced the order of that a bit better too.
order of that a bit better too. So, moving on from that, this is one of
So, moving on from that, this is one of the things I really should have learned
the things I really should have learned a bit quicker. This started with my very
a bit quicker. This started with my very very first game again, Rockman. Um,
very first game again, Rockman. Um, which when I was developing it looked
which when I was developing it looked like
like this. Now, you'll notice a couple of
this. Now, you'll notice a couple of things. The artists there are kind of
things. The artists there are kind of crossing their arms and biting their
crossing their arms and biting their lips and kind of going, "His light
lips and kind of going, "His light sources are coming from all sorts of
sources are coming from all sorts of different directions. He clearly has a
different directions. He clearly has a very poor grasp of shadow and
very poor grasp of shadow and form." The more keen amongst you will
form." The more keen amongst you will notice it's in black and white. And this
notice it's in black and white. And this was on a ZX Spectrum which wasn't black
was on a ZX Spectrum which wasn't black and white. So why was it black and
and white. So why was it black and white? Because I was poor and my family
white? Because I was poor and my family were poor and my development machine was
were poor and my development machine was literally a ZedX Spectrum and a black
literally a ZedX Spectrum and a black and white television
and white television set. Now the problem here is I forgot
set. Now the problem here is I forgot that a majority of my audience were not
that a majority of my audience were not poor people like me with a black and
poor people like me with a black and white TV set. So when they got to play
white TV set. So when they got to play the game, it looked like
the game, it looked like this. I'm now going to use a quote from
this. I'm now going to use a quote from a review. hideishly garish graphics. I
a review. hideishly garish graphics. I was 15. It
hurt. But the takeaway here really should have
should have been, players see things completely
been, players see things completely differently to you as a developer. Your
differently to you as a developer. Your development environment is not
development environment is not representative of the final experience
representative of the final experience the player's going to have. A black and
the player's going to have. A black and white TV was not representative of my
white TV was not representative of my players final hardware. And while nobody
players final hardware. And while nobody here is developing in black and white,
here is developing in black and white, unless for artistic reasons, it's
unless for artistic reasons, it's important to remember that I did not
important to remember that I did not hear anything. It is important to
hear anything. It is important to remember players perceive things
remember players perceive things completely differently to you. Your
completely differently to you. Your players are not hunched over a copy of
players are not hunched over a copy of Unity with gray borders surrounding a
Unity with gray borders surrounding a tiny screen. Your players are not
tiny screen. Your players are not looking for bugs. Your players have not
looking for bugs. Your players have not seen the same scenarios 50 times over
seen the same scenarios 50 times over that day alone. If you forget that, it
that day alone. If you forget that, it can lead to complexity and difficulty
can lead to complexity and difficulty creep. So, watch
out. And then there's the real world to take into
consideration. Your real players lounge on a sofa or relax near their PC,
on a sofa or relax near their PC, probably with a beer. Real players don't
probably with a beer. Real players don't pay attention or understand that crucial
pay attention or understand that crucial information is crucial. Real players go
information is crucial. Real players go on holiday and need to remember what
on holiday and need to remember what they were doing when they
they were doing when they return. Real players take a break
return. Real players take a break because they need the toilet after all
because they need the toilet after all that beer.
that beer. And if you haven't tested your mobile
And if you haven't tested your mobile game on the toilet, you're in trouble
game on the toilet, you're in trouble because that's what real players do.
because that's what real players do. That if you're developing mobile, that
That if you're developing mobile, that is just think of that for a moment. It's
is just think of that for a moment. It's kind of troubling, isn't it? And
kind of troubling, isn't it? And finally, the most humbling thing of all
finally, the most humbling thing of all is real players don't care about your
is real players don't care about your game as much as you do. That's just the
game as much as you do. That's just the way the world is. It's
way the world is. It's fine. Fundamentally, players live inside
fine. Fundamentally, players live inside their own brains and not yours.
their own brains and not yours. Your players aren't living your life,
Your players aren't living your life, experiencing things through your senses.
experiencing things through your senses. Some of your players don't speak English
Some of your players don't speak English as a first language. Some aren't
as a first language. Some aren't straight white
straight white guys. Shakara. But most of all, stuff
guys. Shakara. But most of all, stuff that's absolutely obvious to you will
that's absolutely obvious to you will seem utterly bizarre and alien to
seem utterly bizarre and alien to somebody who does not live in your own
somebody who does not live in your own head. So when you are designing, design
head. So when you are designing, design for players minds, not yours. Because
for players minds, not yours. Because every single time you decide some group
every single time you decide some group of players isn't worth worrying about or
of players isn't worth worrying about or caring about, you pretty much guarantee
caring about, you pretty much guarantee they don't care about you or your
game. A lot of people are going to disagree with me on this
disagree with me on this one, so I'm going to start off with some
one, so I'm going to start off with some quotes to make me sound more
authoritative. My personal favorite specialization is for insects.
favorite specialization is for insects. Robert Heinland. I've decided he speaks
Robert Heinland. I've decided he speaks that way because he was kind of a dick
that way because he was kind of a dick in a lot of the rest of his
life. Second one from Valve. An expert who is too narrow has difficulty
who is too narrow has difficulty collaborating. That's from Valve. So
collaborating. That's from Valve. So there. Yeah. But when they're referring
there. Yeah. But when they're referring to T-shaped individuals, they're talking
to T-shaped individuals, they're talking about people who have a breadth of
about people who have a breadth of experience in their lives and also a
experience in their lives and also a very narrow tight laser beam focus of
very narrow tight laser beam focus of expertise in some small thing.
expertise in some small thing. So, in the early days, in the early
So, in the early days, in the early days, in the 80s, I was making type
days, in the 80s, I was making type faces. I was doing my own art. I coded
faces. I was doing my own art. I coded engines, sound effects, music. I dealt
engines, sound effects, music. I dealt directly with a SID chip. I wrote an
directly with a SID chip. I wrote an assembler, all those fun things. Even
assembler, all those fun things. Even during my time at Bullfrog in the '9s, I
during my time at Bullfrog in the '9s, I was coding user interfaces one day and
was coding user interfaces one day and then a shadow renderer for the engine
then a shadow renderer for the engine the next day. And that's not because I'm
the next day. And that's not because I'm special or magic. It's just because
special or magic. It's just because that's what everybody did at the time.
that's what everybody did at the time. That's how companies didn't spend all of
That's how companies didn't spend all of their money in two weeks. They got
their money in two weeks. They got everybody to do everything all the time.
everybody to do everything all the time. And so you ended up with teams that were
And so you ended up with teams that were made up of multi-skilled
made up of multi-skilled weirdos. I'm sure this seems very
weirdos. I'm sure this seems very familiar to solo devs in the audience.
familiar to solo devs in the audience. Incidentally, indie teams are getting
Incidentally, indie teams are getting bigger and production values are rising.
bigger and production values are rising. So you might be thinking it's wiser to
So you might be thinking it's wiser to specialize. But people tend to forget
specialize. But people tend to forget something here. And that is developing a
something here. And that is developing a broad skill set isn't just for you.
Large teams require collaboration and clear communication beyond anything
clear communication beyond anything else. Being a generalist doesn't just
else. Being a generalist doesn't just help you get more work done with fewer
help you get more work done with fewer people. It helps you learn how different
people. It helps you learn how different disciplines think, their vocabulary,
disciplines think, their vocabulary, their workflow, their
their workflow, their pain. Knowledge breathes respect for
pain. Knowledge breathes respect for others and that helps everybody you work
others and that helps everybody you work with. It stops you making assumptions
with. It stops you making assumptions about how difficult a task is. It stops
about how difficult a task is. It stops you saying just, "Can you just make the
you saying just, "Can you just make the main character run 10% faster?" But
main character run 10% faster?" But that'll break the engine. Oh, just do
that'll break the engine. Oh, just do it. Can you just make all the reds a bit
it. Can you just make all the reds a bit brighter in all art? There's 42 gigs
brighter in all art? There's 42 gigs worth of textures. Every time you say
worth of textures. Every time you say just, you suggest you know that a task
just, you suggest you know that a task is easy. It might not be. And if you
is easy. It might not be. And if you don't know that, you should shut up.
don't know that, you should shut up. Learning more about others areas of work
Learning more about others areas of work makes you less of an ass to work with.
makes you less of an ass to work with. So, there's a good reason.
I also personally believe that in ignorance is an energy. So use it. Those
ignorance is an energy. So use it. Those of you who put up your hands saying you
of you who put up your hands saying you are coders or artists or whatever else.
are coders or artists or whatever else. I know I didn't mention designers.
I know I didn't mention designers. That's I I love you too. Worry
That's I I love you too. Worry not. Don't forget the most of all you
not. Don't forget the most of all you are
are human. You were designed to adapt. You
human. You were designed to adapt. You can do pretty much anything if you put
can do pretty much anything if you put your mind to it. If you're sitting there
your mind to it. If you're sitting there saying, "I can't do art or maths or
saying, "I can't do art or maths or coding or whatever else." I said all
coding or whatever else." I said all those things at one point in my career
those things at one point in my career and I was wrong every single time
and I was wrong every single time because I'm an idiot. As I said earlier,
because I'm an idiot. As I said earlier, at various points, I was convinced I
at various points, I was convinced I would never learn how to do 3D vector
would never learn how to do 3D vector mass from scratch. I would never learn
mass from scratch. I would never learn about music theory and production or
about music theory and production or color theory as you saw in Rockman
color theory as you saw in Rockman earlier. Not a good start. In each case,
earlier. Not a good start. In each case, I was
I was wrong. So, be a human. Learn a skill
wrong. So, be a human. Learn a skill outside your area of specialty. This is
outside your area of specialty. This is my challenge to you today. If you're a
my challenge to you today. If you're a programmer, learn to make a 3D model and
programmer, learn to make a 3D model and get it in game. It's a pain in the ass.
get it in game. It's a pain in the ass. If you're an artist, learn how to code
If you're an artist, learn how to code something in Lure. Free engines like
something in Lure. Free engines like Love 2D exist. They're fantastic and
Love 2D exist. They're fantastic and very easy to use. So have a go. You're a
very easy to use. So have a go. You're a human. Learn music theory. Learn Islamic
human. Learn music theory. Learn Islamic design techniques. Learn film making,
design techniques. Learn film making, theater, learn anything and everything.
theater, learn anything and everything. Think of yourself as an artist or coder
Think of yourself as an artist or coder last. Be a human first because that's
last. Be a human first because that's what you are and that's the most
what you are and that's the most valuable thing about you.
I'm not dropping a mic. I'm having a drink. Rapid team growth is dangerous. I
drink. Rapid team growth is dangerous. I love this quote primarily because it
love this quote primarily because it uses pizza as a metric, which is just
uses pizza as a metric, which is just fantastic. It indicates that he's trying
fantastic. It indicates that he's trying to at least be, you know, a little bit
to at least be, you know, a little bit my people. So, yes, that's Verogles from
my people. So, yes, that's Verogles from Amazon. If your team can eat more than
Amazon. If your team can eat more than two pizzas, it's too large. I've given
two pizzas, it's too large. I've given him that voice. Not it's not quite the
him that voice. Not it's not quite the same one as I used in their
mind. So where does this come from? Um early on in Fable's development at Big
early on in Fable's development at Big Blue Box, there were just three of us,
Blue Box, there were just three of us, me and those two guys sitting down
me and those two guys sitting down there. Communication was really, really
there. Communication was really, really easy. And we were living off savings and
easy. And we were living off savings and a bank loan. And it was kind of weird
a bank loan. And it was kind of weird and stressful and unstable, but still
and stressful and unstable, but still kind of fun. Team and team morale and
kind of fun. Team and team morale and cohesion were pretty darn high. We we
cohesion were pretty darn high. We we didn't really think about those things
didn't really think about those things as an issue. And then we got a deal. The
as an issue. And then we got a deal. The team grew bigger, got a larger office,
team grew bigger, got a larger office, started to fill it with new people, and
started to fill it with new people, and everything was okay up until we hit
everything was okay up until we hit around 12 people. And that's when the
around 12 people. And that's when the rumor mill suddenly developed. We'd have
rumor mill suddenly developed. We'd have people coming up to us and saying, "I
people coming up to us and saying, "I don't know if you know, but half the
don't know if you know, but half the team is saying this game is going to be
team is saying this game is going to be canned in two weeks. Is that true?" And
canned in two weeks. Is that true?" And we'd go, "No." And where the hell did
we'd go, "No." And where the hell did that come from? And the answer is that's
that come from? And the answer is that's just what happens when you start to grow
just what happens when you start to grow teams because what happens is you can't
teams because what happens is you can't have everybody in every meeting at the
have everybody in every meeting at the same time with a large team. It's just
same time with a large team. It's just not going to work. And so what happens
not going to work. And so what happens is you end up with pockets and clicks of
is you end up with pockets and clicks of people going into different meetings and
people going into different meetings and gaps in knowledge develop and people
gaps in knowledge develop and people fill it. They either make up their own
fill it. They either make up their own crap or they misinterpret something
crap or they misinterpret something they've halfheard they don't think
they've halfheard they don't think they're supposed to have heard and
they're supposed to have heard and things start to break down a little bit.
things start to break down a little bit. And we thought we were unique. We
And we thought we were unique. We thought this was just us being really
thought this was just us being really really rubbish. But it turns out that
really rubbish. But it turns out that this is really really common and there
this is really really common and there are really good reasons for it which I'm
are really good reasons for it which I'm going to go
going to go into. Primarily communication paths do
into. Primarily communication paths do not grow linearly with team
not grow linearly with team size. So as I said with a small team you
size. So as I said with a small team you just have a couple of people sitting
just have a couple of people sitting around. Can you do thing? Yes, I can do
around. Can you do thing? Yes, I can do thing. There you go. Team communication
thing. There you go. Team communication 101 sorted. We're experts at
101 sorted. We're experts at this. It's not quite the same as it
this. It's not quite the same as it grows. There's actually an equation for
grows. There's actually an equation for this as well. So, a guy called Fred
this as well. So, a guy called Fred Brooks who wrote a book called the myth
Brooks who wrote a book called the myth my mythical man month which is quite a
my mythical man month which is quite a mouthful and I think everybody is told
mouthful and I think everybody is told to read when they first start KSY or
to read when they first start KSY or they did when I was growing up a very
they did when I was growing up a very long time ago. Um decide that this
long time ago. Um decide that this equation here tells you how many
equation here tells you how many communication lines there are for any
communication lines there are for any team of any size as long as you can
team of any size as long as you can figure out what n is i.e. You can count
figure out what n is i.e. You can count the people in York team and what you end
the people in York team and what you end up with is doink
up with is doink that two people, one line of
that two people, one line of communication all the way up to eight
communication all the way up to eight people, 28 communications. Every one of
people, 28 communications. Every one of those lines represents a potential
those lines represents a potential up represents a potential for somebody
up represents a potential for somebody to misinterpret something that's said by
to misinterpret something that's said by somebody else and to get things horribly
somebody else and to get things horribly wrong to, for example, make a cave piece
wrong to, for example, make a cave piece 400 m long rather than 40 m long. People
400 m long rather than 40 m long. People have seen Spinal Tap. Yay.
have seen Spinal Tap. Yay. Yeah,
Yeah, Stonehenge. It
Stonehenge. It happens. And uh this is this is why
happens. And uh this is this is why producers
producers exist. That's what they're there for.
exist. That's what they're there for. They're people who don't seem very
They're people who don't seem very valuable when you have a company right
valuable when you have a company right in the very beginning. You're kind of
in the very beginning. You're kind of going, "Well, I'm doing art. I'm making
going, "Well, I'm doing art. I'm making stuff. It goes in the game. And I'm
stuff. It goes in the game. And I'm doing coding. It goes in the game. I'm
doing coding. It goes in the game. I'm doing design. I'm telling you what to
doing design. I'm telling you what to do." No, you're not. Oh, all right
do." No, you're not. Oh, all right then. And then you have producers. And
then. And then you have producers. And the producers, every producers, God,
the producers, every producers, God, just gonna come and rearrange the fridge
just gonna come and rearrange the fridge magnets on the front of our fridge
magnets on the front of our fridge again. But they're the people who stop
again. But they're the people who stop that riotous array of lines becoming a
that riotous array of lines becoming a horrific spiderweb that bogs you down
horrific spiderweb that bogs you down and kills your
and kills your game. That was far more dramatic than I
game. That was far more dramatic than I intended to be. It's just bad. But
intended to be. It's just bad. But anyway, there's also something called
anyway, there's also something called the Ringleman
the Ringleman effect. Larger groups lead to less
effect. Larger groups lead to less motivation, coordination, and
motivation, coordination, and productivity. I've decided this guy's
productivity. I've decided this guy's very posh for no good reason. He
very posh for no good reason. He shouldn't be posh because he's actually
shouldn't be posh because he's actually from 1913 and he's a French agricultural
from 1913 and he's a French agricultural engineer. But yeah, he discovered this
engineer. But yeah, he discovered this that basically as his team sizes grew,
that basically as his team sizes grew, everything turned to crap. U that's the
everything turned to crap. U that's the technical way of referring to
technical way of referring to it. So why why decreased motivation?
it. So why why decreased motivation? Well, in a larger group, it's hard to
Well, in a larger group, it's hard to feel that your work counts. You start to
feel that your work counts. You start to feel like a cog in a machine. And if you
feel like a cog in a machine. And if you kind of go, you know what? I'm feeling
kind of go, you know what? I'm feeling knackered. It's Friday. I'm not sure
knackered. It's Friday. I'm not sure anybody's going to care if I spend one
anybody's going to care if I spend one more hour doing this. That's just the
more hour doing this. That's just the way it is. Why decrease coordination?
way it is. Why decrease coordination? Well, I showed you the spiderweb of
Well, I showed you the spiderweb of lines earlier. In a larger group, the
lines earlier. In a larger group, the communication pathways have
communication pathways have exploded. Again, this is why we need
exploded. Again, this is why we need producers. So, what are the suggested
producers. So, what are the suggested solutions? It's okay saying there's this
solutions? It's okay saying there's this problem. So, what do we do to fix it?
problem. So, what do we do to fix it? Okay, I urge you not to look at
Okay, I urge you not to look at Maximleian Ringleman's research on this
Maximleian Ringleman's research on this because it's kind of horrible. Um, his
because it's kind of horrible. Um, his fixes basically involve you turning your
fixes basically involve you turning your company into a version of the Hunger
company into a version of the Hunger Games. Um, I'm not quite sure why, but
Games. Um, I'm not quite sure why, but things like increase surveillance. I
things like increase surveillance. I told you he's posh. Create internal
told you he's posh. Create internal competition. Have them at each other's
competition. Have them at each other's throats. That doesn't seem good. This is
throats. That doesn't seem good. This is a room full of indie developers. We
a room full of indie developers. We don't want to do that. So there is one
don't want to do that. So there is one suggestion though out of all that
suggestion though out of all that research which does seem to work and we
research which does seem to work and we applied it in varying degrees as we went
applied it in varying degrees as we went on and it does seem to work and that's
on and it does seem to work and that's simply increase identifiability in a
simply increase identifiability in a larger team. It's important to assure
larger team. It's important to assure everybody knows the meaning of each
everybody knows the meaning of each person's contribution. People want to
person's contribution. People want to feel useful and needed. They want to
feel useful and needed. They want to know what their role is and why they're
know what their role is and why they're useful and that not that they're not
useful and that not that they're not just another cog in the machine. In
just another cog in the machine. In Bullfrog, Big Blue Box and Lion Head,
Bullfrog, Big Blue Box and Lion Head, this involved making sure we took time
this involved making sure we took time to talk to everyone all the time. Uh
to talk to everyone all the time. Uh we'd also have Friday meetings. people
we'd also have Friday meetings. people could show off what they were doing. And
could show off what they were doing. And giving people an opportunity to show off
giving people an opportunity to show off is
is great, but most of
great, but most of all, think before growing your team.
all, think before growing your team. Think really hard about whether it's the
Think really hard about whether it's the right time, whether you have the right
right time, whether you have the right support in place, and most of all, be
support in place, and most of all, be nice to
nice to produces. This one's a weird one. It'll
produces. This one's a weird one. It'll take a while to
explain. Let that one sink in. So, excellence has a cost. On Fable, I
So, excellence has a cost. On Fable, I once asked an animator for a digging
once asked an animator for a digging animation. Simple request. What I got
animation. Simple request. What I got back was a Pixar quality 12-second
back was a Pixar quality 12-second animation of a tired farm laborer
animation of a tired farm laborer resting on his shovel, wiping his brow,
resting on his shovel, wiping his brow, pushing the spade into the earth,
pushing the spade into the earth, levering up a chunk of turf, and
levering up a chunk of turf, and suffering from acute back back pain. It
suffering from acute back back pain. It was It was beautiful. It was beautiful.
was It was beautiful. It was beautiful. It was It was characterful. It was It
It was It was characterful. It was It was art. It was
was art. It was useless because this is the player's dig
useless because this is the player's dig animation. The player's going to see
animation. The player's going to see that thing a hundred times or more in
that thing a hundred times or more in the game. It wasn't just too long. It
the game. It wasn't just too long. It was also far too
was also far too specific. I had to ask for the animation
specific. I had to ask for the animation to be made more bland, duller. Just
to be made more bland, duller. Just think how counterintuitive that sounds
think how counterintuitive that sounds from you. Just hello. I'm really sorry
from you. Just hello. I'm really sorry the can you can you just like make it
the can you can you just like make it really it's like I know that all the
really it's like I know that all the bank like can
bank like can you just weird but that's what's
you just weird but that's what's necessary if you have really good people
necessary if you have really good people they take pride in their craft pride in
they take pride in their craft pride in work leads to excellence and usually
work leads to excellence and usually quite memorable assets but this level of
quite memorable assets but this level of excellence isn't always a good
excellence isn't always a good thing because blandness helps disguise
thing because blandness helps disguise repetition. There usually isn't enough
repetition. There usually isn't enough manpower to make every single asset in
manpower to make every single asset in your game one use. And if you're reusing
your game one use. And if you're reusing assets, specificity is really bad
assets, specificity is really bad because people's brains are designed to
because people's brains are designed to spot patterns in both visuals and audio.
spot patterns in both visuals and audio. Players notice NPCs talking about having
Players notice NPCs talking about having taken an arrow to the knee for the 500th
taken an arrow to the knee for the 500th time. Players notice the same boulder
time. Players notice the same boulder engraved with Eldrich runes strewn
engraved with Eldrich runes strewn around the same environment a hundred
around the same environment a hundred times. They kind of go, "hm, there it is
times. They kind of go, "hm, there it is again."
again." Players notice these patterns, these
Players notice these patterns, these specifics, and consider the game a
specifics, and consider the game a little bit worse each time they see
little bit worse each time they see them. Slightly worse than a game with
them. Slightly worse than a game with blunder
blunder assets. So, when you're asking for
assets. So, when you're asking for content to be made, communicate the
content to be made, communicate the context of your assets. Be really clear
context of your assets. Be really clear about how how often they will be seen or
about how how often they will be seen or heard, tell content creators how
heard, tell content creators how specific it needs to be. And in a lot of
specific it needs to be. And in a lot of cases, you'll find your assets need to
cases, you'll find your assets need to be bland, and anything else will
be bland, and anything else will actively make your game worse. And you
actively make your game worse. And you might find that your content creators
might find that your content creators thank you for not wasting their
time. So before we move on to the next subject, this is a quick diagram showing
subject, this is a quick diagram showing the continuum of game types as defined
the continuum of game types as defined by me right now that there are no
by me right now that there are no others. That's it. Don't bother reading
others. That's it. Don't bother reading anything
anything else. Not quite true, but just for the
else. Not quite true, but just for the moment, let's pretend. So we get
moment, let's pretend. So we get mechanical at one end like Tetris, chess
mechanical at one end like Tetris, chess where just the rules and the
where just the rules and the configurations of things um are
configurations of things um are everything all the way up to purely
everything all the way up to purely experiential things like proteus where
experiential things like proteus where just being in the world is the thing and
just being in the world is the thing and some people are very denigrating towards
some people are very denigrating towards those sorts of things but they're a
those sorts of things but they're a thing they have their worth. They have
thing they have their worth. They have their
place. So that's the precursor to prototypes can be
prototypes can be misleading. If your game is
misleading. If your game is experiential, it's actually really
experiential, it's actually really difficult to make a prototype. With
difficult to make a prototype. With mechanics driven games, a janky
mechanics driven games, a janky prototype is fine. As long as it lets
prototype is fine. As long as it lets you test the mechanics and rules, it's
you test the mechanics and rules, it's useful. With an experiential game, it's
useful. With an experiential game, it's all about look and feel. And that means
all about look and feel. And that means that a janky prototype really isn't
that a janky prototype really isn't helpful in the slightest. Because if
helpful in the slightest. Because if simply being in your world is the
simply being in your world is the majority of your game's appeal, you
majority of your game's appeal, you can't really test that until the
can't really test that until the experience is close to 100% there.
experience is close to 100% there. Because until that point, it's not the
Because until that point, it's not the world you want people to be wandering
world you want people to be wandering around. You can't test a roller coaster,
around. You can't test a roller coaster, for example, by sitting somebody on one
for example, by sitting somebody on one of these chairs and making whooing
of these chairs and making whooing noises at them. It doesn't
noises at them. It doesn't work. In experiential games, sometimes
work. In experiential games, sometimes so-called polish is the game.
So that is not the sentence I wrote originally. I actually originally wrote
originally. I actually originally wrote a much much ruddder one which I'm going
a much much ruddder one which I'm going to paraphrase here. Fable was a lurching
to paraphrase here. Fable was a lurching joyless horrific experience until the
joyless horrific experience until the last couple of months. If you weren't
last couple of months. If you weren't there, you do not know it was
there, you do not know it was horrible. Thank you very much to those
horrible. Thank you very much to those who didn't go. It was afterwards, too.
who didn't go. It was afterwards, too. Um, that's much appreciated.
Despite having lots of game mechanics in it, Fable was very much an experiential
it, Fable was very much an experiential game. The music, the mood, the the charm
game. The music, the mood, the the charm we were going for, these things really
we were going for, these things really defined Fable, not the raw mechanics and
defined Fable, not the raw mechanics and rules and resources, not the things you
rules and resources, not the things you can prototype relatively easily. During
can prototype relatively easily. During development, we actually threw away at
development, we actually threw away at least one entire combat system. With
least one entire combat system. With what I know now, I suspect that 90% of
what I know now, I suspect that 90% of the reason we threw it away is simply
the reason we threw it away is simply that it wasn't polished. It wasn't
that it wasn't polished. It wasn't finished. We didn't have finished sound
finished. We didn't have finished sound effects, weapon trails, hit particles,
effects, weapon trails, hit particles, and it's really hard to evaluate
and it's really hard to evaluate something like combat without all those
something like combat without all those things. Nevertheless, here are the
things. Nevertheless, here are the lessons I learned from that whole fable
lessons I learned from that whole fable experience and how it applies to
prototyping. There's a weird effect in music production where the louder track
music production where the louder track is played, the better the listener
is played, the better the listener thinks the sound quality is. Exactly the
thinks the sound quality is. Exactly the same track. Just turn the volume to 11.
same track. Just turn the volume to 11. They go, "That's awesome, man. What have
They go, "That's awesome, man. What have you done?" I've turned it to 11. That's
you done?" I've turned it to 11. That's it. Quality judgments can be distorted
it. Quality judgments can be distorted by unrelated factors. Ugly prototypes
by unrelated factors. Ugly prototypes can lead to weird cognitive distortions
can lead to weird cognitive distortions that utterly undermine their value. For
that utterly undermine their value. For experiential games, a bland prototype is
experiential games, a bland prototype is often better than an ugly one. If you
often better than an ugly one. If you don't have representative graphics,
don't have representative graphics, prototype without graphics. Use plain
prototype without graphics. Use plain boxes and spheres instead. If you have
boxes and spheres instead. If you have to keep the prototype completely
to keep the prototype completely separate from the rest of the things in
separate from the rest of the things in the game so you can judge it in
the game so you can judge it in isolation. Most
isolation. Most importantly, define the prototype
importantly, define the prototype success criteria so you reject for the
success criteria so you reject for the right reasons. Before you start, make
right reasons. Before you start, make sure you know, are you prototyping
sure you know, are you prototyping something experiential? What is the
something experiential? What is the scope of your prototype? Have you
scope of your prototype? Have you defined success? If success even isn't
defined success? If success even isn't even achievable at this point, be
even achievable at this point, be especially careful and possibly think
especially careful and possibly think again about doing a
again about doing a prototype. Worst thing about
prototype. Worst thing about experiential games, incidentally, is
experiential games, incidentally, is that you might have to rely on faith for
that you might have to rely on faith for considerably longer than is comfortable.
considerably longer than is comfortable. But that's okay. That's what
But that's okay. That's what experiential games are
like. Art style is more important than you think. I'm sure artists here going,
you think. I'm sure artists here going, "Well, I think art style is quite
"Well, I think art style is quite important actually, so I doubt it's more
important actually, so I doubt it's more important than I
important than I think."
think." Okay, be be
Okay, be be nice. They will also say things like,
nice. They will also say things like, "An art style is something you discover
"An art style is something you discover once you've learned to draw properly.
once you've learned to draw properly. You hack, which is also
You hack, which is also fair. Just we we talk about this
fair. Just we we talk about this afterwards.
afterwards. That's okay if only if you're going to
That's okay if only if you're going to really make art your specialty. I'm not
really make art your specialty. I'm not an artist. I cannot draw. Okay, I state
an artist. I cannot draw. Okay, I state that now openly, cleanly, plainly. I
that now openly, cleanly, plainly. I cannot
draw. But I made that for my wife a couple of years ago. I used a 2D vector
couple of years ago. I used a 2D vector package. It's a really, really simple
package. It's a really, really simple image. It's
image. It's that without colors and gradients. It is
that without colors and gradients. It is just that and no more. You can see how
just that and no more. You can see how simple it is. Because I'm not an artist,
simple it is. Because I'm not an artist, I used a strong style to intro introduce
I used a strong style to intro introduce very strong limitations. And limitations
very strong limitations. And limitations made it easier to come up with
made it easier to come up with variations quickly, which allowed me to
variations quickly, which allowed me to curate rather than create. And yes, I
curate rather than create. And yes, I chose two very similar sounding words,
chose two very similar sounding words, which isn't
which isn't good. Choosing the right style also does
good. Choosing the right style also does something
something magical. Style has the fact you can't
magical. Style has the fact you can't draw. Uh, this is my current project,
draw. Uh, this is my current project, Warden
Warden Cliff. As I said, I'm not an artist. I
Cliff. As I said, I'm not an artist. I really can't draw. I can't model in 3D
really can't draw. I can't model in 3D either, but still. I chose a style that
either, but still. I chose a style that restricted the complexity of my scenes
restricted the complexity of my scenes which allowed me to curate rather than
which allowed me to curate rather than create. There's also something else. And
create. There's also something else. And successful games often have a very, very
successful games often have a very, very strong visual style. My brother and I
strong visual style. My brother and I did a little test quite regularly called
did a little test quite regularly called the 1-in test, which isn't as rude as it
the 1-in test, which isn't as rude as it sounds. Um, it's pretty simple. I'm
sounds. Um, it's pretty simple. I'm going to show you a bunch of screenshot
going to show you a bunch of screenshot sections, no main characters, anything.
sections, no main characters, anything. I want you to shout out what you think
I want you to shout out what you think the games are quickly.
Boink. Awesome. Cross your road.
Right on. Monument
Monument Valley. Isn't that amazing? You just
Valley. Isn't that amazing? You just recognize those games out of thousands
recognize those games out of thousands you know of with minimal information.
you know of with minimal information. The takeaway here should be style is
The takeaway here should be style is marketing. Ultimately, a unique visual
marketing. Ultimately, a unique visual style tells players there might be
style tells players there might be something unique about your game. And
something unique about your game. And having players believe your game is
having players believe your game is unique is half the battle.
unique is half the battle. That's my final point. I'm not even
That's my final point. I'm not even going to talk about it. It's an amazing
going to talk about it. It's an amazing book. Go by. It's not
book. Go by. It's not mine. Slide is going. Three, two, one.
mine. Slide is going. Three, two, one. Bang. Streamline your process. What does
Bang. Streamline your process. What does your iteration cost? No, really. Um, do
your iteration cost? No, really. Um, do you know how much time you waste on
you know how much time you waste on iterations? The little gaps between
iterations? The little gaps between making a change and evaluating it.
making a change and evaluating it. That's the bit I'm trying to get you to
That's the bit I'm trying to get you to think about. Uh, if you do think you
think about. Uh, if you do think you recognize that, be honest. This was the
recognize that, be honest. This was the very first editor I'd used. It's a piece
very first editor I'd used. It's a piece of graph paper which I used during sport
of graph paper which I used during sport at school. Yes, I was that nerd. Uh I
at school. Yes, I was that nerd. Uh I was under the impression that it took me
was under the impression that it took me 10 minutes to make a level. But in
10 minutes to make a level. But in truth, of course, iterating like that,
truth, of course, iterating like that, hand coding it and then typing in data
hand coding it and then typing in data tables in basic is idiotic. And so
tables in basic is idiotic. And so therefore, I never iterated. And I just
therefore, I never iterated. And I just did not want to write an editor. I was
did not want to write an editor. I was stupid and the game suffered. And while
stupid and the game suffered. And while I'm not quite that stupid anymore, even
I'm not quite that stupid anymore, even with Warden Cliff now, I find myself
with Warden Cliff now, I find myself walking to the same place time and time
walking to the same place time and time again in order to test out a ritual. And
again in order to test out a ritual. And part of my brain is resisting writing
part of my brain is resisting writing the tools allowing me to make my job
the tools allowing me to make my job easier. And I was trying to think about
easier. And I was trying to think about why this
why this happens. And I
happens. And I realized that I wasn't convinced it was
realized that I wasn't convinced it was real work. I couldn't take it off on a
real work. I couldn't take it off on a spreadsheet and go, "That's it. That's
spreadsheet and go, "That's it. That's something new in the game. Players will
something new in the game. Players will see because the players weren't seeing
see because the players weren't seeing it. I didn't see it as real." But it was
it. I didn't see it as real." But it was real. It's a form of self-sabotage. So
real. It's a form of self-sabotage. So resist it. Here's some closing thoughts
resist it. Here's some closing thoughts because I'm rapidly running out of time
because I'm rapidly running out of time and I didn't speak anywhere near as
and I didn't speak anywhere near as quickly as I planned to, believe it or
quickly as I planned to, believe it or not. Don't let technology detail your
not. Don't let technology detail your game's core promise. Uh, we did that on
game's core promise. Uh, we did that on Dungeon Keeper. We had a very, very slow
Dungeon Keeper. We had a very, very slow AI update, and Simon and I actually
AI update, and Simon and I actually completely wrecked the game by trying to
completely wrecked the game by trying to make it so you didn't build very much in
make it so you didn't build very much in Dungeon Keeper because it took a second
Dungeon Keeper because it took a second to update the map. Each time that
to update the map. Each time that happens, we oh well, we'll roll the
happens, we oh well, we'll roll the tech. Don't do that. Rethink the tech
tech. Don't do that. Rethink the tech first.
first. Static screenshots have to look good,
Static screenshots have to look good, too. No one pixel lines. I learned that
too. No one pixel lines. I learned that one from Spellrazer. Single pixel lines
one from Spellrazer. Single pixel lines shimmer horribly. And spell spellraer
shimmer horribly. And spell spellraer looks really great moving, but dear God,
looks really great moving, but dear God, it looks dreadful in stills. So, don't
it looks dreadful in stills. So, don't do that either. David
do that either. David Lynch. David Lynch said, "People only
Lynch. David Lynch said, "People only see donuts, not holes." By which he
see donuts, not holes." By which he meant, nobody knows what you cut out.
meant, nobody knows what you cut out. So, when you find yourself cutting
So, when you find yourself cutting things to get a game out on time or to
things to get a game out on time or to finish up a speech very quickly, um,
finish up a speech very quickly, um, don't worry about the things that people
don't worry about the things that people don't ever get to see.
don't ever get to see. unless you told them about them for some
years. And finally, don't panic if your current game sucks. Fix it. Making games
current game sucks. Fix it. Making games is all about making bad games. Being a
is all about making bad games. Being a successful designer means you need to be
successful designer means you need to be comfortable with your game sucking. And
comfortable with your game sucking. And of course, discovering the steps to
of course, discovering the steps to improve it. If your game is bad right
improve it. If your game is bad right now, that's okay. Don't beat yourself
now, that's okay. Don't beat yourself up. The chances are that you're only
up. The chances are that you're only partway through the journey. And that
partway through the journey. And that rather hurriedly is it. Thank you very
rather hurriedly is it. Thank you very much for your time.
much for your time. [Applause]