[Music] Hello. So, um, hi. I'm uh Nicole
Hello. So, um, hi. I'm uh Nicole Berbetum. I'm a indie game developer
Berbetum. I'm a indie game developer from Romania. Uh, and also the founder
from Romania. Uh, and also the founder of those awesome guys, which is quite
of those awesome guys, which is quite ironic because legally I'm the only one
ironic because legally I'm the only one in the company. Uh people also know me
in the company. Uh people also know me as um Celu and I've been uh making games
as um Celu and I've been uh making games for about I think five or six years. The
for about I think five or six years. The number always differs every time I uh I
number always differs every time I uh I um say it. And I've been making a lot of
um say it. And I've been making a lot of uh browser games uh made in Flash. Uh
uh browser games uh made in Flash. Uh I've took part in many game jam and um
I've took part in many game jam and um for the past 2 years I've been working
for the past 2 years I've been working on my most ambitious project yet called
on my most ambitious project yet called Move or Die which is this uh four-player
Move or Die which is this uh four-player party game uh based around the idea that
party game uh based around the idea that if you stand still you explode. Uh and
if you stand still you explode. Uh and uh I'm not only mentioning this uh
uh I'm not only mentioning this uh because well I've been working on it for
because well I've been working on it for wait three three years now two years uh
wait three three years now two years uh and uh also because it's coming up um
and uh also because it's coming up um later this year but also because I'm
later this year but also because I'm going to use it in the context of game
going to use it in the context of game feel. I'm going to use it to talk about
feel. I'm going to use it to talk about why your death animation sucks. So um I
why your death animation sucks. So um I want to talk a bit about feedback. And
want to talk a bit about feedback. And I'm sure all of you know what um
I'm sure all of you know what um feedback is, but I'm not referring to
feedback is, but I'm not referring to the kind of feedback you get from a
the kind of feedback you get from a person. I'm uh referring to the type uh
person. I'm uh referring to the type uh to the type of feedback that you get
to the type of feedback that you get from pressing a physical button. Uh when
from pressing a physical button. Uh when you press a button on a controller, it
you press a button on a controller, it feels much better than uh using a
feels much better than uh using a touchcreen. And I think we can all agree
touchcreen. And I think we can all agree on that. Uh that's probably why I'm not
on that. Uh that's probably why I'm not such a big fan of uh mobile games. And
such a big fan of uh mobile games. And uh the thing is game field doesn't only
uh the thing is game field doesn't only apply to games. It's basically feel with
apply to games. It's basically feel with game appended to it. So we can see it
game appended to it. So we can see it being applied in uh other um uh areas
being applied in uh other um uh areas like have you noticed when you're when
like have you noticed when you're when you're typing a message on your phone or
you're typing a message on your phone or when you're sending an email how when uh
when you're sending an email how when uh whenever you press uh a letter it pop it
whenever you press uh a letter it pop it pops above your finger and it makes a
pops above your finger and it makes a little sound effect or maybe the phone
little sound effect or maybe the phone vibrates. All of these are not cosmetic
vibrates. All of these are not cosmetic only. Uh they're also functional because
only. Uh they're also functional because uh now you no longer have to offset your
uh now you no longer have to offset your um your vision from the keypad to the
um your vision from the keypad to the actual message to see if your input
actual message to see if your input registered. You already know it did
registered. You already know it did because you heard that little clicky
because you heard that little clicky sound or you felt the phone vibrate. So
sound or you felt the phone vibrate. So it makes the act of typing a message
it makes the act of typing a message much much faster and more enjoyable. Uh
much much faster and more enjoyable. Uh and this is how game field can make an
and this is how game field can make an experience better. Uh, I want to show a
experience better. Uh, I want to show a few examples of a game field when it's
few examples of a game field when it's done right and when it's not done right.
done right and when it's not done right. And this is the first
[Music]
example. Yeah. So, I don't know what that was. Uh, it's just a random game I
that was. Uh, it's just a random game I found on YouTube. I don't even know the
found on YouTube. I don't even know the name of it. Uh but yeah, that game looks
name of it. Uh but yeah, that game looks like it feels horrible. I mean, um
like it feels horrible. I mean, um there's a there's no uh muzzle flash on
there's a there's no uh muzzle flash on the shotgun. There's like a smoke asset
the shotgun. There's like a smoke asset that lasts for like three frames and the
that lasts for like three frames and the sound effect is really cheap and it
sound effect is really cheap and it doesn't make you feel like you're
doesn't make you feel like you're shooting a real gun. It kind of feels
shooting a real gun. It kind of feels like you're playing around with a toy
like you're playing around with a toy gun. Uh and it doesn't give weight to
gun. Uh and it doesn't give weight to the weapon. So, that feels bad without
the weapon. So, that feels bad without even mentioning the way the guy died and
even mentioning the way the guy died and that he has 24 rounds in a pumpaction
that he has 24 rounds in a pumpaction shotgun. Uh, but that doesn't count.
shotgun. Uh, but that doesn't count. This is an example of a weapon done
well. Are you drunk?
Right. So, that's Bullet Storm, and that feels amazing. Uh, that's a flail gun if
feels amazing. Uh, that's a flail gun if I'm not mistaken. And it shoots two
I'm not mistaken. And it shoots two bombs chained together and you can see
bombs chained together and you can see them wrap around your enemy and you can
them wrap around your enemy and you can remotely detonate them and see the guts
remotely detonate them and see the guts fly all over the screen. And that's so
fly all over the screen. And that's so good. Uh, in conclusion, the thing is
good. Uh, in conclusion, the thing is game feel is the kind of thing that uh
game feel is the kind of thing that uh when it's there, nobody notices it, but
when it's there, nobody notices it, but when it's not there, everybody notices
when it's not there, everybody notices it. It's the kind of thing that makes
it. It's the kind of thing that makes you say, "This game feels good, but I
you say, "This game feels good, but I don't know why." And um I'm going to uh
don't know why." And um I'm going to uh create a death animation in the context
create a death animation in the context of move or die without using any um
of move or die without using any um handdrawn frame by frame explosions or
handdrawn frame by frame explosions or anything like that. And I'm going to try
anything like that. And I'm going to try to make it feel good. So let's see. I am
to make it feel good. So let's see. I am going to assume we don't have anything.
going to assume we don't have anything. So I'm going to start with the basics.
So I'm going to start with the basics. And I'm going to need movement and a
And I'm going to need movement and a death condition. So, I'm going to skip
death condition. So, I'm going to skip the movement part because you can pretty
the movement part because you can pretty much find all over the internet the
much find all over the internet the building blocks of game development, how
building blocks of game development, how to create uh physics. But for the sake
to create uh physics. But for the sake of this presentation, uh I'm going to
of this presentation, uh I'm going to take the life mechanic out so you won't
take the life mechanic out so you won't explode if you stand still. But I'm
explode if you stand still. But I'm going to say that whenever a player
going to say that whenever a player jumps on another player, that player
jumps on another player, that player will explode. So, I'm talking about
will explode. So, I'm talking about games here, and I could be showcasing
games here, and I could be showcasing this using photos or images, uh, sorry,
this using photos or images, uh, sorry, or videos, but I'm talking about the
or videos, but I'm talking about the game. So, let's make this interactive.
game. So, let's make this interactive. So, it's going to be stupid and I really
So, it's going to be stupid and I really hope it works. What I have here is two
hope it works. What I have here is two controllers, and I'm what I'm going to
controllers, and I'm what I'm going to attempt to do is have two people from
attempt to do is have two people from the audience play the game in real time
the audience play the game in real time as I'm building it. So, who wants to try
as I'm building it. So, who wants to try this? I want to see some hands up
this? I want to see some hands up and somebody helps me spread these
and somebody helps me spread these out. Give it to somebody around
out. Give it to somebody around there. So, uh, or you cool. So, what I'm
there. So, uh, or you cool. So, what I'm going to need you two to do is whenever
going to need you two to do is whenever the game appears on screen, run at each
the game appears on screen, run at each other and jump on each other's heads.
other and jump on each other's heads. What I'm going to need everybody else do
What I'm going to need everybody else do is give them a round of applause anytime
is give them a round of applause anytime they do so to show our appreciation for
they do so to show our appreciation for them helping me make this work. So,
them helping me make this work. So, let's see if this work.
[Applause]
[Music] Go. Come on. Nice.
Go. Come on. Nice. [Music]
[Music] cool, except it's not cool. It's
cool, except it's not cool. It's horrible. It's not good enough. Uh there
horrible. It's not good enough. Uh there are no animations. The characters
are no animations. The characters disappear instantly. It feels bad. It
disappear instantly. It feels bad. It doesn't feel rewarding to eliminate your
doesn't feel rewarding to eliminate your opponent. So, uh what should we add? We
opponent. So, uh what should we add? We should add animations. So, I'm going to
should add animations. So, I'm going to create an animation, talk a bit about
create an animation, talk a bit about sprite sheets versus asset sheets,
sprite sheets versus asset sheets, export pack, and implement them. So the
export pack, and implement them. So the first thing I do uh in mover or die is I
first thing I do uh in mover or die is I split the character into many tiny
split the character into many tiny pieces. Then I can later import in Adobe
pieces. Then I can later import in Adobe Flash where I make all my animations and
Flash where I make all my animations and I animate uh uh I animate them in Flash
I animate uh uh I animate them in Flash and then I have to decide how I
and then I have to decide how I implement the the graphics in the game.
implement the the graphics in the game. The most most common uh method is sprite
The most most common uh method is sprite sheets. And I'm sure all of you know
sheets. And I'm sure all of you know what a spreadsheet is. And just in case
what a spreadsheet is. And just in case somebody doesn't, uh it's basically all
somebody doesn't, uh it's basically all the frames of the animation stored in a
the frames of the animation stored in a bigger image. So, uh I don't use this.
bigger image. So, uh I don't use this. The reason I don't use this is because
The reason I don't use this is because it's quite a big image uh and um uh it
it's quite a big image uh and um uh it takes a lot of resources and especially
takes a lot of resources and especially if you have a game with really high
if you have a game with really high resolution assets uh and a lot of
resolution assets uh and a lot of animations, it can basically make your
animations, it can basically make your computer catch on fire. So, um, what I
computer catch on fire. So, um, what I am using is something I call asset
am using is something I call asset sheets, which I'm still not sure if it
sheets, which I'm still not sure if it has an official name, but that's what I
has an official name, but that's what I call them, which is basically the same
call them, which is basically the same thing, but instead of exporting each
thing, but instead of exporting each frame of the animation, I export each uh
frame of the animation, I export each uh part of my character and then export the
part of my character and then export the animation separately using a custom
animation separately using a custom exporter as a text file. So, this is how
exporter as a text file. So, this is how a frame looks like in the animation. And
a frame looks like in the animation. And I have there the x y coordinates, scale,
I have there the x y coordinates, scale, rotation, alpha, and I can um
rotation, alpha, and I can um interchange these variables very easy.
interchange these variables very easy. So um as a comparison, this is how the
So um as a comparison, this is how the sprite sheet would look for those like
sprite sheet would look for those like what four or five animations I showed
what four or five animations I showed before. And this would be 5700 by 3100
before. And this would be 5700 by 3100 pixels, which is quite a lot. Uh in
pixels, which is quite a lot. Uh in comparison, this is the asset sheet,
comparison, this is the asset sheet, which is 460 by 210, which is less than
which is 460 by 210, which is less than 1% of the number of pixels. So, uh, the
1% of the number of pixels. So, uh, the advantage with asset sheets is that
advantage with asset sheets is that they're they're small, they're flexible,
they're they're small, they're flexible, optimized. Uh, you have individual
optimized. Uh, you have individual control over many variables. I could,
control over many variables. I could, uh, for example, if I wanted a different
uh, for example, if I wanted a different character with a bigger right leg. I
character with a bigger right leg. I wouldn't have to export another like
wouldn't have to export another like sprite sheet and go through the whole
sprite sheet and go through the whole process again. I could just, uh, change
process again. I could just, uh, change the scale number in the code and have it
the scale number in the code and have it done real time. So, that's awesome. And
done real time. So, that's awesome. And another awesome thing is interpolation.
another awesome thing is interpolation. I'm sure you all played the game that uh
I'm sure you all played the game that uh uses sprite sheets animations and uh
uses sprite sheets animations and uh tries to go into slow motion and it
tries to go into slow motion and it looks really choppy because it plays the
looks really choppy because it plays the same frame uh multiple times. But with
same frame uh multiple times. But with uh asset sheets and having the frame as
uh asset sheets and having the frame as text, you can uh spread them apart and
text, you can uh spread them apart and interpolate between them and create data
interpolate between them and create data where there is none. So you can have
where there is none. So you can have really smooth slow motion which looks
really smooth slow motion which looks really awesome uh and it's really
really awesome uh and it's really awesome to have as a tool. So, uh, let's
awesome to have as a tool. So, uh, let's see how the game looks with animations
see how the game looks with animations in
in it.
it. [Music]
[Music] Go. Nice. It It already looks much
Go. Nice. It It already looks much [Music]
better. Who's the yellow one? You're the yellow. Who's the blue one? Oh, by the
yellow. Who's the blue one? Oh, by the way, let's do something. Every time you
way, let's do something. Every time you die, pass the controller to somebody
die, pass the controller to somebody else. One more.
else. One more. Cool. Enough of that. It's not good.
Cool. Enough of that. It's not good. It's still not good enough. There are
It's still not good enough. There are animations, but um it still doesn't feel
animations, but um it still doesn't feel rewarding. So, uh what could I add to
rewarding. So, uh what could I add to make this feel better? Any
make this feel better? Any suggestions? Just yell it out loud.
suggestions? Just yell it out loud. Screen shake. Sound. Sound effect.
Screen shake. Sound. Sound effect. Somebody said sound. Good. So, I'm going
Somebody said sound. Good. So, I'm going to add sound effects. So, um, for sound
to add sound effects. So, um, for sound effects, I'm going to do movement,
effects, I'm going to do movement, death, and the environment. So, uh,
death, and the environment. So, uh, sound effects are really important and
sound effects are really important and they make a huge difference and it like
they make a huge difference and it like it's really sad to see that developers
it's really sad to see that developers leave this at the last step in the
leave this at the last step in the development. Uh, and they're really
development. Uh, and they're really important because they completely change
important because they completely change the feel of the game. So, here are uh,
the feel of the game. So, here are uh, some examples. I've sent uh game uh some
some examples. I've sent uh game uh some gameplay footage uh to some sound
gameplay footage uh to some sound designers and I asked them to do sound
designers and I asked them to do sound effects without any context. I just gave
effects without any context. I just gave them a a piece of footage without any
them a a piece of footage without any sound in it. So this is how it
[Music]
sounds. Okay, fair enough. Uh the thing is I did this with multiple sound uh
is I did this with multiple sound uh designers. So here is another example
designers. So here is another example and how it completely changes the way
and how it completely changes the way the game
[Music] [Applause]
feels. As you can see, this one was a bit more moody. There was a lot of uh
bit more moody. There was a lot of uh echo and it felt like a bigger
echo and it felt like a bigger environment only by uh changing the
environment only by uh changing the sound effects. Uh lastly, this is uh a
sound effects. Uh lastly, this is uh a last third example which is my personal
last third example which is my personal favorite. See
[Applause]
why right? So you can see how important sound effects
are. Um so let's add sound effects. I'm going to add sound effects uh for
going to add sound effects uh for movement. And it's really important to
movement. And it's really important to have them be very subtle and a lot of
have them be very subtle and a lot of variation. So, um, let's start with a
variation. So, um, let's start with a jumping sound effect. It's going to
jumping sound effect. It's going to sound like
sound like this. Cool. So, this is a simple, uh,
this. Cool. So, this is a simple, uh, jumping sound effect. The thing is, it
jumping sound effect. The thing is, it repeats a lot and it's really annoying
repeats a lot and it's really annoying when you have like when you play a game
when you have like when you play a game and there are like only two footstep
and there are like only two footstep sounds and it's really freaking
sounds and it's really freaking annoying. So, what I'm going to do is
annoying. So, what I'm going to do is make it subtle, and I'm going to turn
make it subtle, and I'm going to turn down the
down the volume, which is right off the bat much
volume, which is right off the bat much better. But I want to add variation. So,
better. But I want to add variation. So, I'm going to use a little trick here.
I'm going to use a little trick here. Uh, instead of using multiple sound
Uh, instead of using multiple sound files, what I'm going to do is bend the
files, what I'm going to do is bend the pitch of the sound in real time every
pitch of the sound in real time every time it plays. So, with that, it's like
time it plays. So, with that, it's like one line of code, and you get
this only by uh by adding a slight um pitch band. So, that's a a simple
pitch band. So, that's a a simple jumping sound effect. Uh, when it comes
jumping sound effect. Uh, when it comes to footsteps,
to footsteps, uh, really subtle and a lot of
uh, really subtle and a lot of variation. Uh, I didn't add any
variation. Uh, I didn't add any footsteps in a move or die because there
footsteps in a move or die because there are four characters. They're really
are four characters. They're really small and they run really, really fast.
small and they run really, really fast. So, having footsteps for those would be
So, having footsteps for those would be kind of suicidal. Uh, so I skipped that
kind of suicidal. Uh, so I skipped that and um jump to the death sound effect,
and um jump to the death sound effect, which I'm going to combine multiple
which I'm going to combine multiple sounds to create a satisfying end
sounds to create a satisfying end result. So, I'm going to start with
result. So, I'm going to start with strong impact that sounds like this.
strong impact that sounds like this. Awesome. Uh, I'm going to layer it on
Awesome. Uh, I'm going to layer it on top of a smaller
top of a smaller impact. Cool. And finally, I'm going to
impact. Cool. And finally, I'm going to need a really satisfying squishy
need a really satisfying squishy sound. Yeah, it doesn't make much sense,
sound. Yeah, it doesn't make much sense, but it's going to make more sense later
but it's going to make more sense later on. So, I'm going to combine all of
on. So, I'm going to combine all of these to create this sound
these to create this sound effect. Nice. Now, this sounds like
effect. Nice. Now, this sounds like satisfying. When you kill somebody, you
satisfying. When you kill somebody, you want to hear this. Uh, and one last
want to hear this. Uh, and one last thing, uh, the environment. It's really
thing, uh, the environment. It's really important to add sound effects to your
important to add sound effects to your environment. You notice those little two
environment. You notice those little two blocks that disappear when you touch
blocks that disappear when you touch them. They're going to make this sound
them. They're going to make this sound and that's it. It's really important
and that's it. It's really important because, uh, you want to add context to
because, uh, you want to add context to the world around you. When you play a
the world around you. When you play a first-person shooter and you knock over
first-person shooter and you knock over a chair, you want to hear it hit the
a chair, you want to hear it hit the ground. Otherwise, it doesn't have
ground. Otherwise, it doesn't have weight to it. So, bless you. Let's see
weight to it. So, bless you. Let's see how the game sounds with sound effects
how the game sounds with sound effects in it.
[Music] Nice quick
controller. And come on.
Nice. Cool. I have to go really fast through these because I don't have much
through these because I don't have much time. So, you know what I'm going to
time. So, you know what I'm going to say? It's not good enough. So, um, what
say? It's not good enough. So, um, what I'm going to do next is I'm going to add
I'm going to do next is I'm going to add something I call death paint. I need a
something I call death paint. I need a way to show where a character died and
way to show where a character died and reward you for eliminating your opponent
reward you for eliminating your opponent by leaving a little uh splatter on the
by leaving a little uh splatter on the background. So, what I did is I went on
background. So, what I did is I went on the internet and found these uh assets
the internet and found these uh assets and I changed them to match the colors
and I changed them to match the colors of the player. And what I'm going to do
of the player. And what I'm going to do is spawn one in the background whenever
is spawn one in the background whenever somebody dies. So, they're going to look
somebody dies. So, they're going to look like this. Um I'm going to add a bit of
like this. Um I'm going to add a bit of variation by rotating them and changing
variation by rotating them and changing their scale. Uh, but they will match the
their scale. Uh, but they will match the the player's color. So, they're going to
the player's color. So, they're going to look like this, which is absolutely
look like this, which is absolutely horrible and it looks ugly. So, um, what
horrible and it looks ugly. So, um, what I'm going to do is I'm going to render
I'm going to do is I'm going to render them behind everything except the
them behind everything except the background. So, that's much better, but
background. So, that's much better, but it's still not good enough. I want it to
it's still not good enough. I want it to also make a make an impact on the floor
also make a make an impact on the floor and on the tiles around
and on the tiles around you. Sorry. So, uh, what I'm going to do
you. Sorry. So, uh, what I'm going to do is I'm going to create an alpha mask for
is I'm going to create an alpha mask for the ground and the tiles, and I'm going
the ground and the tiles, and I'm going to apply that on a second layer of paint
to apply that on a second layer of paint that's going to go on the foreground.
that's going to go on the foreground. So, that's going to look like that,
So, that's going to look like that, which is much much better. Uh, also,
which is much much better. Uh, also, it's on additive uh, blending mode. But
it's on additive uh, blending mode. But before the demo, I want to add one more
before the demo, I want to add one more thing. Uh because we all love particles,
thing. Uh because we all love particles, I'm going to add particles that fly out
I'm going to add particles that fly out of the player that died and they're
of the player that died and they're going to leave a little splatter
going to leave a little splatter everywhere they touch um the ground or
everywhere they touch um the ground or the tiles around them. So, let's see how
the tiles around them. So, let's see how the game looks with those. Make a
[Music] [Applause]
[Applause] mess. Come on. We need some blue. There
mess. Come on. We need some blue. There we go. Cool. Imagine this with four
we go. Cool. Imagine this with four players.
players. Nice. Now, these flatters also fade out
Nice. Now, these flatters also fade out in time. So, it tells you when a player
in time. So, it tells you when a player died in time. So, enough of
died in time. So, enough of that. You know what I'm going to say.
that. You know what I'm going to say. It's not good enough. So, uh, what
It's not good enough. So, uh, what should I add to make this feel even
should I add to make this feel even better? Somebody said something around
better? Somebody said something around here.
here. Screen shake. Is anybody from Vamir in
Screen shake. Is anybody from Vamir in the audience?
the audience? So, uh, I'm going to add a few final
So, uh, I'm going to add a few final touches. I'm going to add screen shake,
touches. I'm going to add screen shake, chromatic aberration, uh, shockwave, and
chromatic aberration, uh, shockwave, and haptic feedback. So, uh, screen shake,
haptic feedback. So, uh, screen shake, it's really simple. Uh, it's going to
it's really simple. Uh, it's going to play out whenever somebody dies. This is
play out whenever somebody dies. This is a bit too much for the sake of the
a bit too much for the sake of the presentation. So, I'm going to tone that
presentation. So, I'm going to tone that down a little bit. And it's going to
down a little bit. And it's going to look like Come Oh, there we go. Cool.
look like Come Oh, there we go. Cool. So, that looks good. Uh, but it's still
So, that looks good. Uh, but it's still not good enough. I'm going to add
not good enough. I'm going to add chromatic aberration. uh for those who
chromatic aberration. uh for those who don't know is basically splitting the
don't know is basically splitting the color channels and offsetting them which
color channels and offsetting them which is slowly becoming the new lens flare of
is slowly becoming the new lens flare of 2015. So I'm going to do that and
2015. So I'm going to do that and animate it whenever somebody dies and
animate it whenever somebody dies and it's going to look like
it's going to look like this. Cool. Which is again a bit
this. Cool. Which is again a bit exaggerated. Uh and also I mentioned
exaggerated. Uh and also I mentioned shockwave. I'm going to create basically
shockwave. I'm going to create basically a white donut that keeps growing and I'm
a white donut that keeps growing and I'm going to apply that as a displacement
going to apply that as a displacement map on the whole screen whenever
map on the whole screen whenever somebody dies and it's going to make
somebody dies and it's going to make this ripple in the screen which looks
this ripple in the screen which looks really satisfying. Uh, and finally,
really satisfying. Uh, and finally, haptic feedback. The controller will
haptic feedback. The controller will vibrate whenever you die. You guys won't
vibrate whenever you die. You guys won't be able to tell this, but those who are
be able to tell this, but those who are playing will. So, go ask them after the
playing will. So, go ask them after the presentation. Um, and let's see how all
presentation. Um, and let's see how all that comes together in the game.
[Music]
Nice. You're having
fun. Cool. So, uh, all of all of these are really important because, um, not
are really important because, um, not not only do they look good, like the
not only do they look good, like the chromatic abration and the screen shake
chromatic abration and the screen shake and all that, they also let you know
and all that, they also let you know that somebody else died somewhere else
that somebody else died somewhere else on the screen without you having to look
on the screen without you having to look there. Uh, so it gives you like a
there. Uh, so it gives you like a contextual um, uh, peripheral vision.
contextual um, uh, peripheral vision. So, I'm going to say that's good enough,
So, I'm going to say that's good enough, at least for now. Um, but there are
at least for now. Um, but there are there are a lot of things uh you might
there are a lot of things uh you might have missed. Uh, there are um, have you
have missed. Uh, there are um, have you noticed the little props that are on the
noticed the little props that are on the ground that characters can kick around?
ground that characters can kick around? It also gives a weight and depth to the
It also gives a weight and depth to the to the universe of the game. Uh, the
to the universe of the game. Uh, the landing dust. Uh, this is really
landing dust. Uh, this is really important. There is a mode in the game
important. There is a mode in the game where every player is invisible on the
where every player is invisible on the same screen and you have to figure out
same screen and you have to figure out where you and the other players are only
where you and the other players are only based on that little puff of dust. uh
based on that little puff of dust. uh the eyes, the characters look at each
the eyes, the characters look at each other all the time and this is really
other all the time and this is really important to have um personalities
important to have um personalities injected in your characters and in the
injected in your characters and in the in the full game uh they uh they're
in the full game uh they uh they're happy when they win, they cry when they
happy when they win, they cry when they lose and when you're tied with somebody
lose and when you're tied with somebody score-wise, they give each other mean
score-wise, they give each other mean looks. Uh and finally, rhythm. All the
looks. Uh and finally, rhythm. All the background uh elements pulsated on the
background uh elements pulsated on the rhythm of the music. So that gives the
rhythm of the music. So that gives the game uh a nice rhythm to it. And uh one
game uh a nice rhythm to it. And uh one last thing uh before I end this, I want
last thing uh before I end this, I want to end this on a high note. So I'm going
to end this on a high note. So I'm going to try to make something epic. Uh can
to try to make something epic. Uh can the yellow player go in the other uh
the yellow player go in the other uh corner of the screen and the blue one in
corner of the screen and the blue one in this one? Okay, stay there. And what I'm
this one? Okay, stay there. And what I'm going to do is I'm going to do a
going to do is I'm going to do a countdown. And when I say go, I want you
countdown. And when I say go, I want you to run at each other and jump on each
to run at each other and jump on each other's head. Uh except I'm going to
other's head. Uh except I'm going to make this a bit more epic. Let's see if
make this a bit more epic. Let's see if this works. So stay
this works. So stay there. Ready? Three, two, one,
there. Ready? Three, two, one, [Music]
go. Go, go, go, go,
go. Blue. Let him kill you. Let him
kill the timing. Nice.
you. Thank you very much. This was just a small uh demonstration. The whole game
a small uh demonstration. The whole game is currently in early access on Steam.
is currently in early access on Steam. You can um get it there and give it a
You can um get it there and give it a try. And um again uh thank you for
try. And um again uh thank you for having me here and let's this keep let's
having me here and let's this keep let's keep this conversation going. You can
keep this conversation going. You can find me on Twitter, Skype, Facebook,
find me on Twitter, Skype, Facebook, whatever. If you're using email, do
whatever. If you're using email, do that. Uh let's keep this conversation
that. Uh let's keep this conversation going and um if any of you have any
going and um if any of you have any questions or if we have time for
questions or if we have time for questions. Yeah, we have time for
questions. Yeah, we have time for questions. Go ahead.
questions. Go ahead. Anyone?
Anyone? I could I could leave the game.
All right. Ah, that won't work. Never mind.
All right. Thanks.
Thank you.