So this is co managing, building an effective manager and direct relationship.
So friendly reminder from our staff, please silence your phones.
Um We will have a QR code present at some point.
We will let you know when to pull it up and take photos.
Um And thank you so much for being here.
So
this is me. I am Katie Golden. I'm the executive producer at Wonder Woman.
I've been a manager for about four years.
I've been in the industry for about 10 years.
I'm associated with all these icons that you see here.
They are part of my lexicon of where I have worked
and I will be driving the manager portion of the conversation,
-- but I'm gonna kick it off with Aaron here to discuss the direct -- portion.
Awesome. Thank you, Katie and hi everybody. My name is Aaron Lee.
I'm currently an associate director of production over at second dinner.
You know, Katie and I have worked collectively for 25 years in games,
shipping games to communities that we love.
We've found solidarity and talking about our successes and our failures
and what we've both tried as directs and managers.
So we're here to share more with you.
So first note in an analysis released by mckinsey,
they say your relationship with your manager is
actually a top factor in your job satisfaction,
which means as a result,
it is the second most important determinant in your overall well being
only mental health is higher.
The manager
direct relationship is not a new challenge, but it is vital to our careers.
So we need to bring attention to it consistently
and talk about new approaches and new materials year over year
because you know,
building an effective relationship together is more important over that time.
For today's talk,
we're going to carry you through some key areas you can focus on in developing your
relationship further and we're gonna bring you actionable
tactics that you can try now for being managed
and for managing.
We're here to talk through those actions.
We brought some resources to help like Katie mentioned, we have a QR code later on.
But if you see a doc icon on the slide,
it actually means we have something in that QR code for you
and you might have noticed.
But we brought some friends along like Dwight
and Leslie as you'll see through today's talk.
So we've learned something and that is trial and error
is key and no two relationships look the same.
So our challenge for you today is to pick one thing from today that you want to try,
test it out,
try it again. And find what works for you.
So let's figure out what we want to try today.
So to all the reports in the room, which is probably all of you
uh when it comes to being managed,
a tough lesson that can influence your approach to your career is that
managers are human
and that while managers should care about your career,
no one is going to care about your career more than yourself.
It doesn't excuse managers from the effort that they should put in.
But I do believe that acknowledging this can be freeing.
It can be this lens that you use in approaching your relationship.
And when we do use this lens, it can push us to better know ourselves, our systems
and our managers. So the actions we're gonna discuss today could lead to
more contextual and nuanced conversations and it could help you take
a more active role in participating in what you can control.
So the great thing is the first thing that we can do doesn't require a manager at all.
It is the work to know ourselves better. It is that internal, fun time
to get to know yourself, to understand what's important and why.
And this can be a critical step be
because if
the expectations we put on our managers are
that they support your career and your opportunity,
you need to give them a more complete picture of what's important to you because
that will help them better advocate for us even when we're not in the room.
So the first thing you can do is run through
an exercise like your own personal Q and A session,
do this on your own or with a trusted friend.
And this is also an exercise you can repeat over your career.
I would say do it yearly, do it every time you change a role.
Um And we won't go through every single question on this list.
And you're not required to answer every question on this list.
But a few example, questions could look like
identifying what work fulfills you and what actually drains you.
But also taking a hard look at how you
could even stack rank priorities in your career.
So we're talking about things like
the importance of having a good manager,
the importance of the team or the project that you're on or even money and title.
This is a tough question because it
forces us to really say,
would I choose money over title or would I
choose a project over having a good manager?
Well, we're rarely in a position to have everything at once.
So what would you actually prioritize?
And where do you think you'd compromise at this point in your career?
And an example of how this can manifest if
you get to know yourself a little bit better,
you know, on the surface level,
everyone's probably said they've wanted a promotion before,
but it can look different for two people, it can look very different for two people.
And both of those examples on the screen are OK.
But knowing these nuances can help your conversation,
they can also lead to better opportunities because now that your manager has
a bit more insight into the why about what's important to you,
they might have some opportunities for you in areas you can grow.
So some next steps after you do that,
you want to take these takeaways to your manager unintended.
Um get it into a conversation with your manager. Make it a one on one topic.
We're gonna talk about that later
and share as much as you're comfortable with.
You're not required to tell them every single answer
that you answered on that Q and A sheet,
just tell them your takeaways and what's important to you.
And while we're talking about sharing with your manager,
I wanna mention one lesson,
both myself and many other leaders have experienced and discussed.
And that was we all thought if we worked hard enough and we did a good job
that we would get the thing that we want.
Sounds familiar, right? You feel like you do a good job, you're gonna get it.
Well, a lot of us that doesn't actually happen.
Um It wasn't true and the reason for this was
we didn't ask, we didn't say what we wanted.
We place a lot of weight on our managers for understanding us,
for knowing what we want and knowing that we're doing
a good job and how we're gonna get that.
But in reality, they can't know what's in our minds.
So we have to tell them,
I get it talking about what you want
is hard. It makes you vulnerable.
But I would encourage you to find ways to become comfortable with this
talk with your friends, trusted friends on ways to do this. Practice with them.
You can even tell your manager I'm not comfortable asking for what I want.
Can we exercise this? Can you help me work on this? That is something that they can
and should help you with?
Because I can guarantee you,
you're going to have a higher chance of not
getting the thing you want by staying silent.
So congratulations, we all get to know ourselves a little bit better.
We're now gonna turn our attention on ways to partner with your
manager as a further extension of how you advocate for yourself.
And a major step you can take is learning about the system that you operate in.
So we're gonna talk a little bit
more specifically about performance and reward structures.
And when I say this, I'm not telling you to understand the concept of this system.
I'm telling you to understand how it works
at your company. Your managers should understand this,
but I would encourage you all to educate yourself on this because it can
give you insight to that process and what you can control with them.
And I would say don't wait till re review season to actually learn this,
go find what resources are available to you now.
And if they don't exist because some places don't have these types of things,
you can work with your manager on building some flexible structure for you.
For example, pulling other company J DS to help build
role guidelines for you as something that you can look up and build on.
There are some standard items to investigate here and
you can go find uh for your company.
But I wanna make one call out here and that's requirements for managers.
For example, when a manager submits a promotion for you,
um some companies require what we call business justification.
Managers have to prove your role needs to be higher for the project. And as a result,
um
they need to provide this business of uh sorry,
they need to provide a business justification.
And
what that ultimately means is you could be
competent in your role
and you could be doing all the right things,
but your manager actually has to prove positive
impact that that role needs to be higher,
both for the project and for the company.
So I'll say it again.
They need to not only show that your competent at your role, but the business
succeeds as a result of it.
That kind of sucks
because we're all doing what we possibly can
and that's a bummer. But the thing I would say is
if you know this and you're working with your manager
before review season, you can start talking to them about, hey,
if there's a business justification, how can I help write that with you?
Can we try to figure that out?
So I know when you're going to advocate,
that's something that I know what you're gonna talk about and how
other considerations not outlined in wikis are things like,
are there unwritten values your company or team may
support that could be reflected in your reviews?
What specifically do they want to talk about? Do they want you to talk about
a list of accomplishments that you've done?
Do they want you to talk about your impact
in certain areas or how you lift others up or do they want you to talk about all of that?
You can also partner with your manager to find examples
of success and failures of advancement at your company.
So if you know people who have succeeded in this or failed,
you might actually get to go learn what's worked and what hasn't.
And that can allow you to avoid some pitfalls when you work
with your manager on trying to build that case for yourself.
And while performance reviews also happen only twice, once or twice a year,
we want to be sure throughout the year that you're showing up and partnering,
partnering with your manager and that can look like documenting your growth,
documenting your impact and driving your one on ones
and a bonus.
All the things that we're gonna cover in a minute can even help you
if you transition managers because you will not start from zero by doing that.
So if you're focused on growth,
I recommend that you maintain a document where you can
assess where you are compared to your next level.
This is also known as a gap analysis.
This is where you can look at competencies filled out for your role and
then start to identify where you're strong and where you want to improve.
This type of exercise.
Actually does require partnering with your manager because you are both
going to assess where you're at and then discuss that together
a line on where you may have disagreed and then create an actual
action plan for how you want to move forward.
Your biggest step here today could be just
asking your manager to start this process together.
And a common issue with this is that
like I said, um once everything is checked off,
that may not mean that you are going to get that promotion.
Like I said, there are factors that are out of your control, but I would say that
please don't let that dissuade you,
please focus on what you can control because you know,
you could always make a decision to find a company
that can and will promote you in the future,
but do what you can control.
So additionally, with self reviews, we are asked about our achievements,
what we achieved over the year, right?
But if you start recalling details from a year ago, it starts to look blurry.
You don't recall specific details.
It's really hard to figure out what your impact was
a year ago if you're not really tracking that.
So a recommendation here is to maintain a document and update it regularly.
I would recommend weekly because that time sync can look
a lot more like 10 to 20 minutes a week
and your details are still crisp in your head. At this point in time,
you can list accomplishments, the impact you drove,
you can provide links to resources that you want to recall later.
Um
But the benefits of this could be that you
are saving time and energy come review season.
It is also a great look back to what you've done and how you've grown for me.
It makes me feel really great to go back and take a look at these things.
And it also can lead to a more complete narrative that you can write for yourself.
Come review season.
The bonus is you could tell your manager you're gonna
give them access throughout the entire year of this talk.
And they can look at this week over
week and indirectly see what you're accomplishing week,
over week
without having to tell them all the time
while we're in progression mindset,
we are gonna talk about a very valuable channel for growth.
And that is your one on ones.
Everyone's manager here has probably told them,
I'll say mostly everyone's manager has probably told them
that this is your time.
So you are going to drive it because we want you to get the value out of it.
Well, we've probably all fall,
fell into that trap where we use it for status updates.
Who's used it for status updates?
Oh, I know there's more than, than that, but
I love it. I love it. I've done it too. I do it still.
Um, don't do that find different ways with your manager
to establish work updates because
your one on one time is valuable for getting what you
need from your manager not to show your value to them.
So there's a number of topics you can tackle. We have some here,
for example, setting your goals in a gap analysis.
This requires prep planning.
You can create and maintain a share doc with your manager.
You can track one on one topics you like to cover
and you can likely tackle one or two in a one on one.
But bonus, you can keep a list of parking lot, you, uh,
topics you haven't gotten to as well.
So we're driving impactful conversations with our manager.
Now we know ourselves a little bit better.
That feels pretty good. Right.
Well, let's shift our focus to our managers.
We're gonna find ways to learn about them and build trust with them in a way that you
can, that can set you up both for success.
So when you meet your manager,
you may have had good and bad experiences in the past with other managers.
And
I could probably make the assumption that
they're gonna make the same mistakes, right?
If you've had bad experiences,
it's hard not to want to protect ourselves and
assume they're going to also make the same mistakes.
So
how can you protect yourself and give them a chance to earn your trust?
So relationships require trust, but you're not going to have that on day one.
So I would say, can you credit them trust, kind of like a bank?
You know, can you credit that to them while they are working to earn it from? You
find ways to be more open early in your relationship or
comfortable enough just to talk to them about concerns you have.
I know this can be really hard because it leaves you vulnerable with your manager.
And I'm not suggesting that you let them walk all over you and be ok with it.
But to start,
how can you try to not predetermine that your manager is going to fail you on day one?
This one likely requires more work inside for yourself to figure out
how you want to have that conversation or how you wanna be open.
But I think it's worth a shot.
Also gaining insight to our manager and learning about their work,
you can ask them about their priorities and goals
as well because this can give you more insight
to what the company is doing at the top line or even where your work may align.
But also by doing this,
you can identify work they have and create opportunity for yourself.
They may have work that you wanna grow in
and honestly asking how can I help you?
Has been one of the best tools that you can have with peers, colleagues,
your manager and other leaders because it can enable you to take
on more challenges and new challenges that you'd like to tackle.
And lastly
learning how they work can be important too.
This is about getting the most from them in your interactions. This can be about,
do they like pre reads before a meeting or do they like to work in meetings with you?
Do you get more success with them in slack or over email?
And what patterns you know, do they have that you would like to prepare for?
You see it constantly, right?
You're talking to them about a project or the work that you're
doing and they ask you the same three questions every time.
That might be a great mental note for you to wanna
have that prepared knowing every time you're gonna engage with them,
you know,
we all have to learn how to work with one another on our team on our day to day jobs.
Let's try to figure out what works for them as well.
You know,
I know what I said at the beginning that no
one actually cares about your career more than you.
And, you know, the first time I heard that,
that kind of felt like a slap in the face because you
want everyone to care as much as you do about your job.
And that's hard to hear
because I empathize with how hard it is to be a direct report. That
power dynamic is real. It's so hard to navigate. There's invisible gates,
vulnerability is hard, like with friends, not even your job, right?
It's it's really difficult and not to
mention this industry right now is exceptionally tough
and it is hard not to feel like we just have to accept what's provided to us.
That is an exceptionally hard time to feel like you shouldn't
just be thankful for what you have in your hands.
But
I do believe that through learning more about yourself,
your system and your manager that you can take more power
in taking a more active approach in how you want your career progression to happen.
And I'm so excited for what you all are going to be doing.
So we all know ourselves. Everybody. I'm so excited for you.
I believe in you and I'm going to hand it over to
Katie to talk to the current and aspiring managers in the room.
Thanks to everybody.
Thank you?
Ok.
Current and aspiring managers. Can I see some hands? We have managers in the room?
Oh my God. Oh, ok. A lot of you. Fantastic. I love this.
So we're doing a mind switch right now. We are shifting into,
I'm not a direct report.
I am thinking about a manager and how I am supporting my direct reports.
So I love this quote from the Harvard Business Review.
Is that one quality that truly sets apart great managers from the rest
is that they discover what is unique about each
of their directs and then they capitalize on it.
So average managers play checkers while great managers play chess.
And by the way, we're moving away from the office memes at this point,
Michael Scott is not who we're gonna be talking about for a great manager.
Really there aren't any, a lot on TV, but we have Leslie. No.
So we'll start by creating an environment that fosters relationship building.
Um According to Gallup,
employees who whose managers hold regular meetings
with them are almost three times more likely
to be engaged as employees whose managers do not hold regular meetings with them.
And those are those one on ones that we talked about previously,
the manager is responsible and accountable for creating
the space and time with their direct.
So some tactical suggestions about how to do this.
How do we actually get our checker pieces over into chess pieces?
How do we start to understand what they are,
agree to a one on one cadence with your directs.
And so some examples of some structures that I've seen previously are,
maybe this is one hour monthly,
maybe this is 30 minutes weekly.
Maybe you're doing 30 minutes weekly to discuss career.
You're doing 30 minutes weekly to discuss work,
30 minutes weekly.
Roughly boils out to about six hours a quarter
that you're spending discussing growth with your direct.
which if you think about it, six hours, not that much.
30 minutes a week does sound a lot.
So finding a good balance between your direct, what's gonna work for you?
What's gonna capture your goals is gonna be key here.
Now, ensure that this time is sacred. Do not reschedule your one on ones
if you can help it.
So sometimes a
trap that our colleagues will fall into is they'll look at your calendar.
I just need a meeting. It's really important. They'll see.
Hey, a one on one with a direct report,
they can move that no big deal and they'll stop it.
Do not let this happen
and set an example with the other leads and colleagues around you
that you don't move your one on ones for your directs.
And this sends a message
that your direct time is valuable because you
keep it sacred and also you are present.
So you are demonstrating their time is valuable by giving them your time,
which they already believe is valuable by listening
to what it is they're talking about.
So be mindful of alternative one on one use, Aaron already spoke to this.
Uh There's times where maybe we wanna talk about
other stuff and you might notice that your direct
report is sabotaging themselves by using the dedicated career
growth conversation time to talk about current work.
Maybe they're seeking clarity or alignment or even direction.
So some possible reasons why this might happen.
They don't have enough time with you.
They don't have enough autonomy.
They've been taking direction from you for a long
time and they still think they need to,
maybe they're out of their comfort zone and they
do need to still be taking direction from you
or maybe you have too many directs and your calendar is full and
their calendar jockeying trying to find time with you and they go,
I'll just,
I'll see them at a regularly scheduled time.
So friends managers,
this is on you to course correct.
This is a problem and now you know what it looks like rarely will.
You have a director will say these things to you,
but this is what the indicators look like.
So maintaining the health number one on ones, create a shared one on one document.
I like to put this in a high traffic area for me. I pin it at the top of slack.
I also put it in meeting invites.
So making sure this is not something that gets lost
or you have to find it at a later time
and then update the doc not the direct.
And so as you're going through the week,
as you're going through the month and you're collecting ideas
and things you wanna talk about with your direct report,
add those to the document,
do this instead of reaching out to them and shooting them
a message because it may just be top of mind.
You don't wanna forget it,
but it might be fairly unimportant.
But given power dynamic dynamics,
this can feel like it's urgent to them and it can come across
as a message of uh oh I have to do this right away.
So this sounds familiar. You may have heard Aaron talk about this previously.
They are, they are the exact same concepts. However, as the direct,
this is an ownership tactic to drive their career
as a manager,
this is a responsibility to be documenting and
understanding what the direct needs to do.
So if this is happening, surprise,
you may be experiencing a phenomenon that it's called managing up.
Now. This is not bad.
It is actually very good.
But let's take that sweet,
sweet bandwidth that you just earned and focus on your direct career growth.
That's actually what they're wanting you to do.
So, maintaining our commitments, dedicate time to work, supporting your directs.
This is the time outside
um consider 10% of your time for each of your direct and
that's about four hours a week and a 40 hour work week.
So, what am I doing with all this time?
Actually follow up on the action items that you've written down
in your doc at the very least touch on topics.
And so what you don't want is a situation
where your direct report is pondering and wondering,
man, I, I brought up that thing last week.
Are, are they gonna know,
look at your doc circle back to it and at least indicate that you're
thinking about it and reminding them that their concerns are important to you.
This demonstrates consistency and reliability
and reliability starts to translate into trust. And I will talk about that with
the trust equation. I love this thing. I reference it all the time.
It is fantastic for even in just relationships where
you think maybe you might not have strong enough trust
with your own manager or your career or your peers.
Um I'll talk it through. So we have credibility,
reliability and intimacy.
This can also be authenticity because intimacy
can freak people out in the corporate environment
all over self orientation equals trust.
So, and you're gonna need the stress because we're gonna talk about
feedback, giving feedback, effectively.
Anybody get the willies giving feedback.
Yes, completely and totally normal.
Totally normal.
It's your responsibility though. Sorry.
There's that word again, responsibility.
Some of you were like I came here to make my job easier, not
make it harder. That's fine.
Um
But it's the manager's job to course correct
and help define success for their direct.
This can be scary.
Eight seconds.
The discomfort window for discomfort is eight seconds
according to Berne Brown in her book,
Dear to lead.
And then after about eight seconds that wash of dopamine starts to flood
over you because you're actually doing the thing that you wanted to do.
And we can make this easier for ourselves by creating a culture of feedback,
make feedback, fluid,
make feedback safe with repeated exposure over and over again.
And it becomes easier.
And so a way to do this is to ask for it yourself and demonstrate
how to react to it as you're creating environment of when you receive feedback,
how you respond to it, how you take it.
And so the the direct report can marry you
so more directly
some feedback questions. I love feedback questions.
I definitely recommend them coming up with your feedback question.
Um It creates an environment.
And so when the feedback question is a vote, direct reports say,
OK, now is the time that I can tell them that thing that I've been wanting to tell them
and it creates a shared language.
And so when you, when you say your, your feedback questions to one another,
you understand exactly what's going on.
So some examples, I'm gonna give my feedback question.
This is honest to God. My actual question,
is there something I can be doing to make your life easier.
So when my direct reports hear me say those words, they know, I mean,
what am I doing? That's frustrating you.
Um
I had a direct report. This was uh this was their question. I love it. He said,
am I doing anything that looks like a common pitfall?
This gave me so much license and agency to talk about their
skill set and their career and not about their behavior set.
Highly recommended
letting our reports make their own mistakes. Yikes Yes, absolutely.
Sometimes you just wanna tell your direct no, because you, you know,
you just in your gut, you know what they're gonna do isn't gonna work out for them.
So the problem is with that
is they don't learn to trust their own gut
because they don't get to have those experiences themselves.
So let's help them train their own instincts,
help directs, make or learn from your mistakes.
So first of all, really, really, really listen,
you have to be very tuned in at this moment.
So describe what you think is gonna happen.
So direct has given you the situation and you,
you're into situational coaching at this point.
I like to say,
OK, option A, here's what I think the outcome is gonna be.
Option B here's the outcome. Option C
here's what I think the outcome is gonna be
and then ask the direct, what outcome they want to happen.
And once you understand where they want to go with this,
then start to describe similar situations where you
think you have been a similar environment,
maybe it's not identical but the same feelings, the same outcomes,
that sort of thing.
And then let them choose a path,
let them decide.
So this is super beneficial because I'm bringing back up our trust equation here.
We've already talked about reliability.
So we're talking about authenticity.
Now,
you're sharing a story in which you may have made a right
or a wrong decision and you're relating to your direct report.
And also you're demonstrating credibility because they're gonna come back to you.
And they're gonna say, hey, I chose option B,
but you're totally right about option A and C
and isn't that just so much better now than just telling them what to do?
It's like you predicted the future
shielding. Let's talk about shielding a bit.
Shielding is when we intentionally do not
share information with our direct reports.
Now, this can feel really counterintuitive
to everything.
We just talked about credibility, transparency, vulnerability, all that,
but too much information can be harmful.
So it's more beneficial to maintain attention on what the direct can control.
There was a burnout talk that was yesterday, highly recommended.
It's gonna be in the vault and part of the information that came out
of that is that lack of control can contribute to stress and burnout.
So something that may be bothering you,
that's just a headache can be a heartache for your
direct report because they cannot control us at all.
So how to do this be upfront? Remember, we are co managing here.
Um
Tell your directors, hey, I'm not gonna tell you everything that I know.
I don't wanna spin you out. I don't wanna burn you out
and I don't wanna pull you into contribution into
conversations that you actually can't contribute to anyway,
but do consider exploring their curiosities,
give the information that is contextual to them.
And this is another one of those great ways to identify what chess pieces your
direct reports are by the types of conversations that are gonna be asking you.
I like to say, hey, your instincts are correct.
Here are the conversations that are happening.
Here are the players that are involved.
Here are the key decision makers and here are the
number of outcomes that I think we could have.
So it's giving them enough information uh to satiate and validate their instincts,
but it's not giving enough to, for, to spend them out
and then ask them about the perceived impact. Why is this relevant to them?
Why are they concerned about it?
Someone gets fairly lower to the ground that you can just address?
OK. My last point is educating yourself and the direct on your system that you're in
do not wait until promotion season.
That is way too late. You are reacting, you are not building a plan,
you are uh
as I said, reacting,
so we're gonna empower our reports to advocate for themselves,
know the job ladders yourself,
know what they mean for the direct and understand the career growth system.
And then we're going to leverage that to create our mutual North star.
So, you know, the ladders, you know,
the system set a bar for what is next for your direct reports using these ladders?
Um
Are these peer reviews? Are, are they annual? Are they bi annual?
What time of year are they any road blockers that exist? Like
there's not actually gonna be reviews this year or head count is capped.
All these sorts of things,
make sure they understand what sort of barriers
that could be that could exist above them
that are not within their control.
And so once we understand our North star of according to the job ladders,
here is what the next step looks like for you.
We're going to create a growth plan by
working backwards using their own career goals.
And I'll talk the way that looks like.
So have your direct pitch a promotion plan and
I'll give you a hypothetical example that I like.
I want to be promoted at the end of Q three in year
2000 blank
this promotion cycle. OK, cool.
Let's call that 18 months for the sake of the conversation,
negotiate,
speak openly about the skills that your
director currently has and the skills that they
will need in order to hit that 18 month target that we just talked about.
And at what point they need to be
hitting them in order to demonstrate strong progression.
For example, if you want to be a manager,
that's not something you do in like six months,
that's something you need to show a long tail for.
So once we've outlined the skills and we're able to speak to the goals,
you can also think about how long it's gonna take to get
there and the types of special projects they might need to take on
in order to move forward.
And this will help you write the story. So managers, you've been in the room,
uh We are talking to your colleagues and you're saying, hey,
I really wanna put forward my direct for promotion.
But you say in 18 months
and the next time you circle back with them, maybe it's six months from now.
You say, hey, I think my direct is gonna be ready in about 12 months.
Here's what I'm seeing, here's the progress. It's looking pretty good.
Next time you see him, we'll say at six months,
hey, everybody, I'm calling him a shot six months from now. Here's what I'm seeing.
I think my direct is gonna be ready. So by the time you get in that room,
you've built a long tail conversation
that is believable and consistent and supportive.
So to recap,
we are creating our environment to develop a relationship we're giving feedback
effectively to help build trust and we're educating ourselves in our system
to develop our growth roadmap.
And that is it. We are done. Congratulations.
You are no longer part of the 85% of managers that have
never received training because you just got 13 minutes of it.
Thank you so much.
We do not have time for questions, unfortunately, but we will be around the corner.
This is our QR code that we promised
and if you like us talking, you'd like to see us come back.
Um then please take the survey again. We are Katie and Erin.
Uh If you did not like to talk, then we are Leslie and Dwight.