So hello, my name is Gav Gilbo. I'm gameplay tech lead at Ubisoft Montreal.
gameplay tech lead at Ubisoft Montreal. And I'm Frederick D, AI programmer on
And I'm Frederick D, AI programmer on Foreigner.
Foreigner. So we want to talk to you about the the
So we want to talk to you about the the upcoming presentation that we're going
upcoming presentation that we're going to be doing at GDC, which is called uh
to be doing at GDC, which is called uh replicated versus deterministic AI
replicated versus deterministic AI building the battlefield of Forunner. So
building the battlefield of Forunner. So what we want to do is really showcase to
what we want to do is really showcase to you guys the failures, the pitfalls, and
you guys the failures, the pitfalls, and hopefully the successes that we had in
hopefully the successes that we had in building the game. uh it's a talk aimed
building the game. uh it's a talk aimed mostly at AI programmers and AI
mostly at AI programmers and AI designers. So on one side I'm going to
designers. So on one side I'm going to be talking about the deterministic AI.
be talking about the deterministic AI. What we mean about that how we ended up
What we mean about that how we ended up building a fully deterministic system
building a fully deterministic system for all our AI to have a distributed uh
for all our AI to have a distributed uh AI working on over the network but
AI working on over the network but without any information sent over the
without any information sent over the network for the synchronization how we
network for the synchronization how we what tools we ended up building uh for
what tools we ended up building uh for navigation to combat to giving designers
navigation to combat to giving designers the proper levers for that and uh so
the proper levers for that and uh so that's basically how we built the the
that's basically how we built the the armies and how the clashes happened. And
armies and how the clashes happened. And on my side I will talk about the
on my side I will talk about the replicated AI systems that we build for
replicated AI systems that we build for the game. So in the game we have
the game. So in the game we have different characters. All the playable
different characters. All the playable characters have a lot of specificities
characters have a lot of specificities and we manage to extract uh all these
and we manage to extract uh all these specificities to expose them for the AI.
specificities to expose them for the AI. So this will be the first part.
So this will be the first part. Secondly, we will talk about how we
Secondly, we will talk about how we managed to create a tool to empower the
managed to create a tool to empower the designers to be able to use all the
designers to be able to use all the specificities and control the
specificities and control the characters, try everything they wanted
characters, try everything they wanted and finally ship the game with all the
and finally ship the game with all the AI that we needed for the PVP and for
AI that we needed for the PVP and for the campaign. And also we will expose
the campaign. And also we will expose all the validation system that we build
all the validation system that we build for the AI uh to be able to uh validate
for the AI uh to be able to uh validate that the difficulty of the AI that we
that the difficulty of the AI that we built are what the designer wants to do
built are what the designer wants to do to to create and if they are Korean for
to to create and if they are Korean for for all these difficulty levels. So
for all these difficulty levels. So that's it. So see you soon in San
that's it. So see you soon in San Francisco. Hope to see you there.
Francisco. Hope to see you there. [Music]