Hi, I'm John Manning and at the independent game summit at GDC 2017, I'm
independent game summit at GDC 2017, I'm going to be talking about how we made
going to be talking about how we made the development process for Night in the
the development process for Night in the Woods better through open sourcing part
Woods better through open sourcing part of the game's code. Almost every game in
of the game's code. Almost every game in development makes use of some kind of
development makes use of some kind of open source code. It's freely available
open source code. It's freely available and it solves a problem. However, while
and it solves a problem. However, while many projects are consumers of code,
many projects are consumers of code, it's rarer to see a game release code.
it's rarer to see a game release code. The best reason for releasing is that
The best reason for releasing is that when done right, you can leverage the
when done right, you can leverage the skills of volunteers who contribute back
skills of volunteers who contribute back and make your production easier. In this
and make your production easier. In this talk, we'll discuss how Night in the
talk, we'll discuss how Night in the Woods open- sourced YAN, its dialog
Woods open- sourced YAN, its dialog engine, and how randoms on the internet
engine, and how randoms on the internet took it, improved it way beyond the
took it, improved it way beyond the original feature set, and made more
original feature set, and made more things possible for both the original
things possible for both the original development team, and for many new
development team, and for many new projects. We'll also discuss how to
projects. We'll also discuss how to choose what parts of your code to
choose what parts of your code to release, how to release code in a way
release, how to release code in a way that encourages others to contribute,
that encourages others to contribute, how to manage an open source project to
how to manage an open source project to get the most out of community
get the most out of community contributions, and how to minimize the
contributions, and how to minimize the overhead that's involved. I look forward
overhead that's involved. I look forward to seeing you there.