Hi, my name is Joseph and I'm technical designer at World War and I'll be giving
designer at World War and I'll be giving a talk about how to port a real life
a talk about how to port a real life castle into your game when you're broke.
castle into your game when you're broke. I need to scan a castle to use in my
I need to scan a castle to use in my game and I was low on funding. So, I
game and I was low on funding. So, I decided to just go out and do it with
decided to just go out and do it with whatever equipment I can find and it
whatever equipment I can find and it worked. So, in this talk, I'll be going
worked. So, in this talk, I'll be going over how I managed to scan the castle
over how I managed to scan the castle while reducing the cost as much as
while reducing the cost as much as possible. Then, I'll be going over the
possible. Then, I'll be going over the trade-offs in choosing your equipment,
trade-offs in choosing your equipment, your software, and your processing
your software, and your processing computer. Then I'll be going over the
computer. Then I'll be going over the guidelines of capturing a high quality
guidelines of capturing a high quality scan and tips and tricks you can use in
scan and tips and tricks you can use in order to fix errors that can generate
order to fix errors that can generate from mutation of captured photos.
from mutation of captured photos. Finally, I'll be going over different
Finally, I'll be going over different approaches of processing your scan into
approaches of processing your scan into a game ready asset which can be quite a
a game ready asset which can be quite a challenge when working with such a high
challenge when working with such a high poly model. So this talk should cover
poly model. So this talk should cover everything you need to know about
everything you need to know about scanning your own castle. So if you want
scanning your own castle. So if you want to replicate this process, you'll find
to replicate this process, you'll find the external in my side very useful.
the external in my side very useful. Thank you for showing interest in my
Thank you for showing interest in my talk. I hope you like it and I'll see
talk. I hope you like it and I'll see you at GDC.