Need [Music]
[Music] to will come out of the way
Bring [Music]
[Music] light in the air.
Oh, let it be. Oh, let the pieces fall. Six times knocking on the door. No
Six times knocking on the door. No response. But hey, you're ready. Back to
response. But hey, you're ready. Back to back
back running on a midnight train. Back
running on a midnight train. Back down
again.
I got to break down.
Give me a break down. Just want to get back
Just want to get back now. What the hell?
now. What the hell? Guilty gear. Exile. Exile.
Hello everyone. Thank you for coming to this session. It's an honor to speak in
this session. It's an honor to speak in front of such a big crowd showing
front of such a big crowd showing interest in what we have done today. I'd
interest in what we have done today. I'd like I'd like to talk about our art
like I'd like to talk about our art style of our latest title, Guilty Gear
style of our latest title, Guilty Gear Exod.
Exod. Why did we choose this art style? What
Why did we choose this art style? What made it so hard to fake 2D in 3D?
made it so hard to fake 2D in 3D? How did we accomplish it? What made the
How did we accomplish it? What made the difference? We only have a limited time
difference? We only have a limited time frame and I won't be able to cover each
frame and I won't be able to cover each and every aspect of it. So most so it
and every aspect of it. So most so it mostly consists on the 3D character art
mostly consists on the 3D character art and the animation. If you have any
and the animation. If you have any specific questions, I'll try to leave as
specific questions, I'll try to leave as much Q&A time at the poss at the at the
much Q&A time at the poss at the at the end of the session. So, please ask me at
end of the session. So, please ask me at the end of the session. Before we go on,
the end of the session. Before we go on, I want to know how many people here have
I want to know how many people here have actually played the game.
Much more than I expected. Thank you. Um, how many of you have no idea what
Um, how many of you have no idea what the game is about?
the game is about? Okay. Okay.
Okay. Okay. Um, how many of you are artists?
Um, how many of you are artists? Okay.
Okay. quite a lot. Um, and coders.
quite a lot. Um, and coders. Oh, quite a lot, too. Great. Um, how
Oh, quite a lot, too. Great. Um, how many of you like anime?
many of you like anime? Oh, super. Okay. Um, how many interest
Oh, super. Okay. Um, how many interest How many of you are interested in
How many of you are interested in nonphotorealistic rendering?
nonphotorealistic rendering? Oh, that makes me so happy.
Oh, that makes me so happy. I know our art style is not the most
I know our art style is not the most conventional in the west. So I was just
conventional in the west. So I was just curious to know what kind of people were
curious to know what kind of people were interested in this topic.
interested in this topic. Now let's get started.
Now let's get started. First let me do a super fast
First let me do a super fast introduction.
introduction. I am Junior Christopher Motoa, a
I am Junior Christopher Motoa, a technical artist and character modeler
technical artist and character modeler working at Arc System Works. I've been
working at Arc System Works. I've been working at the company for 13 years,
working at the company for 13 years, mostly as a third 3D artist, but in many
mostly as a third 3D artist, but in many many other positions such as game
many other positions such as game designer, game director, story script,
designer, game director, story script, localization, voice acting, and even
localization, voice acting, and even some singing, which I personally don't
some singing, which I personally don't want to touch.
want to touch. My role in Guilty Gear Exert were lead
My role in Guilty Gear Exert were lead character modeler, character look
character modeler, character look development that included writing
development that included writing shaders, rigging, and other bits and
shaders, rigging, and other bits and pieces.
pieces. So basically I'm the guy behind how the
So basically I'm the guy behind how the three catal characters look on the
three catal characters look on the screen.
screen. Guilty Gear Exard is the latest
Guilty Gear Exard is the latest installment of the Guilty Gear
installment of the Guilty Gear franchise, a long-running series of 2D
franchise, a long-running series of 2D fighting games. Previously, most games
fighting games. Previously, most games in the series used 2D sprites.
in the series used 2D sprites. This title is a reboot from a longtime
This title is a reboot from a longtime halt on the series and has some drastic
halt on the series and has some drastic change in art style. We chose to do it
change in art style. We chose to do it in 3D instead of 2D sprites while
in 3D instead of 2D sprites while maintaining the charm of the sprites it
maintaining the charm of the sprites it had.
had. This was a great leap of faith and we're
This was a great leap of faith and we're thankful it paid out. To get a better
thankful it paid out. To get a better idea of what we're talking about, let's
idea of what we're talking about, let's see another video mainly showing how the
see another video mainly showing how the game play looks.
In Guilty Gear Exod, our goal was to keep the look and feel of the old titles
keep the look and feel of the old titles and represent them in a new form, 3D.
and represent them in a new form, 3D. The visuals needed to resemble those of
The visuals needed to resemble those of the sprites we had used for so many
the sprites we had used for so many years and look even better with higher
years and look even better with higher resolution in mind. Although it utilizes
resolution in mind. Although it utilizes 3D a lot, the game itself is still
3D a lot, the game itself is still played in a 2D plane, being true to its
played in a 2D plane, being true to its nature. As you may see, the art style is
nature. As you may see, the art style is strictly based on Japanese anime, which
strictly based on Japanese anime, which is also a tradition brought over from
is also a tradition brought over from the 2D sprites back in the days.
This was done by combining custom cell shaders and 3D models made especially
shaders and 3D models made especially for these shaders.
for these shaders. Turning 3D meant that we were no longer
Turning 3D meant that we were no longer limited by the resolution. The screen is
limited by the resolution. The screen is now 1080p for PS4, 720p for PS3. So that
now 1080p for PS4, 720p for PS3. So that was a great boost in resolution from the
was a great boost in resolution from the old 480p sprites.
The shift to 3D graphics gave us much more benefit than just high resolution.
more benefit than just high resolution. It's the freedom we achieved on the
It's the freedom we achieved on the camera. The cell-shaded 3D graphics work
camera. The cell-shaded 3D graphics work well in the battle screen. But the real
well in the battle screen. But the real real shine is when the camera swings,
real shine is when the camera swings, being able to move the camera at will,
being able to move the camera at will, dynamic camera angles are now viable in
dynamic camera angles are now viable in the game. for special attacks and final
the game. for special attacks and final and finished scenes. The camera moves
and finished scenes. The camera moves around the 3D space and shows the action
around the 3D space and shows the action from a more dramatic perspective. We're
from a more dramatic perspective. We're happy with the result and the feedback
happy with the result and the feedback we got from our audience. Thanks to
we got from our audience. Thanks to that, I'm standing here today at GDC.
Thank you.
Thanks. So, we got a new art style, but where
So, we got a new art style, but where did the idea come from? Why did we
did the idea come from? Why did we choose this path? Why didn't we stick to
choose this path? Why didn't we stick to 2D sprites? Well, there's a simple
2D sprites? Well, there's a simple answer.
answer. We already had Blaze Blue. Blaze Blueue
We already had Blaze Blue. Blaze Blueue is our other 2D fighting game franchise
is our other 2D fighting game franchise that utilizes high-res sprites. And it
that utilizes high-res sprites. And it does it so well, we didn't see much room
does it so well, we didn't see much room for improvement.
for improvement. We didn't want to compete with
We didn't want to compete with ourselves. So for Guilty Gear Exod, we
ourselves. So for Guilty Gear Exod, we needed something different
needed something different and that's when we decided to use
and that's when we decided to use cell-shaded 3D. Well, we considered many
cell-shaded 3D. Well, we considered many other options such as vector art, ultra
other options such as vector art, ultra hybrid sprites, and others. But what
hybrid sprites, and others. But what merged most promising was self-shaded
merged most promising was self-shaded 3D, which I at the time happened to be
3D, which I at the time happened to be experimenting with.
experimenting with. This here is a piece from a canceled
This here is a piece from a canceled project that I was working on. The
project that I was working on. The project didn't work out, but art style
project didn't work out, but art style showed a lot of potential.
showed a lot of potential. So, when Guilty Gear Exod finally
So, when Guilty Gear Exod finally started to take form, we decided to take
started to take form, we decided to take this art style even further. If done
this art style even further. If done right, we could maintain our anime style
right, we could maintain our anime style while gaining the various benefits of
while gaining the various benefits of 3D.
3D. Dynamic camera angles and animated
Dynamic camera angles and animated cutscenes were things we were craving
cutscenes were things we were craving for back in the days.
for back in the days. We also find potential in it because the
We also find potential in it because the technique was not well explored and had
technique was not well explored and had lots of space for improvement. By
lots of space for improvement. By advancing the state-of-the-art, there
advancing the state-of-the-art, there was a great chance to stand out in the
was a great chance to stand out in the crowded market.
So, we decided which way to go. Now, we needed to actually start moving. Let's
needed to actually start moving. Let's have a look at how we faced the
have a look at how we faced the challenge.
Getting 3D to look 2D was going to be a tough challenge and we knew it. It was
tough challenge and we knew it. It was seldom accomplished. So, we had to find
seldom accomplished. So, we had to find our own way and pave our own path. A lot
our own way and pave our own path. A lot of study went into both 2D art and 3D
of study went into both 2D art and 3D technology because knowing both sides
technology because knowing both sides was essential to tackle this task.
was essential to tackle this task. Elements that were not translated well
Elements that were not translated well enough from 2D to 3D were picked out and
enough from 2D to 3D were picked out and solved one by one. We broke a lot of
solved one by one. We broke a lot of conventions on the way because they just
conventions on the way because they just didn't suit this style.
didn't suit this style. As a result, we came up with a new
As a result, we came up with a new unique workflow mostly built from
unique workflow mostly built from scratch.
scratch. At the same time, we introduced
At the same time, we introduced ourselves to new tools in order to face
ourselves to new tools in order to face this huge challenge. First, Unreal
this huge challenge. First, Unreal Engine 3. We considered multiple engines
Engine 3. We considered multiple engines and Unreal Engine 3 was chosen because
and Unreal Engine 3 was chosen because of multiple reasons.
of multiple reasons. We needed a new engine that could handle
We needed a new engine that could handle multiple multiple platforms. Our
multiple multiple platforms. Our deadline was strict and building an
deadline was strict and building an engine from scratch was not an option.
engine from scratch was not an option. We had a team mostly consisting of
We had a team mostly consisting of artists and the artist friendly design
artists and the artist friendly design of Unreal 3 matched our needs. The fact
of Unreal 3 matched our needs. The fact that Unreal 4 was on its way and Unreal
that Unreal 4 was on its way and Unreal 3 was around the end of its life cycle
3 was around the end of its life cycle also benefited us. The engine was well
also benefited us. The engine was well debugged and stable and we had a lot of
debugged and stable and we had a lot of freedom customizing it with the full
freedom customizing it with the full source code.
source code. The other tool that helped us a lot was
The other tool that helped us a lot was Autoesk soft emarge. The flexibility in
Autoesk soft emarge. The flexibility in modeling and animation let us focus on
modeling and animation let us focus on quality. A built-in shader editor made
quality. A built-in shader editor made possible to experiment with cell shading
possible to experiment with cell shading a lot because of non because of it
a lot because of non because of it non-destructive workflow. We were able
non-destructive workflow. We were able to improve our assets continuously
to improve our assets continuously throughout the whole production right
throughout the whole production right till the last minute without this tool.
till the last minute without this tool. I believe it just wouldn't have
I believe it just wouldn't have happened.
Now let's take dive into the details of how we did it. Starting with the look of
how we did it. Starting with the look of the characters.
The most important asset of our game were the characters. Without getting
were the characters. Without getting them right, there was just no way we
them right, there was just no way we were going to get the game right. First,
were going to get the game right. First, the characters needed to represent the
the characters needed to represent the 2D design well enough to appeal to the
2D design well enough to appeal to the audience. The models had to be as good
audience. The models had to be as good as the designs or even better. And they
as the designs or even better. And they had to look 2D as much as possible.
had to look 2D as much as possible. To do this, our principle was simple.
To do this, our principle was simple. Kill everything 3D.
Kill everything 3D. If you find something that looks 3D, you
If you find something that looks 3D, you just have to find a way to avoid it.
just have to find a way to avoid it. This often boiled down to handcrafting
This often boiled down to handcrafting by the artists. Because while the math
by the artists. Because while the math within the shaders are always correct,
within the shaders are always correct, correct is just not good enough.
correct is just not good enough. To get a convincing 2D look, everything
To get a convincing 2D look, everything on screen has to be an intentional
on screen has to be an intentional choice, not just a result of a
choice, not just a result of a calculation.
calculation. To achieve all this, instant feedback
To achieve all this, instant feedback was key.
was key. We were fortunate to have a real-time
We were fortunate to have a real-time shader preview on our modeling software
shader preview on our modeling software that gave us trustworthy representations
that gave us trustworthy representations of the actual game. I would like to show
of the actual game. I would like to show you a demonstration of this.
Oops.
It's not coming on.
Just a second. Things happen.
No, that's not that's the presentation. I need that one.
This should be one.
Oh, there we go. Okay, great. Sorry for that.
that. Okay. Um,
Okay. Um, here is a model of one of our
here is a model of one of our characters.
characters. As you can see, real-time shading is
As you can see, real-time shading is taking place,
taking place, and it completely resembles the look in
and it completely resembles the look in the actual game.
The models and animation were created in this environment, so the artist would
this environment, so the artist would know exactly how the end result will
know exactly how the end result will look even without exporting to the game.
look even without exporting to the game. For example, the modeler will know
For example, the modeler will know exactly how it will look how it will
exactly how it will look how it will look in game if some vertices were
look in game if some vertices were modified.
Well, you wouldn't really do that, but you'll see how it looks in the real game
you'll see how it looks in the real game if you do that. So, let me just undo
if you do that. So, let me just undo that.
Okay. Okay. So, let's go on.
Okay. So, let's go on. So, let me turn
So, let me turn Okay,
Okay, there we go. Okay. The models have a
there we go. Okay. The models have a highly fairly high polygon around 40,000
highly fairly high polygon around 40,000 triangles in average. We knew we were
triangles in average. We knew we were going to do extra close-ups in
going to do extra close-ups in cutscenes, so the models had to hold up
cutscenes, so the models had to hold up even at extremely close distance.
even at extremely close distance. Details were directly modeled in with
Details were directly modeled in with geometry.
geometry. What made this special about the
What made this special about the character models in Guilty Gear Exod are
character models in Guilty Gear Exod are that they are very texture independent.
that they are very texture independent. For example, unlike average 3D games, we
For example, unlike average 3D games, we do not use textures such as normal maps
do not use textures such as normal maps for our characters. Instead, we use
for our characters. Instead, we use vertx properties such as vertx normals,
vertx properties such as vertx normals, vertx colors, and UV coordinates a lot
vertx colors, and UV coordinates a lot to store data in. The reason for this is
to store data in. The reason for this is again the extra close-ups. The problem
again the extra close-ups. The problem with texture data is that they're very
with texture data is that they're very resolution dependent. Pixel data easily
resolution dependent. Pixel data easily can get jaggy at super close-ups and
can get jaggy at super close-ups and that cannot be helped unless you have
that cannot be helped unless you have ultra high resolution.
ultra high resolution. On the other hand, vertx properties are
On the other hand, vertx properties are linearly interpolated between vertices
linearly interpolated between vertices which is completely resolution
which is completely resolution independent.
Now let's go into the actual shading. In cell shading, the surface is either
In cell shading, the surface is either lit or not and no value in between. This
lit or not and no value in between. This is one of the reasons cell shading is so
is one of the reasons cell shading is so hard to get right. In a drawing, the
hard to get right. In a drawing, the artist will choose the most the most
artist will choose the most the most convincing distribution of light and
convincing distribution of light and darkness. But in a shader, it's all math
darkness. But in a shader, it's all math where unforgiving thresholds mercilessly
where unforgiving thresholds mercilessly split between light and dark. In cell
split between light and dark. In cell shading, every little noise on the
shading, every little noise on the surface will become extremely
surface will become extremely distracting. The slightest difference in
distracting. The slightest difference in the surface normal may end up as a huge
the surface normal may end up as a huge blotch.
blotch. A convincing 2D look can only be
A convincing 2D look can only be achieved with precise control over the
achieved with precise control over the distribution of shades.
The code for our cell shader is actually pretty simple. In the main part of the
pretty simple. In the main part of the calculation, a generic step function is
calculation, a generic step function is used to decide if the pixel is lit or
used to decide if the pixel is lit or not. To put it simple for artists,
not. To put it simple for artists, this code works like this. If the
this code works like this. If the surface normal is facing the light
surface normal is facing the light source, it's lit.
source, it's lit. If it's facing more than 90 degrees away
If it's facing more than 90 degrees away from the light source, it's not. 90
from the light source, it's not. 90 degrees is the threshold here but it
degrees is the threshold here but it could be any other any other value. What
could be any other any other value. What matters here are the following the
matters here are the following the threshold the light vector and the
threshold the light vector and the normal vector and that's all only these
normal vector and that's all only these three components matter in this shading
three components matter in this shading code. So what we have to do is simple
code. So what we have to do is simple take full control over those three.
take full control over those three. First let's look let's have a look at
First let's look let's have a look at the threshold. We used a channel from
the threshold. We used a channel from vertx color as an offset to the
vertx color as an offset to the threshold. This made it possible for
threshold. This made it possible for artists to make certain areas on the
artists to make certain areas on the model get darker more easily. This could
model get darker more easily. This could be used to represent the occlusion of
be used to represent the occlusion of the vertex. Areas more occluded from the
the vertex. Areas more occluded from the light have less chance to be lit. The
light have less chance to be lit. The artist will go around the mesh setting
artist will go around the mesh setting values defining the areas most likely to
values defining the areas most likely to be shaded. The artist may even set the
be shaded. The artist may even set the value to zero, making the area always
value to zero, making the area always shaded no matter what.
shaded no matter what. We use texture data in the same way in
We use texture data in the same way in places, but vertx colors served us
places, but vertx colors served us better in many cases.
better in many cases. Again, texture is dependent on
Again, texture is dependent on resolution, but vertx properties are
resolution, but vertx properties are not. The linear interpolation between
not. The linear interpolation between vertices gave us a very clean result
vertices gave us a very clean result without any without any pixelation.
without any without any pixelation. Adding to that, it was much easier to
Adding to that, it was much easier to adjust with adjust the vertex colors
adjust with adjust the vertex colors because the because you can just get
because the because you can just get instant feedback from the preview even
instant feedback from the preview even while fiddling with the values.
Next to lighting. Unlike normal 3D games, Guilty Gear Exodar does not have
games, Guilty Gear Exodar does not have a global lighting system affecting the
a global lighting system affecting the characters.
characters. Each character has his or her own
Each character has his or her own dedicated light vector that lights their
dedicated light vector that lights their idle pose in the best way. The lighting
idle pose in the best way. The lighting doesn't change frame by frame in the
doesn't change frame by frame in the battle scene, but in cutscenes, it
battle scene, but in cutscenes, it animates along with the character to get
animates along with the character to get the best result each and every frame.
And finally, the normals. Surface normals are one of the main reasons cell
normals are one of the main reasons cell shading is so hard to get right. The
shading is so hard to get right. The smallest inconsistency in normals
smallest inconsistency in normals results in a super evident artifact
results in a super evident artifact under cell shading. The problem with the
under cell shading. The problem with the normals are that they are automatically
normals are that they are automatically calculated and the result of this
calculated and the result of this calculation is often not what the artist
calculation is often not what the artist intended.
intended. On the other hand, shading in 2D art is
On the other hand, shading in 2D art is very intentional.
very intentional. To close this gap, there was only one
To close this gap, there was only one thing we had to do. Control the normals
thing we had to do. Control the normals with intention.
with intention. Fortunately, soft emarge had powerful
Fortunately, soft emarge had powerful tools built in for this purpose.
tools built in for this purpose. Although editing normals is nothing new
Although editing normals is nothing new to game graphics,
to game graphics, we took it even further. To get rid of
we took it even further. To get rid of unintentional shading, we modified the
unintentional shading, we modified the normals on every major feature of the
normals on every major feature of the character. The faces of the characters
character. The faces of the characters especially needed to be handcrafted to
especially needed to be handcrafted to get clean anime look.
get clean anime look. Here I would like to show you the
Here I would like to show you the comparison.
This character model has his face normals edited.
normals edited. It looks clean from any light angle.
And here is what here it was how it going to look if I delete the delete
going to look if I delete the delete delete the normals.
Yeah.
pretty ugly. Practically unusable. So, let me undo that.
And there we go. Clean again. Okay. Something in common with these three
Something in common with these three components I just talked about is
components I just talked about is intention. Being able to reflect the
intention. Being able to reflect the artist's intention on the final result
artist's intention on the final result is the key when it comes to stylized
is the key when it comes to stylized art.
Okay, now we sorted the lighting out. We we
now we sorted the lighting out. We we have to think what the color to paint
have to think what the color to paint the lit and shaded colors.
the lit and shaded colors. Color selection and in anime is vital.
Color selection and in anime is vital. Every color is carefully chosen to
Every color is carefully chosen to express not just the material but the
express not just the material but the character itself.
character itself. It is not as simple as just multiplying
It is not as simple as just multiplying the shaded area with an ambient color.
the shaded area with an ambient color. The coloring coloring style in anime can
The coloring coloring style in anime can vary from title to title. But one thing
vary from title to title. But one thing is in common. This too is very
is in common. This too is very intentional. The combination of lit and
intentional. The combination of lit and shaded colors can express a vast amount
shaded colors can express a vast amount of characteristics. Not just the
of characteristics. Not just the material, but the atmosphere the
material, but the atmosphere the character wields. It's an art in its own
character wields. It's an art in its own sense, and it's a task usually given to
sense, and it's a task usually given to professional color designers.
professional color designers. To get the anime look right in 3D, we
To get the anime look right in 3D, we took this by heart and worked on a way
took this by heart and worked on a way to replicate this process.
By studying anime art style extensively, we found that shaded colors often
we found that shaded colors often express how solid the material is. A
express how solid the material is. A less solid material will pass more light
less solid material will pass more light through it, getting a lighter color for
through it, getting a lighter color for the shades.
the shades. The light passing through the material
The light passing through the material will get tinted depending on the
will get tinted depending on the material's composition.
material's composition. For example, shades on human skin get a
For example, shades on human skin get a red tint because of the flesh under it.
red tint because of the flesh under it. In order to implement this in the
In order to implement this in the shader, we use two textures. The base
shader, we use two textures. The base texture defines the color of the surface
texture defines the color of the surface when it's lit, while the tint texture
when it's lit, while the tint texture defines how dark it gets when shaded.
defines how dark it gets when shaded. Multiplying the two textures, we get the
Multiplying the two textures, we get the shaded color. This way the ch the choice
shaded color. This way the ch the choice of color is completely up to the artist.
of color is completely up to the artist. The artist can choose whatever color he
The artist can choose whatever color he or she may see fit for the lit area and
or she may see fit for the lit area and the shaded area of the material.
the shaded area of the material. On a side note, as you can see, both
On a side note, as you can see, both these textures are just square areas
these textures are just square areas consisting of single colors. This is
consisting of single colors. This is because we simply use them as colored
because we simply use them as colored lookups and do not draw in any details
lookups and do not draw in any details to the textures as images. As stated
to the textures as images. As stated before, most meaningful information is
before, most meaningful information is stored in the mesh itself rather than in
stored in the mesh itself rather than in textures.
Along with colors and shading, lines play a huge role in cell shading. In
play a huge role in cell shading. In fact, if you think in black and white
fact, if you think in black and white manga style, lines would be the most
manga style, lines would be the most important aspect of the visual.
important aspect of the visual. In Guilty Exod, we use a traditional
In Guilty Exod, we use a traditional inverted hull method as outlines for the
inverted hull method as outlines for the characters. A second set of darker
characters. A second set of darker polygons are generated in the shader and
polygons are generated in the shader and are expanded in the normal direction to
are expanded in the normal direction to create the hull which shapes the
create the hull which shapes the outline.
outline. We added some new tricks to this
We added some new tricks to this longestablished method to achieve even
longestablished method to achieve even more control over the results.
more control over the results. It's common these days to use post
It's common these days to use post effect for the outlines, but we found
effect for the outlines, but we found this method suited our needs better.
this method suited our needs better. First of all, we could preview the
First of all, we could preview the result right in the modeling viewboard,
result right in the modeling viewboard, letting us know exactly how it's going
letting us know exactly how it's going to look in the game.
We had more control over the lines through the vertex shader, giving
through the vertex shader, giving precise control over the whole model.
precise control over the whole model. With this, we were able to give the
With this, we were able to give the outline variable width in places we saw
outline variable width in places we saw fit, even erasing it completely at
fit, even erasing it completely at times. Again, vertice colors was used to
times. Again, vertice colors was used to control these line properties.
We got our out outlines solved, but there's another set of lines that need
there's another set of lines that need to be discussed. The inner lines or the
to be discussed. The inner lines or the lines on the surface. We needed a
lines on the surface. We needed a different approach for the inner lines
different approach for the inner lines because the inverted hole method used
because the inverted hole method used for the outlines do not work for these
for the outlines do not work for these kinds of lines.
kinds of lines. These lines play a huge role in 2D art.
These lines play a huge role in 2D art. conducting where one surface ends and
conducting where one surface ends and another starts.
another starts. In order to get a 2D look, we just
In order to get a 2D look, we just needed to find a way to get this right.
needed to find a way to get this right. The easiest way would be would have been
The easiest way would be would have been to simply draw the lines on the texture.
to simply draw the lines on the texture. But we knew that was that was a there
But we knew that was that was a there was a major limitation to this. The
was a major limitation to this. The challenge here was again resolution.
challenge here was again resolution. We needed the characters to be able to
We needed the characters to be able to hold up at extra close-ups without any
hold up at extra close-ups without any jaggies or pixelations to be found. To
jaggies or pixelations to be found. To avoid pixelation, you would need an
avoid pixelation, you would need an infinitely high resolution for the
infinitely high resolution for the textures, which is simply impractical.
textures, which is simply impractical. So, we had to find a better way. We came
So, we had to find a better way. We came up with a technique using special UV
up with a technique using special UV assignments to get jaggy-free super
assignments to get jaggy-free super clean lines even at close-ups.
clean lines even at close-ups. Here is how this technique goes.
Here is how this technique goes. All the lines are drawn on all the lines
All the lines are drawn on all the lines as draw are drawn as axis line beams on
as draw are drawn as axis line beams on the texture and the UV is lined up
the texture and the UV is lined up alongside them. How much the UV overlaps
alongside them. How much the UV overlaps these beams defines how thick the line
these beams defines how thick the line becomes.
becomes. As long as the pixels are lined to an
As long as the pixels are lined to an act to to an axis, they don't get any
act to to an axis, they don't get any jaggy. So, we figured we could use this
jaggy. So, we figured we could use this to our advantage.
to our advantage. The downside is that you get a very
The downside is that you get a very distorted UV for the for the surface.
distorted UV for the for the surface. But that was not a problem for us
But that was not a problem for us because we do not put any details on the
because we do not put any details on the texture.
It may be difficult to imagine. So let me demonstrate it to you.
Okay, this would be how a freehand line on a texture would look like.
Pretty bad. It may look okay from distance,
but it clearly does not hold up at close-ups.
Let me get rid of that and show you the UV.
As you can see, all lines align to the X and Y axis.
and Y axis. This is the area of the shoulder. Here's
This is the area of the shoulder. Here's the shoulder.
the shoulder. Okay.
Okay. By nudging the UV onto the black area,
By nudging the UV onto the black area, you can control how wide the line is.
you can control how wide the line is. I'll show you.
You can precisely define the width of the line at each UV point and get super
the line at each UV point and get super sharp edges at places you see fit.
with the same texture resolution. You get a super clean line without any
get a super clean line without any noticeable pixelation going on.
I zoom up and still no pixelation. And zoom out, still clean.
And zoom out, still clean. These lines look great close by, but
These lines look great close by, but because texture filtering is in play, it
because texture filtering is in play, it also looks very good from a distance.
Okay,
with that, we have a pretty good model with many features representing a 2D
with many features representing a 2D field. Now let's move on to animation.
field. Now let's move on to animation. Animation is where the merits of the
Animation is where the merits of the models and the shaders truly come to
models and the shaders truly come to play. As with the models and the
play. As with the models and the shaders, our goal was to make it look as
shaders, our goal was to make it look as 2D as possible. To do this, we took a
2D as possible. To do this, we took a style called limited animation.
style called limited animation. This is a term often used in Japanese
This is a term often used in Japanese animation industry in in comparison with
animation industry in in comparison with full animation.
full animation. Unlike western animations such as
Unlike western animations such as Disney, it focuses more on tricking the
Disney, it focuses more on tricking the eye with less frames.
eye with less frames. This was the way the old Guilty Gear
This was the way the old Guilty Gear titles were animated. And to replicate
titles were animated. And to replicate that, we decided to use the same
that, we decided to use the same principle, but this time in 3D.
principle, but this time in 3D. We did try the full animation path in
We did try the full animation path in early development, but it simply didn't
early development, but it simply didn't convey the sense that it was 2D. Having
convey the sense that it was 2D. Having the poses interpolate between key frames
the poses interpolate between key frames makes it look smoother, but at the same
makes it look smoother, but at the same time makes it look more 3D. So we just
time makes it look more 3D. So we just stopped using interpolations between key
stopped using interpolations between key frames. Every frame now is a key frame
frames. Every frame now is a key frame and the animator poses the character in
and the animator poses the character in the best way possible. You could imagine
the best way possible. You could imagine stop motion animation where dolls oppose
stop motion animation where dolls oppose each frame. Basically, that is exactly
each frame. Basically, that is exactly what we're doing.
what we're doing. This looked more true to our old sprites
This looked more true to our old sprites and also made the cutscenes look way
and also made the cutscenes look way more 2Dish.
In order to use limited animation as our style, we needed to build a rig to match
style, we needed to build a rig to match this method. Because we were going to
this method. Because we were going to have less frames per animation, we knew
have less frames per animation, we knew we had to add more information to each
we had to add more information to each frame.
frame. This was done by having a lot of bones,
This was done by having a lot of bones, so the animator can move every feature
so the animator can move every feature on the model at a frame by frame basis.
on the model at a frame by frame basis. The bone count is about 500 per
The bone count is about 500 per character in average. No simulation was
character in average. No simulation was used because again, it just doesn't look
used because again, it just doesn't look 2D.
2D. There's just no way to capture the anime
There's just no way to capture the anime style movement with simulation.
style movement with simulation. Scale animation was used a lot because
Scale animation was used a lot because it lets us do many sorts of tricks.
it lets us do many sorts of tricks. Exaggerations of actions let things hide
Exaggerations of actions let things hide or appear. Traditional squash and
or appear. Traditional squash and stretch and more.
stretch and more. We knew we needed it, but the engine
We knew we needed it, but the engine didn't support it. So, we had to
didn't support it. So, we had to implement the scale system by ourselves.
implement the scale system by ourselves. It was a difficult task, but thanks to
It was a difficult task, but thanks to our talented programmers, it was done.
our talented programmers, it was done. And it was totally worth it.
Turning off interpolations between key frames is essential. But that alone is
frames is essential. But that alone is not enough. You need another trick to
not enough. You need another trick to mimic 2D animation.
mimic 2D animation. The secret is to deform the mesh every
The secret is to deform the mesh every key frame to add imperfection.
key frame to add imperfection. The human eyes and brains are very
The human eyes and brains are very sensitive when it comes to perspectives.
sensitive when it comes to perspectives. A part of a 3D model moves through the
A part of a 3D model moves through the perspective perfectly maintaining its
perspective perfectly maintaining its shape. The human brain instantly
shape. The human brain instantly recognizes it as a rigid 3D object. To
recognizes it as a rigid 3D object. To avoid this, adding imperfection was the
avoid this, adding imperfection was the only way.
only way. Nature isn't perfect. The artist is
Nature isn't perfect. The artist is imperfect. Therefore, perfection looks
imperfect. Therefore, perfection looks too artificial.
too artificial. As an example, let me show you how the
As an example, let me show you how the animation actually looks like in soft
animation actually looks like in soft emage.
Every key frame, every bone on screen is adjusted by the animator to break the
adjusted by the animator to break the perfect transition. This this makes each
perfect transition. This this makes each key frame more distinctive, adding even
key frame more distinctive, adding even more information to a single frame. You
more information to a single frame. You need to think in 2D is a word used a lot
need to think in 2D is a word used a lot while animating in our team. 3D accuracy
while animating in our team. 3D accuracy is not priority in this workflow.
is not priority in this workflow. We often sacrifice it in order to get
We often sacrifice it in order to get more dynamic composition. Limbs, hands,
more dynamic composition. Limbs, hands, and feet get a lot of scale animation to
and feet get a lot of scale animation to exaggerate the perspective and facial
exaggerate the perspective and facial parts do not maintain natural positions.
parts do not maintain natural positions. This is exactly the same as 2D
This is exactly the same as 2D animation, expressiveness over accuracy.
animation, expressiveness over accuracy. And what we did was simply bring the
And what we did was simply bring the same principle to 3D.
And here is how the final cutscene looks like.
For those curious, here's a comparison between full animation and limited
between full animation and limited animation. Let's have a look.
This is how a full animation with interpolation would look like.
interpolation would look like. And here is how limited animation would
And here is how limited animation would look.
look. Simply having more frames, it's obvious
Simply having more frames, it's obvious that the full animation looks a lot
that the full animation looks a lot smoother.
smoother. However, it's more apparent that it's
However, it's more apparent that it's actually 3D compared to the limited
actually 3D compared to the limited animation version.
animation version. The limited animation version may look
The limited animation version may look less smooth, but has more distinctive
less smooth, but has more distinctive poses, easier to recognize.
poses, easier to recognize. It's up to you which to prefer, but we
It's up to you which to prefer, but we chose limited animation for the clarity
chose limited animation for the clarity it holds.
it holds. Oops.
So, that was some short explanations of the major aspects on how we built the
the major aspects on how we built the assets for the art style. Of course,
assets for the art style. Of course, there's much more, but there's no way I
there's much more, but there's no way I could have covered it all within time.
could have covered it all within time. If you have anything specific, you want
If you have anything specific, you want to know how it was done, you may
to know how it was done, you may question me in a few minutes. In the
question me in a few minutes. In the meanwhile, let me talk a bit about the
meanwhile, let me talk a bit about the reason why we're able to get this done.
reason why we're able to get this done. What made the difference? In my opinion,
What made the difference? In my opinion, it was figuring out this one thing. The
it was figuring out this one thing. The X factor is the artist's intention.
X factor is the artist's intention. All the techniques we used, all the
All the techniques we used, all the techniqu all the techniques we used are
techniqu all the techniques we used are actually nothing new. No new hardware or
actually nothing new. No new hardware or software innovation was involved.
software innovation was involved. Technically, the art style could have
Technically, the art style could have been done years ago.
been done years ago. What made the difference was the notion
What made the difference was the notion that the artist's intention was the X
that the artist's intention was the X factor. A workflow which lets the artist
factor. A workflow which lets the artist intention carry through right till the
intention carry through right till the final result was the core of our
final result was the core of our accomplishment.
But why was it us and not anyone else? One simple answer would be that we were
One simple answer would be that we were lucky.
lucky. Thinking about it now, we were in a very
Thinking about it now, we were in a very fortunate situation to get this done. We
fortunate situation to get this done. We were a 2D oriented studio that had a lot
were a 2D oriented studio that had a lot of 2D experience. Many artists who knew
of 2D experience. Many artists who knew 2D inside out. We were not new to 3D but
2D inside out. We were not new to 3D but not heavily invested in photo realism
not heavily invested in photo realism either.
either. We were in a need for new art style to
We were in a need for new art style to differentiate from the best of our own
differentiate from the best of our own Blaze Blue. The project was a reboot of
Blaze Blue. The project was a reboot of a very wellestablished game, so we knew
a very wellestablished game, so we knew exactly what we're working on. And the
exactly what we're working on. And the team, the team was a dream team. We had
team, the team was a dream team. We had exactly the right people with the exact
exactly the right people with the exact skill set needed for this challenge. Of
skill set needed for this challenge. Of course, Fortune wasn't all. The
course, Fortune wasn't all. The dedication and the hard work of the
dedication and the hard work of the people involved in the project and the
people involved in the project and the strong support from our fan base was
strong support from our fan base was what made all this possible.
Now to wrap up, here's my final proposition.
proposition. I want to see more studios explore
I want to see more studios explore non-photoreistic rendering. I feel that
non-photoreistic rendering. I feel that not enough research has been put into
not enough research has been put into this area and there's much more room to
this area and there's much more room to explore and improve. Photo realism is
explore and improve. Photo realism is great, but it's not the only route. It's
great, but it's not the only route. It's a crowded one, too. If you look in
a crowded one, too. If you look in different directions, there's a whole
different directions, there's a whole new horizon. You could be the pioneer
new horizon. You could be the pioneer that gets there first. The frontier is
that gets there first. The frontier is there, waiting to be discovered.
there, waiting to be discovered. Thank you.
[Applause]
It seems we have a couple more minutes. How many more minutes? I don't I'm not
How many more minutes? I don't I'm not really I don't have a I'm not really on
really I don't have a I'm not really on track. Um so if you have any questions,
track. Um so if you have any questions, please go up to the mic. I'll try to
please go up to the mic. I'll try to answer them as much as possible.
Okay. Um, how does this go? Please, go ahead.
ahead. Hi. Uh, my first question is how many
Hi. Uh, my first question is how many people does it take to create each
people does it take to create each character and how long does it take?
character and how long does it take? Um, the character model and texture the
Um, the character model and texture the rig is basically done by the same p by
rig is basically done by the same p by the same person. We had about three or
the same person. We had about three or four modelers altogether.
four modelers altogether. Mhm.
Mhm. Um so and it takes about
Um so and it takes about two months altogether for one character.
two months altogether for one character. That's only for modeling and then
That's only for modeling and then another two months I guess for
another two months I guess for animation.
animation. I see.
I see. So it's quite int intensive.
So it's quite int intensive. Okay. The second question is uh you have
Okay. The second question is uh you have the very unique UV layout. So for each
the very unique UV layout. So for each character each character design is very
character each character design is very unique as well. Yeah.
unique as well. Yeah. So, do you just look at the 2D concept
So, do you just look at the 2D concept art and figure out how many specific
art and figure out how many specific patch of UV you need to create and then
patch of UV you need to create and then figure out the final layout for each
figure out the final layout for each individual character texture?
individual character texture? Um, so so your question is about the UV
Um, so so your question is about the UV layout.
layout. Yes.
Yes. Um,
Um, yeah, basically we just um
yeah, basically we just um the first stage of UV layouting I think
the first stage of UV layouting I think is not that different from any other
is not that different from any other project.
project. um we just um lay out the UV depending
um we just um lay out the UV depending on how um big the area is.
on how um big the area is. Mhm.
Mhm. But um after that we kind of line them
But um after that we kind of line them up into straight lines.
up into straight lines. Um and after that
Um and after that once we get straight line UVs you draw
once we get straight line UVs you draw we draw lines on the textures and then
we draw lines on the textures and then nudge the UV back onto the textures.
nudge the UV back onto the textures. I see. Thank you very much.
I see. Thank you very much. Thank you very much.
Thank you very much. Okay. Um, please
Okay. Um, please um I I totally understand not wanting to
um I I totally understand not wanting to do the uh the interpolation between key
do the uh the interpolation between key frames. Did you because it does end up
frames. Did you because it does end up looking more 3D and more artificial. Did
looking more 3D and more artificial. Did you guys ever consider doubling the key
you guys ever consider doubling the key frames themselves by hand? Obviously
frames themselves by hand? Obviously that doubles the amount of animation
that doubles the amount of animation work, but was that ever a consideration
work, but was that ever a consideration or
or um having more key frames in the
um having more key frames in the animation is one thing we wanted to do.
animation is one thing we wanted to do. Um but
Um but doing it too much also um kind of cost
doing it too much also um kind of cost costs a lot. So keeping it down and also
costs a lot. So keeping it down and also um keeping it down makes it more 2D. So
um keeping it down makes it more 2D. So kind of we we were looking for the best
kind of we we were looking for the best balance there.
balance there. Very cool. Thank you.
Very cool. Thank you. Thank you.
Okay. Please. Yeah. So you mentioned that each character takes about uh uh
that each character takes about uh uh two months or so to model and animate
two months or so to model and animate about correct
about correct um two well not anymore maybe the first
um two well not anymore maybe the first the first stage um while we were trying
the first stage um while we were trying to
to um figure out how to do it I think it
um figure out how to do it I think it took more. It's getting shorter
took more. It's getting shorter right and know what to do. Well, I the
right and know what to do. Well, I the main thrust of my question is is uh it
main thrust of my question is is uh it it seems like the models for Exert might
it seems like the models for Exert might be substantially more uh labor intensive
be substantially more uh labor intensive than a spritebased game like uh Blaze
than a spritebased game like uh Blaze Blueue. But then I'm also not sure about
Blueue. But then I'm also not sure about that because I believe the Blaze Blueue
that because I believe the Blaze Blueue sprites start out as 3D models, don't
sprites start out as 3D models, don't they? And then they just get uh uh you
they? And then they just get uh uh you know uh sort of sprite uh captured
know uh sort of sprite uh captured Yes. by frame. Yes. Um, Blaze Blueue
Yes. by frame. Yes. Um, Blaze Blueue also uses 3D models to make um, 2D
also uses 3D models to make um, 2D sprites. They basically are used as
sprites. They basically are used as lotocopes. The models for Blaze Blueue
lotocopes. The models for Blaze Blueue are a bit simpler than the Guild Gear
are a bit simpler than the Guild Gear ones. Um, because the hand the facial
ones. Um, because the hand the facial expressions
expressions are drawn in afterwards. So, they don't
are drawn in afterwards. So, they don't have facial expressions in the models.
have facial expressions in the models. Okay.
Okay. Um, yeah. And basically, they they're
Um, yeah. And basically, they they're not designed for close-ups to place blue
not designed for close-ups to place blue models. So, so is it a lot more labor
models. So, so is it a lot more labor intensive to to do uh uh the exert
intensive to to do uh uh the exert models and uh does that make it hard to
models and uh does that make it hard to add in more characters because you know
add in more characters because you know I uh obviously Arc System Works likes
I uh obviously Arc System Works likes to, you know, put out some updates to
to, you know, put out some updates to its games and whatnot?
its games and whatnot? Yes. Um we would totally love to add
Yes. Um we would totally love to add more characters more quickly. Um yeah,
more characters more quickly. Um yeah, but it to stand out we just needed to
but it to stand out we just needed to pursue quality. So it takes a lot of
pursue quality. So it takes a lot of time.
time. All right.
All right. Um,
Um, yeah,
yeah, dizzy win is basically what I'm asking
dizzy win is basically what I'm asking here.
here. Um, yeah, I was sort of sort of
Um, yeah, I was sort of sort of expecting that.
expecting that. I wouldn't be able to answer that.
I wouldn't be able to answer that. Sorry.
Sorry. A All right. Thank you.
A All right. Thank you. Sometime sometime.
Sometime sometime. Okay.
Okay. Thank you. Okay. Um
Thank you. Okay. Um so for your um inverse hole outline
so for your um inverse hole outline system, did you expand that along the
system, did you expand that along the generated normals or the normals that
generated normals or the normals that you handcrafted or a separate set of
you handcrafted or a separate set of normals?
normals? Okay, that's a good that's a good
Okay, that's a good that's a good question. I didn't really um go too deep
question. I didn't really um go too deep into it, but the um normals for the
into it, but the um normals for the extraction of the um hull polygons are
extraction of the um hull polygons are actually separate from the shading
actually separate from the shading normals. So we have another set of
normals. So we have another set of normals um that are automatically
normals um that are automatically calculated
calculated for that purpose. Yes.
for that purpose. Yes. All right. Thank you.
All right. Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you. Um I wanted to ask uh so you went with
Um I wanted to ask uh so you went with limited animations for the character,
limited animations for the character, you know, um animations and you know
you know, um animations and you know their finishes and stuff. I was
their finishes and stuff. I was wondering what was the reasoning behind
wondering what was the reasoning behind not also doing limited animation for the
not also doing limited animation for the camera rotation as like it goes around
camera rotation as like it goes around the uh the character.
the uh the character. Okay. Uh that's a good question. um
Okay. Uh that's a good question. um camera rotation
camera rotation is it looks ugly with um less frames.
is it looks ugly with um less frames. And in anime um although in limited
And in anime um although in limited animation although the
animation although the frame per second is like low um eight or
frame per second is like low um eight or 12 but the um the actual how the
12 but the um the actual how the background moves is 24 frames per
background moves is 24 frames per second. So it it defers from character
second. So it it defers from character to background. And when the camera
to background. And when the camera rotates, the background moves with it.
rotates, the background moves with it. So it kind of it if you turn down the
So it kind of it if you turn down the camera too much, it gets really um
camera too much, it gets really um snappy.
snappy. If that answers the question.
If that answers the question. Yeah. I just um I have a friend of mine
Yeah. I just um I have a friend of mine who who felt as though it was very kind
who who felt as though it was very kind of for him at least it was very
of for him at least it was very disjointed, you know, the the limited
disjointed, you know, the the limited animation of characters versus the very
animation of characters versus the very smooth animations of the backgrounds.
smooth animations of the backgrounds. Yeah. Um, we tried to um we we tried
Yeah. Um, we tried to um we we tried lower frame camera movement, but it just
lower frame camera movement, but it just didn't feel good.
didn't feel good. Okay, cool. Thank you very much.
Okay, cool. Thank you very much. Thank you.
Thank you. Okay.
Okay. Uh, did you have to swap out models and
Uh, did you have to swap out models and stuff for things like Millia's hair?
stuff for things like Millia's hair? Uh, yes. Um, I didn't touch that today
Uh, yes. Um, I didn't touch that today um because it was uh it was going to
um because it was uh it was going to take a lot of time, but um yes um lots
take a lot of time, but um yes um lots of characters in Guilty Gear have really
of characters in Guilty Gear have really crazy animations. um shadows of Zato,
crazy animations. um shadows of Zato, hairs of Millia, um they do a lot of
hairs of Millia, um they do a lot of morphing animation and that is um
morphing animation and that is um practically impossible to just do by a
practically impossible to just do by a single mesh. So we just have to make um
single mesh. So we just have to make um bunch of meshes to kind of switch in
bunch of meshes to kind of switch in between shapes. Yes. Thank you.
between shapes. Yes. Thank you. Um, I was just wondering with like these
Um, I was just wondering with like these highly detailed models, these, you know,
highly detailed models, these, you know, hundreds of bones per character, um, a
hundreds of bones per character, um, a lot of animations, like how how
lot of animations, like how how difficult was it to get a locked in
difficult was it to get a locked in solid performance out of the game and
solid performance out of the game and how scalable is this whole workflow?
how scalable is this whole workflow? Um,
Um, the shader itself is not that um,
the shader itself is not that um, performanceheavy.
performanceheavy. So, and we only having two characters on
So, and we only having two characters on the screen, it it's much more forgiving.
the screen, it it's much more forgiving. So, maintaining 60 fps was possible on
So, maintaining 60 fps was possible on PS4 easily. We had to um tone down the
PS4 easily. We had to um tone down the shader and the polygons for PS3 a bit,
shader and the polygons for PS3 a bit, but it still runs mainly in 60 fps. Yes.
but it still runs mainly in 60 fps. Yes. Awesome. And it seems like because of
Awesome. And it seems like because of the way you're doing your textures, you
the way you're doing your textures, you can actually do them quite low
can actually do them quite low resolution without losing that kind of
resolution without losing that kind of quality.
quality. Yes. textures. Um
Yes. textures. Um some textures we have three textures per
some textures we have three textures per character. Um basically one is 20 uh one
character. Um basically one is 20 uh one is 2k and two are 1k.
is 2k and two are 1k. Okay. All right. Thank you very much.
Okay. All right. Thank you very much. Thank you very much.
Thank you very much. Please.
Please. Um first of all it's an honor to have
Um first of all it's an honor to have you here. So thanks for giving this
you here. So thanks for giving this talk.
talk. Thank you.
Thank you. Um my question relates to specular
Um my question relates to specular highlights.
highlights. I see.
I see. I I could be mistaken but for instance
I I could be mistaken but for instance on Soul's deltoids
on Soul's deltoids Yes. Um there there was a bright lit
Yes. Um there there was a bright lit area.
area. Yes.
Yes. Do you have a third texture for specular
Do you have a third texture for specular highlight tint?
highlight tint? Um no. Uh we do speculars. Um I didn't
Um no. Uh we do speculars. Um I didn't touch on speculars either. Um
touch on speculars either. Um yes. Um specular
yes. Um specular basically uh no we don't have an extra
basically uh no we don't have an extra texture for that. Um it's basically
texture for that. Um it's basically based off the base color and a tint
based off the base color and a tint color. So we kind of mix that to get the
color. So we kind of mix that to get the right speckle color.
right speckle color. Okay. And and it uses the same normals
Okay. And and it uses the same normals that the shading uh calculations are
that the shading uh calculations are used for.
used for. Yes, that's correct.
Yes, that's correct. Okay. Okay. Thank you.
Okay. Okay. Thank you. Thank you very much. Okay. I lost track.
Thank you very much. Okay. I lost track. Um
Um please.
please. Thank you also um again for speaking
Thank you also um again for speaking today. Um I have two questions if that's
today. Um I have two questions if that's okay. I was curious if the effects are
okay. I was curious if the effects are hand animated um the same way or if they
hand animated um the same way or if they are particles.
are particles. Okay. Um effects some some Okay, that's
Okay. Um effects some some Okay, that's a good question. I couldn't really go
a good question. I couldn't really go into effects today. Um sorry about that.
into effects today. Um sorry about that. Um most of the effect most of the
Um most of the effect most of the effects are um particles, but not just
effects are um particles, but not just particles flying around, but animated
particles flying around, but animated particles. So um the hit effects and
particles. So um the hit effects and everything like that are actually 2D but
everything like that are actually 2D but have um
have um a set of pictures switching every frame
a set of pictures switching every frame to get the animation. Um some particles
to get the animation. Um some particles or effects such as this uh such as the
or effects such as this uh such as the smoke from the character's feet when
smoke from the character's feet when they jump. Um they are actually done in
they jump. Um they are actually done in a pretty um
a pretty um kind of a brute force way. They modeled
kind of a brute force way. They modeled each frame and swapped um each frame. So
each frame and swapped um each frame. So we have a bunch of meshes
we have a bunch of meshes um swapping every frame as a smoke.
um swapping every frame as a smoke. Thank you.
Well, that it actually isn't that hard to do. And we were kind of joking about
to do. And we were kind of joking about it how how we're going to do smokes in
it how how we're going to do smokes in this game. And we were like one of the
this game. And we were like one of the one of the jokes was we're going to
one of the jokes was we're going to model them each frame. and it turned out
model them each frame. and it turned out to be the best way actually.
And then my last question was just um were there some key features of XSI um
were there some key features of XSI um that you could only do in XSI for this
that you could only do in XSI for this game?
game? Um
Um I think it'll be pretty
I think it'll be pretty I wouldn't want to do it in any other
I wouldn't want to do it in any other software. Um that is simply because um
software. Um that is simply because um you can just go back to any state and
you can just go back to any state and continue fiddling with the model
continue fiddling with the model without any um redoing the skins or
without any um redoing the skins or redoing the UVs. It just keeps there and
redoing the UVs. It just keeps there and you can just keep working on it until
you can just keep working on it until the last minute as I said. Um
the last minute as I said. Um and yeah, some the mo the normal editing
and yeah, some the mo the normal editing is pretty good in soft emage. So, I'm
is pretty good in soft emage. So, I'm not really sure how Maya and 3D Studio
not really sure how Maya and 3D Studio Max do it. Um, but I as long as as much
Max do it. Um, but I as long as as much as I know, um, 3D Studio Max has some
as I know, um, 3D Studio Max has some problems with the normal mapping. I
problems with the normal mapping. I mean, I mean, the normal editing.
mean, I mean, the normal editing. Yeah.
Yeah. Thank you.
Thank you. So, that's about it. Thank you.
So, that's about it. Thank you. Thank you very much.
Thank you very much. Please.
Please. So, the effects question was actually
So, the effects question was actually what I was going to ask, but um, okay.
what I was going to ask, but um, okay. to expand on that. The parts like if
to expand on that. The parts like if they're swinging swords and there's some
they're swinging swords and there's some drag on the shape, is that just the mesh
drag on the shape, is that just the mesh of the sword being like the verts being
of the sword being like the verts being dragged?
dragged? Um yes. Um that is a combination with um
Um yes. Um that is a combination with um switching meshes um in question. Um,
switching meshes um in question. Um, some characters swords are switched when
some characters swords are switched when they are kind of expanded and other
they are kind of expanded and other times we just add an extra um, mesh of
times we just add an extra um, mesh of that shape because it only lasts for
that shape because it only lasts for like a frame on the screen. So, it's no
like a frame on the screen. So, it's no point um, putting the mesh into the
point um, putting the mesh into the actual mesh. Um, so we just add it as an
actual mesh. Um, so we just add it as an effect.
effect. Okay, cool. Thank you.
Okay, cool. Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you. Please.
Please. Uh, hi. Um, I actually had a question
Uh, hi. Um, I actually had a question about the normals editing. Uh, it seemed
about the normals editing. Uh, it seemed like you had some really specific
like you had some really specific control over the normals on the models
control over the normals on the models and I was wondering uh what tools you
and I was wondering uh what tools you were using to do that. Was that just um
were using to do that. Was that just um the XSI modeling tools or were did you
the XSI modeling tools or were did you build your own?
build your own? Um, yes. Um, basically what we know uh
Um, yes. Um, basically what we know uh use a lot is Gator. It's a um it's a
use a lot is Gator. It's a um it's a tool in soft emage that lets you copy a
tool in soft emage that lets you copy a norm set of normals from a simpler mesh
norm set of normals from a simpler mesh to a more complicated mesh. Um this
to a more complicated mesh. Um this gives you a more smoother mesh, smooth
gives you a more smoother mesh, smooth the normal and everything else basically
the normal and everything else basically we just um hand tweak by the normal
we just um hand tweak by the normal editing tool.
editing tool. Thanks. It looks really awesome.
Thanks. It looks really awesome. Thank you. Thanks a lot.
Thank you. Thanks a lot. Um T. Yeah, I actually did have a second
Um T. Yeah, I actually did have a second much more serious question about uh your
much more serious question about uh your lighting uh uh solution.
lighting uh uh solution. Okay.
Okay. Um so you have each character lit
Um so you have each character lit individually separate from like a global
individually separate from like a global lighting solution like you you you've
lighting solution like you you you've got the lighting for the stage and then
got the lighting for the stage and then lighting for each character. Uh but
lighting for each character. Uh but first of all, does the lighting per
first of all, does the lighting per character change a little bit depending
character change a little bit depending on uh the stage they're in uh uh to to
on uh the stage they're in uh uh to to make them sort of match the feel of the
make them sort of match the feel of the stage better or
stage better or Okay. Um first of all, the background
Okay. Um first of all, the background isn't lit. It's all the shadows in the
isn't lit. It's all the shadows in the backgrounds are pre-baked. Yeah.
backgrounds are pre-baked. Yeah. Yes.
Yes. Um so there's no global lighting. Um one
Um so there's no global lighting. Um one thing that has global lighting is the
thing that has global lighting is the character's shadows on the ground. Mhm.
character's shadows on the ground. Mhm. So, the shadow maps have one global
So, the shadow maps have one global lighting and that's independent from the
lighting and that's independent from the character's um own
character's um own light set.
light set. Um the light set doesn't move and that
Um the light set doesn't move and that is an intentional choice. Um we have the
is an intentional choice. Um we have the same light set in every every stage
same light set in every every stage because um we didn't want to change the
because um we didn't want to change the impression of an action. If the sha if
impression of an action. If the sha if the shape of the shadow changes um from
the shape of the shadow changes um from stage to stage, it will give a different
stage to stage, it will give a different impression in each action. Okay? And
impression in each action. Okay? And that is not a good idea for fighting
that is not a good idea for fighting games,
games, right? Which which sort of gets to my
right? Which which sort of gets to my bigger question. It sounds like because
bigger question. It sounds like because of the way you have the lighting sort of
of the way you have the lighting sort of customized per character and like no
customized per character and like no global lighting, it would be
global lighting, it would be extraordinarily
extraordinarily difficult to use your uh specific sort
difficult to use your uh specific sort of solution for a game that would
of solution for a game that would require somewhat more open movement
require somewhat more open movement through a stage like an RPG for example.
through a stage like an RPG for example. um like you know where you there's just
um like you know where you there's just sort of this requirement for global
sort of this requirement for global lighting or local lighting and the
lighting or local lighting and the character has no choice but to interact
character has no choice but to interact with that somehow or else it'll look
with that somehow or else it'll look really
really That's true. Yes. Um
That's true. Yes. Um basically we knew it was going to be a
basically we knew it was going to be a fighting game with a fixed camera.
fighting game with a fixed camera. Yeah.
Yeah. So it was a choice
So it was a choice with that in mind. Okay.
with that in mind. Okay. If we were going to do a RPG or action
If we were going to do a RPG or action game, we would take a different route
game, we would take a different route obviously.
obviously. Okay. So yeah. So that just your leting
Okay. So yeah. So that just your leting solution just can't really apply to sort
solution just can't really apply to sort of wider games.
of wider games. Well,
Well, probably not.
probably not. Probably. Yeah.
Probably. Yeah. Okay. Thank you.
Okay. Thank you. Okay.
Thank you. You're welcome. Thank you. Sorry.
You're welcome. Thank you. Sorry. Please.
Please. Hi. Thank you. Uh first of all, I'd like
Hi. Thank you. Uh first of all, I'd like to say it's great seeing uh Japanese
to say it's great seeing uh Japanese companies kind of embracing NPR
companies kind of embracing NPR rendering or NPR rather. Um, we don't
rendering or NPR rather. Um, we don't have a lot of companies here in the west
have a lot of companies here in the west that are doing that and like stuff that
that are doing that and like stuff that your company and Cyber Connect 2 with
your company and Cyber Connect 2 with the Ultimate Ninja store games is just
the Ultimate Ninja store games is just really inspiring. Uh, my actual question
really inspiring. Uh, my actual question is I noticed that you're using uh a lot
is I noticed that you're using uh a lot of the vertex color information for the
of the vertex color information for the outlines.
outlines. Um, but you're also using some for to
Um, but you're also using some for to define the lighting on the character.
define the lighting on the character. Um, yes. Are you managed to fitting that
Um, yes. Are you managed to fitting that all that information in the RGB channels
all that information in the RGB channels or do you have to store it some other
or do you have to store it some other way?
way? Um yes um we are using all the four
Um yes um we are using all the four channels RGBA for um the lighting or the
channels RGBA for um the lighting or the threshold of the lighting and the other
threshold of the lighting and the other three are basically uh dedicated for the
three are basically uh dedicated for the uh outline.
uh outline. Okay, great. Thanks.
Okay, great. Thanks. Thank you.
Okay, please go. I had another question about the editing of the normals. Do you
about the editing of the normals. Do you allow non-unit normals when you are
allow non-unit normals when you are editing them? So in the case of the
editing them? So in the case of the front of the face that you would
front of the face that you would actually scale them down so when you do
actually scale them down so when you do the normal dotted with the light it
the normal dotted with the light it would you know more easily bias into
would you know more easily bias into shadow or highlight.
shadow or highlight. Um yes uh we considered that. Um but uh
Um yes uh we considered that. Um but uh we we at at the moment we keep it at
we we at at the moment we keep it at unit um normals. Okay.
unit um normals. Okay. Because it kind of it kind of gets
Because it kind of it kind of gets unpredictable in places. So we just keep
unpredictable in places. So we just keep it to that state. Yes.
it to that state. Yes. And one more quick question with the
And one more quick question with the textures that you fetch.
textures that you fetch. Yes.
Yes. Um do you just point sample those only?
Um do you just point sample those only? And I assume you don't use MI maps
And I assume you don't use MI maps because you would worry about at far
because you would worry about at far views they would
views they would well um
well um sort of blur and give you
sort of blur and give you non-controllable
non-controllable issues.
issues. No. Um although I said we don't really
No. Um although I said we don't really treat them as images. Um we do sample
treat them as images. Um we do sample them as textures.
them as textures. Um without that we wouldn't get the um
Um without that we wouldn't get the um inner lines like that. So it's it's
inner lines like that. So it's it's basically the same um texture sampling
basically the same um texture sampling but with a special UV set.
but with a special UV set. Okay. But the sampling mode like for the
Okay. But the sampling mode like for the line control and the extrusion, is that
line control and the extrusion, is that in like a point sampled mode where it's
in like a point sampled mode where it's actually is or is it linear? So when you
actually is or is it linear? So when you you zoom out into the distance, it's
you zoom out into the distance, it's it's smoothly adjusting.
it's smoothly adjusting. Okay. Um
Okay. Um I assume you're talking about texture
I assume you're talking about texture filtering.
filtering. Yes. Okay.
Yes. Okay. Texture filtering in the shader when
Texture filtering in the shader when you're looking up those textures and
you're looking up those textures and texture
texture having them Yeah. drive the extrusion.
having them Yeah. drive the extrusion. Yeah. Texture filtering is in use. Um
Yeah. Texture filtering is in use. Um therefore the texture blurs at far away.
therefore the texture blurs at far away. Yes.
Yes. And that blurring area kind of acts as a
And that blurring area kind of acts as a fill in to the um
fill in to the um so you so you allow it to center it
so you so you allow it to center it then.
then. Okay. Thank you.
Okay. Thank you. Thank you very much.
Thank you very much. Um, please.
Um, please. Uh, for characters that cast shadows on
Uh, for characters that cast shadows on themselves, do you kind of author the
themselves, do you kind of author the self-shadowed areas manually or do you
self-shadowed areas manually or do you do something um for like um something
do something um for like um something special with lighting to deal with
special with lighting to deal with those?
those? Okay. Uh so this question is about self
Okay. Uh so this question is about self shadowing.
shadowing. Yeah.
Yeah. Okay. Um self shadowing is one thing we
Okay. Um self shadowing is one thing we wanted to do but um we didn't do. So
wanted to do but um we didn't do. So basically uh we we
basically uh we we um we use the threshold mechanic
um we use the threshold mechanic instead. The problem with uh self
instead. The problem with uh self shadowing is that it's very um
shadowing is that it's very um uncontrollable. Um in anime you get like
uncontrollable. Um in anime you get like characters with big hairs
characters with big hairs and big hairs drop big shadows on the
and big hairs drop big shadows on the faces and there's just no way to control
faces and there's just no way to control that. um you either have to turn turn it
that. um you either have to turn turn it off and kind of deal with it. So we just
off and kind of deal with it. So we just decided not to deal with the self
decided not to deal with the self shadowing and do kind of a manually set
shadowing and do kind of a manually set the sort of self sort of self shadows by
the sort of self sort of self shadows by hand.
hand. So for all the characters with like
So for all the characters with like coats all of this like shadowed regions
coats all of this like shadowed regions were just the threshold um vertex paint
were just the threshold um vertex paint manually edited and
manually edited and Wow. Thanks.
Wow. Thanks. Okay. Thank you. Please. Yeah. Uh, I
Okay. Thank you. Please. Yeah. Uh, I think that the game looks really
think that the game looks really amazing.
amazing. Excuse me. Sorry. Um, so we don't have
Excuse me. Sorry. Um, so we don't have much time, so this will be the end of
much time, so this will be the end of the questioners. So, please go on.
the questioners. So, please go on. Yeah. Uh, I just wondering if you have
Yeah. Uh, I just wondering if you have any further thoughts on what to do to
any further thoughts on what to do to improve even more on the 2D look in the
improve even more on the 2D look in the future.
future. Okay. Um, yeah, we have various ideas.
Okay. Um, yeah, we have various ideas. Um,
Um, I can't really talk about them yet. it
I can't really talk about them yet. it will kind of ruin the surprise. So, I
will kind of ruin the surprise. So, I hope you just stick around and see how
hope you just stick around and see how it goes.
it goes. Yeah, that sounds interesting enough.
Yeah, that sounds interesting enough. Thanks.
Thanks. Okay. Thank you. Thank you very much.