Good afternoon.
Note to self. Don't schedule yourself
a opposite. Destiny.
So this is Patrick
Zell.
Patrick
Zel is a former professional uh e sports athlete e-sports player.
Um
He's retired about a year ago. He's 23 now, I think.
And
when he was playing,
he realized, wow, sometimes my ears ring a lot
and then they started ringing more,
and he did some googling
and he realized
I have tinnitus,
which is a constant ringing in his ear and now the ringing doesn't go away.
So he's now got permanent tinnitus.
And after some more googling, he kind of realized,
I think I gave this to myself. So
Patrick's game was a tactical five on five shooter.
Aware, hearing footsteps
is his paycheck.
So in order to hear those really, really quiet footsteps that are, you know,
asymptotically logarithmically soft away, far away,
he would crank the volume like insanely loud
levels so he could hear those quietest footsteps.
But of course, when the flash bang grenade goes off next to him,
it was really, really loud.
So combination of
playing really, really loud because that's what his paycheck depended on.
And
the fact that he plays for long hours. He practices, he plays,
uh
he realized he gave himself Tidus.
I met Patrick uh in Geneva uh this last summer
at the World Health Organization.
Uh I started doing some pro bono work for them last May or June
because they're more very interested in video games
as a potential source of hearing health problems.
Um
And they've created something called their Make Listening Safe initiative
uh
to look at hearing health for the population in general.
And it, it's a big problem hearing health,
uh you know, the inability to hear well,
has all sorts of downstream health ramifications
from increased risk of Alzheimer's depression.
Not to mention, of course,
the fact that we aren't a people are not able to enjoy the work that we all create here.
So,
um
who here either has an iphone or an Android.
Yeah, 100%
hands go up. I don't, you
have to ask that question.
Um Has anybody with an Apple watch ever had this pop up? Yep, hand goods go up.
So a couple of years ago,
uh the um World Health Organization
in conjunction working with Apple,
working with Google and working with the ITU actually created something
uh a specification
for hearing safety on these sorts of devices, right? People listen to music
with their earbuds in, they listen for, you know,
too loud for too long.
Uh They've got their
yeah, watches
to tell them things
and
they implemented
what's called the
whoituh 0.870 spec
guidelines for safe listening devices and systems that first came out in 2019,
it was updated recently in 2022.
Here's the uh World Health Organization
version of the uh the spec here is the little bit more buttoned
up itu version of the spec I kind of like that one better.
Um
But what it does is it specifies amongst other things under
what circumstances should devices that play music to your ears,
you know,
either provide some warnings and notifications to the user
to the listener or uh perhaps automatically lower the volume
down which uh we do in some cases as well.
So that was a very, very successful initiative, right?
They got something into devices that virtually every person
uh carries through this htuwhoitu 8.8 70 spec
through their make listening safe, safe initiative.
So what are they doing now?
They deliberately left video games off of the ITU 870 spec.
They just felt they didn't know the space well enough.
They wanted to get something out, right? You
what feature you're gonna cut in order to ship,
they cut uh video game systems and devices.
So
they are in the middle right now of writing
a there's no number two for it yet or anything
but writing an analogous specification
for us in the video game industry.
Um
Again,
the it and so they started the ituwho global
safe standard for listening in video game and e-sports
initiatives as part of the
um make listening safe campaign.
So a goal is to create a spec kind of analogous to the one adopted by
Google and Android, Google and Apple.
Another is that they do have uh an awareness campaign.
They just published a
article uh got picked up by most of the
press in January about hearing safety in general.
So there's uh
community awareness going on
and also they started reaching out to the development community,
which is kind of how I got involved.
Um
You know, again to help them better understand
how people play games, how people make games, how game systems work and so on.
So that's kind of what they're doing.
And like I said, part of what they're going to likely, you know,
working on are what would
analogous features to what we have on our iphones and Apple I watches and so on.
What sorts of things would we put into things
like game consoles or gaming devices and so on.
So that's part of what they're doing.
We're not gonna talk really too much about that,
except that if you are interested in that,
I'll have some contact information at the end.
Um Let me know by all means, we would love you to be part of the conversation.
So the things I also did want to do is reach out to us, to game developers,
particularly those on the audio side of things.
And uh towards that, for example, at Game Sound
Con this last October
uh by pure happenstance,
the head of this initiative at the who doctor Sally Chatta
happened to be in Los Angeles. And she actually took an Uber.
Uh I invited her to become part of my opening remarks at Game Sound
Con this year.
And li literally, she took an hour, hour and a half, Uber from Southern L A
up to Burbank where she spoke for 10 minutes and
then went back to doing the business that she did.
So they're very, very
uh passionate about this particular thing.
Um
And her big point is that this is a, this is a very real threat there.
She who estimates that 3 billion human beings
will have significant hearing damage in their life.
Um
If things don't change on their current course
and for us in games, it's kind of an interesting thing.
Uh I mean, there's nothing necessarily more,
you know about games that makes games more damaging to your hearing than say,
watching a movie or something like that.
But we do kind of have a bit of a triple threat here. Um
One is that
if we are successful, people play our games a lot. Um
You know,
I think balder's gate is about 100 and 20 hour playthrough.
Um
I certainly know people, um
very, very close family members who play many, many hours a week,
tens of hours a week.
Um So that's one of the problems, not problems. It's a success of us,
but it's a potential thing to worry about that.
People play our games for long periods of time,
they play it loud volumes. Um, many people play games
pretty loudly
and
they're playing with headphones,
by the way, that's the chat GP T image, the, uh,
the guy with the sound waves coming out of his ears.
We got, we got more um
so and studies show and in talking with some of the,
you know, publishers and so on that, about half of our
customers, about half of our players play with headphones on.
That's up all, you know, significant amount, you know, from a dozen years ago or so.
In fact, so much so that a lot of us mix our games with headphones on as well as with
uh speakers. I was uh
I had a coffee with uh Emily Ridgeway at
Valve and she's got this wonderful tree of headphones
that because they all sound so different.
She wanted to figure out, oh, what do these different headphones sound like?
What sounds sound good in them?
So, headphone listening is definitely a very, very big thing.
And uh to be Frank biology is going against us. Um
It's fun to listen loud. Um
This is another chat GP T image.
This is um
make me a realistic picture of somebody
rocking out loudly while playing a video game
uh not super careful on how they count hands. But, um,
but it, so it turns out that there's a part of our, uh it's not,
we don't use it for hearing, but it's still part of our auditory system called the
sacculus is in the,
in the inner ear that's particularly sensitive
to low frequencies at high DB levels.
Again, we don't use it for hearing,
but it does
sort of activate at about 90 decibels
and it's got a connection to the hypothalamus.
And yeah, that's the part of the brain that deals with hunger,
sex and sort of hedonistic responses to things.
Um
So it
literally is more pleasurable to us
to experience louds and anybody who's played in a band or
been in a concert or loves Mahler without Brass is blaring.
It's just some, yeah, something that's really cool.
So it's something that we are definitely fighting against.
It's we, we kind of want to turn ourselves
up to. This is the first meme I ever made.
So, uh for this talk here.
All right.
Um
So how does this uh you know,
super, super bit on the biology?
This is what it looks like inside our ears.
I'm sure we've all heard that we have hair cells in our ears.
We actually have two different sets of hair cells,
those top hair cells are called the inner hair cells.
So those are the only hair cells that are actually connected to nerves.
So, those are the ones we actually used to hear
those bottom hair cells, those three rows,
they're called the outer hair cells.
And they, um
their job is simply to mechanically amplify sounds.
We'll get to that in just a second. But, uh, it's really that top line.
That is the, the thing that changes vibrating air molecules to,
you know,
transduction
through the three bones in our inner ear to liquid in our cochlea,
that wiggle these hairs.
Um
This is how we hear.
And of course, if we listen for a little bit too loudly for too long,
this is what happens.
Um
In fact, those of the hairs stay bent over and our
body determines that they are dead
and that they don't regrow.
Um instead actually literally like a scab forms over where they used to be,
which is why there's empty space, not sort of you don't see the dead hair cells there.
So
those outer c
cells are really, really important
without our outer hair cells,
this would be our limit of our hearing.
So we, we literally would hear nothing below 60 decibels.
If we did not have those outer hair cells,
the outer hair cells act as a nonlinear amplifier
for. And this is the curve that represents the amplification.
It's a mechanical amplification that the outer hair cells do.
That bring the level of the vibrations up to the
point where our inner hair cells can actually detect,
move enough.
So that we detect sound.
Um
And if in the audio world, this is an upward compressor.
Uh
um
So
literally mechanically, we're providing variable gain
at very, very soft levels. We're providing lots of gain
at higher levels. We uh our auto hair cells provide little or no extra gain.
And
this is why, by the way, if somebody is hard of hearing,
you don't shout at them
because the upper range of their hearing is normal like anybody else,
it is just that the softer sounds are not
amplified up to the range where our inner ear ear
cells, hair cells can actually
de detect sound.
So this is why hearing damage is so insidious.
Um
Right,
they say an ounce ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure,
except in our case, there's no cure. So it's kind of problematic.
Um
So the thing that you want to track,
if we're talking about either our own hearing health
or our players hearing health is dosage over time,
right?
It's like a Geiger counter,
you can be exposed to so much radiation for a certain number of time minutes.
If you're exposed to twice as much radi
radiation, you better be in the room half as long
and it's just like that uh would sound as well.
And this is called the equal energy principle, right?
If I listen for four hours at 80 decibels on Monday
and two on Sunday, that's the same as if I had
um, listen for six hours in one day.
And, uh, here's an example, by the way of some,
uh lt's output from a couple of different games.
Um,
the second one,
it's a little bit more steady, very,
very high levels where the dy dynamic range of the first one,
gives a lot more
opportunity for our ears, sort of to breathe and so on
come.
So
the
who, uh, and international standards have, have come up with
what are safe listening levels? How loudly can we listen for?
How long in a recreational setting?
There are different numbers for occupational settings, right? Where there's a, a
factory
stamping machine going 24 hours a day,
uh for recreational listening.
What they have
settled upon is
80 decibels a weighted DB A
for 40 hours a week
and every three decibels of increased listening level
is ha
halves the amount of safe listening time.
So at 86 decibels,
it's not 40 hours a week that is safe.
It is only 10 hours a week that is safe and at 100 decibels.
Uh, right. It's like five minutes, six minutes.
Uh, that is, that is safe.
So the wh a did a survey and also a survey of literature kind to kick this thing off.
Um
And one thing that they found was people when they are playing games are playing
louder than 80 decibels
and they're playing for, in some cases, you know, more than 10 hours a week.
So people generally are listening at unsafe levels. Uh certain,
certain subsets of our players are playing loud
and playing for long periods of time.
The, uh they do set different levels for uh, Children versus adults.
That's what the uh, mode two was, is the same thing, but for kids.
Um,
so it's definitely a little bit of a problem.
Um So some of the other results of their surveys were,
people did not perceive
themselves as being susceptible to hearing loss. That makes sense.
Gamers are for the most part,
kind of young and young people kind of feel pretty invincible
in general,
much less for something where slow dosages over a period of
decades will result in hearing loss when they're 75 or 80.
So that kind of makes sense. Um
They do believe that reducing volume would limit limit gaming enjoyment
a year ago. I would have rejoiced at that statement.
Um
But it is something we need to keep in mind.
Like I said, we're,
we're fighting against the sacculus and the fact that it's more fun to listen loud.
Um
That said half of the response to the survey said
that they were interested in learning more about this thing because
it's sort of like smoking, people do not want lung cancer
so they realize they shouldn't smoke.
Um And so, yeah, I kind of want to know more about that.
So,
uh
yeah, this is what they're the kind of the survey, the um results there.
Now some listening habits that they have,
uh,
these were done on Windows systems and the average volume
setting was 56% 56% on Windows system volume is about,
I measured it just the other day,
I think it's about minus eight decibels um from peak.
So they're down a little bit,
um,
21% listen at high or very high
volume settings which were high,
was defined as the system volume was greater than 60%
or very high, the greater than 80%. So one in five people,
system volumes while they're playing games are pretty loud.
Um
Of course, the one thing that was kind of cool is,
you know,
three out of four said they believe that
sounds are either extremely or very important.
That's yay us again.
So that's good.
But it is, it is problematic. Um
Right
time spent ga with gaming is associated with higher odds of hearing loss.
That was one of the findings of the survey people who game more,
um tend to start to have some hearing problems.
Gamers who played more frequently were more likely to game at higher volume.
So that's
that double whammy
of dosage right time at a certain volume
times. Um
the level at which you are actually
listening
um, you know, four or five and 10
reported having heard ringing in their ears
after playing a game session at least once
So there's definitely some stuff that, you know,
some things to look at here from a safety perspective.
So as game developers,
you know, are there things that we can do to make the game people play the games?
We have, we want them to play long periods of time, we want them to hear our stuff.
Uh But are th are there anything we can do and to be frank? This is an open question.
This is one of the things we're trying to figure out.
This is a new topic for us.
Um
Right, we haven't thought of this another chat GP T image except I did Photoshop um
The Wise mastering plug in into the Thought Bible there.
So yeah, this is not something
I don't know about you. I had never really given this a second thought.
So it's not something we had thought about.
The exception being Rob Bridget who has thought about this, of course,
because Rob Bridget has thought about everything.
Um
But it does seem kind of close to some things that we have worked on.
So, accessibility
um loudness standards.
We boy, I remember being at,
at the Fairmont talking about uh loudness standards at G DC,
uh listening environments like night time mode,
audio customizability, advanced audio settings, these sorts of things.
And again, you know, several years ago,
uh Sony Microsoft kind of joined forces to help create
the um mixed recommendations that standard minus 23 left,
we're kind of at right now,
a lot of games have very cool audio options
with headphone base boosts and different cus kinds of custom
customizability.
Um
This is from, is this from God
or Ragnarok? I think it is.
Um Yeah,
of course, somebody here knows that.
Uh So yeah, different levels of dynamic range, right?
So that if I don't want my gunshots to be quite so out,
maybe I can play my game in a more limited dynamic range.
Uh Some devices actually do implement some of these warning features already.
This is the manual from
I forgot if it's Oculus Go or Oculus Quest.
But um you know, to prevent hearing loss, do not listen at high volumes,
that's warning in the manual.
And actually you will get a visual alert
if you've been listening in this VR experience and
some VR experience for too loud for too long.
Now, there obviously
are a lot of challenges. Um
Right, there is the biggest is the last mile problem.
It's all good. And for us to talk about, you know,
how we create our games and the volume levels we set.
We don't know what the person's headset is, right?
An 80 ohm headset vers the 30 dome headset, vers,
the 250 ohm headset are gonna be massively, you know,
like orders of magnitude different spl levels to the eardrums.
So who is fully cognizant of that?
There are some initiatives to try and deal with that,
that are kind of fun for us long term like headphones that
tell you the exact spl level that are going to the ears,
which we can then do things like, you know,
Fletcher months and compensated listening.
It's volume controls and things like that.
So those are a little bit down the road.
But their idea is that we can make a meaningful
impact while working on a little bit longer term solution.
So what we have here is
a behavior is sort of a call to action.
Um
The idea of this talk, it's a 30 minute talk.
So it's a quick one is just to sort of introduce the topic to the industry a little bit.
We had a little bit of a panel at Game Sound Con on it
continuing to here at G DC.
So part one is just if you're interested in being part of the conversation,
come join to be part of the conversation, we'd love to get your input on
this topic in general.
Um
Consider hearing health in the same way you might consider accessibility
or those sorts of things or it's say
something,
maybe we can start thinking about how might we change
a little bit of the way we make our games
not to diminish the content, we wanna make
the emotional content we wanna make.
But with just something like this in mind,
I think also being aware of how our players
are listening to our games could be really helpful.
There's a lot of
not, we have a lot of opaque areas where we're not really quite sure what's going on.
So, telemetry data, audio and audio analytics, right?
Um Have your games report back to you back to home base,
what people's volume slider settings are at or what their system settings at and
things like that play testing of trying things out to see how it affects,
how loudly people listen and so on.
Um And the kinds of telemetry days telemetry data we might want to collect.
Are you listening on the headphone or speakers? What options are people set again?
This is non intrusive stuff. This is stuff you can just get by calling API S
um USB versus analog
by what's the level of chat versus game versus sound
effects versus music and so on game volume settings,
system volume settings, things like that.
Um
So another instinct call to action might be thinking about
what kind of features might we want you want to implement in your game
that could lead to a lower sound pressure level experience for the player, right?
Less loudness at the headset
um without compromising our experiences.
Um loudness set up some more gran audio sliders,
uh you know, back to Patrick
when he realized that he was, you know, he had literally damaged his hearing,
he wrote a little piece of Windows software. He's, he's a programmer too.
And what this piece of Windows software did again.
The game he did was a five on five tactical shooter.
Um, which means that unless you win,
there are long periods of the game where you're just spectating, right? You die,
you're out of this round until the next round.
Um
And he realized, hey, when I'm spectating after I've been killed,
I'm still hearing the game at this full volume.
And so he simply wrote a piece of software that detects
when
he is dead.
And it literally reached into the window system volume and lowered
the window system volume by like 15 or 20 decibels.
And then when it,
his software would detect that he was no longer dead and active in the game,
it would bring it back up again.
So things like that might be some, you know,
that was something he implemented so that he could practice.
Uh right. He can't use that kind of software in a tournament.
But when he was practicing, he would use the software such that
he could still get the experience,
but only when he wanted it, he didn't need that high volume dose
when he wasn't even active in the game. So things like that,
um
if you are an educator definitely call the action for you all.
There's lots of, lots of areas we could, you know,
we could sit down and think of 15 to 20 mas under either undergrad or master's thesis,
uh like projects, things like listening habit studies and
the effects of L level on a in ear spl. And
you know what if we make our logo screens louder or softer?
How does that affect how loudly people play their games?
Um user behavior for different
all sorts of studies that kind of could be done.
Um
So if you're
an educator and you have students who are interested in,
hey, I might want to publish a paper that
you know how we call this talk,
how to get a paper referenced by the who in three
easy steps just make it about hearing health and video games.
I can't guarantee anything but boy,
that will be read by the WHL within days of it being published.
Um
Another call to action
be nice to your own ears. Um
What this graph is is uh what's called TT S or temporary threshold chef shift.
So when we expose ourselves to loud, sounds like
I,
I remember being 22 years old and mixing my band in the studio and it
was cranked up and it was rock and roll and it was really fun.
Um
After loud exp loud exposure to sounds drastically changes
our free the frequency response of our ears.
So this is 100 and 15 DB A which is pretty loud. That's, that's a loud band
at a club. But for just 20 minutes
after that,
you've got a 50 decibel notch at three kilohertz,
which totally is gonna screw up your mixes
and even 24 hours later, that top green one, even 24 hours later,
you still got six or eight or almost 10 DB
of
a notch in your hearing. A
full 24 hours after like going to a concert.
Um
So yeah, long sound design mixing sessions,
excessive levels will distort your hearing.
So take care of your own hearing. I know,
you know, many uh mixers and so on.
Never go anywhere without ear plugs. Um
Right. Right.
You mix, you're really loud in your mixing session.
The next morning you come and listen to your mix. Like why is it so bright?
Well, it's bright because while you were mixing at the end of the night,
you had a giant notch
in uh in your high mids there.
So if you are interested in this topic,
drop me an email. This goes straight to my inbox hearing at games sound con.com.
And with that, I'll open it up to any questions anybody might have.
Yes. Uh Please walk up to the microphone so that the folks at
home um can have a chance and we've got like four minutes
for questions before we take you to the walk up room.
Yes.
Hi. Um
Thanks so much for putting on this presentation.
Um
I'm just curious with regards to VR headsets like the Quest Three
the in head or in headset speakers.
Uh It's, it's gonna be very difficult for them to produce
uh low frequency information.
Um And as we discussed today or as you discussed today,
uh gamers like to hear or everyone likes to hear that low frequency information to
make it feel good.
Um
How, what would be the best practice to
uh help reduce the chances of harm from players trying to boost the volume on their
headset,
uh speakers to get that sensation.
Yeah, that is a great question.
And my guess as I saw Scott's cell phone out here,
my guess is there is like half of a team at meta working on that.
Very proud.
Yeah,
getting low frequencies out of small transducers is challenging and we do want
to try and make sure our systems aren't designed such that people overcompensate
um for not, not having the low end by just cranking it up really loud. Uh
There have been some
attempts to work at this.
One is, you know, use of things like Mac based technologies, you know,
missing fundamental phenomenon and so on.
But yeah, there, there's no perfect solution for, for that right now. Um
So, yeah,
yeah, it's a great,
it's a great question and it's a creative challenge that we need to solve.
Ok. Thanks a lot
again. Thank you so much for all of this information gathered in one place.
I'm curious what you or the who might be doing
with E sports tournament organizers or leagues who will put,
um often put on a secondary set of headphones on top of the in ears
that a lot of the um the competitors are using for communications or inga sound
in order to play to blast the white noise or pink noise at them
mute the audience basically.
Yeah, that's a great question if you're in an E sports tournament. Um
Not only, first of all, you're probably wearing deep in ear monitors
over the top of which you're wearing
acoustically.
Um you know, th minus 30 DB things to which they sometimes pipe in white noise
so that the gamers don't get an advantage by listening to the show casters,
the, the, the, you know, the, the announcers announcing the thing.
Uh that is definitely something the who is looking at trying
to have some more safety standards around for players because it,
it's not healthy for players.
Now, the, the only mitigating factor is that that is a pretty small
scenario does not happen
in, in the
context of numbers of human beings playing video games at loud volumes.
It's, it's a very, very small thing,
but it's definitely one of the things that they're
working on and it's probably one of the reasons Patrick
King got as bad as it was.
I think I have time for one more question before we take it up to the,
the uh the wrap up room.
-- Yes, hi. -- Um
I,
from, from what I remember uh the
monitoring uh standard for um speakers is around uh
85 decibels, uh, at least for uh, film and TV.
Um,
and I'm not sure if there is one for, uh headphones
but, um, I was just wondering if, um,
in order to, uh, protect your own hearing
and, um, make sure that
your, um, mixes are as good as possible without um,
the effects of
um losing, um,
like, like, like having that notch effect that
you were talking about.
Um, would you recommend
a me
a revision to that uh standard? Um And, or a different uh
um behavioral change in terms of uh
when you're mixing like um
uh doing like a one hour session
here and there ra rather than um a two hour session, like, like would,
would spacing it out
um help um
uh any long term effects during, during the week when you're working on a project.
Yeah, it's, it's a great question.
I,
I definitely would not go as far as tell the entire
audio industry that they should change their mixing level standards.
Um
uh That said, you know, taking breaks is an important part of the mixing process.
Again, it gives your ears a chance to rest.
The 80 you know, from a so 80 decibels is the recreational, 85 is actually the,
the occupational.
So if you're working
and that said again, you're,
when we mix the 85 that's kind of, you know, we dialogue level we wanna have.
It's not like you're listening to pink noise at 85
decibels for eight hours in a mixing session or,
or again, you know,
you're not on a factory floor where the ambient noise
level is 85 decibels and literally all day long,
you're listening to that.
So the fact that, yeah, we're,
you know,
I suppose if you were a,
you know,
heavy metal mixer that just did nothing but mix heavy
metal albums 12 hours a day that could be problematic.
But yeah, just taking breaks and that the natural ebb and flow of most media,
um,
you know,
has enough softs versus louds that II I don't see that
as probably being an issue as long as you take breaks.
Yeah, you, you need to give your ears a rest,
not just for your hearing but for your profession.
So that you're, we're not making mixing decisions based upon um,
the colorization based up that because of TT s it's temporary threshold shift.
It's called
so, thanks so much. Uh Thanks for showing up in, be
in this topic.