Hello. Uh welcome. I'm I'm Chris JL.
Um CTO at Odyssey, Interactive Odyssey is kind of a,
we're a small studio uh focused on competitive online games. Um
I should
remind you to please silence your phones if you could.
And uh you're gonna get like an email, I presume or maybe it's in the app.
I've now already forgotten
um about a survey,
please. Uh
you know, be nice to me. That'd be great.
Um And so this is how to launch an online game uh and still attend the launch party.
And uh thanks for coming.
Um So the structure of the talk here is
kind of largely oriented around two case studies.
Um Before we get to the first one, I'm gonna introduce the game uh
that the case studies are from uh games called Omega strikers.
And I'm gonna briefly discuss sort of the
architecture of the game services that we used
uh from development all the way uh through release. Um And,
you know, since I put in the title,
I will point out that launch day wasn't exactly boring or peaceful.
But um
I was the first call for pager duty.
I made it into the pictures that we took, you know, um and into the dinner afterwards.
Um
And so I think in the end, you know, we sort of had confidence in our tech and,
and it seemed to work actually.
Um
so part of the discussion about architecture,
um I will then define sort of observable
um and, and explain why it's necessary.
Um The first case study is a really
sim simple trace. Uh that's uh
for players magma
status,
um which will be a little bit of an orientation into what observable can look like.
Um Then I'll dig into some of the tech underpinning kind of observable
and, and how we implemented in Omega strikers.
And then the second case study is a little bit more complicated.
Uh hopefully to show kind of where things can go uh with the observable.
Um It revolves around kind of a,
a matchmaking problem that we had in in the actual uh public beta.
And then finally, you know,
just some summary stuff and uh hopefully there will be time for questions.
Uh So starting with the game itself, uh it's called the Make Strikers, like I said,
uh here's a short video, you know, because it's cool,
it's just
right,
but you have been
a discerning
child
again
until they
thank you video team.
Um So Omega strikes, like I said, it's uh it's Odyssey's first uh released game.
Uh It's a three on three competitive online game um
kind of many of the features you expect from such game, there's matchmaking,
there's in game friends presence, chat.
Uh We have custom games, you know,
the typical progression systems that you might have daily, weekly missions,
that kind of thing.
There's battle pass entitlement shop,
um and all the things that I just listed are what we
had Odyssey call our services or the sort of a round game,
uh which is somewhat distinguished from the core game.
And I will only really be talking about uh the services uh
in the infrastructure kind of to support that uh for this presentation.
Uh Omega strikers launched on eight platforms, uh PC mobile console,
kinda all of them all together.
Uh We did it with a pretty small team.
We were about 1010 engineers and, and for services in particular, we were 2 to 3 at,
at any given time
and just to give you a sort of a scale of, of uh people to, to, to do what we're,
what I'm explaining.
Um
And so being an online competitive game, you know, as an ensuing team,
I think we had sort of the responsibility to provide not
only sort of stable game play uh for our players,
but
really just ensure that they can log in and play uh whenever they want.
And I think failing to meet that,
uh especially right as the game is launching is like a really,
really negative impact
on any momentum that we might be able to build.
And I think just sort of personally, it feels bad if somebody can't play your game.
Um
And so,
in order to achieve sort of our successful launch and uh do live service operation,
uh we focused on scalability and operability as our kind of
principles.
Um So essentially, we wanted to be able to respond in minutes to some problem
uh while also simultaneously handling significant
fluctuations in uh concurrent players.
Um And so the goals there of scalability and operability
kind of led us to focus on managed infrastructure.
Uh And that's very pervasive through the entire uh
architecture of the game.
Uh And, and we kind of identified the general overhead and, and inflexibility of we,
we call it owning a computer
um as something to be avoided as much as possible.
Uh So here is a picture
um of the high level architecture of the game services in Omega strikers.
Um Sort of pretty, pretty briefly, you know, game clients go
and send a TP requests to services uh via some kind of gateway.
Um They receive the notifications about state changes back down over a web socket.
Um The actual logic of those services run on a
big bundle of uh lambdas that's like a serverless compute offering
um persistence. We're using Mongo DB. Um
They have a managed service as well
and then sort of sprinkled around in there,
there's a bunch of red S nodes that do caching for us.
Uh also on a kind of managed offering.
Um, there are game servers as it turns out.
Um And, and we, as may not surprise you use a managed service
to, to handle scaling them up and down and as well as uh place matches,
um, there is a computer that we might describe as owned uh in the middle,
that's the match finder, a single box.
Um And it just sits there and kind of spins over an in memory list of players. Uh
And then spits out matches when they're found.
Uh And then all of these pieces of infrastructure, talk to our observable service,
uh which I'll talk about a bit later.
Um And so the, the key thing I think about this is that
as I've said repeatedly, they're all managed services, uh which gives us, you know,
the ability to, to scale, uh quite, quite nicely.
Um
And as a result,
the computer doing the actual work may actually be ephemeral. Uh
you know, it, it, it may go away or we may not have control over it.
And so if we want to do a typical thing, uh like, you know,
log into the box and see what happened,
you may not be able to do that because either
like it's gone or you just aren't allowed to or
whatever.
Um
So
that's kind of a big blind spot and it makes it really difficult
to operate uh these kinds of services and that's what observ ability,
really.
That's the hole that it's plugging.
Um And just before we move on, I'll sort of highlight two notable decisions.
Well, I think they're notable anyways, uh
about how we actually made use of this.
Um,
and I would describe them as probably opposite
sides of the conventional best practices spectrum.
Uh The first one,
which is the probably
good side. Um, everything was automated.
Uh, in terms of deployments, we, we aimed for like one button.
Uh We ended up with three buttons
but, you know, it's not that many.
Um And that was sort of a core safety blanket
uh for us in terms of really responding to really,
really high demand or if we had a really significant outage,
um we sort of had this in the back pocket where we
could spin up the entire stack in another zone region wherever,
um or potentially concurrently in multiple zones.
Uh If we really had big, big scaling problems.
Um
And there's a, there's a requirement um
to really maintain uh
that
ability.
Um You know, usually it'll be every couple of months or weeks,
you spend a few days yelling at computers because it's not working.
Um
But
it was totally worth it.
Uh An example of the value.
We had a play test that we heard about only a few hours before it was supposed to happen
in Asia. Um And we were able to just
like click the buttons and it worked and I was like, great.
And so it didn't disrupt any of our daily play tests or,
or any other really development process.
So we went to the unusual choice um for Omega strikers,
it's like there's a single environment just, just one.
it handles, you know, live game, uh it handles internal play tests,
it handles literally everything.
Um
So when you make an update,
it's going live now. And
that means that like development features upcoming content, absolutely,
everything is always in production.
Uh So this forces us to implement sort of
logical barriers uh to enable testing or protected actions.
But the upside is that there's only one process and
we do it every day or potentially multiple days.
And so we're really used to it
and
as I will talk about later,
that's really, really helpful. Um So changes
get put out quite frequently. Um And, and there's, there is a risk to that.
Um But you can kind of mitigate that or we mitigate that through
pretty extensive automated testing um
in, in the sense of like end to end testing. Uh And then
there's, you know, feature flags and
actually rolling out a change is quite, quite quick.
So if it goes out and it's bad, you just undo it, it's,
it's like not the end of the world.
Um And I think again,
the big s big upside of this single
environment is that the in the scripted deployments
um
that for each individual change is actually relatively low risk.
And like I said, you can kind of just undo it
and it's very incremental in that way.
Uh And uh the other big thing is you're never
migrating or you're trying to do like any integration between these
environments, it's always there.
Um
So like I alluded to a major downside uh to the managed infrastructure
and especially these kind of ephemeral compute uh
offerings is the significant increase in difficulty of debugging.
The thing when it's actually running.
Um There's several factors I think that contribute to that, but generally,
it's just like hard to isolate a particular change or figure
out what the heck it was doing at that time.
Um Or, or, or reproduce it in any sort of really controlled fashion.
And so solving that is obviously something that we are going to need
to do so that we can actually use these things uh at scale.
And so I'm gonna define observable kind of informally and it's,
it's really the ability to inspect or sort of
otherwise know what the state of an application is.
Um while it's doing processing
and logging is an example of a common,
but I will classify it as somewhat rudimentary form of observable
in Omega strikers.
What we use is essentially a highly structured logging,
uh systematic instru instrumentation and then a queried U I uh altogether uh to,
to solve these problems for ourselves.
Um
And we'll dig into the really
sort of more specifically how that, how that looks, uh, again a little bit later.
Uh But for now, I just wanna highlight a couple of things that
this allows us to do, which are really significant time savers and debugging.
And I think as a result really increase our, our reliability.
Um,
the system is always on, it's always recording, there's a just kind of,
it's like a 30 day buffer, but um it potentially could have been longer or shorter.
Um But it allows us to kind of go back and investigate problems um
after they've happened.
So we do daily play tests and this was like our primary
testing of the game more or less.
Uh And so someone would say, hey,
this was weird or this was busted or whatever it was and like we were playing the game.
So we were not like monitoring this stuff,
but we were able to go back in time and look at the state
that they had at that time.
It was all captured and just traced through and be like, yes, that's right.
It was busted, it was busted here
no, you're wrong. That's actually how it's supposed to work.
Um
And, and it, it's a proactive as well. It's sort of real time.
So when you release new code, you can just like look at if it's doing what you expect.
Uh So you can you fully inspect the, the system
OK. So we'll start with the first example. Um
It hopefully kind of
illustrates now what I've been describing for the last few minutes.
Um This is like a sample of the U I uh that
you would see.
And it's, it's a really simple matchmaking status query.
The focus here is not on this particular request,
but sort of on how this data is structured and, and presented
that hopefully will illustrate some of the benefits
um each row. So it's a nomenclature here. Each row is called a span. Uh
spans are typically organized in sort of a tree like hierarchy.
The one at the top is called the root
and the collection of related spans is called a trace.
And typically, that's gonna represent some logical operation,
it's kind of context dependent.
Um Every span usually has some common data like you have a name,
uh a duration and then it'll point out who its parent is.
Uh And this allows us to create, you know,
it's kind of waterfall type visualization.
Um
And you know,
just with that,
we're able to see how long individual
functions take basically within these requests.
Uh you know, we can aggregate them across multiple requests or, or by players.
And this is essentially what we use to do uh
low testing and, and profiling.
Uh So by itself, I think that's pretty valuable.
Um But then there's a bit more uh so each span
you can give it kind of this custom bag of data.
Uh So here's
an example of a few things that are useful.
Um And then, you know, those get indexed basically, so you can query on them.
Uh And, and look for related spans or, or traces.
So here's like, you know, uh
I don't actually remember what I highlighted there, but you know, the game version,
for example, um
would be useful things to, to create against.
Um
So here's a different trace just to sort of highlight the,
the value of the built in timing.
Um
It should not take 30 seconds to log into the game.
Uh
And I we pull this up and we know exactly what step actually took all of that time,
you know, immediately
kind of like a profiler, but it's always on.
Um And finding this takes like 10 seconds, you like, hey,
find me things that took a long time. Oh This is bad.
Um
OK, so we'll move on now um to sort of
what an implementation might look like and, and what tools are out there to,
to use uh for your own code
um
at
its core,
right? This data is kind of just semi structured
JSON like that's what's being passed around.
Um Fortunately,
there's sort of a standardization body uh it's called open telemetry.
They identify a few common property names uh that are expected to exist.
So this is like that's the name and, and the parent and,
and the timing and those things, they have like
almost like a, a schema.
Um And outside of those,
the rest of the data is pretty context sensitive or context dependent.
Um you kind of give it whatever you want.
Uh So we ended up building a pretty small set of utility functions that
made it really easy to integrate like expanse and traces and the services code.
Um
And
we through fairly continuous effort, um
we ended up with like about 1200 instrumentation points.
Last time I checked,
um the number goes up, like every time you write a function, we just always wrap it in a
trace or a span.
Um
There are lots of frameworks that you could use that have like, you know,
sort of built in uh instrumentation for this kind of thing.
So it's not like there's this massive labor cost.
Um We didn't actually use anything like that. So we did it ourselves.
And then
we're able to use that integration then to facilitate
sort of debugging across all phases of production.
So development stacks, your unit tests are running this code,
so you can actually look at them.
Um And then having them all visualized in this single tool is really nice.
It's like again, back to the sort of
you're used to this process um from all uh points of development.
Um And then
to, to actually aggregate things and visualize them, we use a vendor
uh to store and index this data. Um There are lots of back ends. Uh
You can kind of just Google them and pick your favorite one.
Uh Here's like a kind of cool picture that open telemetry made,
which is great uh It to sort of show what
the internals of the observable system itself are doing.
You know, there's got your various producers and they're sending data to,
you know, these service or, or services that are called collectors.
The collector then is, you know,
doing something probably indexing maybe a database is involved.
Um And then it's feeding some kind of front end uh to assemble, you know, however,
the visualization is
could be the waterfall, it could be something else.
Um
And then typically it'll provide some kind of querying interface as well.
Uh So you can look at
interesting things.
Um I'll just point you kind of to the
open telemetry documentation for any really specifics or,
or to, to go deeper on that.
Um Yeah, so now we'll move on uh to the second example,
it's a little bit more complicated.
Um But the idea here is to show that
you can look at data from multiple systems uh
together uh to solve problems that I think would
be pretty challenging without some kind of centralized system.
Um This is sort of AAA recreation because the data was is aged out.
But a recreation of a real problem that we had in our first fairly large public test
um, you know, we were sitting there playing the game,
it was great and then all of a sudden
people were not matching for relatively short periods of time.
It was like, you know,
15 seconds ish. It's kinda
when you get, like, AD M from Discord,
it's kind of hard to know exactly what they're doing.
Uh, and then some groups, like, weren't match, uh, I'm sorry,
weren't matching at all.
Yeah.
And so the first thing to do it is a matchmaking problem, right?
So we go look at the matchmaker and it's like,
OK, this, this is bad.
Um But
what is going on here? Um So we can
basically zoom into the last trace before one of the dips. And
again, the useful part of that is
this may or may not be actually happening live,
but I don't care because I can go back and find
a case of it that it was happening uh
in the past.
Um And so we kind of drill down
into this particular match finder trace. Um Get that last one. That's great.
Uh And we can look at some of the context data we've got here,
which in our case, we were specifying, you know,
these are the actual groups that are in the queue
this actually looks fine.
So this is probably not the problem, but maybe this one at the front is,
is suspicious.
So let's go ahead and dig further into that.
Um
Like query. Hey, give me things that are related to this group.
Um I've sort of filtered out all of them but you would see like the construction of the
group so you can see the invites for them
and who accepted and how that was actually done.
Um But the relevant one for us is like, ok, well,
they're getting added to the matchmaking cue.
So
who was in their group? What happened when that,
uh, addition happened?
Maybe that data is what's suspicious
and it turns out, um, unsurprisingly because it's kind of a guided tour,
but this is the one that's, that's wrong.
Um
They're all forwards which probably doesn't mean anything to you, but in our game,
you have to have a goalie
or at least that's what the match finder decided.
And so it was sitting there trying to construct groups
where one of the teams was full of forwards and it was like, I don't
know how to do that.
Uh And so then they would sit there and plug the queue for
essentially the time out, uh, for them.
So they would fail and then people would go through be a big burst
and that was the, the chart.
Ok, great. So now we know the problem. Um,
we basically then
like, hacked in a really quick fix so that, ok,
we just ignore what you want to be for now so that people can play the game,
um, throw a test case in actually fix it properly in, in the matchmaker,
uh update the matchmaker.
And then
we're, we're good again
and like the total time kind of to do this was in a 25 minute range,
um
which I think is pretty good.
Uh We're like aggregating data across multiple things.
There's, you know, hundreds or thousands of matches being made
uh per second at this time. No, not, not the picture that I showed you, but I promise
it was like that.
Um
And you know, so being able to drill down into that data really quickly is,
is solving a big, big problem.
Um
But it's not as,
it's not quite as valuable when you aren't able to also operate on it.
So that's kind of a principles uh
in action.
Um
Yeah, so uh kind of in summary,
we kind of kept our infrastructure as
simple as possible while still addressing the,
the problems that we are trying to solve.
Um
We use the same process every day
from like really early development
uh all the way through launch and, and in into life service as well.
So we were really, really familiar with it.
And
so when there was a problem,
it, we weren't like trying to remember like, oh,
how do you do whatever in production or how do you do it in stage or what's that?
No, there's just the one thing.
Um
I think the investment commitment to observable really meant that
we could understand what was happening. Uh
So we could drilled in directly quickly.
There was again a single tool you just go here and find it.
Um
And then lastly on launch day itself, we really significantly over provision,
the infrastructure just give ourselves a buffer.
Um This flexibility is,
is exactly what the managed services were supposed to provide
and they did it
and that was great. And yeah, it costs more than it maybe should have. But
the thing ran and then you can scale it down
very quickly over the next, you know, couple of days or, or weeks once you identify
like what your players are doing and how many of them there are and,
and what you need to do there.
Um So I kind of think of that as a marketing expense
realistically if you're trying to sell that to someone
get some marketing money to run your servers.
Um
ok. Uh That's it.
Uh Thanks for coming.
Uh I can take any questions you ask that you go up to the,
the microphone if you have a question.
Hello?
Hi
talk.
Um I was curious about your match finders, you said, is it literally one machine?
Yes, it's a single c five large, it's like a little baby machine running
and it can produce like 3 million matches per second.
Ok.
-- How -- do you patch it if it's one machine without taking prod
down or do you just take prod down for a brief downtime.
-- Oh, -- we just spin up a new one. So there's like hues and redis around it.
Right. Right. So you just kind of pop one up and that one takes over and
drop
down the
other one.
Yeah.
So for my matchmaker, I recently decided, you know, against,
against external advice to you in memory as well.
And I was like, well, it's probably, it's probably fine. So
it's pretty fast.
Yeah,
I think we as a distributed system sort of tech
space right away from any kind of in memory.
Anything when we figured all this stuff out. But
I think if you're calculated about it, you still can do in memory,
sometimes it's validating to see somebody else do the same
100 producer.
But uh X Apple software engineer for seven years
did SRE live ops dev ops kind of stuff.
Uh Very interested to see your basically like mono
reo style like single branch production because that was not my experience. But
curious to see if you think for a game like Omega strikers and maybe other games where
um maybe you aren't developing too many features that would be
maybe taking months to develop and they're needing special integration.
Do you recommend that maybe other games maybe take
a similar approach using feature flags and end testing?
Um
And using that just for simplicity's sake,
-- especially for the simplicity of automated one to maybe three button -- launch.
I would, yeah, I, you know, I think it was great and,
and we have features that took months to develop.
Uh You just build them in the branch, like turn off the code, don't call the code.
Um You know, obviously there's like two or three of us,
so it's a lot easier for us to communicate.
We'd like, hey, don't call these functions, please. They're not ready.
Um
I think there are probably process ways to, to address that at a larger scale.
Um
I had another thing that isn't just gone.
Uh I'll just deal in that time that you just lost that thought. Um Testing
-- you do unit functional and then end to end or just do you focus on -- like the last
function pretty much just ran full end to end uh spin up the whole stack locally and,
you know, we use some docker for that
um
and just run the whole thing because I don't know
that's what's actually running.
And so especially, you know,
we have to be able to observe those things anyways.
So that's just part of the stack and then
we know it's gonna work because we tested literally the whole thing.
Cool. Thank you. Thank you.
Uh Hey,
uh I'm also a big fan of open telemetry.
Uh One of the issues I've seen teams try to solve is volume of events.
So you showed a trace that had every function call
uh generating uh span and being sent to the event,
I wonder. Yeah. Have you had to deal with volume problems and costs?
And so uh I, I have a slide that I, that I removed. But yeah, it was, it was massive.
Uh When we launched, we were sending like almost a trillion events a day.
Um
You do some sampling basically is, is how it boils down.
Um
It's a really challenging problem. I, I think to solve where, where we are now is
there's baseline flat sampling like at the actual event creation.
Uh because otherwise you have to centralize the,
the whole volume of data and trying to do any
analysis on it becomes really challenging because the volume is so high.
Um But then we have special paths through. So like
any cert requests, for example, they're never sampled, we,
we want to know what's happening in cert or we want to know what's happening in DEV
uh we're able to turn traces on for individual players, you know,
and these are sort of just like overrides that we've learned are very useful for us.
Um I think it probably depends on what your particular context is and,
and what is useful information.
But yes, that is a
-- hard problem. OK. -- Cool. That's good to know. Did um
is basically like you could turn it on the root span like OK,
the root span and all child spans are gonna get.
-- So -- we keep most of our root spans because we like to
see um kind of the how many requests are happening and,
but we throw away the rest of it essentially.
And so it basically just rolls, rolls a die at the beginning of this ban and says,
yeah, we don't need you.
Um
If there is then a fatal error or something,
it'll keep the stack basically because that's kept kind of in memory.
Um
Ideally, we would buffer all the requests, probably the the whole trace
while the request was happening so that if we do hit these error cases,
we can like dump the whole thing.
Um But it's been pretty useful just to
be able to see that particular stack basically.
-- Cool. Hey, -- thanks. Yeah.
Um
hello uh with uh I don't know if it, if this is OK to ask but within,
within sad news of Omega strikers, uh I want to ask is,
is there still a team that looks into the problems and
all these uh for
example,
errors or bugs
or anything else?
Is there like a small team or is it like when it pops up is like, oh,
can someone like check that out?
So like deal with that or
how does that work?
Yeah, we, we still have people uh full time on.
Ok,
thank you.
Thanks.
Um
Last
one. But
yeah.
Ok,
great. Yeah,
so uh yeah, running a live game as well.
Um And I think one of the interesting things you brought up is that your,
your serve back end is entirely all pro all forever.
Um
But that also means that you have a high potential of leaks and stuff like when you,
that also means you also have like code duplication, right?
So if you have something that's not backwards compatible, for example,
um you're gonna have to have old code and a new code, how do you
like maintain that
and make it so that people aren't duplicating all their work over and over again.
Um When they're back comp patting.
Yeah. So I think there are a couple of questions there.
The first one is like worrying about leaks.
Um We worry about them but not like too much.
Like it's probably stuff we're going to release anyways.
If it leaks, it's not like maybe the end of the world obviously, we try to,
to avoid the leaks.
Um but it's not gonna end of the game.
Um And then the backwards compatibility thing, we basically duplicate
API S if, if they're gonna change significantly,
we just go for V two and
great. And then you in theory delete it later.
I don't know if you've ever done that, but
we probably should. Right. Right. OK.
So it's normal, normal code duplication is fine. Just deal
with it later. Copy and paste. Is there for a reason?
-- Ok, cool. -- Thanks. Oh jeez.
All right. Thank you.