Uh My name is Richard Rouse. I'm studio creative director at Far Bridge.
Uh We're working on a bunch of games not announced.
Um And my talk today is how interactive should my game story be.
So I've actually been working on
games for a while and specifically a lot of
games that have sort of interactive narrative components.
Uh The very first game I ever worked on
Odyssey was sort of uh
four style RPG that at least one person in the room uh may remember.
Uh And then uh later on,
I worked on the suffering uh action horror game set in a prison.
It had sort of an interactive narrative morality
system thing that led to branching endings.
Uh Later at Microsoft, I worked with the good people at undead labs on state of decay.
That was a game where you're sort of trying to survive in the the zombie apocalypse,
sort of a light survival game
um where, you know,
the characters you had that you were
getting to control were semi procedurally generated and
Perma die and then you'd have to take over other ones.
So the character roster was always changing. It was very interactive in that way.
And then
uh most recently I shipped a few years ago, the Church In the Darkness,
a sort of experimental indie game.
Uh We're infiltrating a religious cult and trying to figure out
are the
leaders good or bad. And that procedurally changed every time you played the game.
So I've been fortunate to do this a bunch of times.
I'm sort of always fascinated by how different movies
depict the interactivity in games versus maybe the reality.
We know you could go all the way back to like the last Star Fighter
uh where the kid gets really good at the arcade game.
And then it turns out it's training for an intergalactic war. He needs to go fight in.
Uh the favorite of mine from the sixties is Fahrenheit. 451.
Had this weird interactive TV thing in the middle of it.
I recommend checking that out.
Um Another more recent one,
Serenity kind of not a movie I can actually recommend
but has a weird video game twist in it.
Uh If you're into, into finding out what that is, you could seek it out.
But I did warn you, it's maybe not a perfect movie.
Um But the one of the, you know,
one of the ones people always think about when they
think about this sort of thing is like The Matrix,
right?
1999 Classic.
You know, Neo doesn't really know he's playing a video game at first and then,
you know, it turns out he's in this simulated reality.
And as he, uh
you know, as he finally realizes where he is,
he gains these superpowers and sort of lives out
this video game power fantasy as he's going.
Um
but that's not my favorite movie from 1999 about video games.
My favorite movie from 1999 about video games is called Ex Exist
Ends. I don't know how many people have seen ex exist
ends.
Many people. Wow. Well, sorry, you can all go. My talk is spoiled.
No. So
uh for those who haven't seen it, Ex and Sense is David Cronenberg movie.
Uh where uh the video games of the future,
they're not consoles in the plastic box scent,
but they're sort of these fleshy organisms that live and you jack into
them with these umbilical cords that go into the base of your spine.
Um
And these games are sort of these, you know,
uh things that in the movie is about,
uh this game designer called Allegra Geller who has designed this amazing game.
It's very, it's about to come out is highly anticipated,
but she's on the run from the realist,
the realist think people are playing video games too much.
You know, this is, this is bad for us. We need to kill Allegra Geller.
We need to destroy ex exist ends. So she goes on the run this, the guy called Ted
Piel.
Uh here and he's never played a game before actually,
but he's trying to save her life.
So they end up and she's like, well, actually in that last attack,
the, uh, the exit
dens was damaged. It's wounded and I have to play it to find out if I can cure it or not.
And to do that, I need to play it with a friend. We need to get you a bio port.
So they gave him a bioport and he finally plays one of these games for the first time.
And then, uh
you know, as he jacks in, he realizes it's this perfect, you know,
visual simulation of reality looks perfect in every way.
And he sort of like reaches out and touches things and he's like, oh my God,
this is amazing.
Um And,
but then he finds out that not everything is
exactly like reality as we'll see in this clip.
I have
what you're looking for.
-- Who said -- you,
it's none of your business who sent us.
We're here.
That's all that matters.
God,
what happened?
I,
I didn't mean to say that
it's your character who said it?
It's kind of a schizophrenic feeling, isn't it?
You'll get used to it.
There are things that have to be said to advance the
plot and establish the characters and those things get said,
whether you want to say them or not,
don't fight it,
just go with it.
But should you be saying this in front of him.
Look at him.
What's he doing?
He's gone into a game loop.
He won't come out of it until you give him a proper line of game dialogue.
Uh
This is tricky,
start by repeating your last line,
include his name. So he knows you're talking to him.
We're here, Darcy Nader.
And that's all that matters.
Yes, you're right.
That is all that matters.
Now,
you said you have what we want,
we were waiting.
So when I saw this, I was like, wow, this is amazing. They've completed this, this
totally perfect simulation of reality. That's sort of indistinguishable.
Except for one thing, the narrative is still on a rail.
Like, like how did this happen?
Like all this technology, they spent the entire budget on the graphics,
nothing on the interactive narrative.
This is a travesty
and I was very strident about this back then.
I really felt like all games should really have interactive narrative in some way.
And this, this was super important.
Uh And here I am seeing uh this nightmare. Uh But
you know, I I over time, I have calmed down a little bit about this.
I've gone on to work on many other games. I've worked with many different teams and
different uh met different developers and met other players
and they all play games for different reasons.
So it doesn't,
I've become a little less strident in this
belief that everything should be an interactive narrative.
You know, to the nth degree and you kind of have to figure out well, what are,
what's the type of interactivity I need to have in my game,
what's gonna work for my game specifically?
Um
So this is gonna be a talk about sort of going through six steps of figuring out
how much interactivity does my game story need.
Um
And uh we're gonna start off with just I think the first step
in this is figuring out what does the player get from the interactivity?
Like what are you trying to accomplish with it before you even start?
Think about what's the player gonna get out of it and
they can get a lot of different things out of it,
right?
Um You know, we often think of those perfect narrative experiences.
It's like this really nice package, everything is great.
You play it once you get to the ending and you're happy,
but a lot of players crave rep replayability.
A lot of players wanna stay in your game longer than
maybe just your core quest or whatever or so much.
They wanna play things like rogue likes. This is a screenshot from Hades.
I'm sure everybody knows that.
Um You know, where they sort of there, you're,
you're making a rogue like where you can go on multiple runs.
So to put a narrative into this, they made a narrative that fit that structure,
right?
They built the narrative around the replayability
and you should be thinking about that too.
If that's one of your goals having a replayable game,
how is the narrative going to support that?
Another thing players really crave is reactivity, right? The idea that
uh the game is gonna react to the choices they make. This is a screenshot from fable.
Um where in that game, you would,
you would go on a pretty linear story throughout the game,
but the game was just very reactive to the choices you made.
What weapon were you wearing? What things had you done in the previous quest?
And the NP CS would stand around and applaud or boo or whatever,
depending on what you've done.
And players really love that feeling of just the game is noticing me.
It's,
it's seeing what I'm doing and it's commenting and not just in like stat upgrades,
but also the characters in the game,
they're gonna, they're gonna comment on it. The game is seeing what I'm doing.
Another thing players really crave is share
ability like you can think of streamers,
right?
Like this guy went out of his way to make a video about a Baldur's gate three play,
play through with evil, you know, and evil alignment and,
and having a palate in
and they want, he was able to make a unique thing for his stream because of, you know,
having something that was interactive in
game uh that he could play off of and it's not just streamers who want this too, right?
It's players play games, talk about them with friends,
talk about them in discussion groups.
They want to say, hey, I wanna share my experience
but also have something that's unique as I'm sharing it. Right?
So I'm not just telling you if you're playing a game that's totally linear,
you're sharing something, the other player probably already knows.
Um
Another thing that, you know, going back to Baldur's gate three again,
self expression, that's why you have creative players in games like this
players want, even if, even if the story is fixed,
being able to create your own character to take through, it can be very meaningful.
Similarly, with self-expression, though you can take it to the nth degree,
you can go all the way to a game that allows full self-expression,
full interactivity like the Sims
and you at some point sort of stop having so much of a fixed linear narrative,
but you can still have something.
And obviously players love this game and some see it as a storytelling experience.
Um And some games, it might,
your interactivity might be the entire point of what you're making.
This is a shot from Dwarf Fortress.
Uh And you know, if you go that far down that road, you're sort of again,
still the, the, this is the whole point of what you're making and that's fine too.
Sometimes players go to that they want something that's maximally interactive,
that does all the things
So the next question you should ask yourself
is what does the player expect from the interactivity,
which is a little bit different than what they get
because they're gonna come to your game with certain expectations.
You know, they may come to a game with genre expectations, right?
They're coming to play an RPG
and you have to decide, well, how much interactivity we're gonna put in.
But if you had none, you would be going against the genre expectations, right?
And that's fine. Sometimes you want to do that.
Uh But you should be aware that you're doing it.
How are you gonna have to teach the player how
you're doing things differently uh than the genre expectations.
Um
You know, RPG could be a case or against state of decay uh as a survival game,
a light survival game where the genre expectations in a survival game where you can
go a lot of different ways to figure out how you're going to survive.
You need to have a narrative that supports that you need
to have something that has that space for the player uh to
make different choices in the game world or react to that
not only in the systems and like a game mechanics way,
but also in a narrative way.
Of course, again, in state of decay, they may also be coming with, with a player,
fantasy expectations, like players come to a game thinking, oh,
this is the game where I'm going to get to do this.
It's sort of sold to me is like, how are you going to survive the zombie apocalypse?
What choices you're gonna make?
If you're selling the player on that fantasy,
you need to support it with the narrative, you need to make sure there's enough um
sort of interactivity in there
that as they make their choices about how
they're going to live through that player fantasy,
the game is reacting to it
and again,
going back to the church and the darkness of the game I did
this had a lot of fantasy expectations that kind of went wrong actually.
So this game, you're infiltrating this religious cult,
we sold it as like try to figure out are the cult leaders good or bad.
Um But a lot of players came to the game sort of expecting, oh,
I'm going to get to talk to everyone, really do detective work about it
and you can't do that. But it's also kind of an action game with stealth in it.
So a lot of, and because of some scope reasons,
a lot of the characters just run away from you
and other ones start shooting at you right away.
Um So you're like, hey, well, this isn't
really the fantasy I had sure I can talk to some characters,
but what are the rest of these characters?
I was expecting something different and that's something to think about.
Uh when you're selling a certain player fantasy in the game to
make sure your game is living up to it and not,
not bringing the player something they weren't expecting or, you know,
hopefully adjust your marketing to be selling the game you're actually making.
Um So another thing you should think about in terms of expectations
is how your game sets expectations within itself, right?
So if you look at this, this is sort of a perfectly linear story, right?
Going from event to event, to event, quest to quest, whatever.
Um And let's say that we're like, hey,
we should make this more interactive narratively, right?
OK. Well, how could we do that? We could do that this way right
now? It's an interactive story. It's, it's perfect. Um
And if you do this,
you, you, this isn't very common, but you sort of set up this case where it's like,
hey, I get to make this cool choice and then I don't get to make any choices again,
like what wait, what happened to the game.
So this isn't very common, but this is a little more common, right?
Where you have a game that feels very linear all
along the way and then suddenly like surprise multiple endings.
Uh And you, you know, this can be, again, the player is learning from your own game,
what they're gonna get and they'll end up disappointed in the ending,
but it doesn't live up to what they thought were
the rules of the game that were established early on.
So this actually happened to us and the suffering where the structure of the
game originally looked very much like this where you were sort of going,
you were doing different objectives you had along the way,
you could like choose sort of good or bad things to do with each.
But there wasn't a lot of feedback about it along the way and then,
oh surprise multiple endings at the end.
So what we did was we started first, we added signposting along the way to say, hey,
this thing you've done is actually a really big choice.
You should uh be thoughtful about it.
You should realize you've done it, proceed differently in the future.
So this was better but still not quite there.
So we ended up add adding just enough again, this was an action horror game.
This wasn't somewhere a person was necessarily expecting any interactivity.
Um So we wanted to make sure there was enough to sort of show them, hey,
this is the game you're getting into.
Uh This is what you can expect as, as you keep going.
And so when you get to the end, you're like, oh, of course,
I've been seeing this all along the way.
So as you've established sort of the ground rules between,
you know, what is the,
what do you want the player to get out of the
interactivity and what can the player expect out of the interactivity?
You should start thinking about, well,
what are the layers of interactivity that I care about?
And there's a lot of different ones you can care about.
You don't necessarily have to care about all of them
to put some interactivity in the game, right?
So one layer is what I call moment to moment, you know,
you can play through fable again to go back to that example,
where you're getting this sort of reactivity along
the way to all the choices you're making.
Um But the, the narrative itself is actually pretty fixed,
but it still feels very reactive because in the
moment you're getting all this feedback from the system.
You know, if you, if you're interested in this sort of moment to moment feedback,
something I recommend checking out a sports
games are actually really excellent at this,
the sort of play by play commentary you get out of systems,
uh just feels this makes you, you know,
feel very centered in what you're doing while they're talking about what I did.
It feels great even though, you know,
the game's gonna go nine innings maybe over time.
Uh But you sort of get that feeling in a way that
I think other games could learn a lot from those systems.
Like in MLB, the show here, it's just super high fidelity, very well done.
You also just might have moment to moment sort of interactions and conversations,
you might have branching dialogue
that doesn't need to affect the end of the game.
But just might be in that moment you're having fun
like in Monkey Island here navigating through conversation trees,
learning little bits of extra things about the characters,
even though there's not like extensive branching in the story.
So that's sort of the moment to moment layer, just
you know what's happening right? Then doesn't need to affect anything later.
The next layer up you might say is like the quest level, right?
I'm gonna, this is an example from Fallout three.
I'm gonna go on quest and Fallout three.
I'm gonna get different outcomes depending on choices I make.
Um And then that's,
that's gonna feel meaningful to me because I'm gonna see these little changes.
Now,
the interesting thing about Fallout three is it actually
has a very linear sort of main quest structure.
Sure, it has side missions all along the way that you can do.
Uh But as you go through these different quests,
you're gonna see these little changes,
but you're gonna stay on that sort of very linear rail.
So it's gonna feel reactive but not actually be branching all over the place.
Of course, the the corollary to the quest levels,
you can pay this off with multiple endings and that is something Fallout three.
Did
you know they had this sort of beautiful wrap up at the end,
it went over all the events that you did.
Um And how everything you know,
sort of paid off for these characters that you touched
along your way in your journey through the capital wasteland.
But then like, you know, the, the,
the the next evolution in layers above this then
would be to actually go to multiple paths.
And that's something they didn't fall out for
where they actually had again, those sort of linear quest structures,
but then it actually forked into different paths
and you might miss whole sections of it.
Um And this, you know,
creates an even more different experience for different players.
Then you get into challenges of like, hey,
can we make these all interesting to the same amount?
Do we have time to do all of this content?
Then here you're gonna start missing content.
This is really great if you have, you know, a pretty large team, pretty large budget
uh and some cool stuff can come out of this.
Is it necessarily better than what we saw in Fallout three? Not necessarily.
But again, it comes back to what are the choices you're making for your game.
So the next layer I want to talk about isn't
at the quest level but just at the character level.
Um you know,
it's sort of like forming up a party in an
RPG to go through a pretty linear story with them.
Hey, well, at least I'm experiencing it with different people along the way, right?
Um So the layers, uh again,
this sort of character level can happen in state of A K where the
simulation is spitting out these different characters
who are um sort of uniquely generated,
they might die at any time, you might lose them.
Um So you're gonna have to decide, hey,
you know, who,
who do I care enough to take with me to be the one that I play going through this story.
Uh Watchdogs Legion did a really interesting version of this too where you
can promote these characters sort of out of the world and decide,
hey,
uh I'm gonna take, you're gonna be the one in my group,
we're gonna go, you know, do this together and this the the narrative then in,
in Watchdogs Legion is very fixed, right?
It's not branching all over the place, it's not changing a ton.
Uh But it's sort of uh because you're doing it with these different characters,
it changes enough that it's interesting, right?
And they wrote these tons of variations of
the scenes uh with which character you had.
So it was actually fairly complicated, but still in a fairly linear structure.
And again, if you want to go crazy,
combine all the layers to get end up with a simulation,
uh something like the Sims,
something like do Fortress No authored story feels a lot more, you know,
kind of amorphous as a story.
It doesn't feel like a traditional story.
Players may not say, hey, that's a story game at all.
Um And players are doing a lot of the work here.
It's really the player story that they're telling. So
you're gonna be um
you know, relying on them to do it, but it can be very meaningful with them.
If that's your goal,
uh you're gonna wanna have that,
you know, leave them in that experience where it's OK,
that they don't have a fixed story
because they're getting this amazing simulation.
So next up, um once you've thought of the different layers,
you can think about what's the depth of the interactivity
I want to go to in each of these layers.
And you know, this, this can, you know, be in all sorts of ways in your project. Um
One thing I like to think about is just what I call the chatter dialogue.
A lot of people call these barks, you know,
a lot of times barks kind of get a bad rap on writing teams,
like the more junior person has to do that.
But I like to remind everyone that, hey,
this is actually the most important part of your writing in a lot of ways.
You know, the person who does the lead, maybe they get to write the, the cut scenes,
the fancy things.
But let me tell you
those things are probably going to be watched only once, right?
You know,
the barks are going to be with you all the time
where you're playing while you're spending time in the game.
And that's why I kind of don't like the term barks.
It's like, are these dogs or what, what are we talking about here?
You know, I prefer to feel like these are meaningful things.
And hey, if the barks are bad,
that's what players are going to take away from the game.
Uh And the great thing about implementing barks, you know,
is that you can tie them directly to players actions as they're
going along and they're kind of not that hard to implement.
You can just trace things that, hey,
these are the things the players are doing as they're going,
let's write triggers for those.
Um And they can, they can get more complicated.
This is an example from uh home World remastered
um where, you know, as you're playing in RT S,
you're directing units around and things like that
you're gonna um
wanna, you know,
react to the different choices you see players making these can get, you know,
simple to like, hey, I ordered my unit over there, it got into combat over there,
that sort of thing, you can get it more complicated where they're reacting to like,
hey, we're in a tough situation here or winning here.
Those things are harder to implement.
You can decide if that's sort of worth it on your project.
Again,
with branching conversations is another example of where
you can go to different levels of depth,
right?
So,
you know, when you think of branching conversations,
it's like particularly as you start out in the industry.
And you're like, hey, I'm gonna write a branching conversation.
You might say, wow, I'm gonna make this really interactive
and you start making it. You have a starting point.
You're like, hey, from there, I can say three things. Cool. OK.
From there, I can go to these different nodes and I can make these choices and then,
oh I can make these, I'm pretty sure you pretty soon you realize, hey,
I can't fit this on the page anymore.
It's getting so large, right?
Um
And you're just having this sort of explosion of content
you now have to create and manage as you're going
uh trying to develop your whole game.
Uh eventually as, as you think about branching conversations more, you're like,
hey,
some structure like this is actually better where
it feels like it loops back to things,
it has choices.
They don't all fork the entire tree, right?
And you're able to have something that still feels very interactive this way
uh But is less of a burden on you to just create. Um
And, and having something that,
that still really works for the player but doesn't crush you with the content.
Um
You know,
one way to obviously bring some some without having that huge forking thing.
Uh You can also just have branching conversations that
have really meaningful consequences in the sequence of events
like the telltale games are really good at that for example, with the walking dead.
Um
All right. So now that you've thought about, hey, well, these are my different
layers of where I'm gonna work on interactivity.
Here's how deep we want to go on each of them.
Remember, you don't have to go deep on all of them.
There's lots of simpler ways to do things that still feel really interactive.
Um
Next, you have to sort of teach the player that your interactivity is even there.
Because again, often when you're doing games that maybe
users aren't used to having interactivity,
they may not even know it's there and they may not know they're making these choices.
Uh The and the telltale games are really good
about that having this warning up front that says,
hey,
you know, this, this game uh series adapts to the choices that you make.
The story is sort of tailored to how you play it.
It's really shining a light on this is what
players can expect out of the game they're having.
Um
You know, this was something I did again in the church in the darkness where,
you know,
this was a very different type of game for the
different type of story for the game we were doing,
you know,
action stealth game suddenly has this weird procedural narrative layer on it.
So we just wanted to be clear, hey,
you know, in this game where the,
the modest beliefs and actions of the preachers who
are sort of the antagonists in the game,
uh may be different every time you play,
just be really clear about it from the beginning.
We actually did this too. We made a an endings menu right off of the main menu.
You could pick uh the thing that said endings and it
showed you what the different endings you had unlocked were.
Um
And you know, looking back, I don't love this menu anymore.
It's sort of pretty cluttered from a U I standpoint, kind of ugly.
Um And it kind of encourages the wrong thing too, which is encourages like, hey,
look at this thing, I've got to go, you know, I've got to get all of these,
I gotta collect all these things and that really wasn't the intention.
I really want players to get, you know, get four or five endings,
something like that,
that gives you a pretty good sense of what the simulation is doing.
Um
But instead, you know, some players would see this and say I gotta get them all.
I love players who, who get into that and do that,
but it wasn't really the intent there.
Another interesting example of this would be like in Detroit, beyond human,
they actually went even farther showing what
was underneath the hood when actually saying,
hey, you made this choice.
Well, actually there's all these other choices you can make.
Here's our tree structure.
Maybe you want to look at this and this is something
that actually showed up in the game as you made choices.
Again, this has a lot of sort of breaking of the uh
suspension of disbelief. You could say where the
player is. Really,
I'm no longer thinking about it purely as a narrative,
but maybe thinking of it as a hey, I should explore this, but it's something they did.
It was an interesting choice and I think might fit for your game as well.
So the interesting thing to think about as you play,
as you're working on the game is you're
gonna end doing all these new interactive things.
You're gonna need to play, test, play, test and play, test your narrative.
So often in games we play, test the systems are players learning the controls,
are they figuring out how to play and win?
Right? We focus on that. We don't spend enough time play, testing the narrative
and this can be hard, obviously, like
so often it's hard to know.
Is it really working until you get to, you know,
the whole thing has to be there to see if it's really landing.
But of course, by the time the whole thing is there,
you're shipping and you can't change it that much.
So try to figure out how do I play,
test some small section of it so that I see if players understand the systems
we have uh in the narrative uh so that we can see if it's really landing
all right. So
this has been a quick summary of how interactive you should think, you know,
your game story should be
uh just to go back.
You want to think about like what does the player get out of the experience of,
of having an interactive, what do they expect out of it?
Um And as you think about those things, think about what are the layers we wanna do?
What's the depth of the interactivity we want to do?
And then finally remember to teach the player everything you have, remember to,
to play, test it to see if it's really working.
So,
but there's probably another little summary of this that we could go back to ex exist
ends for a quick thought on just how interactive your story should be.
But you know,
I do feel the urge to kill someone here
who
a
one
minute,
one
minute
I need to kill our waiter.
Oh,
well, that makes sense.
Um
waiter,
when he comes over do it. Don't hesitate.
Everything in the game is
so realistic. I,
-- I don't think I really -- could.
You won't be able to stop yourself. You might as well enjoy it.
Free will is
obviously
not a big factor in this little world of ours.
It's like real life. There's just enough to make it interesting.
So in the end, that's the most important answer to
interactive. Should my game story be just enough to make it interesting.
Thanks.
Mm
I think we're pretty low on time,
but if there's a question or two or I could talk to people after, go ahead.
Um Thank you for the talk.
First of all, um I, I wanted to ask uh specifically about 0.5 the idea of um
teaching players about sort of the level of interactivity.
And I was wondering how you sort of frame that
up against uh like hidden choices and kind of,
uh you know, things that like might make, you know,
sort of reward a player for like thinking creatively about the systems.
Thank you.
Yeah, I mean,
I think I definitely am a fan of hidden choices and
have sort of sort of tried to go that way,
maybe too much in the past.
Um But I think if you're saying, hey, we have some choices at all,
there are some choices here,
then you can hide other ones without it feeling like so much of
a surprise at the end or whenever the system pops up and says,
oh, wait, no, that, that mattered, you didn't know.
Um So definitely pro hidden choice, but
just work them in with more obvious choices.
So the player even knows there are choices going on.
Um You mentioned the last point was play,
play, test your narrative. What are your favorite methodologies for play?
Testing a narrative specifically?
Yeah, I mean, that's, that's tricky again with the like, how do we play test when
um you know, the whole thing isn't done yet.
I think, you know,
play testing something like a vertical slice to
see if the systems are working at all.
Uh can work where you can say, hey, we've got this chunk of it.
Let's see if it's just working here.
Otherwise you often have to go to like paper sort of stuff where, you know,
someone is telling the player, telling the subjects, the research subjects,
what the, the interactivity or what the the story is gonna be and see if they would,
you know, are, are getting it are into it and that sort of stuff.
Uh And then finally do a play test once it
is all there just to make those last minute adjustments.
Uh But it's tricky, like I said,
I was always wondering, uh they sometimes have the negative Karma path in games.
You ever find it disturbing how many people
seem not just to just pick it because it's fun,
but actually go for the negative karma path as their first path.
Yeah, I mean,
what I found is usually players go with the positive path the first time, right?
Um
It's like I, I heard someone told me I can't remember who it was. It was like,
you know, the first person,
the first time the player is going through the game they're playing and,
and something they know there's an interactive narrative
they're playing is themselves and the second time they're playing is the opposite.
Of the themselves, which is interesting because the first time, you know,
they're getting a more honest experience of what they would do
and the second time they're doing everything they don't wanna do.
So that's kind of like, not great where it's like,
I don't wanna play a game and just to go against the, the, the, the, the,
the opposite of everything that I would prefer to do.
Uh, so I prefer, you know,
my, my personal take is like having Karma systems that are more gray,
it's less like labeled,
what the good and bad choice is and you have to think about it a little more.
I mean, that's my personal taste.
So obviously lots of different opinions on how to do that.
Um,
but yeah, I haven't.
We used to, I remember on the suffering we thought everyone was going to play it evil.
We were certain.
Uh,
and then we found just from like feedback,
reading forums and post release stuff that almost everyone did good first.
Um So that was sort of interesting. Like players aren't as evil as you think.
Oh, I think they turned off your mind. It is a ray of hope.
What's that? That is a ray of hope. Right. Exactly.
All right. I think we're out of time. Thanks, everybody.