Knock. Change.
Change. Change. Oh, wait. Not that change. Not
Change. Oh, wait. Not that change. Not that change in regards to how comedy is
that change in regards to how comedy is utilized, presented, and created in the
utilized, presented, and created in the medium of video games. And because games
medium of video games. And because games are like theater. No, wait. No, wait.
are like theater. No, wait. No, wait. Oh, it's not even here. Is it here? Yes.
Oh, it's not even here. Is it here? Yes. Yes. That bit there. Act one. Beginning
Yes. That bit there. Act one. Beginning of act one. It's starting. Great. So,
of act one. It's starting. Great. So, I'm William Pew. I co-created the 2013
I'm William Pew. I co-created the 2013 game The Stanley Parable with a guy
game The Stanley Parable with a guy called Davy Reeden over in America, but
called Davy Reeden over in America, but he's not here and I'm here, so I get to
he's not here and I'm here, so I get to just take all the credit. It was me. It
just take all the credit. It was me. It was all me. But, um, yeah, just
was all me. But, um, yeah, just applaud. Oh, yeah. See, this is just ego
applaud. Oh, yeah. See, this is just ego food for me right now. Oh, yeah. But,
food for me right now. Oh, yeah. But, you know, uh, enough jokes. Let's get
you know, uh, enough jokes. Let's get down to the humor.
I'm going to talk about comedy and games that use comedy. They're different. All
that use comedy. They're different. All right. Comedy games are designed from
right. Comedy games are designed from the ground up to be funny, like Surgeon
the ground up to be funny, like Surgeon Simulator or uh Goat Simulator or
Simulator or uh Goat Simulator or something like that. And games that use
something like that. And games that use comedy are mechanical games that add
comedy are mechanical games that add comedy bits and bobs to improve the
comedy bits and bobs to improve the experience overall. So, like a Portal or
experience overall. So, like a Portal or or Portal 2. And there's a blurred line
or Portal 2. And there's a blurred line between them. And I think that's
between them. And I think that's probably where The Stanley Parable sits.
probably where The Stanley Parable sits. But let's forget the Stanley Parable for
But let's forget the Stanley Parable for a moment. Let's go back in time in 2016.
a moment. Let's go back in time in 2016. No, in 2006, a friend of mine was
No, in 2006, a friend of mine was interning at Valve Software. And back in
interning at Valve Software. And back in those days, before they were content to
those days, before they were content to make
make millions cosmetics pipeline, right, they
millions cosmetics pipeline, right, they actually made games and they split their
actually made games and they split their whole office up into little cabals and
whole office up into little cabals and they fought brutally against each other
they fought brutally against each other in order to try and innovate the
in order to try and innovate the interactive medium. Now, truly, some of
interactive medium. Now, truly, some of the greatest men and women were like
the greatest men and women were like fought inside this arena of game design.
fought inside this arena of game design. And I will regail you now with this
And I will regail you now with this neverbefore hurt
neverbefore hurt tale. Not that. Okay.
tale. Not that. Okay. So, the first team was fast off the
So, the first team was fast off the mask. Was fast off the mark. Led by the
mask. Was fast off the mark. Led by the writer Eric Walpaw. He had a vision for
writer Eric Walpaw. He had a vision for a game that transcended the mechanics
a game that transcended the mechanics driven monotony that pervaded the
driven monotony that pervaded the industry at the time. He envisioned a
industry at the time. He envisioned a game without gameplay, with no
game without gameplay, with no restrictions for the writer. When the
restrictions for the writer. When the rest of Valve saw this, he'd never have
rest of Valve saw this, he'd never have to write another Combine Soldier
to write another Combine Soldier reloading line again. He'd be free to
reloading line again. He'd be free to lead the creative charge, right? With no
lead the creative charge, right? With no restrictions without structure, without
restrictions without structure, without the structure enforced by traditional
the structure enforced by traditional notions of gameplay that we've held
notions of gameplay that we've held since like the '9s. He could reach
since like the '9s. He could reach heights of storytelling and narrative
heights of storytelling and narrative freedom and immersion and jokes never
freedom and immersion and jokes never before imagined by human beings or
before imagined by human beings or gamers. Not sure. He might not have
gamers. Not sure. He might not have known what it was going to look like
known what it was going to look like exactly, but you know, as old Grandpa
exactly, but you know, as old Grandpa Walpaw had told him many years before,
Walpaw had told him many years before, he said, "Son, if you don't understand
he said, "Son, if you don't understand what your concept will look like once
what your concept will look like once it's built, it lies outside of the
it's built, it lies outside of the conventions you hold. Therefore, it will
conventions you hold. Therefore, it will not only surprise yourself, but your
not only surprise yourself, but your peers, too."
peers, too." Huh? Huh? Right. That's that's
Huh? Huh? Right. That's that's important. By the way, if you're writing
important. By the way, if you're writing notes, write that one down because
notes, write that one down because that's good. you know, old man Walpar
that's good. you know, old man Walpar had design he like his job he wasn't a
had design he like his job he wasn't a game developer but he he designed safety
game developer but he he designed safety devices for automobiles so his
devices for automobiles so his philosophy might not have suited his
philosophy might not have suited his kind of profession entirely but Eric
kind of profession entirely but Eric heard those words echo in his head and
heard those words echo in his head and so he got down to work however as he had
so he got down to work however as he had spent most of the day philosophizing and
spent most of the day philosophizing and thinking about heady concepts all of the
thinking about heady concepts all of the technically talented people at Valve had
technically talented people at Valve had joined other teams so you just had a
joined other teams so you just had a texture artist and Jeff the coffee guy
texture artist and Jeff the coffee guy but they embraced their limitations like
but they embraced their limitations like true indies and produced a game with no
true indies and produced a game with no barrier of gameplay or interactivity.
barrier of gameplay or interactivity. Right. A piece that allowed Eric's inner
Right. A piece that allowed Eric's inner thoughts to be completely communicated
thoughts to be completely communicated directly to the player. His masterpiece
directly to the player. His masterpiece was completed quickly and he proudly
was completed quickly and he proudly presented Gabe with four jokes by Eric
presented Gabe with four jokes by Eric Walpaw. And we are going to look at that
Walpaw. And we are going to look at that now. Oh yeah. Play.
now. Oh yeah. Play. Watch. Yeah. Magic.
Now we mixed up the next one. This is a visual
joke. Yeah. Yeah. And the last one returns back to the
text. Yeah. Yeah. And then that ends and uh the player turns around if they want
uh the player turns around if they want to see the jokes again. And jokes are
to see the jokes again. And jokes are only funny
only funny once. Right now, Eric was playing with
once. Right now, Eric was playing with fire here. Sure, he removed gameplay
fire here. Sure, he removed gameplay from the equation, but did that make it
from the equation, but did that make it any
any better? I don't know. Um he replaced the
better? I don't know. Um he replaced the structure that HalfLife 2 gave him and
structure that HalfLife 2 gave him and replaced it with something else. It was
replaced it with something else. It was a step in the right direction, but
a step in the right direction, but perhaps just right and good jokes wasn't
perhaps just right and good jokes wasn't good enough. Gabe didn't really feel
good enough. Gabe didn't really feel engaged by four jokes by Rick Walpaw and
engaged by four jokes by Rick Walpaw and decreed that making a good comedy game
decreed that making a good comedy game is a design problem as much as it's a
is a design problem as much as it's a writing problem. And you can't argue
writing problem. And you can't argue with me about that because I didn't say
with me about that because I didn't say that. Gabe said that and he is like well
that. Gabe said that and he is like well smart and and he knows what he's talking
smart and and he knows what he's talking about. So, you know, it's good stuff.
about. So, you know, it's good stuff. Good stuff. Right. So, Eric nodded his
Good stuff. Right. So, Eric nodded his head to Gabe and agreed. He knew that he
head to Gabe and agreed. He knew that he wasn't talking about funny design like
wasn't talking about funny design like Octoad or Surgeon Simulator. He was
Octoad or Surgeon Simulator. He was talking about creating a structure in
talking about creating a structure in the game that allowed writers to write
the game that allowed writers to write jokes that fundamentally incorporated
jokes that fundamentally incorporated the notion of player interaction. And
the notion of player interaction. And that's what games are about, aren't
that's what games are about, aren't they? They're like immersive theater.
they? They're like immersive theater. The player is integral to the message
The player is integral to the message that they're trying to convey and the
that they're trying to convey and the jokes that they're trying to tell. And
jokes that they're trying to tell. And if you make the player walk through a
if you make the player walk through a bunch of rooms and write jokes at them,
bunch of rooms and write jokes at them, they won't feel engaged and connect with
they won't feel engaged and connect with what you're doing. Eric knew he'd had a
what you're doing. Eric knew he'd had a he'd have to change his approach, but
he'd have to change his approach, but hey, that they'd worked out something
hey, that they'd worked out something about environmental storytelling, what
about environmental storytelling, what with the writing on the walls, and
with the writing on the walls, and Eric's design idea evolved to become
Eric's design idea evolved to become Left for
Left for Dead. Hey, yeah, realistic.
Dead. Hey, yeah, realistic. However, another force was lurking at
However, another force was lurking at the edge of this meeting room. The
the edge of this meeting room. The writer Cet Falisk rubbed his hands
writer Cet Falisk rubbed his hands together
together gleefully, right? And he ran back to his
gleefully, right? And he ran back to his cabal and explained to them exactly how
cabal and explained to them exactly how they should make their prototype. He saw
they should make their prototype. He saw Eric's floor. He cackled with malice and
Eric's floor. He cackled with malice and explained in an American accent, which I
explained in an American accent, which I can't do, so we'll make him British. Uh,
can't do, so we'll make him British. Uh, we must let the writing inform the
we must let the writing inform the design, and the design informed the
design, and the design informed the writing, chaps. His unlings nodded and
writing, chaps. His unlings nodded and got to work. They worked for five days
got to work. They worked for five days and five nights and produced something
and five nights and produced something that fundamentally improved upon Eric's
[Laughter] game. Now, Chad knew he couldn't just
game. Now, Chad knew he couldn't just use the same mechanics and structure as
use the same mechanics and structure as the previous game and just slap more
the previous game and just slap more writing on the wall. Valve, but you
writing on the wall. Valve, but you know, Valve law dictated show, don't
know, Valve law dictated show, don't tell. But Chet amended it to involve,
tell. But Chet amended it to involve, don't show. Huh?
don't show. Huh? Uh yeah, check it out. Player clicks on
Uh yeah, check it out. Player clicks on the door, knocks, responds, they click
the door, knocks, responds, they click again for spell, spell him, and
again for spell, spell him, and joke. Yeah. Yeah. Like he wasn't writing
joke. Yeah. Yeah. Like he wasn't writing a play. He wasn't writing a book. He
a play. He wasn't writing a book. He knew the play needed to be imshed in the
knew the play needed to be imshed in the world he was creating. He was making his
world he was creating. He was making his game a conversation, right? And that's
game a conversation, right? And that's the end. And then they might turn
the end. And then they might turn around. And jokes can be funny twice if
around. And jokes can be funny twice if you change them into a call
you change them into a call back. That was the cleverest joke of the
back. That was the cleverest joke of the talk. I hope you enjoyed it. So, uh,
talk. I hope you enjoyed it. So, uh, come on. You check, uh, surveyed the
come on. You check, uh, surveyed the paradigm of interactive humor he'd
paradigm of interactive humor he'd created, and he knew he'd done well. So,
created, and he knew he'd done well. So, he took a copy home on a USB. He walked
he took a copy home on a USB. He walked into his house. He went up to his attic
into his house. He went up to his attic and he placed the USB on a shrine he'd
and he placed the USB on a shrine he'd created to the spirit of games writing.
created to the spirit of games writing. He spoke the magic words and the shrine
He spoke the magic words and the shrine came to life and a ghostly figure picked
came to life and a ghostly figure picked up the USB and plugged it directly into
up the USB and plugged it directly into its ghostly laptop computer. Right? Cet
its ghostly laptop computer. Right? Cet spoke to the spirit and said, "Oh, great
spoke to the spirit and said, "Oh, great spirit of games writing. What do you
spirit of games writing. What do you think of this game that I created?" And
think of this game that I created?" And uh the ghost spoke in this voice. Look,
uh the ghost spoke in this voice. Look, Chad, if you're writing a comedy game,
Chad, if you're writing a comedy game, write it like comedy, not like a like a
write it like comedy, not like a like a soding jug bug. Yeah. I'm talking about
soding jug bug. Yeah. I'm talking about callbacks, chat. a consistent character
callbacks, chat. a consistent character that develops over the course of the
that develops over the course of the work. Design your games so the player is
work. Design your games so the player is inherently involved. This all ties into
inherently involved. This all ties into how you should be designing and writing
how you should be designing and writing jokes for your for your games, chat.
jokes for your for your games, chat. Involve your player. And then chat
Involve your player. And then chat responded with, "No, but I'm already
responded with, "No, but I'm already involving the player. It's like you
involving the player. It's like you knock on the door." And the ghost rep
knock on the door." And the ghost rep responded angrily. He was like,
responded angrily. He was like, "Silence. You are merely having your
"Silence. You are merely having your player act out of script with no options
player act out of script with no options or granularity when it comes to player
or granularity when it comes to player interaction. You you've done no better
interaction. You you've done no better than your predecessor, Chat." And then
than your predecessor, Chat." And then chat responded and like, "Hey, hey, come
chat responded and like, "Hey, hey, come on. I thought it was." And then the
on. I thought it was." And then the ghost cut him off again saying like,
ghost cut him off again saying like, "Whoa, whoa, whoa. I'm not finished. Why
"Whoa, whoa, whoa. I'm not finished. Why is there no voice acting? Why are you
is there no voice acting? Why are you telling jokes via text?" Right? If
telling jokes via text?" Right? If there's voice over, your actor will do
there's voice over, your actor will do 90% of the work. They're also human
90% of the work. They're also human beings and are unpredictable. With this
beings and are unpredictable. With this in mind, you could write a lot of short
in mind, you could write a lot of short extra jokes and incidental dialogue. In
extra jokes and incidental dialogue. In the recording booth, you will be
the recording booth, you will be surprised by how actors deliver things.
surprised by how actors deliver things. You don't have to think every extra
You don't have to think every extra bonus line you write is brilliant, but
bonus line you write is brilliant, but good actors can make lines you think are
good actors can make lines you think are average sing in ways you'd never expect.
average sing in ways you'd never expect. Knowing this, you'll find a lot of great
Knowing this, you'll find a lot of great cheap content for you to tuck away
cheap content for you to tuck away behind corners for players to discover.
behind corners for players to discover. And Chad paused and asked, "Are you
And Chad paused and asked, "Are you Steve
Steve Gainer?" And then the ghost shout, "No,
Gainer?" And then the ghost shout, "No, no, no. You're getting advice right from
no, no. You're getting advice right from the fing of writing or whatever I am.
the fing of writing or whatever I am. Just just just pay attention. All right.
Just just just pay attention. All right. adding this adding the extra content
adding this adding the extra content will balloon play times massively. Just
will balloon play times massively. Just be prepared for that by designing your
be prepared for that by designing your game so it doesn't waste your players
game so it doesn't waste your players time. Keep the pace fast. I mean I mean
time. Keep the pace fast. I mean I mean I had to fast forward that video earlier
I had to fast forward that video earlier because all your jokes needed the same
because all your jokes needed the same repeated setup. If the player knows
repeated setup. If the player knows what's coming, they'll get bored and
what's coming, they'll get bored and you're also missing a fantastic
you're also missing a fantastic opportunity to subvert expectations.
opportunity to subvert expectations. Now, as Cet and the ghost of spirit
Now, as Cet and the ghost of spirit thing argued back and forth, right,
thing argued back and forth, right, neither of them noticed a figure slip
neither of them noticed a figure slip away from the window. That figure had
away from the window. That figure had heard everything. He'd seen Chet's game.
heard everything. He'd seen Chet's game. He knew what he had to do. That's right.
He knew what he had to do. That's right. Tim Schaefer heard everything. He rode
Tim Schaefer heard everything. He rode back to Double Fine on his motorcycle
back to Double Fine on his motorcycle and called an emergency meeting. They
and called an emergency meeting. They would start work immediately on a brand
would start work immediately on a brand new game.
new game. Tim Schaers
Tim Schaers Joker.
Joker. Right.
Right. So,
oh, now Joker used some of Czech's door idea combined with Eric's corridor
idea combined with Eric's corridor gameplay, but he added in an important
gameplay, but he added in an important twist. At several points throughout the
twist. At several points throughout the game, the player would make a choice,
game, the player would make a choice, and that game would split off and and
and that game would split off and and riff off whatever the player whatever
riff off whatever the player whatever choice the player made. And I don't have
choice the player made. And I don't have a copy here to show you, but take my
a copy here to show you, but take my word for it that it was pretty special.
word for it that it was pretty special. and too complex to actually make for
and too complex to actually make for just a talk like the other games. But
just a talk like the other games. But no, it was pretty no and it's real. It's
no, it was pretty no and it's real. It's real and it was pretty special. Okay, so
real and it was pretty special. Okay, so it was structured like a small standup
it was structured like a small standup set, but call backs and jokes were based
set, but call backs and jokes were based around the players's actions rather than
around the players's actions rather than being predetermined 6 months before the
being predetermined 6 months before the game was built. Tim Schaefer play tested
game was built. Tim Schaefer play tested this for like 90 days and 90 nights,
this for like 90 days and 90 nights, iterating constantly. He hid jokes
iterating constantly. He hid jokes everywhere. He did, they called him the
everywhere. He did, they called him the joke hider back where I came from. You
joke hider back where I came from. You know, he'd go and hide funny textures
know, he'd go and hide funny textures and little skits behind odd
and little skits behind odd interactions. He'd see players try in
interactions. He'd see players try in play testing. And he'd say stuff to his
play testing. And he'd say stuff to his staff on a near hourly basis like they
staff on a near hourly basis like they won't see them all, but it'll make the
won't see them all, but it'll make the game feel really kind of full of humor
game feel really kind of full of humor and nice. It'll make it feel nice.
and nice. It'll make it feel nice. That's what that's what Tim Tim sounds
That's what that's what Tim Tim sounds like. I have limited
like. I have limited voices. But one errant designer said in
voices. But one errant designer said in brave defiance, "But Tim, Mr. Schaefer
brave defiance, "But Tim, Mr. Schaefer Joke joke hider. Uh, why are we making
Joke joke hider. Uh, why are we making all this content that players won't see?
all this content that players won't see? Why don't I just add a few extra design
Why don't I just add a few extra design tricks and point out these secrets to
tricks and point out these secrets to the player? Like add a light over here
the player? Like add a light over here to guide the players like eyesight. Pop
to guide the players like eyesight. Pop a bit of signage to lead the player to
a bit of signage to lead the player to the kind of secret so they can see more
the kind of secret so they can see more content. And and old Tim Schaefer was
content. And and old Tim Schaefer was enraged by this. He slapped his designer
enraged by this. He slapped his designer across the face. Oh, it made a horrible
across the face. Oh, it made a horrible mark. A he slapped him again back and
mark. A he slapped him again back and forth, back and forth. He went all over
forth, back and forth. He went all over the shop. Tim Schaefer looked at him and
the shop. Tim Schaefer looked at him and he looked with rage in his eyes, right?
he looked with rage in his eyes, right? And he said something that employee
And he said something that employee would never
would never forget. The less you try and push
forget. The less you try and push players towards secrets via obvious
players towards secrets via obvious design decisions, the less special it is
design decisions, the less special it is for them to discover them. If you hide
for them to discover them. If you hide 10 secrets and they discover one, that
10 secrets and they discover one, that one secret will be memorable and make
one secret will be memorable and make their experience incredibly unique.
their experience incredibly unique. Unique player experiences linking to
Unique player experiences linking to viral marketing and YouTube let's plays.
viral marketing and YouTube let's plays. And I know we're doing this for the art,
And I know we're doing this for the art, but if we can help, you know, sell the
but if we can help, you know, sell the game, that's that's a nice bonus. It's a
game, that's that's a nice bonus. It's a nice bonus. But Tim Schaefer had gone a
nice bonus. But Tim Schaefer had gone a bit secret crazy, right? So, uh, and he
bit secret crazy, right? So, uh, and he knew that himself, like legends have it,
knew that himself, like legends have it, he stayed in his office until about 5 in
he stayed in his office until about 5 in the morning every night, just adding
the morning every night, just adding secret joke after secret joke after
secret joke after secret joke after secret joke. and he was wandering home
secret joke. and he was wandering home after a drunken night of joke writing
after a drunken night of joke writing and he looked up to the moon and much to
and he looked up to the moon and much to his surprise it spoke to him and it
his surprise it spoke to him and it said
Tim I didn't have that voice prepared that just kind of came out Tim you need
that just kind of came out Tim you need to be sensible about this hidden joke
to be sensible about this hidden joke stuff you're too wild man too wild as a
stuff you're too wild man too wild as a rough guideline you'll want to hide
rough guideline you'll want to hide secret jokes that maintain the pace and
secret jokes that maintain the pace and feel of the area they're placed in if If
feel of the area they're placed in if If you want a section to be snappy, hide
you want a section to be snappy, hide some fun visual stuff rather than uh
some fun visual stuff rather than uh elaborate 5-minute skits. Hey, you could
elaborate 5-minute skits. Hey, you could even add a procedural callback system
even add a procedural callback system that remembers the side jokes player
that remembers the side jokes player have seen players have seen and then
have seen players have seen and then tailor future jokes to involve that
tailor future jokes to involve that theme or reference. And then Tim
theme or reference. And then Tim responded, "Yeah, yeah, most of that's
responded, "Yeah, yeah, most of that's good, but that last part sounds a bit
good, but that last part sounds a bit hard to implement and write, so I'm not
hard to implement and write, so I'm not doing that." And the moon said, "Yeah,
doing that." And the moon said, "Yeah, okay, I understand." And Tim said, Tim
okay, I understand." And Tim said, Tim said, "Yeah, and and the players, the
said, "Yeah, and and the players, the players wouldn't even notice something
players wouldn't even notice something that complex to do with like procedural
that complex to do with like procedural joke callbacks." And the moon said,
joke callbacks." And the moon said, "Yeah, in fact, actually, I bet you
"Yeah, in fact, actually, I bet you could just randomize those jokes and
could just randomize those jokes and players would infer some sort of complex
players would infer some sort of complex system on it. I bet I bet they'd think
system on it. I bet I bet they'd think your game would be doing some crazy
your game would be doing some crazy strange backend logic when all you're
strange backend logic when all you're really doing is calling random dialogue
really doing is calling random dialogue variations," Tim. And then Tim said,
variations," Tim. And then Tim said, "Yeah, but I bet if you made that game,
"Yeah, but I bet if you made that game, you'd probably be the kind of type of
you'd probably be the kind of type of wanker who'd do a talk at GDC and then
wanker who'd do a talk at GDC and then use some kind of fake story character
use some kind of fake story character nonsense to talk about your game as a
nonsense to talk about your game as a metaphor." And the mood and the moon
metaphor." And the mood and the moon agreed, "Yeah, and they'd probably go
agreed, "Yeah, and they'd probably go and reference that in a weird meta sort
and reference that in a weird meta sort of
of way." And and Tim responded, "Yeah, the
way." And and Tim responded, "Yeah, the the audience would probably initially
the audience would probably initially think it's funny and clever. They'd like
think it's funny and clever. They'd like laugh, you know, but then they'd kind of
laugh, you know, but then they'd kind of quickly realize that it's just a ploy to
quickly realize that it's just a ploy to waste
waste time because he applied for the talk
time because he applied for the talk because he didn't have a IG. He didn't
because he didn't have a IG. He didn't have a pass and and he really wanted to
have a pass and and he really wanted to to get one for free. And he he he gave a
to get one for free. And he he he gave a really vague talk description and then
really vague talk description and then he had to write something and he didn't
he had to write something and he didn't know what to
know what to write. And
write. And then and then the other one, I can't
then and then the other one, I can't remember which one, said, um, but once
remember which one, said, um, but once he went down that road, he'd be a bit
he went down that road, he'd be a bit stuck, wouldn't he? He'd he'd just be
stuck, wouldn't he? He'd he'd just be narrating two people talking to each
narrating two people talking to each other. And then the other one said,
other. And then the other one said, "Yeah, he would
be. He'd need to do something really clever in order to segue out of this."
Ah, act two.
Yeah. Okay. Oh, yeah. The time like I've write I've written here like how long it
write I've written here like how long it will take me to get to this point and
will take me to get to this point and it's fine. Everything's going really
it's fine. Everything's going really well.
well. And so basically, legend has it that all
And so basically, legend has it that all of Tim Schaefer's prototype was stolen.
of Tim Schaefer's prototype was stolen. Nobody knew who by, but Tim's multiple
Nobody knew who by, but Tim's multiple door nonlinear repeatable game featuring
door nonlinear repeatable game featuring jokes in corridors was likely developed
jokes in corridors was likely developed into some sort of commercial product
into some sort of commercial product that I'm sure is unrecognizable from
that I'm sure is unrecognizable from that bland and silly description. But
that bland and silly description. But alas, we may never know what those
alas, we may never know what those despicable thieves did with that
despicable thieves did with that beautiful concept and what they
beautiful concept and what they perverted it into. Anyway, let's talk a
perverted it into. Anyway, let's talk a bit about the Stanley parable on a on a
bit about the Stanley parable on a on a different on a different notion. So,
um now now it's the actual talk. The spaces in between the choices are the
spaces in between the choices are the best to design for me. I mean, whenever
best to design for me. I mean, whenever I was designing a space for the player
I was designing a space for the player to choose a path in a game, I knew it
to choose a path in a game, I knew it had to be a quiet space for the player
had to be a quiet space for the player to think about things, to talk back to
to think about things, to talk back to themselves where they'd never where
themselves where they'd never where they'd been before or what they thought
they'd been before or what they thought lie behind each choice and then try with
lie behind each choice and then try with no information to justify red over blue
no information to justify red over blue or left over right. And the spaces in
or left over right. And the spaces in between those kind of moments were
between those kind of moments were really fun to play with because the only
really fun to play with because the only technical kind of requirement of that of
technical kind of requirement of that of those spaces is that they just get you
those spaces is that they just get you to the next choice. So that's like time
to the next choice. So that's like time that you can do with anything. You can
that you can do with anything. You can like um like within the structure of the
like um like within the structure of the game you can play with anything. You can
game you can play with anything. You can like write anything basically in a and
like write anything basically in a and took it behind a corner so the player
took it behind a corner so the player can like you know find it out. So like
can like you know find it out. So like early on we started by blocking out the
early on we started by blocking out the corridors and then we just really played
corridors and then we just really played for a long time. We like reiterated
for a long time. We like reiterated everything about three times and we just
everything about three times and we just you know had a good play. But I suppose
you know had a good play. But I suppose in games where levels have to serve a
in games where levels have to serve a greater definition of gameplay, like
greater definition of gameplay, like having the area fun to navigate while
having the area fun to navigate while shooting bad guys or needing the level
shooting bad guys or needing the level to teach the player how to solve
to teach the player how to solve puzzles, I suppose that would be much
puzzles, I suppose that would be much harder to achieve. If your player gets
harder to achieve. If your player gets distracted by a joke written on the
distracted by a joke written on the floor, they might forget some vital
floor, they might forget some vital information that you needed to
information that you needed to communicate to them about weapons or
communicate to them about weapons or reloading or
reloading or whatever. I don't care. But if you're
whatever. I don't care. But if you're making a comedy game, you do really want
making a comedy game, you do really want to have it. Do you really want to have
to have it. Do you really want to have its central focus be kind of technically
its central focus be kind of technically complex gameplay? If the answer is yes,
complex gameplay? If the answer is yes, then you can still use the hidden secret
then you can still use the hidden secret stuff in downtime or in areas where you
stuff in downtime or in areas where you don't need the player to focus. So yeah,
don't need the player to focus. So yeah, so in one of these moments that I made
so in one of these moments that I made between the bigger choice sections, it
between the bigger choice sections, it was this thing called the broom
was this thing called the broom closet. And here's the nice interactive
closet. And here's the nice interactive part of the talk that I probably should
part of the talk that I probably should have done at the start. Who here has
have done at the start. Who here has actually played the Stanley
actually played the Stanley Parable?
Parable? Uh, okay. That's really hard to judge.
Uh, okay. That's really hard to judge. Who here has not played the Stanley
Who here has not played the Stanley Parable? Okay, I'm really sorry
Parable? Okay, I'm really sorry everybody for all of you. Yeah,
everybody for all of you. Yeah, well, might as well just go. Don't know.
well, might as well just go. Don't know. Don't know why you even came
Don't know why you even came here. No, don't actually leave cuz like
here. No, don't actually leave cuz like No, no, it's good. It's fine. That was a
No, no, it's good. It's fine. That was a joke. It didn't hit as well as I thought
joke. It didn't hit as well as I thought it would, but
it would, but but moving on. I really enjoyed players
but moving on. I really enjoyed players like going through the kind of broom
like going through the kind of broom closet, going in, waiting, have the
closet, going in, waiting, have the narrator talk to them. It felt like a
narrator talk to them. It felt like a step outside of my design philosophy a
step outside of my design philosophy a bit because during the core of that
bit because during the core of that skit, there's no actual tactile
skit, there's no actual tactile interaction going on. The player is just
interaction going on. The player is just kind of waiting about, but the only
kind of waiting about, but the only option they have at like that time is to
option they have at like that time is to leave the broom closet. And the only
leave the broom closet. And the only option they have is when they're going
option they have is when they're going to do that. And that somehow makes it
to do that. And that somehow makes it feel like a back and forth between the
feel like a back and forth between the narrator and the player, even if we're
narrator and the player, even if we're just playing lines with like a time
just playing lines with like a time delay. However, I also do think that the
delay. However, I also do think that the broom closet flirts a bit with an
broom closet flirts a bit with an unhelpful facet of comedy games, and
unhelpful facet of comedy games, and that's waiting dialogue. Waiting
that's waiting dialogue. Waiting dialogue is fun, guys. We get it. You
dialogue is fun, guys. We get it. You know, where like your players waiting
know, where like your players waiting around and the writers are like, "We've
around and the writers are like, "We've got nothing to do for 90% of
got nothing to do for 90% of development." So, we'll write loads of
development." So, we'll write loads of funny little jokes for the characters to
funny little jokes for the characters to say while like the players not doing
say while like the players not doing what the game's about. Um, but if you
what the game's about. Um, but if you only hide extras in waiting around, then
only hide extras in waiting around, then you're tying content to player in
you're tying content to player in action. And if you let the player play
action. And if you let the player play about, like tie content to exploration
about, like tie content to exploration and play, again, we're talking about
and play, again, we're talking about like games as a conversation rather than
like games as a conversation rather than asking the player to sit still and
asking the player to sit still and listen to the writer. Moments of quiet
listen to the writer. Moments of quiet are also important, and a space without
are also important, and a space without waiting dialogue can definitely like
waiting dialogue can definitely like provide that.
provide that. Uh, so we had to kind of make a
Uh, so we had to kind of make a determined effort to try and cut down as
determined effort to try and cut down as much as we could on on waiting about and
much as we could on on waiting about and rewarding players for waiting about. So
rewarding players for waiting about. So we tried to kind of incentivize them
we tried to kind of incentivize them through like experience for them to like
through like experience for them to like if they see something weird, click on
if they see something weird, click on it. If they like see two doors opposite
it. If they like see two doors opposite each other, try closing them both and
each other, try closing them both and maybe you'll get a little joke or a
maybe you'll get a little joke or a section. Uh, so it was kind of a way of
section. Uh, so it was kind of a way of trying to teach the players to to play
trying to teach the players to to play about and to kind of have a bit more fun
about and to kind of have a bit more fun and not try and find content through
and not try and find content through boring means.
boring means. Um, and and if you get your playfulness
Um, and and if you get your playfulness from players waiting around, they'll
from players waiting around, they'll miss 90% of it in the latter half of
miss 90% of it in the latter half of your game. And that really skews the
your game. And that really skews the distribution of joke stuff to the first
distribution of joke stuff to the first half. And and you'll want players to be
half. And and you'll want players to be focusing on learning how to interact
focusing on learning how to interact with your game. If you could find a way
with your game. If you could find a way to do both of these at the same time,
to do both of these at the same time, like that'd be pretty cool. It's kind of
like that'd be pretty cool. It's kind of like improvisation in a stand-up comedy
like improvisation in a stand-up comedy set. They'll often play around in the
set. They'll often play around in the first act and the audience will be like,
first act and the audience will be like, "Oh, wow. This is cool." And then
"Oh, wow. This is cool." And then they'll the audience will be kind of out
they'll the audience will be kind of out of energy by the second half and then
of energy by the second half and then you've just got to kind of go and talk
you've just got to kind of go and talk serious stuff. It's meta. It's about my
serious stuff. It's meta. It's about my talk. Did if you if you didn't get
talk. Did if you if you didn't get that? Yeah, the energy thing. Yeah,
that? Yeah, the energy thing. Yeah, that's that's you can feel
that's that's you can feel that. So, another thing to think about
that. So, another thing to think about is repetition. Jokes heard again and
is repetition. Jokes heard again and again, they're not only not funny,
again, they're not only not funny, they're annoying. If your player moves
they're annoying. If your player moves through an area more than once, or if
through an area more than once, or if your game is designed so they will have
your game is designed so they will have to repeat content. Listen to me now.
to repeat content. Listen to me now. Randomize assets. Add varants in like
Randomize assets. Add varants in like every way that you can. Repeated content
every way that you can. Repeated content usually stems from a facet of your
usually stems from a facet of your design that just kind of has to be. You
design that just kind of has to be. You can't design around it. It's what your
can't design around it. It's what your game is. And um it's okay. Nobody's
game is. And um it's okay. Nobody's perfect and you can't always design a
perfect and you can't always design a game, you know, that that isn't
game, you know, that that isn't repetitive in some aspect. And in fact,
repetitive in some aspect. And in fact, a level of repetition gives you a bunch
a level of repetition gives you a bunch of great options to subvert and call
of great options to subvert and call back. But in reality, you can't always
back. But in reality, you can't always redesign the entire basis for your game
redesign the entire basis for your game to fix the flawed assumption about your
to fix the flawed assumption about your game. So my advice would be to not
game. So my advice would be to not think, well, if people don't like this,
think, well, if people don't like this, then they just don't get the game. This
then they just don't get the game. This is just how it is. You need to be
is just how it is. You need to be applying as many like plasters and
applying as many like plasters and band-aids onto that gaping design wound
band-aids onto that gaping design wound as possible. If you can find 20 really,
as possible. If you can find 20 really, really tiny things to make it a little
really tiny things to make it a little less painful, then you better be doing
less painful, then you better be doing all of those 20 things and thinking
all of those 20 things and thinking about how you can find 20 more. So, the
about how you can find 20 more. So, the problem with the Stanley Parable was the
problem with the Stanley Parable was the opening section. If you play 10 endings,
opening section. If you play 10 endings, that's about 45 seconds of repeated
that's about 45 seconds of repeated content each restart. That's 7.5 minutes
content each restart. That's 7.5 minutes of dead time. Like time where your
of dead time. Like time where your player is getting nothing new from you.
player is getting nothing new from you. And that just that like that might cause
And that just that like that might cause players to get bored, say, "Okay, I've
players to get bored, say, "Okay, I've seen enough content. I I've hit a lull."
seen enough content. I I've hit a lull." And then, you know, you don't get the
And then, you know, you don't get the funness of players kind of experiencing
funness of players kind of experiencing all of your stuff together and, you
all of your stuff together and, you know, keeping their head in your work
know, keeping their head in your work throughout the entire piece and like not
throughout the entire piece and like not splitting it up into chunks or whatever.
splitting it up into chunks or whatever. So, um, uh, and actually, previously, we
So, um, uh, and actually, previously, we did actually kick the player back to the
did actually kick the player back to the start menu at the start of, uh, after
start menu at the start of, uh, after after each ending, and that was insane.
after each ending, and that was insane. And that added like like 10 10 minutes
And that added like like 10 10 minutes to just loading times which was
to just loading times which was completely useless. So the 20 things
completely useless. So the 20 things that we did to make this section better
that we did to make this section better the opening section in Stanley was to
the opening section in Stanley was to add a lot of randomizable like elements
add a lot of randomizable like elements from the narrator dialogue to the layout
from the narrator dialogue to the layout itself. This not only added to like the
itself. This not only added to like the mystery feeling of the game but it also
mystery feeling of the game but it also sprinkled more jokes into the repeated
sprinkled more jokes into the repeated sections and gave the game a feeling of
sections and gave the game a feeling of being fresh every kind of knowable. you
being fresh every kind of knowable. you couldn't understand what it was. And
couldn't understand what it was. And that kind of felt even if the player was
that kind of felt even if the player was playing for the ninth time, it still
playing for the ninth time, it still felt like, okay, I'm back at the start,
felt like, okay, I'm back at the start, but things have changed. What's changed?
but things have changed. What's changed? What have I done previously to make this
What have I done previously to make this change? And I referenced this earlier
change? And I referenced this earlier where we did where we did like all this
where we did where we did like all this random generation stuff, but players
random generation stuff, but players thought that we were being much cleverer
thought that we were being much cleverer than we were, and they, you know,
than we were, and they, you know, thought that, oh, something I did in
thought that, oh, something I did in this ending caused the office layout to
this ending caused the office layout to change and whatever. So, you know, you
change and whatever. So, you know, you don't always have to go the complex
don't always have to go the complex route. You kind of you can fake it and
route. You kind of you can fake it and people won't know.
people won't know. So, so one of the randomized bits and
So, so one of the randomized bits and bobs we put in the opening section was a
bobs we put in the opening section was a phone in an office that just started
phone in an office that just started ringing. None of the items in the office
ringing. None of the items in the office ever made any noise or allowed you to
ever made any noise or allowed you to interact with them much. So, when the
interact with them much. So, when the phone rang, it gave the players this new
phone rang, it gave the players this new interaction with the world that they'd
interaction with the world that they'd not had before. It's off to the side,
not had before. It's off to the side, though, hidden in one of the cubicles.
though, hidden in one of the cubicles. So, if players want to go searching,
So, if players want to go searching, they can. But if they want to rush in,
they can. But if they want to rush in, rush on and get to the next ending,
rush on and get to the next ending, there's nothing stopping them. Anyway,
there's nothing stopping them. Anyway, so you pick up the phone and we do a
so you pick up the phone and we do a little skit about this box delivery
little skit about this box delivery company and you talk to them on the
company and you talk to them on the phone and you like press numbers and the
phone and you like press numbers and the skit ends with a player ordering like
skit ends with a player ordering like 500,000 boxes to the office and you know
500,000 boxes to the office and you know they think, "Aha, that's funny. What
they think, "Aha, that's funny. What what an inconvenience for the office.
what an inconvenience for the office. Haha." And they put the phone down and
Haha." And they put the phone down and they move on and they play the next
they move on and they play the next ending or whatever. But then the next
ending or whatever. But then the next restart, we do a call back to that joke.
restart, we do a call back to that joke. And instead of randomizing the office,
And instead of randomizing the office, we instead force it to fill itself with
we instead force it to fill itself with boxes everywhere. And it doesn't really
boxes everywhere. And it doesn't really change anything gameplay-wise, but it
change anything gameplay-wise, but it starts a precedent for those little
starts a precedent for those little independent jokes, but beginning to like
independent jokes, but beginning to like link together to form something more.
link together to form something more. And even if you just do a few of them,
And even if you just do a few of them, that really that will start the player
that really that will start the player thinking like, okay, maybe something
thinking like, okay, maybe something more complex is going on. And that helps
more complex is going on. And that helps into the lying thing. Lying. Lying.
into the lying thing. Lying. Lying. Okay, you're not idiots. It's clear as
Okay, you're not idiots. It's clear as day that we stole the concept from Tim
day that we stole the concept from Tim Schaefer's Joker. Calisex presents five
Schaefer's Joker. Calisex presents five jokes by Calisk and four jokes by Eric
jokes by Calisk and four jokes by Eric Walpart. Okay, we stole it. But you know
Walpart. Okay, we stole it. But you know what? Stealing is really, really
what? Stealing is really, really easy. I've stolen like 10 jokes in this
easy. I've stolen like 10 jokes in this talk and you won't ever know. And you
talk and you won't ever know. And you all laughed like idiots. You thought
all laughed like idiots. You thought that was funny when in reality I I did
that was funny when in reality I I did very little work for that and you all
very little work for that and you all thought you enjoyed it. You didn't enjoy
thought you enjoyed it. You didn't enjoy it, but you thought you did and that's
it, but you thought you did and that's good enough. So, you know, as long as
good enough. So, you know, as long as you stealing is really easy and it's so
you stealing is really easy and it's so as long as you don't found out you don't
as long as you don't found out you don't get found out, it's fantastic. So, like
get found out, it's fantastic. So, like if you get called and and if you do get
if you get called and and if you do get called out on something, just say, "Hey,
called out on something, just say, "Hey, dude. It was a really kind of formative
dude. It was a really kind of formative piece of work and I took a lot of
piece of work and I took a lot of inspiration for it from it." So, so I'd
inspiration for it from it." So, so I'd like you all to repeat this line with me
like you all to repeat this line with me so you can steal jokes in the future.
so you can steal jokes in the future. The phrase is, okay, so I'll I'll say
The phrase is, okay, so I'll I'll say you respond. Hey, dude.
you respond. Hey, dude. It was a really formative piece of work.
And I took a lot of inspiration from it. And I took a lot of inspiration from it.
And I took a lot of inspiration from it. I am a creative individual. I am a
I am a creative individual. I am a creative individual. No idea is unique.
inspiration is that wait cop no not copying off you know actually I didn't
copying off you know actually I didn't even write this bit it's because I've
even write this bit it's because I've actually got like this much left and
actually got like this much left and they just put the 5 minutes up but you
they just put the 5 minutes up but you know we that killed time and I get to
know we that killed time and I get to end on this great joke. So uh if you
end on this great joke. So uh if you need an example for how to use that line
need an example for how to use that line it's uh yeah the Simpsons episode in the
it's uh yeah the Simpsons episode in the box factory where the guy shows you know
box factory where the guy shows you know them around and shows them like the the
them around and shows them like the the line to walk along. That was a really
line to walk along. That was a really formative piece of
formative piece of work and I took a lot of inspiration
work and I took a lot of inspiration from it. And online, I've seen nobody
from it. And online, I've seen nobody call us out on stealing that. So, uh,
call us out on stealing that. So, uh, yeah, steal your jokes. You You can
yeah, steal your jokes. You You can never write that many good ones. Steal
never write that many good ones. Steal them. No one will find out. And if they
them. No one will find out. And if they do, just
do, just lie. Thanks for listening to my talk.
We have two minutes left. We can do one question. A sole question. It's whoever
question. A sole question. It's whoever goes fast is is go run. Oh, there's one.
goes fast is is go run. Oh, there's one. Oh. Oh, yes. Hello. And the one question
Oh. Oh, yes. Hello. And the one question is is can I ask that question?
You can ask that question.
Are you Alex Bruce?
Yeah. Did he tell you to say
that? Yeah. So, I'm just going to kind of like There was no really great ending
of like There was no really great ending bit there, so I'm just kind of just
bit there, so I'm just kind of just going to kind of walk off stage.
going to kind of walk off stage. [Applause]