So I said welcome to Killer portfolio.
Uh We are doing a portfolio review, portfolio reviews after this from 2 to 5.
So, if anybody's interested, this is where we're gonna be
-- anyway. All right. So let's start with some introductions. Dennis. Do you wanna -- go?
Sure. Uh My name is Danish Syed. I'm uh one of the art directors at Bit Reactor.
Um I guess I will leave it there for now.
Hello, my name is Lana
Basinski.
I'm an associate art director at Riot Games working in research and development.
Hi, I'm Ashley Sparling.
I'm the co-founder and character art director at Canine Digital.
I'm Jeff Perrett.
I'm an associate art director at Blizzard Entertainment on World of Warcraft.
And I guess I probably should have said I'm Greg Firs,
I'm the creative director at Bit
Ror.
Um
You guys wanna maybe tell us a little bit about how you got in the industry,
like what your background is.
All right, I'll,
I'll try to make this brief.
It's a very circuitous route which I think is actually pretty beneficial
to hear about because there's no one way to get in.
Um So I started out in computer science.
Um I always wanted to do something on the art field,
but I also like computers and I wasn't like, super confident in my artistic skills.
And so I got a, I went to school for computer science,
worked as a systems administrator for a few years
and decided, ok, well, I guess this is cool, but I'd really want to pursue my passion.
So I went to school at night, went to art school and got an animation degree
and eventually broke into the industry,
doing motion graphics for film and television.
And then eventually, after a few years of that,
um the studio I was working at,
it was kind of like shifting direction into a place where I wasn't as interested.
And I had sought an opportunity for a contract position
at Warner Brothers Games in Chicago,
which I didn't realize was actually uh mid uh
midway games that the creators of Mortal Combat.
And so uh I had the entire interview not realizing what I was interviewing for.
At the end. I was like, so what are you working on?
And they're like, we're doing Mortal Combat.
And I was like, oh my God,
I cannot believe that that's like one of my favorite games of all time.
So uh that was kind of my, my way in
uh I can uh make up some time. I have a very straightforward path I think obnoxiously.
So it has a very boring tale
when I was a kid. I thought, wow, Blizzard games are so cool.
I wanna work for Blizzard.
And then in high school, I uh from Edmonton, Alberta Canada.
I went to VIC Comp, which is an art school there and I learned how to animate.
And then I came here for university just around the corner.
I applied for the Blizzard internship back in 2012 and I
got it and then they hired me back full time after that
and that's how I did it.
Uh So for me, I was always into art.
Um I got like a traditional background in sculpting and painting and drawing.
And I was like, I always wanted to do special effects makeup.
That was always my thing that I wanted to do.
And I went to go look at a university and one of the teachers was like,
you don't want to get into the practical stuff, go into digital, go into digital.
So I was like, oh, I never really thought about it and then
found out that I quite like doing game characters and then kind
of went from there been in the industry now 17 years,
worked at
Rare Lion Head Rest in Peace but and Ubisoft and eventually started
my own company with my wife and it's pretty damn cool.
Um My path is kind of similar to the niche.
Uh I went to school graphic design major, uh went to college graphic design major,
computer science minor.
Got out was doing websites and logo design, stuff like that. Freelance. And uh
my father came to visit me um where I was living at the time and he, and he could kind of,
wasn't super happy doing that.
And he said, why don't you find a, you know,
go back to school and find something that lines up better with what you like to do, uh
games, movies, whatever. And
I up to that point,
I never realized that people actually feel like people make games.
I don't know what I thought they just appeared, you know,
uh at the store and I went and got them. Um,
it, it was, it was a really odd thing and he kind of connected that up and, um that,
uh so what I ended up doing is going back to school
and doing that and then I started out doing freelance work and uh
then moving to in studio uh work and that was
early two thousands.
Um I think I've probably contributed to like north of 2527 games,
something like that.
So, um,
yeah,
quick path.
Cool.
Um Do you guys have a really diverse background up here?
-- What are some of the, -- uh what about you, Greg?
Me?
Ok. All right.
Um
So I started as an intern, um didn't know anything about games, sort of
like some of you.
Uh really, they just kind of magically happened. I have a traditional background.
I started as an intern at a place called Micro Pros Way Way Back.
Um And then I left there, I spent about 22 years at FRAXs Games.
Uh left there did a little stint, help my friends out at Romero Games for about a year
while I started my own studio. And now
I went from art director to creative director and CEO of my own company,
which is kind of cool.
So if you're an artist out there,
you can do it.
Um
You don't have to work for finance people.
Um
And so yeah, so that was my path. So, and I'm lucky enough to have
uh surrounded myself with some really talented people uh
both at my office and friends in the industry,
which I really appreciate them being here.
Um Anyway,
so let's jump into what do you guys see is most
likely like what are some of the common mistakes that you,
you see in portfolios? You all see a bunch of them?
Um What are some things that you see that are, are,
are typical that that could be avoided?
Should we go down the line or does anybody's got
-- animation? What is the biggest stuff you see there? -- Animation.
How many animators up in this room?
Nice. Right. On take notes. Just kidding.
Um
The biggest things that I see are a sort of lack of diversity
in a portfolio is probably the one I think goes under the radar.
I think people have heard, oh, it's too long or like,
the, the length is the thing that comes up most often.
But the, I would rather have a long rail that has a lo like a lot of it
is properly showcasing your skills.
Um,
but also don't make it super long.
What I mean by that is
I see a real and it, if you're applying for a game studio, there's like an, this
implication of like what you think you should do.
And it's like all walk cycles and they're not different walk cycles,
they're all the same piece over and over and over again.
Or it's just all dialogue and it's just lip syncs.
And even if those walk cycles are amazing or even if those lip syncs are amazing,
it's more than likely that you will be asked to do
a variety of different things once you get on the job.
And so showcasing as best as you can,
variety of the things you might be asked to do.
I need a body mechanics piece. Sure, throw a lip sync piece in there.
Sure, throw a cycle in there. But don't make it some kind of vanilla thing.
We'll do a character cycle.
You want all those different pieces that are showing the,
the myriad of things that you're able to do
and let that be your super tight reel of sort of one of each is good enough for me.
Don't double up. There's no need,
Jeff, what do you
say?
Um So I think the, the biggest thing to keep in mind is hiring managers,
uh recruiters, you know,
art directors leads are taking a risk when they hire people,
you reduce that risk as much as possible and uh show
them that you can do the job that they're hiring for.
Be specific.
If you're really excited about creating stylized fantasy characters,
have a portfolio focused around that.
If you really love realistic military vehicles, have a portfolio around that,
but understand your portfolio isn't going to be applicable to all jobs.
I know that feels limiting.
But what that does is that actually gives you that time to focus on that one,
pure craft as students,
you don't have that the 10,000 hours to get good at all the things,
all the things comes over time, it's really narrow your focus down.
Um Secondly,
I would say do the kind of um one of these things is not like the other test.
Uh
You can look at uh online, you can just uh enter in a search engine,
whatever game you want.
Art blast or you know, artists you can look on on any of those uh platforms,
art platforms out there, art station Kara, any of those kind of ones
and find professionals that are doing what you wanna do,
put those portfolios up on a screen and put yours up on a screen.
What is yours missing? And really be analytical, think through it.
What do I need to do? What do I not have that they have? And what am I including that?
They don't think that they have. Uh And then I also say, like, with that
sort of run your work through what I, I call like the civilian test people.
They don't know anything about video games, like a roommate, a loved one, a parent,
a relative, whatever.
Does this stuff look right,
what's missing and they'll really point out those
flaws because they'll give you that snap judgment.
So I think it's really important to, to, to curate, focus your portfolio.
Uh But then also make sure it's aligned with the people that you wanna work with.
I know that's a little daunting
in terms of like, well, they've been doing this for X number of years.
I'm a student, I'm still learning.
But if you want your work to sit next to their work in a game,
your work needs to be able to sit next to their work on a screen.
And so you do have to kind of keep that as a target for you.
Um I'll probably stop, keep going for 30 minutes, but I'll stop.
I actually have an addition to that.
You have to be very selective. I think
I fell into this trap, you know,
coming out of school where I just felt like I didn't have enough to show.
And so I would put too much into a portfolio, including pieces that,
you know,
really shouldn't have made the cut and because I just thought I need to pat it out,
I need to be bigger, I need to be more impressive.
But,
but really being more selective and honing things down is actually the way better,
way to go.
You're, you're only as strong as your weakest piece, right?
And that's, and you don't want to give them any reason to,
to think why did they include this in their portfolio?
You know, like, don't give them that reason.
Um Hone it down, really focus it
and just as like a like a caveat to my, my earlier statement, like,
just because I,
we wanna see the breadth that doesn't mean you need to show everything.
Like, if you only like
doing uh like fight scenes, we wanna work on cinematics,
you don't have to show cycles at all.
Like that doesn't have to be a part,
but like just be thoughtful with what you're curating for each thing.
One of the things I'd say as well, I mean,
there's a lot of competition out there, you know,
and
I see a lot of like portfolios of characters like in T
pos or if you're doing environments just like a brick or something.
But the whole reason why we want to get into this industry is to tell stories,
you know,
so don't just do like a character in the t
you know,
like
either an idle animation or put in a pose if you are doing
a brick for whatever reason,
just do like a couple of bricks and make it into a natural story, you know,
show that you can actually tell a story for
your characters and for your environments for your animations.
Could, could we talk about uh one thing just kind of spread that actually
spread an idea.
Um Fan art I think is that acceptable in a portfolio?
Uh
I personally love seeing fan art. Yes, I wanna see it.
But what I don't wanna see is recreating the
thing that's already been made in the game.
I wanna see the thing that feels new
but it, that, but also that it belongs in the game.
What's the thing next to that person?
If it's a superhero, what's that character that's next to the superhero? If it's a, a
huge building, you know, in a, in a key city in Am
Mo world, let's say
um what's that building that maybe is around the corner, add,
add something new to it, but fan art is awesome.
Um Just don't remake the thing because the team is gonna know what you did, right?
They're also really gonna know what you did
wrong because they've been looking at those,
the exact things for a long time also.
Uh if you need a logo to say it's fan art,
um it's not successful in my view like you shouldn't have to
take a logo from a game that you did not work on
and put it on like your thumbnail image to say that it's fan art.
Someone should be able to look at it and go oh my gosh,
this looks like game X and tell from that instead of just a logo.
Do you want,
-- do you want that in the description though to say like like that it is fan art just -- so it
doesn't,
yeah,
it say fan art in the description but the logo kinda comes
across like clout chasing to me a little bit like I don't,
I don't love it.
Cool.
All right. So what are you guys have seen a ton of portfolios?
Are there any that like you can go back and think about like this is
like the best one I've ever seen or is one that really lasted with you?
Maybe even if it wasn't the best one. Like it was one that
stood out over a period of time.
There was one I saw recently that
excuse me, it was for um a
U I artist
and uh what I really loved about it,
it was not only the final art was really excellent, but
it showed the process. It showed the, the sort of like
um
process and personality are two things that I look for and
uh how you know what was going through their mind when they came
up with this idea and what were they trying to achieve emotionally and
what kind of impact they want. Like all of those things.
Like, that's what I love seeing is the thought process
and getting into their head.
And um
and also just like the, the sometimes the dirty work of like,
yeah, so this is kind of my scratch pad and like,
I didn't like this or I didn't like that,
but then kind of showing the evolution of an idea.
Um So something like really thorough where you have the the final piece,
but then all of the kind of leg work behind it.
So portfolios like that, I think really stick out.
Yeah, I was gonna say a similar thing. It's um
I always quite like, I like to see if you can add value to the community,
like if there's like a little like tutorial or something like that or
a different way that you've been able to make, I don't know,
chain or something like that.
And I think that those things are kind of
more rememberable than the actual artwork because quite often,
oh,
are you thinking of like making something?
And I'm like, oh yeah, I saw this person, I can't remember their name,
but I can remember that they did this tutorial.
So it's like a chain tutorial, whatever,
but it kind of shows that you're,
you're willing to work in a team and you're willing to share your knowledge as well.
Some of the most memorable portfolios that I
see are ones that are able to demonstrate
sort of a at shaped person
um and T shaped uh is when somebody has
like a very clear skill that they're applying for.
So an animation, it's an animation demo reel. But
if it is edited, amazing,
you know, we're not just seeing the full length of every piece,
it's like got quick cuts to a song and the song is not overwhelming.
And then the,
you know, the splash screen with their information on it has a nice design on it.
To me that is, it's not, I would never turn
somebody away who was applying for an animation position,
who didn't have music and just had their animations, etcetera, etcetera,
etcetera.
I think like that's what I'm hiring for.
But these memorable portfolios really stick out as somebody
who will be extensible will be adaptable and possibly
be able to give your team more because they're
also able to show these other skills on display.
Um So if you have other skills that are,
you know,
tangent to the art that you do and you're confident that you're good at them,
like don't do it.
If it's just to throw it in that it will not,
there's gotta be some sense of self-awareness there.
But if you got the skills show them off,
I I think the most memorable portfolio I saw um and this is gonna date myself,
but back in 2005, I wanna say,
um back when normal maps and specular maps were kind of, uh just, you know, um
uh coming into the development process, uh
an artist put a scene together and on a cardboard box in the scene,
they had a fingerprint in the spec map
and it's little things like that, like the storytelling,
like I wanna work with storytellers and I think that's really important
to have that kind of uh ability tell stories through your artwork.
Uh We, I, I don't want to work with people that are just 3d printers, you know,
and just make a thing and, and, you know,
go to uh an online store and just like print out the, the cabinet or whatever.
The pair of jeans, like tell a story with your artwork is what I tell you.
The next one is not super complex here,
but like how many samples everybody always wants to know
and we sort of touched on this a little bit before, but
how many samples should be in a portfolio? What do you guys normally think?
Uh animation? I think the current advice is roughly a minute.
If you're above two, it's like way too much. Um And
uh ultimately just only the best things, you know, if your reel is 30 seconds long,
but it's like best of the best.
That's great. That's great.
Uh Three pieces.
Next question
I was going to say to that.
Normally, when we're looking at portfolios,
we can probably tell in the 1st 1015 seconds that
are we going to continue looking at the rest of the portfolio?
Just because we get inundated on portfolios and you could spend
a lifetime looking at portfolios and never get any work done.
So
you've got
in that
1030 seconds, you've got to make something. Wow. To catch our attention.
Treat it like a store window, you know, like a, a department store or whatever,
put the enticing stuff that people want to come in and look at more stuff.
So best, best piece, whether it's
animation, you know, whether it's, you know,
your online portfolio for 3d characters, environments, whatever
um visual development concept are best work first. Always.
That's a great lead into the next question,
which is, is a good idea to show in progress work
like, and, and
how would you do it? I think you started to allude to it, like,
start with
that stuff.
It's always tricky to me to see that because, you know,
like another question is like, should I show wire frames and, and there's,
that's such a specific answer because there's a lot of hiring managers and,
and folks that are like, yes, I always want to see wire frames.
I only want to see them for good,
which I can tell you I haven't seen a lot of good wire frames.
I've never looked at it and go gone like, oh my gosh,
it's really unless it's like 50 polygons, you know, and it's a,
it's a some car or something, you know, some detailed car.
Um
So I think it's really
challenging. I think you need to do it in the right space.
I don't know, in your main portfolio if work in progress is the way to go.
But I think you can have a blog or something like that.
I do love seeing thinking and the thought process.
Um If I can click on an image and then see the
build up in like a process gift of how you made that,
I, I love seeing that stuff. Secondarily, I would say,
I think like when you have portfolio, if you have a portfolio website,
like a youtube video for animation or anything like that is great.
But I think places like art Station are also awesome because you can
have a video and then under the video in the same post,
you can embed a bunch of images and stuff too.
If you have thumbnails that you do or like
reference videos that you wanna throw in there.
It's like good to I I think to provide the option
because if it's getting down to like a couple candidates,
I will weigh that in.
But I would,
I wouldn't put it in like the core thing
that went for that initial pass of digging through
and always lead with the finish piece right
then tree out underneath
danish. Anything else about like U I because that's such an,
-- I hate to say it's an emerging but it, but it is -- different.
Yeah, it,
it definitely is different and I think I agree that like process
is for a lot of portfolios should be sort of secondary but
in U I, it is a little bit more important because we, we want to know because
U I and UX is so much about um
player uh sort of psychology and, and the user experience and
how you're thinking about how the player thinks and that sort of thing. So
I think for that, it, it actually is very important to show process and, and
your, your thought. Yeah, your thought process.
Next one,
we kind of talked about a little bit before and
Jeff and I were not actually talking about this outside
generalist versus specialist. Like the, the industry has grown so much.
The window for what you do is so different.
I think when I started it was like,
you're just an artist, like you're an artist and animator.
Um
I'm, I'm truly not an animator.
Um But I think
uh I appreciate them.
I, I really do.
Um But like, I think, I think a lot of, a lot of people coming out of school feel
conflicted is like, do I do I do
the wide range of things, do I do something special?
Um What do you guys think?
-- Yeah, -- that it speaks to me greatly because I wanted to do everything II I was
almost like short attention span that like, oh that's shiny. I wanna do that.
but I would like get pretty obsessed and, you know,
try to get really good at every single thing.
Um So like that, I was saying very much t shaped, I guess.
Um but the important thing is to
not have all of that on your portfolio.
Like you, you should really tune it to the job that you want.
Because what happens is if, for example,
we'll get a portfolio for a specific role and they have all that other stuff,
we immediately question, well, like what do they actually want to do?
Like where does their heart lie? Because the thing is they can,
they can work a job and do the job that they, you know, we're asking of them,
but maybe that's not exactly what they want to do and they're,
they're kind of like always eyeing this other thing
that, that's, you know, this is a stepping stone to something else.
And so we're always cognizant of that because we don't want,
you know, our employees to be unhappy either.
Like if, if they're not happy during their job, then it's kind of like,
not beneficial for anybody.
So we really want the portfolio to focus on like,
oh it's clear that they love this thing
and that can be difficult because like, like I said, I'm like that,
I love everything but
Um
you know, I'm like, if I decide on, OK,
I'm gonna make a portfolio about this because I think
this is what I want to focus on right now.
I think that's really important.
I also think that like it, even if you love doing everything,
there will be opportunities to learn and likely learn quicker once you get in.
So being able to specialize,
uh I remember when I was going to school II, I wanted to do it all.
I wanted to be able to be like a self sufficient art making machine.
Uh I wanna be able to make the whole game by myself. But the reality was
as if I'm just animating or doing whatever art I wanna do. I'm spending 100% of my time
is great. That's focus. The second I split my focus,
you know,
50 50% of my time gets to go to these two things to try and get it to the right quality.
Somebody who's spending 100% of their time on.
One thing is gonna get better faster and get the job
and it's gonna take me double that amount of time. I
mean, maybe I'm a genius artist.
I'm just a, a creative to my bones and I'll be able to do it. But
it is lowering my chances of getting as good as I
need to be at both things that I'm splitting my focus between
and I might get it, not get a job at either thing or it'll take me way longer.
So specializing early and getting the job and then then branching
out and looking for opportunities to try new things or,
you know, when you have an income,
just being able to spend your free time comfortably learning other stuff,
I say get in and then, and then go wide baby
also actually real quick to go back to your
earlier point about like what makes a memorable,
memorable portfolio
is you can Sprinkle in those other interests
on the side and that's actually really great.
So
you focus on one but then you say like I also kind of like this,
I also kind of like that and then,
but since it's all about the proportion of it
because then I see the portfolio and it's like,
oh wow, they really love this one thing.
But hey, they're also kind of like interested in this too,
that that's actually appealing too.
I'm also seen like with even indie studios that
they're starting to be like more specialized in what they do.
Um But I do think it's good to, so for example,
I'm going to use character art as an example because of what I do.
Um I do think it's good to have like an understanding of how concept art works.
And obviously, if you're a 3d modeler,
how rigging works and how that gets put into animation
because
when you are working together,
you need to know what everybody's discipline is
and how that's gonna affect your work.
So even though you don't want to be an animator,
it's good to have an understanding of how things move,
especially as a character artist.
Uh You have to think about the time, I think,
especially as a student and enter entering the industry,
you only have so much time in front of you to get really
proficient at something to be able to do it at a professional level.
You know, it's kind of that Malcolm Gladwell, 10,000 hours, you know,
uh outliers saying,
um you, you don't have infinite time in school and,
and while you're developing your portfolio, so really focus and hone on something
and then like everybody else said, you can kind of branch out after
um you can learn those other things and have those additional skill sets.
It'll make you a better game developer being able to communicate with
people in disciplines and other areas even within the art world.
But ultimately, like Denish said,
we really want to hire people and we want them to be happy
in what they're doing.
So make the things that you are happy, making the process,
the style of art that you enjoy making for eight hours a day, you know,
what do you want to do for a full time job um
and be specific uh you know, stylized fantasy environment art,
even within that world, the team I work on, it's
do you like doing trees, props buildings, you know, architecture,
like be specific and hone in on that.
I think again,
that's where you can go back to find those professionals that are doing
what you wanna do and they have those portfolios online,
you can find those and see what they're doing
and kinda mimic that and have a similar portfolio.
Cool.
We're gonna start questions after this last question that we have.
So if anybody's got stuff start lining up now if you want.
Um
But the next thought was since there's a lot of this going on right now
and I've seen a few things lately that I thought it was worth mentioning.
Is there a place for a IR in a portfolio?
Any, any thoughts? Anybody?
No dog.
Um
I think that a I, you know,
it's uh unmistakably sort of part of our reality and
it's gonna be something that we're gonna have to face,
I think in a portfolio especially just starting out.
You have to
do, do yourself the service of making sure you know, those skills and would not,
I would not be leveraging A I for anything because you need to
take the time to learn how to be able to do it without.
There are lots of legal and ethical questions surrounding A I
I think that in your free time if you wanna mess around with it A I is tools.
It's not just like mid journey chat BG BT Garbo,
there's like interesting tools that are based in A I,
there are interesting space there that isn't
necessarily harming people. And I think is
irreversibly a reality for us. But in your portfolio,
you owe it to yourself to, to I don't, don't do it.
It goes back to what I was saying earlier about um
what I want to see in a portfolio is you, I want to see who you are as a person,
what you like,
you know, I want some be something original.
Um And what is your thought process? All of these human elements
that
A I just bypasses and then I get absolutely no sense of who you are.
And so that's another reason not to
and seeing like your experiments in A I like
that's not you, right?
-- Like those don't really have a place in your portfolio and they're -- also ugly.
Yeah, we want, we want to see that you've done the training like
you can
a I A creature but we want to know, do you understand like anatomy again?
Do you understand how things would move correctly and stuff?
Cool.
All right. So let's get to some questions. Um
again, stick around something fun at the end,
I promise.
Um
All right. So let's start with you.
It will be, it will be,
we'll,
-- we'll repeat -- it.
OK. Sounds sorry.
My voice is also kind of
stopped
like modulating.
Uh So first of all, thank you all for coming.
Actually on the T uh this is tangentially related to A I. Um
I find that finding reference images lately has become a lot harder now that,
you know, like go
like Google images is full of
A I if I, especially if I'm I'm an environment artist,
if I'm looking for like historical reference
or, you know,
even or Pinterest or a lot of these places where I'm used to finding reference image
images. It's become harder with the rise of just,
you know,
churn the churn of A I content. So,
you know, a as I'm kind of developing my portfolio,
you know, what would be your advice as to like,
or what would your advice be to younger artists sifting through
and finding good reference versus like A I schlock.
What kind of artist are you just for curiosity?
Uh 3d environment artist uh generally lean, stylized fantasy. So
cool.
I was, I was gonna say, I think books are gonna come back into fashion guys.
It's I, I mean, I,
I'm very badly dyslexic but I've got thousands of books, pitch books.
My wife will laugh at me about this
but because she's like, you've got so many books but you can't read.
But yeah, they're good
and I think that would be,
-- you know, sometimes there's stuff in those things that you can't get anywhere -- else.
I
would also say, like, get out and see the world.
Um That's really important take a break while you're working,
uh your eyes are gonna rest,
you're gonna look at something you're gonna not see the flaws in your work.
Uh You know,
a lot of concept artists will like flip their
work uh horizontally just to refresh your eyes.
But like sometimes you just need to step away,
so step away, take a walk,
I'll do that quite often even at work and I'll just walk around the building,
you know, walk around the office.
Uh It refreshes your eyes. You come back, you're able to think through things.
Uh Also when you go to
places, uh, historical places or whatever, take pictures.
If you're in San Francisco, take pictures of all the buildings and, you know,
go see museums and, and go see historical sites.
Uh
My, you know, my family pictures when we travel, it's like, you know,
the family here at this building and then it's like brick textures
or, you know, half the, half my phone and like, that's ok.
Um, you know, so I would just say get out and see the world.
Yeah. My mom's asked a question about the rock textures.
Awesome.
Hello. Oh, hi, guys. Uh Thank you so much for your time.
Uh My question really is about,
I'm finding work as an artist in the industry right now.
It's no secret that, uh,
we're in a bit of a lull as an industry and I just wanted your guys' opinions, you know,
from a more art standpoint about what the landscape might look like in six months.
Like, are all these senior developers gonna start building their own companies?
And then
what would be the best avenue for us to try and find work uh in that lens?
I wish we knew
like, honestly,
-- it's rough which, -- which way is the wind?
It's, it's hard to say.
Um What I can tell you is like, I think when we look at portfolios,
I'll let you guys jump in on this.
It's like I'm jumping on a grenade here. Um But I think like, I think the
just be
like, make great work.
Like when we look at work and then you guys told me if you're wrong, if I'm wrong,
but like,
I don't look at how long somebody's been making something. I look at their work
and then I look at their work again
and then maybe I'll see how long they've been doing it. So it's all about the work.
It's gonna rebound at some point. But I would say like, just
to stick with it,
try to weather the storm and get as good as you can
get and make yourself as valuable as you can to somebody.
I also also think coming to places like this and I mean,
it doesn't have to be G DC because I think it's
financially inaccessible, I'll say,
um
but there are lots of communities online like
talking with people putting yourself out there, like,
don't be shy to ask a bajillion questions of a bajillion people and
obviously, like, read the room if somebody's like, not vibing with that, but
like talking with people and making friends.
I know like this term like networking is like, ew and networking. That's a sm
word to use.
But I mean,
I feel like I owe a lot of my career and
the opportunities I've had to come in here and effectively,
you know, trying to make friends
and
you work with people 8, 10 hours a day,
you wanna work with people you like.
And so if you meet somebody and you get good vibes from them, he's like, well,
what is your portfolio like?
Let's check it. I'd lo I'd love to, to see that.
And so, uh you know, the fact that you're here and then talking to us now it's a,
it's a good start.
Awesome.
I'll give an unpopular answer to if you're, if you're looking for work and you're,
you're new,
but at the top of your resume will relocate.
I'm serious.
Like it will get a door open for you especially that'll,
it'll compensate for your inexperience.
Um and it might just open a door for you. So,
you know,
I'm not sure, I'm not sure how popular that opinion is here, but
I'm telling you as a guy who owns a business, I would, I would do that.
Great. Thanks so much, guys. Appreciate it.
Hi. Thank you all.
Uh my question is like for the new grads you hired, do you have any personal stories,
like how you know them
and do you know them by personal connection or it's
like by internal recommendation or just like on campus recruitment?
Because I guess it's like for students in school,
like how we can effectively effectively prepare ourselves for like networking
instead of just like a blind application to all the companies,
-- just like some personal stories, I -- guess. So.
I think Lana said it really well is like go to events like this or even local things,
reach out to folks online.
I have people do that often with me
the thing to keep in mind and networking.
She's right. It sounds kind of icky.
You
know,
it isn't transactional though and you need to
look at relationship building as not transactional.
What is this person going to get from me? That's not the outcome.
I have people that I've talked to for 20 years,
never met them,
but I've talked to them online and they've given me advice over the years
and I've never asked anything from them. I've never expected anything from them.
I just like their work. I wanted their opinion.
The other thing is when you do reach out, hey, you know,
um I'd love to get your opinion on this.
Like, your work. Like, what you're doing,
could you give me your opinion on my work if someone takes,
if a professional takes their time to
do a pain over or even just some verbal feedback that they're writing out,
take the feedback, incorporate it. Don't rush, do it right.
And then send it back to them.
I cannot tell you how many times I have someone reach out for that.
I take time, you know, during lunch or whatever.
And I'm, I, I'm sitting there and I'm, I write that out.
I send it back, never hear from them again.
That follow through is super important.
I think professionals that have really good follow through is great to see
because what happens is, oh, hey, we have an internship position and we have a,
you know, an associate level position.
Uh
Does anyone know anybody?
Oh, you know, I know this one person, they've been talking to me for a year and a half,
they, they take feedback.
Well, they incorporate it. Um So, you know, be genuine, be yourself.
And uh you know,
relationships aren't transactional and then incorporate feedback.
-- Probably -- the only other thing I would add is
the blind, like the blind applications do work.
I got my internship from the a blind application.
And yeah, that was a ways ago but as a company that does does hire interns,
they're also blind uh applications.
Uh
You can still show who you are not just through your art,
don't undersell the quality of like a really good cover letter,
seeing a cover letter that shows up. That's like, hi. I would like job, please.
Thanks. It's like not good.
Making sure that your cover letter is a partner thing to your resume and not a long,
like an essay form.
Resume.
What else do you bring that can't be just written on a resume?
What are your personal skills skills, your soft skills? What games do you like?
There's a way to show who you are and I read cover letters and I wa I wa I wanna see you
and that's, that's how you get yourself out in a, in a blind application.
I can't agree more. I,
I used to hate writing cover letters. I thought, what's the point of this?
Just look at the resume, look at the portfolio.
But now on the other side, I was like,
I was so wrong because I do read every single cover letter and that is,
it goes a long way for me.
I'd also say, you know, there's avenues like uh some companies do contests.
Uh
uh
We actually just announced our winners today for
our World of Warcraft uh student art contest.
I know if Josh and Fred are here but uh congratulations guys.
Um but that the all those work,
uh every applicant does get looked at by a whole group of leads on the team,
uh art directors, et cetera, et cetera.
So we do look at those things. So look for those kind of avenues.
I know a lot of companies will do things like that
and I think that's a good way to get on their,
their map.
Thank you so much.
One of those things where you just never know who you're gonna meet.
So you could be standing there getting a coffee and like,
start chatting to somebody and they go, oh, yeah, we need some character work done.
You just, you just never know.
Um, hi, everybody. Thank you so much. It's been a great talk so far.
Uh My question was just,
I was curious if you had any advice for people who are specializing
because it seems like entry level positions are already so extremely competitive.
So I was curious if you had any advice on how to stand out amongst already
like specializing people and just is it just
like putting in more hours than anybody else or
just give you any advice or how to maybe stand out?
I think the comment earlier about like making sure your portfolio
uh is something.
Uh It's, I've actually never heard somebody give that no before, but about
you're making something
that would so obviously like it's a no brainer that you
could do what we need you to do in your portfolio.
So like if I, when I was a a student, I was maybe like, oh, I wanna work at ILM.
What does ILM make? Ok, Star Wars at the time.
Not so much but like transformers,
I'm gonna do a big characters hitting each other fighting contact, breaking trees.
Like
they'd be like, oh, this person can animate a robot running through the forest.
Like that's, it was like a no brainer.
It wasn't exactly fan or it wasn't exactly those things. It's just
making it.
So it, it clearly would be a seamless transition to,
to take what you put and put it in the game.
But not exactly the number of times when I
was working at Blizzard on here's the storm,
I'd be like here's Sylvanus and I'm like, yeah, but your Sylvanus was bad
and that's not like
I'm not trying to be insulting. It's just, it's too, it's too on the nose. I wanna
see what you can bring,
not just what we already created.
So, thank you so much.
Go ahead.
-- Hi. Thank you so much -- for being here. Um I'm
Katie. I'm a 3d environment artist.
I was wondering what is your opinion on
dioramas and vertical slices in your portfolio?
Love him.
Yeah, it's great. Um Little bit of everything, but it's really cool.
Uh I don't know how you can like sometimes I'll see entry level portfolios.
It's like it's a whole city
and you know, have you made a door? Have you made a facade of a building?
Um I would rather have a little bit of awesome than a lot of me.
So, yeah, I, I think it's great home
and focus
your pieces
to, to go on from that. Is that whole thing about storytelling.
It's easier to tell a story in a small little section than a massive world.
OK.
Thank you so much.
Good.
Hey, guys. So
right now I'm working on a project that
incorporates a bunch of different like specialties.
Um I was wondering if like,
say I'm done with that project and I really like one aspect of it.
So right now it's environment design, character animation,
like just a few different things that I've liked doing
once I'm finished with that project, is it something that I should just
see? Like, hey, I like environment only. Should I just
expand that skill set and then still include what my project was on my portfolio.
I think it depends on what job you're looking for.
Like I think it's, it, it's more work, it's, you know, you have to,
to tune a portfolio for different jobs, but it really does help a lot.
So if you
were going for an environment, you know, like
make that the focus and then have it be, you know, other things be supplementary
and then you could almost take all of the same work
and then do a different version of the portfolio where the,
the, you know, proportions have shifted and it's
more focused on something else and you could show this is supporting.
So I think it depends on what you're applying for
and the quality of all those things like
you got you,
I want you to be really real with yourself and really self aware
is the quality of all the pieces of everything you created portfolio worthy.
Will you get a job for any one of those disciplines individually?
And if not don't show it all?
Perfect. Thank you.
Good.
Oh, sorry. Hi. My name is Raw.
I'm a 3d artist and environment artist.
Um My question I guess is
how can I like as somebody who is about to enter the industry,
how can I like mold my skills for each portfolio? Like,
do I have to have a bazillion portfolios lined
up per each job specializing in specific things?
Because I kind of live like
weapon creating and
all forms of like asset creation.
Um But I also like making foliation and things like,
right? Is very different from them. Blizzard. Um
How would I like
have a portfolio specific for you versus you
and on like what art station,
my own website?
Um I would say that that whole thing depending what,
what type of job you're you're going for.
If you're going for a weapon artist job,
there's no point putting characters in it for example.
And it's even something that we do. I mean, we're an outsourcing studio.
It's if we know that we're applying for a uh a client that does stylize,
there's no point us putting realistic stuff in there because it's not,
it's not what they're looking for.
So just tailoring it to the company and position that you're that you're aiming for?
Hello. Thank you so much for coming today.
Um My question is actually pretty similar for formatting portfolios.
Uh So for people that are having many different interests, you guys emphasize,
like it's really important to focus and like maybe
put the interest Sprinkle it in the side.
And I was wondering if you have one,
for example, website portfolio,
would it be worth it to just make different portfolios for the
different disciplines that you're interested in
or just formatting it by discipline
to like guide the recruiter that's gonna look at your work?
-- Yeah, -- I mean, be specific but also like, you know,
realize that you don't have the time to do, you know,
uh the quality level portfolios,
you're gonna have to for all of the different disciplines.
So I would say like, really f
uh like focus, what do you like doing, what do you enjoy doing and focus on that first?
And then you can kind of branch out later, you know, and, and so I think you can do that,
I've hired people as environment artists and then they really love characters
and they transition over time into doing characters.
Um say, hey,
I did this on the weekend and they'll
show the character team and they'll get feedback and
you can kind of do that over time.
But I, I think having multiple portfolios, realistic stylized vehicles,
weapons animation effects,
it's so much stuff and each of those disciplines now is so specific.
So I would just say,
you know,
be specific
but uh formatting wise like art station, as long as the link that you send,
the recruiter goes to the thing that matters the most for that job,
send that if you have a personal website and your reel is like right on that page.
But then you have like little headings that's like weapons, character, whatever.
If I got time and your stuff's good, I'll click through.
Um uh
But just don't send to a page that's just like a long list of stuff.
Thank you so much.
I was gonna say that's a really, really good point. Um I just wanna clarify on that.
Um Don't ever send a Google Drive link. No, I ain't clicking on that. No.
Thank you so much. Really good feedback.
Hi. Thanks so much for your time. Uh I'm Amanda and I'm a material artist.
Um So as I heard
you say, and other uh specialists say
uh it is less likely that you will find your first job
doing exactly what you wanna do.
Like me, my, my case, material art. Um
So
uh I
heard people giving advice, like take some time sometimes even a year
to make your portfolio better.
Me as an international student, I only have three months to find a job
otherwise I have to leave the country.
So, um in that case, I guess my question is gonna split in two
in the case of making my portfolio specialized. Um
what is like,
what are some things that a portfolio would
have that would get them like higher immediately?
And the other question would be
um how do I make my portfolio attractive to the tangent industries?
In case of me getting a job that is not exactly
in material art.
I talk a lot so people just interrupt me if you want me to stop talking.
Uh
I think that there's,
there's no silver bullet even if your your demo
real or your uh portfolio is like perfect.
Somebody could
like I my first job they told me at the end of my internship,
my boss said we were not gonna hire you,
but I made an embarrassing joke to the other candidate.
So we hired you instead,
you never know
why you're not gonna get your portfolio.
So there's nothing,
it could be a perfect thing and then somebody else
messes up and then you take the hit for it.
You will never know.
So there's not security there
but cast a wide net.
Like I used to apply for three jobs every day for six months
or something like that and I got rejected from all of them.
So
uh but don't just set your eye on AAA like especially I was
international as well and I felt the stress of that looming visa.
I worked out like the tiniest little local publishing house and that still counted.
So look for anything local that will get you through,
that's even somewhat tangent to, to your art form.
And then once you have that job security and that visa security,
then you can
work to where you get where you wanna be.
-- Yeah, -- it comes down to preparation, timing
and luck and, you know, some of those factors are outside of your control.
You can only control really the preparation
and then timing is just, you know, pay attention to the job sites, see when the jobs,
when the jobs are posted.
Um You know, those sort of things.
Uh Nowadays, again, you can usually find folks that are doing what you want to do.
So you have a good kind of barometer or bar for what,
what that uh portfolio should look like.
I was gonna say as well. Don't underestimate the power of the collaboration.
Like there's like environment artists here, there's material artists here,
rigors, animators, you know,
work together like and make a kick ass piece together because
that's what you're going to be doing in the industry.
It's not just one person doing it or it's a, it's a collaboration thing.
And if you can show that you can collaborate with people that's,
that's going to help.
Thank you so much.
Hi.
Um So I'm a concept artist and something that
I hear a lot trying to break into the industry
is I've reached out to a lot of other concept
artists that are juniors at various studios and stuff.
And I've gotten a wide mix of people saying go to have
your concept art portfolio as a generalist or people that say it's OK
be like, I just wanna do environment concepts
and it seems like so far from talking about specialization and stuff
you guys are would be fans of being like go
into environment concept art don't just include a mixture or
maybe include an environment piece that could also show my
creature design within that environment or something like that.
The, the funny thing is like with video game, with game art in general,
it's my answer is always, well, it depends,
there's always an outlier where like, you know,
you could have a generalist concept art portfolio
and just be in the right place at the right time and
get your portfolio seen at the exact right time by the right person
and it could line up um
you know, or you could have a very specialized portfolio where it's specifically,
you know, fantasy weapons and you,
you have nothing but fantasy weapons and that's a position that you apply for.
So it's really hard to give an uh an answer that's gonna apply all over the place.
Um I think the specialization gives you a narrow focus to get, you know,
really skilled in one area instead of, you know, kind of even across the board.
It lets it lets your skill set really focus in one area.
Thank you.
How's it going? Uh My name is Angel Padilla and I'm a 3d character artist.
So I have a question for, I believe both of you. Actually, both of you kind of
because you said something similar about you just want to
see how cool it looks rather than how good the,
the overall topology. I guess the topology is important.
But
um my question is a majority of the time I'll skip the steps
to make something look cool because it can be very tedious and,
and making a character takes like a month if you're,
if you're trying to make a good one.
So I'll like
Z re
mesh, it automatic UV. It just
try to make it look like super cool rather than following the process.
Would that be important to show that? You know, it,
rather than just trying to make it look cool.
Um For me, I,
it is,
for me it's different.
I, I do like to see like topology and UVS and things like that because
it helps me when I'm hiring somebody to work out. Ok.
What do I, what do I need to train that person upon?
And I think
once you get further
city industry, like once you're a senior, once you become a lead or, you know,
you kind of, and you've got a few titles under your belt,
it's kind of like you don't really have to show that stuff.
We, we hope that, you know, that stuff by now because you're in those positions.
But when you're first starting off, it is
good to show that stuff.
Yes,
you can still do the kick ass stuff where we
don't really care about topology and stuff like that.
But
especially if you're
applying for, for games, which at
G DC. So
I'm guessing a majority of people are,
we do want to see that you can work within a limitation
that you do understand the fundamentals of creating models with that.
I get the answer like it depends.
Um At the end of the day, it's got to be awesome and cool and uh
you gotta start there. Uh The technical side of things can always be taught.
I, I found that's much easier to teach.
It's really hard to teach someone how to make something awesome.
Um It's much easier to teach them which buttons to press or the process to follow.
So um yeah,
it
-- looks like -- we're at time. Hold on before you all leave one second.
Um We'll talk to you guys outside for a minute
too if you guys want to have other questions.
Um But while we're here for prize time,
uh
thanks for coming
our friends at Sense Labs, uh donated
a tablet.
So if you look under your chairs and see if you have a
Yeah, look and see if you've got a business card stuck under there.
-- Yeah, -- you got it.
I don't have it. We are.
Yeah.
Thank you guys for all coming.
Uh Please be sure to fill out your forms and if you want to join us later
uh for portfolio view, please do it.
Thank you all.