[Music] We got the mic on. All right, cool. Good
We got the mic on. All right, cool. Good afternoon. How's everybody doing?
afternoon. How's everybody doing? Couple
Couple uh quick uh announcements GDC wanted me
uh quick uh announcements GDC wanted me to make. Um if everybody could turn off
to make. Um if everybody could turn off their cell phones so they don't beep
their cell phones so they don't beep during the presentation and so there's
during the presentation and so there's not a symphony after the presentation of
not a symphony after the presentation of emails. Um the
emails. Um the uh evaluation forms will be emailed out
uh evaluation forms will be emailed out after uh the session. So, if you guys
after uh the session. So, if you guys could all fill those out, uh GDC wants
could all fill those out, uh GDC wants to know which sessions were good. I'd
to know which sessions were good. I'd also, you know, like some feedback in
also, you know, like some feedback in terms of if you guys enjoyed the
terms of if you guys enjoyed the presentation. So, if you guys could fill
presentation. So, if you guys could fill those out, that'd be awesome as well.
those out, that'd be awesome as well. So, with that, let's get started. This
So, with that, let's get started. This is League of Legends scaling to millions
is League of Legends scaling to millions of summoners.
of summoners. A little bit about me. My name is Scott
A little bit about me. My name is Scott Dilap. I'm a scalability architect at
Dilap. I'm a scalability architect at Riot. I've been with Riot since uh 2008.
Riot. I've been with Riot since uh 2008. Uh how many people played uh League of
Uh how many people played uh League of Legends in beta?
Legends in beta? We got a good mix of people. Looks like
We got a good mix of people. Looks like about 5 10%. So in League of Legends
about 5 10%. So in League of Legends time, I was at Riot about a year before
time, I was at Riot about a year before beta to kind of put some things in
beta to kind of put some things in perspective. Um,
perspective. Um, and then
and then uh you've got my uh Twitter, my Twitter
uh you've got my uh Twitter, my Twitter handle and my email uh there on the
handle and my email uh there on the slides if anybody wants to catch up
slides if anybody wants to catch up after the presentation. I'd be more than
after the presentation. I'd be more than happy to talk to people. So just look me
happy to talk to people. So just look me up. Little bit about Riot. So,
up. Little bit about Riot. So, Riot was founded in September of 2006 by
Riot was founded in September of 2006 by Brandon Beck and Mark Merrill. Uh, back
Brandon Beck and Mark Merrill. Uh, back when I joined Riot about four years ago.
when I joined Riot about four years ago. I think we had about 25 or 30 employees.
I think we had about 25 or 30 employees. Uh, today we've got a little bit north
Uh, today we've got a little bit north of 500 with offices, the main office is
of 500 with offices, the main office is in Santa Monica, California. We've got
in Santa Monica, California. We've got an engineering office in
an engineering office in uh in St. Louis, Missouri. And then
uh in St. Louis, Missouri. And then we've got a uh player support and
we've got a uh player support and community office in Dublin and another
community office in Dublin and another one in Soul, South Korea.
So our mission at Riot, every company's got to have a mission. You've got to
got to have a mission. You've got to have some sort of core theme that you're
have some sort of core theme that you're going to optimize on. Um you know, if
going to optimize on. Um you know, if you've got five things, which one do you
you've got five things, which one do you pick? And actually, I'm going to restart
pick? And actually, I'm going to restart this because it's auto doing timings on
this because it's auto doing timings on me,
me, which could be a bad thing.
Let's see if this will work. So, our mission at Riot is very simple.
So, our mission at Riot is very simple. It's to be the most player focused
It's to be the most player focused gaming company in the world. So, what
gaming company in the world. So, what does that mean? Well, everything that we
does that mean? Well, everything that we do at Riot is viewed through the lens of
do at Riot is viewed through the lens of what do you do? What do we do uh for the
what do you do? What do we do uh for the players? So, whether that's an
players? So, whether that's an engineering decision, whether that's,
engineering decision, whether that's, you know, feedback from the forms,
you know, feedback from the forms, taking that into account. Now, that
taking that into account. Now, that doesn't necessarily mean that, you know,
doesn't necessarily mean that, you know, every new skin idea or something like
every new skin idea or something like that is instantly uh, you know, released
that is instantly uh, you know, released every two weeks right after it pops up
every two weeks right after it pops up on the forms, but we we take all that
on the forms, but we we take all that into account. I mean, we really want to
into account. I mean, we really want to focus on what's the best the best player
focus on what's the best the best player experience for everything that we do.
experience for everything that we do. So, League of Legends, how many people
So, League of Legends, how many people played League of Legends?
played League of Legends? Most everybody on it. So, I don't need
Most everybody on it. So, I don't need to go into everything about League of
to go into everything about League of Legends.
Legends. This thing keeps like auto moving. It's
This thing keeps like auto moving. It's possessed.
possessed. two seconds.
two seconds. Let me try it the other way. I'm gonna
Let me try it the other way. I'm gonna do it in rehearsal mode
do it in rehearsal mode and then that should reset the uh
and then that should reset the uh slides for some reason.
All right, sorry about that. So, um this is a scale talk. So, it's useful in a
is a scale talk. So, it's useful in a scale talk to have uh some perspective
scale talk to have uh some perspective on what we're talking about in terms of
on what we're talking about in terms of scale. So, we released some numbers in
scale. So, we released some numbers in July of last year and basically covered
July of last year and basically covered that we had 15 million registered users.
that we had 15 million registered users. Uh we had about 4 million uh players a
Uh we had about 4 million uh players a month and a peak CCU of about 500,000 uh
month and a peak CCU of about 500,000 uh players a day when we hit peak. Now, if
players a day when we hit peak. Now, if we compare that to November, going
we compare that to November, going forward just a little bit, uh we went to
forward just a little bit, uh we went to 32 million registered accounts, uh 4.2 2
32 million registered accounts, uh 4.2 2 million daily players and 1.3 million uh
million daily players and 1.3 million uh peak concurrent users. So little bit of
peak concurrent users. So little bit of a difference. Now if any of you went to
a difference. Now if any of you went to how many of you went to Travis George's
how many of you went to Travis George's talk this morning on Dominion,
talk this morning on Dominion, uh one of the phrases that Travis used
uh one of the phrases that Travis used was riot scale. U one of the things
was riot scale. U one of the things that's interesting about the things we
that's interesting about the things we do at Riot Games is those are the
do at Riot Games is those are the numbers that you have to hit when
numbers that you have to hit when something goes out the door. And not
something goes out the door. And not only do you have to hit those numbers,
only do you have to hit those numbers, but you have to plan in advance. Case in
but you have to plan in advance. Case in point, a feature that went out in July
point, a feature that went out in July now needs to be able to handle a much
now needs to be able to handle a much larger amount of users in November, for
larger amount of users in November, for instance. So for, you know, certain
instance. So for, you know, certain types of features, you know, Dominion,
types of features, you know, Dominion, um, I think it was about 12 months worth
um, I think it was about 12 months worth of development. So obviously, we can't
of development. So obviously, we can't go rework Dominion between July and
go rework Dominion between July and November to hit scale targets. So we
November to hit scale targets. So we have to be cognizant of that as we're
have to be cognizant of that as we're developing new features to kind of have
developing new features to kind of have runway going forward.
Now you you take the scale and you take the mission of being the most player uh
the mission of being the most player uh player focused gaming company in the
player focused gaming company in the world and then you start to look at that
world and then you start to look at that in terms of challenges and the big thing
in terms of challenges and the big thing is there's lots of ways that we can
is there's lots of ways that we can solve problems but they don't always
solve problems but they don't always make sense from a player perspective.
make sense from a player perspective. So social elements for instance they
So social elements for instance they have to be accessible from everybody.
have to be accessible from everybody. doesn't make sense if five of you can
doesn't make sense if five of you can chat with five more people but you can't
chat with five more people but you can't chat with everybody in PvP Net for
chat with everybody in PvP Net for instance. Um there's also crafting just
instance. Um there's also crafting just an enjoyable player experience. So one
an enjoyable player experience. So one of the things we like to get right is
of the things we like to get right is when we release a feature we like for
when we release a feature we like for everybody to be able to get their hands
everybody to be able to get their hands on it. Um, how many people have ever
on it. Um, how many people have ever gotten a a Christmas gift and you pick
gotten a a Christmas gift and you pick the box up and it kind of feels funny
the box up and it kind of feels funny and you open it up and there's some uh
and you open it up and there's some uh dot there's some inkjet printer uh
dot there's some inkjet printer uh printed out thing from Amazon that says
printed out thing from Amazon that says you will receive this in two weeks. Your
you will receive this in two weeks. Your mom, you know, didn't order it on time
mom, you know, didn't order it on time or something. So, you got this stock
or something. So, you got this stock gap. Well, how many people like that? It
gap. Well, how many people like that? It sucks. So, it's the same thing, you
sucks. So, it's the same thing, you know, with gaming. You don't want I
know, with gaming. You don't want I mean, you don't want to have this
mean, you don't want to have this feature out and like, oh, well, only a
feature out and like, oh, well, only a thousand people can play it right now or
thousand people can play it right now or something. That's not what you want to
something. That's not what you want to do. And ju, you know, just like the
do. And ju, you know, just like the Christmas gift, you'd almost wish that
Christmas gift, you'd almost wish that you didn't get the Christmas gift
you didn't get the Christmas gift because now you just got to stare at
because now you just got to stare at this piece of paper and you're like,
this piece of paper and you're like, "This isn't fun." Well, I mean, it's the
"This isn't fun." Well, I mean, it's the same thing when we release features. I
same thing when we release features. I mean, if everyone can't play them, it's
mean, if everyone can't play them, it's just not fun. I mean, it it actually
just not fun. I mean, it it actually does the inverse. It creates negative,
does the inverse. It creates negative, you know, will of the player base and
you know, will of the player base and people just aren't enjoying what they're
people just aren't enjoying what they're doing. So, when something goes out the
doing. So, when something goes out the door, we like to make sure that
door, we like to make sure that everybody can get it. uh you know the
everybody can get it. uh you know the more recent example for instance uh was
more recent example for instance uh was ranked teams and then back before that
ranked teams and then back before that um with Dominion Dominion was in private
um with Dominion Dominion was in private was in a limited beta form for a couple
was in a limited beta form for a couple days and then flash forward to Monday
days and then flash forward to Monday and here's Dominion and everybody can go
and here's Dominion and everybody can go play it. So how do we create a system
play it. So how do we create a system that balances this? We've got scale that
that balances this? We've got scale that continues to increase but yet we want to
continues to increase but yet we want to deliver, you know, the highest quality
deliver, you know, the highest quality all at the same time to the players.
all at the same time to the players. So that's what we're going to talk about
So that's what we're going to talk about today. Essentially what we what I've
today. Essentially what we what I've tried to do is over the last four years
tried to do is over the last four years we develop a number of core strategies
we develop a number of core strategies that have kind of evolved that we use to
that have kind of evolved that we use to align uh with player value and being
align uh with player value and being able to run League of Legends as an
able to run League of Legends as an operational service. And I've tried to
operational service. And I've tried to take the core things that we do and
take the core things that we do and really get down to the essence of them.
really get down to the essence of them. So it's not just me talking about well
So it's not just me talking about well yeah we did this cool thing. We wrote
yeah we did this cool thing. We wrote these lines of code and here we go. You
these lines of code and here we go. You guys can't do anything with that. So,
guys can't do anything with that. So, we're going to start with the core items
we're going to start with the core items and then we're going to work back and
and then we're going to work back and add some add some color commentary of
add some add some color commentary of how that applies to League of Legends.
how that applies to League of Legends. But at the end of the day, whether
But at the end of the day, whether you've got a big project or a small
you've got a big project or a small project, if it's mobile or if it's, you
project, if it's mobile or if it's, you know, a PC game, all the things that
know, a PC game, all the things that we're talking about should apply. So,
we're talking about should apply. So, the first thing that we're going to talk
the first thing that we're going to talk about is we're going to talk about em
about is we're going to talk about em embracing Java and NoSQL. Although
embracing Java and NoSQL. Although really most of this is NoSQL, so if you
really most of this is NoSQL, so if you don't use Java, it's not a not a big
don't use Java, it's not a not a big deal. We're going to talk about how we
deal. We're going to talk about how we think simple is the best way to go
think simple is the best way to go followed up by coding a dynamic system
followed up by coding a dynamic system some scaling best practices and then
some scaling best practices and then finally monitoring everything.
finally monitoring everything. So embracing Java and NoSQL. So the
So embracing Java and NoSQL. So the first thing that problem that we have is
first thing that problem that we have is how do we develop a system rapidly but
how do we develop a system rapidly but at the same time plan for future
at the same time plan for future capacity needs just like we saw with
capacity needs just like we saw with those slides a second ago. July is here,
those slides a second ago. July is here, November is here.
November is here. Um, a little bit of context as we're
Um, a little bit of context as we're going through uh the session this
going through uh the session this afternoon. The backend platform systems
afternoon. The backend platform systems for League of Legends are are written in
for League of Legends are are written in a Java based stack. So, we use a lot of
a Java based stack. So, we use a lot of different technologies at Riot. Uh, you
different technologies at Riot. Uh, you know, we use Adobe Flex, we use PHP,
know, we use Adobe Flex, we use PHP, we've got a lot of C++ code, but we're
we've got a lot of C++ code, but we're going to kind of focus on this portion
going to kind of focus on this portion of the stack today that does a lot of
of the stack today that does a lot of the backend systems with matchmaking,
the backend systems with matchmaking, uh, game server allocation, things of
uh, game server allocation, things of that nature.
that nature. As far as what the stack looks like in a
As far as what the stack looks like in a little more detail, uh we use a kind of
little more detail, uh we use a kind of a mix of old and new elements. If you've
a mix of old and new elements. If you've done anything in the Java ecosystem,
done anything in the Java ecosystem, Spring and Tomcat are pretty uh common
Spring and Tomcat are pretty uh common things in that space. And then we use a
things in that space. And then we use a caching technology uh from Oracle called
caching technology uh from Oracle called Oracle Coherence. So before I dive into
Oracle Coherence. So before I dive into NoSQL, when we were developing League of
NoSQL, when we were developing League of Legends, well, I couldn't tell you that
Legends, well, I couldn't tell you that we would be where we're at today in
we would be where we're at today in terms of CCU or players, we did always
terms of CCU or players, we did always have an eye towards the future. And part
have an eye towards the future. And part of building something is not just
of building something is not just building it, it's being able to sustain
building it, it's being able to sustain it and grow it. So given that, you know,
it and grow it. So given that, you know, we wanted to be able to continue to
we wanted to be able to continue to develop faster and faster. So we use a
develop faster and faster. So we use a lot of open source. Uh you can do that
lot of open source. Uh you can do that with any language, whether it's in
with any language, whether it's in Python or in Ruby. A big thing is
Python or in Ruby. A big thing is tooling. Um technologies almost always
tooling. Um technologies almost always fail my five minute test because of
fail my five minute test because of tooling. you pull something up in an IDE
tooling. you pull something up in an IDE or some, you know, editor that's
or some, you know, editor that's supposed to support a language and then
supposed to support a language and then it doesn't work or you try to run the
it doesn't work or you try to run the debugger or you try to run a profiler.
debugger or you try to run a profiler. So, you know, there are languages that
So, you know, there are languages that are more concise, but um that's not the
are more concise, but um that's not the entire part of the delivery pipeline.
entire part of the delivery pipeline. You have to be able to debug things. You
You have to be able to debug things. You have to be able to performance tune. And
have to be able to performance tune. And if you don't have the right tools to be
if you don't have the right tools to be able to do that, then you run into
able to do that, then you run into problems. So, we always try to take both
problems. So, we always try to take both tools and language into account when
tools and language into account when we're delivering features at Riot.
we're delivering features at Riot. We also looked at the fact that we had a
We also looked at the fact that we had a large pool of developers to pull from.
large pool of developers to pull from. There are a lot of buzzword ccentric
There are a lot of buzzword ccentric technologies right now that are awesome
technologies right now that are awesome technologies, but you can't hire anybody
technologies, but you can't hire anybody to do anything with them. You'll find
to do anything with them. You'll find one guy and the other two guys got a job
one guy and the other two guys got a job somewhere else. So that's also a
somewhere else. So that's also a problem. So one of the things we liked
problem. So one of the things we liked about Java is there's a a large talent
about Java is there's a a large talent pool of really awesome developers that
pool of really awesome developers that we could work with to continue to raise
we could work with to continue to raise the bar of our engineering teams.
As I mentioned earlier, we use a product from Oracle called Oracle Coherence, but
from Oracle called Oracle Coherence, but I like to always explain it. If you took
I like to always explain it. If you took the name off of it and threw the source
the name off of it and threw the source code up on GitHub, it would just be
code up on GitHub, it would just be classified as a NoSQL.
classified as a NoSQL. Oh, PowerPoint says no. That's good.
I blame the projector.
Here.
Let me see. I think I can just skip ahead.
There we go. Okay. Try this again. So if you put it up on GitHub, uh it would
you put it up on GitHub, uh it would just be classified as a NoSQL
just be classified as a NoSQL technology. The other thing is, uh we
technology. The other thing is, uh we were you know when we started
were you know when we started development of League of Legends 4 years
development of League of Legends 4 years ago, the you know the NoSQL space was
ago, the you know the NoSQL space was different than it is today. So we we do
different than it is today. So we we do use different NoSQL technologies at Riot
use different NoSQL technologies at Riot today. We use uh Reddus for some things,
today. We use uh Reddus for some things, MongoDB, but back when we were making
MongoDB, but back when we were making decisions four years ago to to start
decisions four years ago to to start with, this was one of the more
with, this was one of the more established choices. Uh coherence is
established choices. Uh coherence is used a lot in the financial space. So
used a lot in the financial space. So there's a there's a lot of large
there's a there's a lot of large clusters um that do a lot of high
clusters um that do a lot of high performance computing behind it.
performance computing behind it. So the big things that coherence gives
So the big things that coherence gives us and you get these with a lot of NoSQL
us and you get these with a lot of NoSQL technologies. You got horizontal scaling
technologies. You got horizontal scaling um that's helped us simplify absorbing
um that's helped us simplify absorbing CCU growth over time. So you can add
CCU growth over time. So you can add boxes, the data partitions. So that that
boxes, the data partitions. So that that that's a pretty good combination. The
that's a pretty good combination. The other thing that you get from a lot of
other thing that you get from a lot of NoSQL technologies, and we talk a little
NoSQL technologies, and we talk a little bit more about this later in the
bit more about this later in the presentation, it's not just about the
presentation, it's not just about the tech. A lot of them have patterns, the
tech. A lot of them have patterns, the way you interact with them. And given
way you interact with them. And given those patterns, the real power is what
those patterns, the real power is what they're, you know, enforcing with those
they're, you know, enforcing with those patterns that then translates out and
patterns that then translates out and scale and other benefits later. So, and
scale and other benefits later. So, and I started this with the presentation
I started this with the presentation view again
view again one more time. Sorry about that guys.
one more time. Sorry about that guys. It is possessed today.
Okay. So as far as how we use coherence, one way that people use caching
one way that people use caching technologies, how many people use mim
technologies, how many people use mim cache? So a lot of times with mimcache
cache? So a lot of times with mimcache we'll do a cache to the side pattern
we'll do a cache to the side pattern where you have some sort of data access
where you have some sort of data access tier and then you load data from a
tier and then you load data from a database and then we turn around and uh
database and then we turn around and uh put the data in the cache to then read
put the data in the cache to then read from memory and normally it's some sort
from memory and normally it's some sort of distributed memory uh because you
of distributed memory uh because you have too much data or something. It's
have too much data or something. It's not going to fit on local machine. Well
not going to fit on local machine. Well in our case we actually take the cache
in our case we actually take the cache and pull it over here and it's actually
and pull it over here and it's actually the first level that the uh DAO talks
the first level that the uh DAO talks to. In a lot of cases I tell the
to. In a lot of cases I tell the engineers just forget that there's a
engineers just forget that there's a database even back there. So the benefit
database even back there. So the benefit of that is it's much more direct on one
of that is it's much more direct on one at one level but then we're also taking
at one level but then we're also taking advantage of all the different
advantage of all the different technologies that are in the NoSQL
technologies that are in the NoSQL and/caching layer itself. Uh a lot of
and/caching layer itself. Uh a lot of times to get real performant things
times to get real performant things you're going to have to get down into
you're going to have to get down into the technology. the idea of we're going
the technology. the idea of we're going to do everything agnostic starts to kind
to do everything agnostic starts to kind of break down at some point because you
of break down at some point because you need something that you're just not
need something that you're just not going to get in an agnostic sense just
going to get in an agnostic sense just like if you've written SQL and then you
like if you've written SQL and then you need to get down to some stored
need to get down to some stored procedure technology in Postgress or my
procedure technology in Postgress or my SQL you can't write it in plain vanilla
SQL you can't write it in plain vanilla a lot of times so we get a lot of power
a lot of times so we get a lot of power from doing that though the biggest thing
from doing that though the biggest thing um is is grid computing uh I can write
um is is grid computing uh I can write one line of code and run a query or run
one line of code and run a query or run a mutation operation
a mutation operation and it will turn around and use 200
and it will turn around and use 200 cores seamlessly and come back with some
cores seamlessly and come back with some sort of result. I don't have to worry
sort of result. I don't have to worry about well will it not come back? What
about well will it not come back? What if it gets duplicate um data coming
if it gets duplicate um data coming back? It's just one line of code and
back? It's just one line of code and that's it. That's a really cool thing
that's it. That's a really cool thing because now engineers at Riot we don't
because now engineers at Riot we don't have to focus on well how do I deal with
have to focus on well how do I deal with all the plumbing of 200 cores. I just
all the plumbing of 200 cores. I just use them so I can go back and do what I
use them so I can go back and do what I want to do which is focus on player
want to do which is focus on player value. We also get things as I mentioned
value. We also get things as I mentioned earlier like transparent partitioning.
earlier like transparent partitioning. So we can add machines to the cluster
So we can add machines to the cluster and our scale pretty much goes out
and our scale pretty much goes out linearly in a very predictable fashion.
So moving a little bit away from the setup now uh the next thing is simple is
setup now uh the next thing is simple is best. So how do we develop features
best. So how do we develop features quickly but at the same time don't drown
quickly but at the same time don't drown ourselves in bugs and technical debt.
ourselves in bugs and technical debt. So a modern CPU will do more than 3
So a modern CPU will do more than 3 billion instructions. That's a lot. uh
billion instructions. That's a lot. uh you can throw away and mess around with
you can throw away and mess around with 2.5 billion instructions and still have
2.5 billion instructions and still have 500 million instructions to do something
500 million instructions to do something with. Uh most code I've seen 500 million
with. Uh most code I've seen 500 million instructions is plenty for most types of
instructions is plenty for most types of things that you're doing. The other
things that you're doing. The other thing is technology these days is fast.
thing is technology these days is fast. I'm not saying you don't need to pay
I'm not saying you don't need to pay attention to it and you know make smart
attention to it and you know make smart decisions but languages are fast, memory
decisions but languages are fast, memory is fast, network's fast. uh used to when
is fast, network's fast. uh used to when I was fresh out of college, you'd have
I was fresh out of college, you'd have all these debates about this language is
all these debates about this language is fast, this language is slow, this is
fast, this language is slow, this is interpreted, you can never use it for
interpreted, you can never use it for that. I don't hear a lot of that these
that. I don't hear a lot of that these days. You know, if you read hacker news,
days. You know, if you read hacker news, most of the stuff is not about a
most of the stuff is not about a language being fast or slow. I mean,
language being fast or slow. I mean, there's all kinds of things with, you
there's all kinds of things with, you know, uh JavaScript with no.js out there
know, uh JavaScript with no.js out there and Python and all kinds of new
and Python and all kinds of new languages. So, it's really not so much
languages. So, it's really not so much about, you know, raw language speed
about, you know, raw language speed anymore. The other thing is complexity
anymore. The other thing is complexity at the end of the day is the enemy of
at the end of the day is the enemy of quality. um the more complex things are
quality. um the more complex things are I can give you a laundry list of reasons
I can give you a laundry list of reasons why that's a problem
why that's a problem uh you know long methods with lots of
uh you know long methods with lots of code in them if you try to transition it
code in them if you try to transition it to a new engineer you know that that
to a new engineer you know that that handoff has problems you know there's
handoff has problems you know there's unforeseen edge cases there's bugs that
unforeseen edge cases there's bugs that pop up if you want to reuse code between
pop up if you want to reuse code between this piece of a system over here and
this piece of a system over here and this piece of a system over there it
this piece of a system over there it doesn't quite fit right because it's too
doesn't quite fit right because it's too big so at the end of the day our big
big so at the end of the day our big thing is to not overdesign
thing is to not overdesign So let's let's dig into a little bit of
So let's let's dig into a little bit of that. So one of the theories that we use
that. So one of the theories that we use is this thing what we call rig the game.
is this thing what we call rig the game. So you can have some sort of operation
So you can have some sort of operation that you need to do multiple things at
that you need to do multiple things at the same time and you can do a lot of
the same time and you can do a lot of coordination but it's usually easier to
coordination but it's usually easier to kind of divide the inputs up in advance
kind of divide the inputs up in advance if you can kind of flip the problem
if you can kind of flip the problem inside out. So if we look at a
inside out. So if we look at a visualization of that,
visualization of that, you can have a bunch of threads and have
you can have a bunch of threads and have work and then have data that they share
work and then have data that they share and they can sit there and coordinate.
and they can sit there and coordinate. But as you can see, just looking at this
But as you can see, just looking at this picture, the picture doesn't even look
picture, the picture doesn't even look clean. You got all these lines. It kind
clean. You got all these lines. It kind of takes you a second to figure out
of takes you a second to figure out what's going on.
what's going on. On the flip side, you can take the data
On the flip side, you can take the data kind of nightly nicely split it up based
kind of nightly nicely split it up based on pairing it up with the work. It's a
on pairing it up with the work. It's a much cleaner picture. The other thing is
much cleaner picture. The other thing is the code behind this is much simpler.
the code behind this is much simpler. Once the code gets a chunk of data, it
Once the code gets a chunk of data, it does what it needs to do and that's it.
does what it needs to do and that's it. It doesn't have to worry about edge
It doesn't have to worry about edge cases, doesn't have to worry about dirty
cases, doesn't have to worry about dirty reads or anything else. It just goes
reads or anything else. It just goes about its business and then that pattern
about its business and then that pattern will pretty much stack out. So, a couple
will pretty much stack out. So, a couple examples of that in League of Legends,
examples of that in League of Legends, uh, right around season one, we went
uh, right around season one, we went through and reworked the game server
through and reworked the game server allocation algorithm. Um, and I'll talk
allocation algorithm. Um, and I'll talk more about that later as well. But one
more about that later as well. But one of the things that we did was we wrote
of the things that we did was we wrote it with the idea that it could partition
it with the idea that it could partition itself. And for the longest time in
itself. And for the longest time in production, we never turned it up more
production, we never turned it up more than one. There was just, you know, a
than one. There was just, you know, a level of one running back there. But
level of one running back there. But then when we got close to Dominion, if
then when we got close to Dominion, if you went to Travis's presentation, one
you went to Travis's presentation, one of the interesting characteristics of
of the interesting characteristics of Dominion was the fact that games are now
Dominion was the fact that games are now 20 minutes shorter for Dominion. So the
20 minutes shorter for Dominion. So the same quantity of players that used to
same quantity of players that used to play Summoner's Rift now play Dominion.
play Summoner's Rift now play Dominion. It's twice as many people going through
It's twice as many people going through the turn styles. So, uh, twice as many
the turn styles. So, uh, twice as many game starts, twice as many champ
game starts, twice as many champ selects, twice as many statistics being
selects, twice as many statistics being processed, twice as many games being
processed, twice as many games being allocated. So, when we were load testing
allocated. So, when we were load testing for Dominion, we went and cranked the
for Dominion, we went and cranked the knob up, so to speak, validated the
knob up, so to speak, validated the results, tweaked a couple little edge
results, tweaked a couple little edge cases for things. Um, you can run into
cases for things. Um, you can run into things like uh starvation with this
things like uh starvation with this model. I mean, you don't want to run out
model. I mean, you don't want to run out of game servers, for instance. So we
of game servers, for instance. So we added a little bit of work stealing. So
added a little bit of work stealing. So um you didn't have one pool that got
um you didn't have one pool that got full and the other one didn't. But all
full and the other one didn't. But all in all it was a very simple migration.
So the next thing I'm going to cover today is the concept of coding a dynamic
today is the concept of coding a dynamic system. And this is one of the key
system. And this is one of the key things that we've evolved to do at Riot
things that we've evolved to do at Riot over over the last uh several years. So
over over the last uh several years. So the big problem is how do we handle not
the big problem is how do we handle not only monthly change but uh as you guys
only monthly change but uh as you guys all know every two weeks we push out a
all know every two weeks we push out a champion and use a couple skins. So we
champion and use a couple skins. So we have bi-weekly change and then we also
have bi-weekly change and then we also have what I like to call hourly change.
have what I like to call hourly change. Change is not just when we decide that
Change is not just when we decide that we're going to have change. Change just
we're going to have change. Change just kind of happens. So I usually like to
kind of happens. So I usually like to use the analogy a single box or a
use the analogy a single box or a developer laptop or workstation is a
developer laptop or workstation is a very predictable beast. It's got a set
very predictable beast. It's got a set amount of memory. There's a set CPU on
amount of memory. There's a set CPU on it. You run your code. It runs kind of
it. You run your code. It runs kind of in a predictable amount of time and you
in a predictable amount of time and you know what you're going to get.
know what you're going to get. A large system, however, changes while
A large system, however, changes while it's running. Um, I like I usually say
it's running. Um, I like I usually say around the office. I mean, it's
around the office. I mean, it's basically organic. There's inputs and
basically organic. There's inputs and outputs and you see things ripple, but
outputs and you see things ripple, but at the same time, you may not exactly
at the same time, you may not exactly know, well, why does that ripple? I I
know, well, why does that ripple? I I see it and I kind of know, but again,
see it and I kind of know, but again, why is it doing that? There's all kinds
why is it doing that? There's all kinds of reasons for that. So, a couple
of reasons for that. So, a couple examples just to give you guys a few
examples just to give you guys a few that we've seen over the years. Uh, one
that we've seen over the years. Uh, one thing, I think it was two summers ago.
thing, I think it was two summers ago. Um, we had lots of player reports on the
Um, we had lots of player reports on the forums of issues in the game and we kind
forums of issues in the game and we kind of dug into our systems a little bit and
of dug into our systems a little bit and then it kind of went away. Well, then
then it kind of went away. Well, then late in the day we figured out this
late in the day we figured out this happened to be uh Europe. the uh there
happened to be uh Europe. the uh there was a I think a Champions League uh
was a I think a Champions League uh playoff going on and all the people in
playoff going on and all the people in Europe were streaming the soccer matches
Europe were streaming the soccer matches over the internet and the pipes were
over the internet and the pipes were just a little bit full. So we were
just a little bit full. So we were seeing a reflection essentially of the
seeing a reflection essentially of the of the internet infrastructure in Europe
of the internet infrastructure in Europe and it wasn't just us. All kinds of
and it wasn't just us. All kinds of other games are seeing it too. So that
other games are seeing it too. So that was something didn't have anything to do
was something didn't have anything to do with us doing a deploy yet we had an
with us doing a deploy yet we had an operational you know change that we had
operational you know change that we had to try to mitigate. Um, a little
to try to mitigate. Um, a little different example that I'll tell on
different example that I'll tell on myself is back when we were in real real
myself is back when we were in real real early beta. Um, of course we were a 25
early beta. Um, of course we were a 25 30 person company and our beta
30 person company and our beta environment was sharing a certain amount
environment was sharing a certain amount of infrastructure in data centers that
of infrastructure in data centers that our load test environment was sharing.
our load test environment was sharing. And I'm sitting in the office in in
And I'm sitting in the office in in Santa Monica. I got my headphones on.
Santa Monica. I got my headphones on. I'm pounding the heck out of the system
I'm pounding the heck out of the system trying to, you know, raise the scale on
trying to, you know, raise the scale on some stuff. And all of a sudden,
some stuff. And all of a sudden, everybody around me starts asking, "Why
everybody around me starts asking, "Why do we have lag in the system? What's
do we have lag in the system? What's going on here?" And the forums go crazy.
going on here?" And the forums go crazy. I'm like, "It's probably me." So, I
I'm like, "It's probably me." So, I clicked the little button, stopped the
clicked the little button, stopped the load test, and sure enough, everything
load test, and sure enough, everything went away. Well, turns out I had
went away. Well, turns out I had saturated a couple switches and a few
saturated a couple switches and a few other things sitting there in the office
other things sitting there in the office with my little uh botnet of load test
with my little uh botnet of load test harnesses. So, you know, that was
harnesses. So, you know, that was another example of something that just
another example of something that just kind of came out of the left field. But
kind of came out of the left field. But there's much more practical things, too.
there's much more practical things, too. I mean, you you get hardware failures.
I mean, you you get hardware failures. If you do the math on large systems, you
If you do the math on large systems, you know, a hard drive will die, you know,
know, a hard drive will die, you know, once about once a year on average. So,
once about once a year on average. So, if you have enough boxes, you're going
if you have enough boxes, you're going to get a hard drive that dies every day.
to get a hard drive that dies every day. So, the question is, when do we fix
So, the question is, when do we fix this? Uh, do we do it next release? Do
this? Uh, do we do it next release? Do we do we create a downtime? Well, if we
we do we create a downtime? Well, if we do it next release, what if it's a big
do it next release, what if it's a big problem? Again, player value. Another
problem? Again, player value. Another one would be, what if we do it during a
one would be, what if we do it during a downtime? Well, we can pick lighter down
downtime? Well, we can pick lighter down times, but that doesn't mean there's not
times, but that doesn't mean there's not people playing. Um, for instance, we
people playing. Um, for instance, we hired a new engineer the other day, and
hired a new engineer the other day, and we were talking and he's got a young
we were talking and he's got a young son, so he gets up at 5:00 in the
son, so he gets up at 5:00 in the morning and would play League of
morning and would play League of Legends. Uh, get a couple games in in
Legends. Uh, get a couple games in in the morning. Well, we might be doing
the morning. Well, we might be doing downtime at 5:00 a.m. Pacific. So, yeah,
downtime at 5:00 a.m. Pacific. So, yeah, that doesn't affect the masses, but he's
that doesn't affect the masses, but he's just as valuable as they are. So, you
just as valuable as they are. So, you know, you want to try to not have
know, you want to try to not have downtime as well when you have to fix
downtime as well when you have to fix things.
things. So, that's not going to work. So there's
So, that's not going to work. So there's a variety of ways that we come about
a variety of ways that we come about making things dynamic. Uh one of them is
making things dynamic. Uh one of them is picking technologies with elastic
picking technologies with elastic properties. Um as we talked about
properties. Um as we talked about earlier like no SQL you get dynamic
earlier like no SQL you get dynamic cluster uh recomposition if you need to
cluster uh recomposition if you need to pull nodes. We try to pick a lot of
pull nodes. We try to pick a lot of things with stateless growth patterns so
things with stateless growth patterns so we can add boxes in and you know put
we can add boxes in and you know put them behind the load balancer and add
them behind the load balancer and add capacity
capacity things of that nature. Now not
things of that nature. Now not everything has to be elastic. A lot of
everything has to be elastic. A lot of times you'll get force multipliers. So
times you'll get force multipliers. So like for instance in our caching tier
like for instance in our caching tier that helps a lot of things you know it's
that helps a lot of things you know it's less load on things in the front they
less load on things in the front they can kind of spread out across the
can kind of spread out across the caching tier. You also get things in
caching tier. You also get things in different places in the stack maybe
different places in the stack maybe sometimes behind the the caching tier.
sometimes behind the the caching tier. So like in our case we do uh right
So like in our case we do uh right behind uh batching for certain things.
behind uh batching for certain things. So that actually gives us in some ways
So that actually gives us in some ways uh a little more robustness for the
uh a little more robustness for the database because the database doesn't
database because the database doesn't have to work as hard. There's not as
have to work as hard. There's not as many simultaneous open connections. uh
many simultaneous open connections. uh you know being able to take a larger
you know being able to take a larger chunk of data, the databases can
chunk of data, the databases can optimize a little different. So you know
optimize a little different. So you know compared to what I've seen on a lot of
compared to what I've seen on a lot of crazy rigs and setups with you know 50
crazy rigs and setups with you know 50 100 my SQL instances we don't have to
100 my SQL instances we don't have to run near as much per CCU is what I've
run near as much per CCU is what I've seen for a lot of things that just go
seen for a lot of things that just go straight to a database for example.
straight to a database for example. Now it's also not just about
Now it's also not just about technologies. It's about what you do
technologies. It's about what you do with your code. Your code is probably
with your code. Your code is probably the biggest thing um that you're going
the biggest thing um that you're going to run into is things that you've done
to run into is things that you've done and we've done lots of these our
and we've done lots of these our ourselves. Um I'm not going to lie, when
ourselves. Um I'm not going to lie, when we first rolled League of Legends out,
we first rolled League of Legends out, guess what we did? We had properties and
guess what we did? We had properties and config files because that's what
config files because that's what everybody else does. They've got their
everybody else does. They've got their little XML or their JSON or their text
little XML or their JSON or their text file and hey, that works. Works real
file and hey, that works. Works real good until the system is having an issue
good until the system is having an issue at 5:00 on Friday afternoon and you
at 5:00 on Friday afternoon and you don't want to have to reboot it to
don't want to have to reboot it to change a setting. So, all of our
change a setting. So, all of our settings are dynamic these days.
settings are dynamic these days. And then we use uh coherence to
And then we use uh coherence to basically propagate out the data. But
basically propagate out the data. But you can use all kinds of different
you can use all kinds of different things. Um I think uh Netflix the other
things. Um I think uh Netflix the other day did a white paper or something I
day did a white paper or something I that I saw that they're using Zookeeper
that I saw that they're using Zookeeper to push out configuration changes. Now
to push out configuration changes. Now the other thing that people get hung up
the other thing that people get hung up on is well oh when do I push those
on is well oh when do I push those changes? How do I make this happen?
changes? How do I make this happen? Because you know I need to make sure it
Because you know I need to make sure it happens at right this exact second. Well
happens at right this exact second. Well with a larger running system or just any
with a larger running system or just any system in general there is no exact
system in general there is no exact second. There's people and there's still
second. There's people and there's still people. So there's just before and
people. So there's just before and after. So it doesn't matter that you get
after. So it doesn't matter that you get lost in the minutia of it has to go out
lost in the minutia of it has to go out right here. It's just before and after
right here. It's just before and after and it needs to be a reasonable amount
and it needs to be a reasonable amount of time. The other thing is your
of time. The other thing is your algorithms have to be able to take uh
algorithms have to be able to take uh advantage of this. You can push out a
advantage of this. You can push out a new setting, but if your system doesn't
new setting, but if your system doesn't ever pay attention to it, it doesn't
ever pay attention to it, it doesn't matter. So a lot of our algorithms
matter. So a lot of our algorithms essentially they'll they'll loop or
essentially they'll they'll loop or they'll come back around and every so
they'll come back around and every so often look and see, oh well this value
often look and see, oh well this value went from 5 to 10. Let me adjust.
So, looking at some more specific examples of this, um, all the thread
examples of this, um, all the thread pools that we've got, we've added
pools that we've got, we've added wrappers to them to be able to config
wrappers to them to be able to config them on the fly. Uh, let's just say it's
them on the fly. Uh, let's just say it's not a good thing if we have a box that's
not a good thing if we have a box that's running at 10% CPU and we have some
running at 10% CPU and we have some operational issue and, uh, Mark
operational issue and, uh, Mark Merrell's like, well, can we fix it? And
Merrell's like, well, can we fix it? And I'm like, well, we have lots of
I'm like, well, we have lots of hardware, but no, I can't get any more
hardware, but no, I can't get any more threads out of it right now. I mean,
threads out of it right now. I mean, that's just silly. So all the threads we
that's just silly. So all the threads we can we can tweak on the fly if we need
can we can tweak on the fly if we need to. We've taken this up a couple levels
to. We've taken this up a couple levels in recent years as well. Uh we can
in recent years as well. Uh we can change roles of machines, you know, pull
change roles of machines, you know, pull them in and out. This helps a lot with
them in and out. This helps a lot with uh hot fixes. We we can do, you know,
uh hot fixes. We we can do, you know, much smaller hot fixes on backend server
much smaller hot fixes on backend server side things now. And we can also do
side things now. And we can also do different things with features uh
different things with features uh without just rolling them out as part of
without just rolling them out as part of a big bang deploy. So Dominion again was
a big bang deploy. So Dominion again was a perfect example of that. Dominion was
a perfect example of that. Dominion was out. we were able to do some kind of uh
out. we were able to do some kind of uh real world uh beta testing with it and
real world uh beta testing with it and then just flip it on. So that works out
then just flip it on. So that works out really good to be able to manage that.
So the next thing I'm going to dive into is scaling best practices. So what
is scaling best practices. So what happens when we follow all these rules
happens when we follow all these rules for scaling that we see floating around
for scaling that we see floating around the internet and we still run into
the internet and we still run into issues.
So this is my modern scaling cliffnotes as I like to call it when we do uh
as I like to call it when we do uh engineering onboarding in in uh at Rya.
engineering onboarding in in uh at Rya. So we start out and scaling is hard. So
So we start out and scaling is hard. So let's get rid of some things so it's
let's get rid of some things so it's easier.
easier. What do we get rid of? Does anybody
What do we get rid of? Does anybody know? There's like all kinds of options
know? There's like all kinds of options and then there's these things that you
and then there's these things that you use all the time. You're like I can't
use all the time. You're like I can't get rid of that. So then we go the other
get rid of that. So then we go the other way. We're like all right I'll start
way. We're like all right I'll start with a blank sheet of paper and we're
with a blank sheet of paper and we're going to just put like three things on
going to just put like three things on there and call it a day.
there and call it a day. And then once we only have three things,
And then once we only have three things, we can optimize. So let's say we make a
we can optimize. So let's say we make a choice that the minimum user that plays
choice that the minimum user that plays League of Legends has to have a 2
League of Legends has to have a 2 megabit internet connection. Well, I
megabit internet connection. Well, I don't have to optimize for 56k modem
don't have to optimize for 56k modem anymore as an example. There might be
anymore as an example. There might be some other decisions I can make. You
some other decisions I can make. You know, maybe my art assets can be a
know, maybe my art assets can be a little bit bigger because I know they
little bit bigger because I know they can come down faster. So if we take that
can come down faster. So if we take that and we take that that concept and we
and we take that that concept and we look at it with some different
look at it with some different technologies. How many people know what
technologies. How many people know what map produce is? So a lot of the Hadoop
map produce is? So a lot of the Hadoop stuff in the BI space these days, it's a
stuff in the BI space these days, it's a concept called map reduce under the
concept called map reduce under the hood. And really map reduce is saying,
hood. And really map reduce is saying, well, we're going to solve all of our
well, we're going to solve all of our problems with a map step and a reduced
problems with a map step and a reduced step and then we can optimize the heck
step and then we can optimize the heck out of how that operates.
out of how that operates. Uh with no SQL, a lot of NoSQL is I'm
Uh with no SQL, a lot of NoSQL is I'm going to just take your joins away
going to just take your joins away because the average case is awesome on
because the average case is awesome on your joins, but the una case that we
your joins, but the una case that we need to join two big tables causes you
need to join two big tables causes you performance problems. So if you don't do
performance problems. So if you don't do that most of the time, you won't have
that most of the time, you won't have problems. Now, interestingly enough,
problems. Now, interestingly enough, most NoSQL technologies are putting
most NoSQL technologies are putting joins back and secondary indexes and
joins back and secondary indexes and NoSQL in SQL now. It's kind of funny.
NoSQL in SQL now. It's kind of funny. Uh, another one's cap theorem. How many
Uh, another one's cap theorem. How many people know what cap them is? So cap the
people know what cap them is? So cap the is this theory that says you've got uh
is this theory that says you've got uh consistency, availability, and uh
consistency, availability, and uh partitioning. And you can only pick two.
partitioning. And you can only pick two. So if you want consistency and
So if you want consistency and availability, it's kind of hard to
availability, it's kind of hard to partition stuff. Whereas if you have
partition stuff. Whereas if you have availability and you can seamlessly
availability and you can seamlessly partition, keeping things completely
partition, keeping things completely consistent all the time will cause
consistent all the time will cause problems.
So looking at this a little more practical level, the common example if
practical level, the common example if you read a lot of big data stuff or uh
you read a lot of big data stuff or uh scaling data in general is they talk
scaling data in general is they talk about keeping stuff together. So they
about keeping stuff together. So they usually always use this example of like
usually always use this example of like a blog entry and the blog entry has a
a blog entry and the blog entry has a comment and you store them in the same
comment and you store them in the same record. Then you do something uh I write
record. Then you do something uh I write some crazy uh you know discussion on um
some crazy uh you know discussion on um on the League of Legends forums uh with
on the League of Legends forums uh with a blog, one of our blogs about something
a blog, one of our blogs about something about this champion is the best champion
about this champion is the best champion ever. Well, everybody gets on there and
ever. Well, everybody gets on there and says, "No, you're crazy." So now I have
says, "No, you're crazy." So now I have 300 comments that are all stored in the
300 comments that are all stored in the same record. And now my oper my code
same record. And now my oper my code that's manipulating that has a different
that's manipulating that has a different performance characteristic.
performance characteristic. But we're not here to talk about blog
But we're not here to talk about blog comments. So let's talk about a very
comments. So let's talk about a very practical example. the same thing. So
practical example. the same thing. So with League of Legends, we have servers
with League of Legends, we have servers that run lots of uh League of Legends
that run lots of uh League of Legends server processes
server processes and we have a root object that we that
and we have a root object that we that represents the server and there's a
represents the server and there's a bunch of child objects that represent
bunch of child objects that represent the game server processes underneath
the game server processes underneath that and we use that as part of our uh
that and we use that as part of our uh game server provisioning algorithm.
game server provisioning algorithm. So the thing that's interesting is over
So the thing that's interesting is over time the complexity of those child
time the complexity of those child objects has gotten uh larger. We have
objects has gotten uh larger. We have more game modes now. There's more
more game modes now. There's more champions in the game. And the number of
champions in the game. And the number of games per server, we're more efficient
games per server, we're more efficient and we run larger hardware than we used
and we run larger hardware than we used to. So if you kind of dig down into the
to. So if you kind of dig down into the data model a little more, you've got a
data model a little more, you've got a machine. It might have game instances
machine. It might have game instances with name and player and some different
with name and player and some different state. Well, the problem is
state. Well, the problem is all that's happening at the same time
all that's happening at the same time and these child objects start to get
and these child objects start to get bigger and I've got tons of instances on
bigger and I've got tons of instances on on a server. So I go from pushing 20k of
on a server. So I go from pushing 20k of data around to maybe pushing more than a
data around to maybe pushing more than a half a mega data around.
half a mega data around. And even though I said things are fast,
And even though I said things are fast, things aren't infinitely fast. So I
things aren't infinitely fast. So I start having network transfer and object
start having network transfer and object serialization being bounding factors to
serialization being bounding factors to my game server provisioning algorithm.
my game server provisioning algorithm. You've also got the fact that this
You've also got the fact that this algorithm performs exactly the opposite
algorithm performs exactly the opposite of how you would want as an engineer. As
of how you would want as an engineer. As you get more people on the system, it
you get more people on the system, it goes slower. At a minimum, you want it
goes slower. At a minimum, you want it to run at constant speed. And even
to run at constant speed. And even better, it would be to find a clever way
better, it would be to find a clever way with uh technologies use like ring
with uh technologies use like ring buffers to actually run faster when
buffers to actually run faster when there's more load on. But we're going
there's more load on. But we're going the opposite. So essentially, we've kind
the opposite. So essentially, we've kind of got the pipe full. I mean, yeah, we
of got the pipe full. I mean, yeah, we may not be saturating a one gig uh, you
may not be saturating a one gig uh, you know, uh, network segment, but we're
know, uh, network segment, but we're still bound by moving all that data
still bound by moving all that data around. So, at this point, we had to go
around. So, at this point, we had to go back uh before season 1 and review and
back uh before season 1 and review and basically say, do we really have one
basically say, do we really have one object anymore? We thought we did, but
object anymore? We thought we did, but when we really dug into it, there's
when we really dug into it, there's actually, even though it's the both
actually, even though it's the both objects are about a game, they have very
objects are about a game, they have very different roles. So, we had to go
different roles. So, we had to go through and divide those objects up uh
through and divide those objects up uh with one having the players in some
with one having the players in some different state that we need for pregame
different state that we need for pregame and another object that represents just
and another object that represents just the state we need for game server
the state we need for game server allocation. At that point, that object
allocation. At that point, that object became a very consistent fixed size. So
became a very consistent fixed size. So now the pipe is much better. So the game
now the pipe is much better. So the game server provisioning algorithm will now
server provisioning algorithm will now run uh pretty much at constant speed. So
run uh pretty much at constant speed. So essentially the moral of the story is
essentially the moral of the story is all these rules, you can't just let them
all these rules, you can't just let them go to your head. You got to wonder,
go to your head. You got to wonder, well, okay, when do I pick a new set of
well, okay, when do I pick a new set of rules? When do I slightly adjust things?
rules? When do I slightly adjust things? And you you have to continue to look at
And you you have to continue to look at your system as it evolves to see if now
your system as it evolves to see if now you've moved into a different place that
you've moved into a different place that now you need to react to.
So the final thing I want to drive into is the concept of monitoring everything.
is the concept of monitoring everything. So how do we know when we have a
So how do we know when we have a problem?
We got pictures. How many people like pictures? Few people. All right. How
pictures? Few people. All right. How many people like logs with millions of
many people like logs with millions of operations a day? Few more people. It's
operations a day? Few more people. It's about even so far. Well, I'm gonna vote
about even so far. Well, I'm gonna vote like this.
like this. There are logs right now that I will die
There are logs right now that I will die before I can scan them with my eyes
before I can scan them with my eyes enough to find patterns in them. I've
enough to find patterns in them. I've tried.
tried. And there's also causality. Causality in
And there's also causality. Causality in logs is hard. You can, you know, a lot
logs is hard. You can, you know, a lot of times limit things down by a thread,
of times limit things down by a thread, but when you're going across different
but when you're going across different machines, you got to start having uh,
machines, you got to start having uh, you know, ways to coordinate, you know,
you know, ways to coordinate, you know, transactions and sequences and it just
transactions and sequences and it just kind of spirals out of control real
kind of spirals out of control real quick. So like in this case uh this
quick. So like in this case uh this happened to be a network issue and we
happened to be a network issue and we can see it ripple through that organic
can see it ripple through that organic system I talked about earlier with load
system I talked about earlier with load averages change and the matchmaking
averages change and the matchmaking queue has a little hiccup and then the
queue has a little hiccup and then the you can see it reflect in the network
you can see it reflect in the network traffic. So you go look at the graphs
traffic. So you go look at the graphs and essentially you try to go back in
and essentially you try to go back in time and figure out well what was the
time and figure out well what was the trigger cuz you'll see the ripple in all
trigger cuz you'll see the ripple in all kinds of different cases. Maybe it was
kinds of different cases. Maybe it was the other thing maybe it was the
the other thing maybe it was the matchmaking queue. Well, if there's an
matchmaking queue. Well, if there's an issue with the matchmaking queue, then
issue with the matchmaking queue, then people can't get in champ select as fast
people can't get in champ select as fast and you'll see network ramifications
and you'll see network ramifications that way. So, it is kind of tricky to
that way. So, it is kind of tricky to find the timing, but at least you've got
find the timing, but at least you've got something to start with.
something to start with. So, we try to monitor the heck out of
So, we try to monitor the heck out of everything. Uh, and one way that we do
everything. Uh, and one way that we do that is we automate metrics gathering.
that is we automate metrics gathering. So, in our case with Java, we've got a
So, in our case with Java, we've got a um AOP uh aspect oriented interceptor
um AOP uh aspect oriented interceptor that basically we log all the external
that basically we log all the external calls for League of Legends uh coming
calls for League of Legends uh coming into the plat the platform systems. So
into the plat the platform systems. So think about that for a second. Lots of
think about that for a second. Lots of calls. Then we sample the internal
calls. Then we sample the internal calls. Now really we just need a
calls. Now really we just need a statistical sample. So we've backed this
statistical sample. So we've backed this uh out over time. It used to be I don't
uh out over time. It used to be I don't know 5% and 1%. Now it's probably a
know 5% and 1%. Now it's probably a tenth of a percent. And then we we log
tenth of a percent. And then we we log all that out and then we automate the
all that out and then we automate the reporting on it. And as the last bullet
reporting on it. And as the last bullet point says, people always like ask me,
point says, people always like ask me, well, isn't this slow? Well, you need
well, isn't this slow? Well, you need you know you need to be cognizant of
you know you need to be cognizant of things. You know, you don't want to get
things. You know, you don't want to get a disc IO backup or something like that.
a disc IO backup or something like that. So you got to make sure that that's
So you got to make sure that that's okay. But general overhead on this CPU
okay. But general overhead on this CPU and diswise is about 1%. Versus the data
and diswise is about 1%. Versus the data that allows us to triage live systems
that allows us to triage live systems and you know make evaluations of
and you know make evaluations of changing features that data is
changing features that data is invaluable.
invaluable. Now all that data is useless if I can't
Now all that data is useless if I can't look at it in a good way. So this
look at it in a good way. So this happens to be an example of an automated
happens to be an example of an automated report that we run that basically
report that we run that basically compares two snapshots in time and it
compares two snapshots in time and it runs every day on all the different uh
runs every day on all the different uh environments that we run. Now, I can
environments that we run. Now, I can scan those numbers that are there, but
scan those numbers that are there, but that's going to take me a second. So, as
that's going to take me a second. So, as you can see, we've got the color-coded
you can see, we've got the color-coded red bars that pop out real quick, and I
red bars that pop out real quick, and I can say, "Well, something's changed."
can say, "Well, something's changed." So, now, what are we going to do next?
So, now, what are we going to do next? We've got those red bars. How are we
We've got those red bars. How are we going to dig into that problem?
going to dig into that problem? We could go back to our logs and GP
We could go back to our logs and GP things. That sounds like a good idea.
things. That sounds like a good idea. However, if you're going to bother to
However, if you're going to bother to add one layer of automation, why stop
add one layer of automation, why stop there? So, it was very obvious when we
there? So, it was very obvious when we first got this report, the engineer that
first got this report, the engineer that worked on it, he'd bring he'd email me
worked on it, he'd bring he'd email me the sample of it and I'd be like,
the sample of it and I'd be like, "Great. Now, what are we going to do
"Great. Now, what are we going to do with the red bar?" And I'd always ask
with the red bar?" And I'd always ask him the the next question was always the
him the the next question was always the same one. So, I'm like, "Well, let's
same one. So, I'm like, "Well, let's just automate that." So, in this case,
just automate that." So, in this case, let's say hypothetically the red bar was
let's say hypothetically the red bar was like a max value. So, with a max value,
like a max value. So, with a max value, I'm going to want to know distribution
I'm going to want to know distribution because a max is only telling me a half
because a max is only telling me a half the problem.
the problem. So in this case, you can, you know, very
So in this case, you can, you know, very I don't know if you guys can read that
I don't know if you guys can read that or not, but down at the bottom, we've
or not, but down at the bottom, we've got about 113 calls that took more than
got about 113 calls that took more than two seconds. Uh that could have been
two seconds. Uh that could have been slow ISP, all kinds of things. But on
slow ISP, all kinds of things. But on the flip side, I've got a little bit
the flip side, I've got a little bit north of uh uh 542,000 that are less
north of uh uh 542,000 that are less than 100 milliseconds. So if I was to
than 100 milliseconds. So if I was to give you a percentage on this, 99.99
give you a percentage on this, 99.99 something% are all fine. So
something% are all fine. So statistically, there's really not a
statistically, there's really not a problem here. So, we need to go through
problem here. So, we need to go through and automate to make those decisions be
and automate to make those decisions be able to just happen. Um, now some other
able to just happen. Um, now some other things that we've done is uh game server
things that we've done is uh game server monitoring. You know, originally there's
monitoring. You know, originally there's things that dump out in logs that say uh
things that dump out in logs that say uh how many people have been in champ
how many people have been in champ select and then we transition and you
select and then we transition and you sit there and wait. That usually is
sit there and wait. That usually is indicative of a game server having
indicative of a game server having issues. So, we'll turn around and we've
issues. So, we'll turn around and we've automated the log gathering of that and
automated the log gathering of that and it goes straight to the person that's
it goes straight to the person that's going to react to that. Um, and then
going to react to that. Um, and then over time we've we've wor started to
over time we've we've wor started to work on things like building more
work on things like building more sophisticated rules that the servers
sophisticated rules that the servers will basically just take themselves
will basically just take themselves offline. I mean, again, it's easier to
offline. I mean, again, it's easier to error on the side of the player
error on the side of the player experience than it is to, you know, wake
experience than it is to, you know, wake somebody up or have the network
somebody up or have the network operations center take time to go figure
operations center take time to go figure respond. It's better to pull the thing
respond. It's better to pull the thing from service, you know, in a, you know,
from service, you know, in a, you know, in a uh peaceful transition and then
in a uh peaceful transition and then react to the problem.
So to recap, we talked a little bit about embracing
we talked a little bit about embracing technologies that are elastic like
technologies that are elastic like NoSQL.
NoSQL. Uh we're big believers at Riot that the
Uh we're big believers at Riot that the best thing to do is usually the simplest
best thing to do is usually the simplest thing to do. Um the engineers that sit
thing to do. Um the engineers that sit at the round table and say, "Oh, I need
at the round table and say, "Oh, I need this crazy threading thing and I need
this crazy threading thing and I need this big huge, you know, grid computing
this big huge, you know, grid computing setup." A lot of times we don't even
setup." A lot of times we don't even need that even though we use it. Uh we
need that even though we use it. Uh we use it for some things but we try not to
use it for some things but we try not to to pound a to fit and put everything in
to pound a to fit and put everything in it. We always start with simple
it. We always start with simple a dynamic system is going to give you a
a dynamic system is going to give you a lot more operational flexibility than
lot more operational flexibility than having hard-coded config files and
having hard-coded config files and things that are very rigid.
things that are very rigid. Monitoring everything or excuse me
Monitoring everything or excuse me scaling best practices it uh are pretty
scaling best practices it uh are pretty much you know even though they're the
much you know even though they're the 8020 case there are cases that they are
8020 case there are cases that they are meant to be broken. And then finally,
meant to be broken. And then finally, you need to monitor the live system.
you need to monitor the live system. Otherwise, you essentially are kind of
Otherwise, you essentially are kind of flying blind in terms of uh what is
flying blind in terms of uh what is actually happening and what's happening
actually happening and what's happening to your players. So, with that, uh I'd
to your players. So, with that, uh I'd be happy to take some questions. Uh I
be happy to take some questions. Uh I purposely left a little bit of time
purposely left a little bit of time because I assume people had a number of
because I assume people had a number of questions. Just walk up to the mics. If
questions. Just walk up to the mics. If you want to talk to anybody at Riot,
you want to talk to anybody at Riot, there's a few people floating around the
there's a few people floating around the audience. Uh I'll be available
audience. Uh I'll be available afterward. And then we've got a booth at
afterward. And then we've got a booth at the uh over in the career pavilion if
the uh over in the career pavilion if you're interested in any of the types of
you're interested in any of the types of things that we're doing. We're always
things that we're doing. We're always looking for uh more awesome engineers to
looking for uh more awesome engineers to join Riot Games. So, thank you.
join Riot Games. So, thank you. [Music]
Uh question on uh your server side stuff. How do you how do you test
stuff. How do you how do you test everything? How do you test you know
everything? How do you test you know things like failover or if somebody
things like failover or if somebody accidentally a server? you know, you
accidentally a server? you know, you can't just crash a data center and see
can't just crash a data center and see what happens. So,
what happens. So, well, actually,
well, actually, uh, one of the things that we do that
uh, one of the things that we do that I've heard is a little different than
I've heard is a little different than some people is we have a couple full
some people is we have a couple full scale environments that we try to test
scale environments that we try to test as detailed as we can. Uh, there are
as detailed as we can. Uh, there are certain features. It takes longer to
certain features. It takes longer to statistically model the data, dummy it
statistically model the data, dummy it up, and run the I like to call it's like
up, and run the I like to call it's like the uh the high school chemistry lab
the uh the high school chemistry lab experiments. it takes longer to do that
experiments. it takes longer to do that sometimes than uh to actually write the
sometimes than uh to actually write the code sometimes. We do a lot of that. Um
code sometimes. We do a lot of that. Um now that's not even for us that's not
now that's not even for us that's not always practical for everything. So we
always practical for everything. So we try to spend a lot of time of what can I
try to spend a lot of time of what can I do to test something that will then
do to test something that will then extrapolate. Um so that's another thing
extrapolate. Um so that's another thing that we do as far as specifically your
that we do as far as specifically your case of failure. Um 95% of things that
case of failure. Um 95% of things that I've seen that has a white paper or a
I've seen that has a white paper or a sales guy that says it fails over
sales guy that says it fails over doesn't. Um I can't tell you how many
doesn't. Um I can't tell you how many times I've seen something that oh yeah
times I've seen something that oh yeah it's master slave and when you pull the
it's master slave and when you pull the master it's just going to pop. It never
master it's just going to pop. It never works like that. I can give you two
works like that. I can give you two technologies we've got in our stack that
technologies we've got in our stack that work as advertised and the rest we've
work as advertised and the rest we've had to kind of work on. So yeah, you
had to kind of work on. So yeah, you have to test failover. You don't just
have to test failover. You don't just put it in and configure it and go. Um, I
put it in and configure it and go. Um, I know some companies, uh, I'm trying to
know some companies, uh, I'm trying to think, I think it's Netflix has got a a
think, I think it's Netflix has got a a tool called Chaos Monkey that they
tool called Chaos Monkey that they actually let it run during set hours of
actually let it run during set hours of the day and it just runs around and
the day and it just runs around and destroys stuff because their theory is
destroys stuff because their theory is if you can't survive when something's
if you can't survive when something's destroyed, then you're not you're kind
destroyed, then you're not you're kind of just putting your head in the sand.
of just putting your head in the sand. Uh, I know I joke with some of the guys
Uh, I know I joke with some of the guys at Riot, I'll say things have been
at Riot, I'll say things have been running good and they're like, "Sh." I'm
running good and they're like, "Sh." I'm like, "No, I want a system good enough I
like, "No, I want a system good enough I can taunt it daily and it still won't
can taunt it daily and it still won't fall over." So, so those are some of the
fall over." So, so those are some of the things we do, but yeah, the big thing is
things we do, but yeah, the big thing is to test the failover cases because they
to test the failover cases because they don't ever work out of the box. So,
don't ever work out of the box. So, yeah.
yeah. As far as monitoring everything, uh
As far as monitoring everything, uh couple of charts up there look like you
couple of charts up there look like you uh use a tool called Cacti. Is that
uh use a tool called Cacti. Is that true? And do you also use any others?
true? And do you also use any others? We've used Cacti for some things. Um we
We've used Cacti for some things. Um we use, you know, Nagios for different
use, you know, Nagios for different alerting. One of the more recent things
alerting. One of the more recent things is we ended up writing a homegrown
is we ended up writing a homegrown charting tool for a lot of the non
charting tool for a lot of the non hardware type metrics that are actually
hardware type metrics that are actually I call them synthetic metrics of our
I call them synthetic metrics of our application. And essentially what we've
application. And essentially what we've done is we we're big on the definition
done is we we're big on the definition of done at Riot. And it's not just code.
of done at Riot. And it's not just code. You know, it's unit test, it's QA. Well,
You know, it's unit test, it's QA. Well, one of the definitions of done these
one of the definitions of done these days at Riot is every piece of code,
days at Riot is every piece of code, every feature that goes out, you have to
every feature that goes out, you have to be able to monitor it at an application
be able to monitor it at an application level. So developers, you know, we've
level. So developers, you know, we've got libraries. They'll drop a couple
got libraries. They'll drop a couple lines of code in for their key metrics.
lines of code in for their key metrics. And then when the features go out, we
And then when the features go out, we make sure to explain to, you know, the
make sure to explain to, you know, the network operations staff and to, you
network operations staff and to, you know, live support and player support,
know, live support and player support, different people that will be consuming
different people that will be consuming that data, what does it mean? So it's
that data, what does it mean? So it's not just the engineers. So it's part of
not just the engineers. So it's part of the development cycle. You have to have
the development cycle. You have to have data because what we kept running into
data because what we kept running into was we'd write things and then they go
was we'd write things and then they go to production and then we'd be like,
to production and then we'd be like, "Oh, it'd be nice if we added an alert
"Oh, it'd be nice if we added an alert for that or it'd be nice if we had data
for that or it'd be nice if we had data for that." and we you were just too far
for that." and we you were just too far behind you just too much behind the
behind you just too much behind the curve when you you did it that way. So,
curve when you you did it that way. So, we've got some homegrown tools for some
we've got some homegrown tools for some of those things. Now, there are there's
of those things. Now, there are there's a ton of things these days that you know
a ton of things these days that you know you can just pull off the shelf. There's
you can just pull off the shelf. There's three or four different things on
three or four different things on GitHub. Uh I know um uh Stumble Upon had
GitHub. Uh I know um uh Stumble Upon had a time series based uh tool that's
a time series based uh tool that's backed by Hadoop and you can basically
backed by Hadoop and you can basically store like finite data like CPUs and all
store like finite data like CPUs and all kinds of different things. Uh, and
kinds of different things. Uh, and basically you don't have to get rid of
basically you don't have to get rid of any of it, which is really nice because
any of it, which is really nice because if you need to go back to an event and
if you need to go back to an event and correlate it from two weeks ago, you
correlate it from two weeks ago, you don't just have the aggregate, you can
don't just have the aggregate, you can get down to the the detail level data.
get down to the the detail level data. So, um, I'd look at some of that stuff
So, um, I'd look at some of that stuff if it's something you're interested in.
if it's something you're interested in. So,
So, see, yeah.
see, yeah. Hi. Um, I was just kind of wondering
Hi. Um, I was just kind of wondering because you did a great job of uh
because you did a great job of uh explaining scaling on technology, but
explaining scaling on technology, but I'm also kind of interested in how the
I'm also kind of interested in how the human resources end of this works
human resources end of this works because if you're scaling technology, I
because if you're scaling technology, I assume you need a certain amount of
assume you need a certain amount of human resources to be able to cope with
human resources to be able to cope with the, you know, building out of your
the, you know, building out of your systems because I mean, you've already
systems because I mean, you've already described a lot of QA and testing and
described a lot of QA and testing and and and programming. So, can you
and and programming. So, can you describe a little bit how uh how much
describe a little bit how uh how much how big is your team and what do you
how big is your team and what do you think you need to actually implement
think you need to actually implement some of these techniques and maybe some
some of these techniques and maybe some other advice in that area? Um, as far as
other advice in that area? Um, as far as exact numbers these days, I'll
exact numbers these days, I'll apologize. I'm probably not the guy. Um,
apologize. I'm probably not the guy. Um, but I can give you a couple ballparks.
but I can give you a couple ballparks. Um, first of all, we got a 24-hour a day
Um, first of all, we got a 24-hour a day uh network operations staff that there's
uh network operations staff that there's usually two or three guys uh basically
usually two or three guys uh basically on duty all the time. So, that's just
on duty all the time. So, that's just the live side of it. Now, I think back
the live side of it. Now, I think back to what you were maybe hitting on. One
to what you were maybe hitting on. One of the things that we invested in uh
of the things that we invested in uh several years ago because we knew it was
several years ago because we knew it was going to come to pass u is uh DevOps. So
going to come to pass u is uh DevOps. So we have an in-house DevOps tool that
we have an in-house DevOps tool that basically just like the definition of
basically just like the definition of done is you have to be able to monitor
done is you have to be able to monitor things. The other definition of done is
things. The other definition of done is you have to have the recipes to be able
you have to have the recipes to be able to push the code. So that scales all the
to push the code. So that scales all the way up from you know local QA
way up from you know local QA environments to larger public you know
environments to larger public you know public beta environments to you know
public beta environments to you know different platforms of League of Legends
different platforms of League of Legends all over the world. So that's actually
all over the world. So that's actually kept you know the the people side of
kept you know the the people side of this much more uh fixed than what it
this much more uh fixed than what it would have been otherwise. uh you know
would have been otherwise. uh you know as we've grown because we have different
as we've grown because we have different territories that run as different
territories that run as different environments instead of having to have
environments instead of having to have you know a whole set of people for each
you know a whole set of people for each one the tool will do a lot of it and we
one the tool will do a lot of it and we keep you know trying to automate that as
keep you know trying to automate that as much as possible. So really you need
much as possible. So really you need people more on you know the things with
people more on you know the things with you know racking and stacking hardware
you know racking and stacking hardware and that side of it. So,
and that side of it. So, but can you give me an overall staff?
but can you give me an overall staff? I tell I tell you what. Um, if you want
I tell I tell you what. Um, if you want to hang around after uh the session,
to hang around after uh the session, there's a couple people from Riot the
there's a couple people from Riot the audience I'll be happy to hook you up
audience I'll be happy to hook you up with and they can give you a more
with and they can give you a more specific uh number on some of that.
specific uh number on some of that. Okay. I was just looking for ballpark.
Okay. I was just looking for ballpark. That's Thank you.
That's Thank you. Yeah. Hi. Um I was wondering about your
Yeah. Hi. Um I was wondering about your use of map produce map produce. Um
use of map produce map produce. Um because I guess um some things, for
because I guess um some things, for example, getting one player stats, you
example, getting one player stats, you don't really need map produce. I guess
don't really need map produce. I guess it's just like one get. So I was
it's just like one get. So I was wondering what kind of situations you
wondering what kind of situations you use.
use. A lot of the stuff we're driving on with
A lot of the stuff we're driving on with map produce these days are uh we have a
map produce these days are uh we have a a big data team at Riot that is diving
a big data team at Riot that is diving into a number of different things with
into a number of different things with um statistics and BI and things of that
um statistics and BI and things of that nature. So we're diving into a lot of
nature. So we're diving into a lot of that stuff uh with Hadoop and map
that stuff uh with Hadoop and map produce these days. Actually, it's a
produce these days. Actually, it's a pretty hot thing that we're hiring for
pretty hot thing that we're hiring for if you got any interest in it. But
if you got any interest in it. But that's where a lot of it's coming from
that's where a lot of it's coming from on the I I call it the the more pure
on the I I call it the the more pure platform side of the world. Um we
platform side of the world. Um we haven't steered to that as much. I mean,
haven't steered to that as much. I mean, 3 four years ago, a lot of the map
3 four years ago, a lot of the map produced stuff was more batch job type
produced stuff was more batch job type things which didn't really fit with the
things which didn't really fit with the gameplay type experience. So although
gameplay type experience. So although there's different things now with you
there's different things now with you know that are more performant with stuff
know that are more performant with stuff like that but back when we were looking
like that but back when we were looking at some of the original stuff we try to
at some of the original stuff we try to probably keep the map produce a little
probably keep the map produce a little more on the analytic side than the
more on the analytic side than the actual you know champion select side of
actual you know champion select side of the house. Cool. Thanks.
the house. Cool. Thanks. Yeah.
Yeah. Can you talk about how and how often you
Can you talk about how and how often you guys do your load testing?
guys do your load testing? Load testing is a continual thing as I
Load testing is a continual thing as I like to say, but uh primarily there's
like to say, but uh primarily there's load testing that fits in the cadence of
load testing that fits in the cadence of the release um that goes out every two
the release um that goes out every two weeks. So that's a must. Um essentially
weeks. So that's a must. Um essentially there's a what I it's similar to the
there's a what I it's similar to the tribunal for the game. There's a load
tribunal for the game. There's a load testing tribunal and they have to sign
testing tribunal and they have to sign off on things and if uh they don't then
off on things and if uh they don't then various people start to kind of what's
various people start to kind of what's going on? Is it has a release? it ready
going on? Is it has a release? it ready to go. Now that being said, we also use
to go. Now that being said, we also use load testing for a number of features
load testing for a number of features because sometimes uh as we like to call
because sometimes uh as we like to call it, we have this concept of we call it
it, we have this concept of we call it the treadmill. So when code goes in and
the treadmill. So when code goes in and depending on where it gets, then you
depending on where it gets, then you know you have a set amount of time for
know you have a set amount of time for it's going to go out. So we'll actually
it's going to go out. So we'll actually branch off and do specific load tests
branch off and do specific load tests for different things uh to verify uh you
for different things uh to verify uh you know different uh code paths and
know different uh code paths and strategies before the code goes into
strategies before the code goes into main because sometimes just based on the
main because sometimes just based on the risk factors of it and things like that
risk factors of it and things like that you have to have the data before you can
you have to have the data before you can just say all right this is ready to go
just say all right this is ready to go out the door now. So
hey yeah thanks for the talk. Um, I was curious on your perspective on the value
curious on your perspective on the value of owning your own hardware and the data
of owning your own hardware and the data centers and that sort of thing,
centers and that sort of thing, especially as it relates to scalability
especially as it relates to scalability and you know, not so much when you're
and you know, not so much when you're like where you are now at whatever 30
like where you are now at whatever 30 million monthly active or 11 million
million monthly active or 11 million monthly activives, but as you're
monthly activives, but as you're building your enterprise early on and
building your enterprise early on and the cost benefit is is less obvious than
the cost benefit is is less obvious than it is now.
it is now. Yeah, it you know, it's a mix of cost
Yeah, it you know, it's a mix of cost and performance and predictability, I
and performance and predictability, I guess I'd say. Um, I've seen lots of
guess I'd say. Um, I've seen lots of things that I've spent an hour digging
things that I've spent an hour digging on something and then it's like, "Oh,
on something and then it's like, "Oh, Amazon's just having a bad day." Um, so,
Amazon's just having a bad day." Um, so, you know, it's a mix of things,
you know, it's a mix of things, especially when you're starting out. Uh,
especially when you're starting out. Uh, you know, there's a variety of cloud
you know, there's a variety of cloud providers. I know I walked through the
providers. I know I walked through the pavilion earlier and there's three or
pavilion earlier and there's three or four of them over there that, you know,
four of them over there that, you know, are good places to probably start. The
are good places to probably start. The bigger thing I'd probably look at is,
bigger thing I'd probably look at is, you know, where you at with cons
you know, where you at with cons consistent performance. I mean, we've
consistent performance. I mean, we've had the uh I'm trying to think, was that
had the uh I'm trying to think, was that last fall when when Amazon had like the
last fall when when Amazon had like the big massive outage and you know, people
big massive outage and you know, people were running from EBS volumes, you know,
were running from EBS volumes, you know, running for the hills, all kinds of
running for the hills, all kinds of stuff. So, it it adds a layer of um
stuff. So, it it adds a layer of um disruption in just, you know, your
disruption in just, you know, your performance, too. And if the system can
performance, too. And if the system can handle that, that's great, but it's not
handle that, that's great, but it's not going to be quite as consistent as um
going to be quite as consistent as um you know, real hardware. So, you know,
you know, real hardware. So, you know, it's just it's a balance you got to
it's just it's a balance you got to maintain on all those things. Or the
maintain on all those things. Or the other thing you can do is you can have
other thing you can do is you can have hybridized approaches. I've talked to a
hybridized approaches. I've talked to a lot of uh different people that you know
lot of uh different people that you know you use a little bit of this use that
you use a little bit of this use that for burst capacity and so on and so
for burst capacity and so on and so forth. So
forth. So yeah.
yeah. Hey Scott, thanks. Um managing all those
Hey Scott, thanks. Um managing all those servers, you know, for something this
servers, you know, for something this big, it's pretty tough, I'm sure. Uh do
big, it's pretty tough, I'm sure. Uh do you guys use any like uh configuration
you guys use any like uh configuration management like Puppet or Chef and and
management like Puppet or Chef and and and how would you um get those on the
and how would you um get those on the new instances as they're booting up? you
new instances as they're booting up? you know, if there's failover or you need a
know, if there's failover or you need a scale. Um, and how would you promote
scale. Um, and how would you promote those from like dev to QA to prod once
those from like dev to QA to prod once they're tested?
they're tested? Gotcha. So, as I mentioned a little bit
Gotcha. So, as I mentioned a little bit earlier on the uh DevOps side of things,
earlier on the uh DevOps side of things, we do use a lot of Chef uh that
we do use a lot of Chef uh that basically is a key part of our kind of
basically is a key part of our kind of homegrown DevOps tool. So, that that
homegrown DevOps tool. So, that that that handles a decent amount of that. As
that handles a decent amount of that. As far as the hardware goes, while it is,
far as the hardware goes, while it is, you know, smoke tested and things like
you know, smoke tested and things like that, hardware doesn't go from dev to
that, hardware doesn't go from dev to QA, the software does more so. So we
QA, the software does more so. So we don't have to worry as much about that.
don't have to worry as much about that. Um, and then the big thing is just
Um, and then the big thing is just having these things being elastic
having these things being elastic because you can't put something in if
because you can't put something in if the system's not made to handle it. So I
the system's not made to handle it. So I mean that's been the big thing or even
mean that's been the big thing or even if you essentially you've got to be able
if you essentially you've got to be able to 100% trust it. Um,
to 100% trust it. Um, um, back in, you know, years past, we've
um, back in, you know, years past, we've had things that are supposed to fail
had things that are supposed to fail over, they work most of the time. Well,
over, they work most of the time. Well, or, you know, you can hot, you know,
or, you know, you can hot, you know, deploy things and they'll work most of
deploy things and they'll work most of the time, but then there might be an
the time, but then there might be an issue. What happens is you end up ering
issue. What happens is you end up ering airing on the side of well we're not
airing on the side of well we're not going to do a hot deploy because we
going to do a hot deploy because we don't know what'll happen even if it's a
don't know what'll happen even if it's a 1% case. You just can't. So I mean
1% case. You just can't. So I mean essentially you nullified the entire
essentially you nullified the entire thing. It's just like we have a a bad
thing. It's just like we have a a bad you know a player that has a network
you know a player that has a network issue. One player can cause an issue
issue. One player can cause an issue with you know the entire champ select
with you know the entire champ select process. So you've got to get those
process. So you've got to get those types of hot swappable things rock solid
types of hot swappable things rock solid so then you can start to use them as a
so then you can start to use them as a foundation. And if there's any um doubt
foundation. And if there's any um doubt at all, then essentially uh most of the
at all, then essentially uh most of the time you end up just not using them to
time you end up just not using them to be safe. So
be safe. So yeah.
yeah. Hi.
Hi. Um I'm curious if you evaluated any
Um I'm curious if you evaluated any other languages for your server back
other languages for your server back end, especially C or Erling and what
end, especially C or Erling and what your opinions on those are.
your opinions on those are. Yeah, I mean we're constantly looking at
Yeah, I mean we're constantly looking at things. I mean again the industry
things. I mean again the industry continues to evolve. So we do have some
continues to evolve. So we do have some things in house uh with Erling and a
things in house uh with Erling and a little bit of stuff with Scala that
little bit of stuff with Scala that we've uh that we've been doing recently.
we've uh that we've been doing recently. So we've got some things there. Uh at
So we've got some things there. Uh at the time at least when we started things
the time at least when we started things with the platform we wanted to kind of
with the platform we wanted to kind of accelerate using a mix of different open
accelerate using a mix of different open source tools and other things. So that's
source tools and other things. So that's kind of where we arrived at with Java
kind of where we arrived at with Java plus uh some of the guys on the team had
plus uh some of the guys on the team had experience in that to start with. But
experience in that to start with. But you know as we build new pieces and
you know as we build new pieces and modules and things we're always kind of
modules and things we're always kind of on the lookout for what's the best thing
on the lookout for what's the best thing and you know there is no one way to do
and you know there is no one way to do this. I mean like I said these days it's
this. I mean like I said these days it's not about this language being fast or
not about this language being fast or something else. There's different
something else. There's different characteristics you know with you know
characteristics you know with you know actorbased models and things like that
actorbased models and things like that that have pros and cons to them and in
that have pros and cons to them and in certain in some situations you know the
certain in some situations you know the pros are you know very powerful. So
pros are you know very powerful. So uh what is your personal opinion of
uh what is your personal opinion of Erling? of
Erling? of Erling.
Erling. Erlang, I've seen a lot of awesome stuff
Erlang, I've seen a lot of awesome stuff done in Erling. You know, it's one of
done in Erling. You know, it's one of the things that if I had it to do over
the things that if I had it to do over and I knew a little more about it when
and I knew a little more about it when we started a few other things, it would
we started a few other things, it would have been a very powerful thing. Um I
have been a very powerful thing. Um I know we've got a couple engineers that
know we've got a couple engineers that are diving into some of the things with
are diving into some of the things with it. I know um I think it was Facebook
it. I know um I think it was Facebook there's a uh PDF floating around. They
there's a uh PDF floating around. They built their chat system on top of Erling
built their chat system on top of Erling as an example. So, uh, you know, there's
as an example. So, uh, you know, there's a little bit of a learning curve,
a little bit of a learning curve, especially coming from some other
especially coming from some other places, but the power of being able to
places, but the power of being able to swap things in and out and, you know,
swap things in and out and, you know, it'll do in-memory migrations on
it'll do in-memory migrations on different things is really cool for, you
different things is really cool for, you know, these types of systems. So,
know, these types of systems. So, okay, thanks.
okay, thanks. Yeah.
Yeah. So, you had active MQ on one of your
So, you had active MQ on one of your slides. I wonder if you could talk about
slides. I wonder if you could talk about messaging and how that fits in with
messaging and how that fits in with scalability and monitoring. Um, I didn't
scalability and monitoring. Um, I didn't dive into it, but messaging is one of
dive into it, but messaging is one of those key uh elements that always comes
those key uh elements that always comes up when you're reading about, you know,
up when you're reading about, you know, building scalable systems. You know,
building scalable systems. You know, you've got concepts of messaging. Uh,
you've got concepts of messaging. Uh, essentially, you know, asynchronous
essentially, you know, asynchronous behavior because asynchronous behavior
behavior because asynchronous behavior is also going to allow your system to
is also going to allow your system to stretch. Now, you know, it can only
stretch. Now, you know, it can only stretch so far, but if you got messages
stretch so far, but if you got messages going back and forth, then you've got
going back and forth, then you've got some variance on uh as far as, you know,
some variance on uh as far as, you know, how fast things have to move. They get
how fast things have to move. They get degradated by 10%, it's okay. depending
degradated by 10%, it's okay. depending on how you have buffering and
on how you have buffering and persistence set up that can do some
persistence set up that can do some things for failover. So messaging, you
things for failover. So messaging, you know, is a key piece of the equation. Um
know, is a key piece of the equation. Um there's different ways to do that, you
there's different ways to do that, you know, too. I mean, some people go down
know, too. I mean, some people go down to kind of a bare bones layer these days
to kind of a bare bones layer these days with the zero MQ. There's the Java
with the zero MQ. There's the Java technologies. Uh more recently, I know
technologies. Uh more recently, I know uh I think it's uh Castle that Twitter's
uh I think it's uh Castle that Twitter's uh Twitter's got and uh I think it's
uh Twitter's got and uh I think it's Kafka is the one that LinkedIn has that
Kafka is the one that LinkedIn has that have different characteristics. So yeah,
have different characteristics. So yeah, that's that's a key part of, you know,
that's that's a key part of, you know, the space as well, depending on, you
the space as well, depending on, you know, your use case.
know, your use case. Anybody else? Okay. Well, thank you guys
Anybody else? Okay. Well, thank you guys for coming. Uh again, uh please fill out
for coming. Uh again, uh please fill out the evaluations. They're going to email
the evaluations. They're going to email out uh afterward and I'd be happy to
out uh afterward and I'd be happy to hang out up here and talk for a second
hang out up here and talk for a second if anybody's got any questions. Thanks.