The lessons from our mistakes.
What experience has taught us about leveling up our careers?
So let's get started.
So, hi, I am Doctor Jen Ch,
people strategy consultant who is deeply devoted
to human sustainability
and de I initiatives.
My passion is about managing
community-based access programs that elevate marginalized
voices and support divergent thinkers.
I believe people grow best in the sunshine
and I hope these talks
will provide some of that sunshine for you.
I'm gonna yield most of my time to the panelists,
but I do have a few things to say.
Ok, so why are we here
to lean into those mistakes?
My hope is to further break down those
silos and the unhealthy aversion to speaking about
mistakes.
So I'm hoping that these mistakes that are shared
will be fertile ground for all of us to grow
the games industry and to be better.
I appreciate the panels being up here and accepting my invitations.
So uh
they are here to speak about thriving
in a tough
ever evolving
and often scary industry.
And at the core, each person on this panel cares deeply about people.
So I've invited them because I've witnessed each one of them
working towards making the games industry better.
And undoubtedly, I hope, I hope this information will be valuable for you.
Um And to the audience. Thank you for coming.
Um By a show of hands. How many students do we have here?
Just get it, gauge the room here.
Ok, great. Thank you. Decent amount.
Uh by show of hands. How many nonstudent
job seekers out there?
Ok.
So a nice mix,
career changers.
OK.
People striving to be at
least 1% better every day.
Oh, come on everybody.
OK. So my hope is that I've assembled a team
of experienced devs that will allow you to
leave this session with at least one actionable way
to make a positive difference in the games industry
and in your attempts to level up your career
for us in
this room, we're privileged enough to be here.
But please, as you leave, share what you've learned with your devs back home.
I want to acknowledge
that there are people who cannot be here in person
because of war, border restrictions, finances, caretaker obligations
and or layoffs.
But I hope
that this advice reaches them too.
March 22nd,
2024. OK. So last day of G DC,
this is also um this is my little tidbit here. I get to add.
Um So this is actually the last day I
updated my resume
and not just because I'm here at G DC,
but
because of the times that I've had to hand off a resume so quickly.
Um So that's my little tidbit for success. Um
But
I'm gonna yield most of my time to folks here. So, speaking of success,
nurturing and resilience and they go hand in hand
and it is
hard out there and you will continue to be hard for the um years to come.
But I welcome to the podium, my long term friend
Tony who will share about how in the face of adversity
he found strategies to be resilient.
Mm mm
oh There's a lot of you out there.
OK. Can everybody hear me? OK. Despite the mask and everything? Cool. Awesome.
So
job search resilience and you how to deal with
the greatest hits of a job search and layoffs.
Um
A lot of this is all from anecdotal experience
and um I understand that your mileage may vary,
but these are all personal things that I've discovered
and
I hope you get something out of it.
So, hi, I'm Tony. I'm a game designer. I focus on systems and combat design
and I have worked in the games industry for more than 10 years.
Some of the games I've worked on includes Diablo three,
Castle Bill Deforms and the Echo VR series.
And the thing I want to talk about is
four steps of job search starting with the search.
Um I think
for me,
we sometimes lose focus and
specific goal setting will help create
proper expectations when it comes to accomplishing that goal.
Um
For example, I want to be,
I want to be able to successfully run a marathon
in four hours
and 45 minutes within six months. Why do I put such a detail on all those things?
Because
it lets me know what I want to accomplish,
run a marathon
which is
26 miles, 385 yards,
right? Uh time frame. How long do I want to do in, in
four hour, 45 minutes
and
the amount of time that I have to prep for it, which is six months,
this gives you
the ability
define specific steps you can now take towards accomplishing that goal.
How many day, how many days do you have to run?
How many miles do you need to run a day in order to accomplish that goal and also
better to be able to track your successes? And are you hitting those goals?
And also it helps you to evaluate if the goal is realistic or not.
I could say I want to run a marathon in a week.
Um,
probably not likely.
So
my takeaway from this
if you set very, very realistic and very, very specific goals,
you will be able to figure out
what you can do to accomplish that goal.
And the more realist, the more specific that goal is,
the more you'll find that
you are able to set
steps
to actually gauge whether you succeed or not on it.
And by the way,
um,
I know it's tough out there.
The average job search time right now from what I was
able to sort of do a brief search on the internet
is
like
65 to 6 months on the average.
So, you know, that's, that's not,
that's not nothing.
So
that is a fact.
And now let's talk about dealing with rejection.
I think following the job search,
we find something we apply to something we will always,
well, some of us will end up with rejections.
Um This is an excerpt from my own job search. Excel
and the reds are the rejections
and the grays are the ones the times that I got ghosted
and that is just a little excerpt of it.
So as you can see,
it's not just you, this happens to everyone.
And the biggest thing is when rejection happens, chances are
you won't know why most of the time.
Um
it is important to try to get feedback
and sometimes not all company is willing to give feedback,
but you do have the ability to ask
and any chance that you do get feedback from a company,
you should analyze the feedback, break it down
and take what you can out of it and act on that action, action
make it an action item.
Um
And
while there are definitive stats in rejections,
um according to a survey,
I think
most people, most success. Successful applicants
that applies for 10 to 15 jobs, usually get
6 to 10 rejections.
So rejection is like above 50%. Right.
Don't take it personally. It happens.
Well,
while you're on a job hunt, what can you do?
Well, you can improve
and what you want to strive is to be better daily.
Um, it's easy to get into the downward spiral of a job search.
Um, there are only so many job applications
you can apply in a day
and then you end up sort of doom schooling for, for more jobs.
Instead of doing that,
you should find things to work on and
continue to improve yourself during your downtime.
Um
This
helped me utilize my downtime as a way to improve myself.
And what I did is I created a daily schedule that included
time to work on things that will help me improve myself.
Um, in any way, this could be a health goal, this could be a future goal, work goal,
or this could be a hobby.
Um, you don't know what will actually help you improve.
And I think any bit of improvement will help you maintain sanity
and also feel productive, which is very important during this time.
Um Lastly, let's talk about deserving this.
It's
really hard to deal with the success of those around you,
especially when you're on the job search, right?
You look around and people have announced
that they've got something
and what not.
And and my takeaway is
very much like social media.
You often don't get the full picture of what it happens.
And this is especially true when it comes to the story of air, air quotes, success.
Um being disappointed at the accomplishment of others
will not help you in any way. And actually it mentally damages you and makes it hard.
So
um
focus on the positives and be happy for success in general.
Um
And what you'll find often
is that sometimes the people who achieve success before you
and if you maintain the friendships and the connections will
be able to somehow help you farther down the road.
Um So let's do a quick recap.
Focus goals,
rejection happens,
be better daily,
remain positive.
Um I tried to come up with a cool acronym but I ended up with a real weird word.
So that didn't work for me, but you get the idea
and finally
it's, we are all aware, it is dangerous out there and it's not great, right?
We don't know what someone else is going through because we're not in their head,
but
we can be kind and support each other.
Um Final thoughts for anyone who needs to hear this.
You are good enough. Thank you.
We absolutely did.
I can't, I can't talk today guys. Um
We abso
absolutely did need to hear that, Tony. So thank you.
And now I welcome to the podium,
a dear friend whom I've had the pleasure of working with in Europe
and visiting in two countries in Asia.
And I invite
Inda to share her stories that she's benefited from studying and working abroad.
Thank you. So I'm at
the uh
sorry. Oh, it's, it's the room. It's a room people. Uh, I'm a
fan
also
from the Netherlands.
I'm a game journalist,
a teacher and international relation specialist at Delhi in college.
I had a fortune
uh,
experience to go in exchange between my studies.
Yeah, don't be jealous, jealous of this list by the way,
uh to have a full time internship at user
joy,
a game company in Taiwan to do a game design research master
in Germany and to work one year as a course creator at Linlin
University in Hong Kong.
So we like Jen early asked like who is our student in the room?
And well speaking to, to the moment that I was 17,
I went to Hong Kong for the first time.
Um
And many international trips followed my decision to go overseas was like
at this moment I realized from time to time,
uh new employers really liked it that I went overseas
because they see the experiences that I got with it.
They really liked it. So basically because I went abroad, I get
later on a lot of advantages and I'm not the only one.
There was a recent mass qualitative study from Erasmus.
Plus that showed that going abroad
uh has a long term influence on your life.
97% of all participants confirmed a positive influence on
your life and 90% on the career path.
So for my internship, I wanted to go to Taiwan,
but I had no clue to start.
And it was not easy.
I went on the website and checking all like
the emails I could find from for the companies
and of course,
no response and the deadline of getting
an internship was getting closer and closer.
And I really didn't want to do an internship
in the Netherlands because that's boring.
So I started to pick up the phone
and just call them.
And uh one of the ladies that picked up the phone
uh explained to me that it was not because uh well,
they most likely hadn't seen my email but it was so much paperwork
to let me come to the company and also was cultural difference and
so on.
So at the moment, uh of all those emails rejection,
I realized because I didn't give up,
I was kind of like forcing them to just hire me basically as an intern.
Uh it wasn't about
like they were rejecting me but they were rejecting to someone else
coming because of paperwork and I was a foreigner which is weird.
Um
So
not everyone in this room is a student and I
believe that personal growth always goes with going abroad.
I mean, you can do it other ways but I really believe that
uh for me, it changed a lot of my own self esteem. Uh I push my boundaries
and I learned to communicate with people from all over the world.
And I grew an amazing network which is still really
uh instrumental in my career today.
Um
And I have many cool stories to tell. I tell you but not now.
But over a beer, you can ask me any weird stories. It's really cool. Really?
It's best benefits ever.
So uh at this moment,
we are in a time that going remote is is getting more popular and more common.
So a research by hip
marker shows that at this moment uh the
rema job is very good
and even still now because we're having a dire time,
it has 360 remote jobs open on their website when I last checked, which was last week.
So
there are different ways to start to work overseas.
Uh Please talk me after this talk.
Uh I can unravel like what you want to know.
Um Because this is, yeah, this is going to be another talk. You don't have time.
So as I mentioned,
I studied and worked in several countries overseas and
I learned that research doing research is really
important because every single country has a really little
nitty gritty details, um visas injections whatsoever.
Um
Just I really like this website uh that you see on the site.
Uh
any visas check before you go, which country you go because it's uh it's
just prevent so much stress to know things beforehand.
So, uh Jen mentioned already the resumes earlier.
Uh I want to say that apart from visas
resumes also have like a lot of different things.
There are different countries with different personal information,
uh descriptions, some countries like your photograph, some don't,
uh your length can be different, the structure.
Um And maybe, I mean, I'm in America but I hear that
maybe you don't know what the A four is. Well, uh please, if you don't
search it because it's really good to show that you understand the culture,
you show employers that
you uh take that extra step and that is super important.
And of course, our,
our world is getting globalized and people understand there are
differences but it is really that extra little mouth that
makes your employer realize that you are taking them serious.
So
making additions. Uh a decision to work overseas is a big one.
I mean, I can keep talking about this like for an hour, please. I shouldn't.
So um before that you should make
a wot analysis. So
write down your strength, weaknesses, opportunities and threats.
Um
So
for me, uh for example, uh I uh had an education
uh I wanted to teach in
uh Hong Kong uh f
in, in Taiwan and Hong Kong. But I said I need a master.
So these kind of things can differ from countries.
Your portfolio is still really important in our commu community.
Um Don't forget it apart from the resume.
And I already learned the language so I already
uh could speak some Chinese.
So for yourself, write down what are your internal strength and weaknesses
and get it noted
because you should also note what are your external uh strength and weakness,
the things that you don't have control on.
So uh this is going to be a package of text,
but it will uh foster out where you want to go.
So I want to stress
that working abroad, especially when moving to a new place is not an easy decision.
A lot of things need to be considered,
but I invite you to think about all the new possibilities that comes along with it.
Thank you.
OK,
I appreciate your international perspective
agenda.
Now, I'm excited for Angela's talk.
Um I've seen Angela work closely with so many mentees
um in early phases of job preparation,
helping them to decode job applications for goodness of fit
and Angela renews my optimism and
she pushes boundaries of my thinking and of the mentees that she's working with
in such creative approaches. So I look forward to your talk, Angela.
All
right.
Hello.
Welcome to life lessons from the hunt. Uh, the job hunt.
So who am I?
Hi, I'm Angela Geis
pronounced she
and I'm currently an associate sound designer at Nether
Realm Studios in Chicago,
I did not go to school for games. I am self taught.
And two years ago,
I was in the middle of my own job search learning
and putting all of these tips and tricks to use.
These are my stories about the things that worked for me.
So please take or leave them as you see fit.
So throughout my time applying for jobs,
these are the four big lessons that I learned,
I'm gonna share two with you and then Tony already and Tony and
Trento are gonna do a deeper dive on to the last two.
First one will be do your due diligence, research,
network maintenance.
Welcome back to these
and then
expect nothing, prepare for everything,
do the work to make sure you are ready for the just in cases like an interview.
But if you send off every application
with an expectation of success or even a response,
it will only drain your energy and enthusiasm.
And you already heard Tony heard uh talk about this
and my favorite piece of advice
be your ambitious,
passionate and genuine self because this is the only person you can be
and actors know and I learned in my theater career
that you shine the brightest when you are your most genuine self.
And that's what draws people in
which Trento will be talking a little bit about later.
So due diligence, research,
common advice is to know the company that you're applying for.
I found that the most critical aspect for me
was to know as much as you can about who you're talking to.
So search the company, see if you can tell the size what they're known for the games,
they make the team composition and who you might be working with or talking to.
If you can't find something
that would be something good to ask in the interview.
Uh Don't be like me who is woefully uneducated in mainstream anything
except like grpgs
and audio
and uh panics whenever someone from
Larian studios walks up to and then introduces themselves and I
can't pinpoint exactly what game I'm supposed to know them from
and uh that I can connect and chat about them with
the multi
award
winning game of the year. Boulder's gate three.
I do know Balder's gate three.
Uh So next network maintenance, networking
is making friends.
Keep it simple, keep it chill, keep it calm.
If you think about networking like this,
it helps lower the pressure you put on yourself and it helps
you to be more confident and easy to approach and talk to
after meeting someone use Discord, Twitter, linkedin,
whatever you like to reach out and reconnect occasionally.
Uh I saw this thing and it reminded me of this conversation we had at G DC.
I played your game and I loved the music. This is important for keeping friendships,
having professional friends locally can be a game
changer if people are easier to get to,
they're easier to keep in touch with.
And if you can't think of anything else to say, send a meme
appropriate
worksafe memes, please.
For example, uh, when the winter storm hits in Chicago, uh, you can send this
to the Mortal Combat team.
Last, the mo uh, the last most important thing about network maintenance.
So I asked a few lovely folk for their experience in the job hunt around the world.
I pulled these quotes from their answers about finding jobs in the UK, Sweden,
South Africa, Indonesia and Canada.
And though they all have wildly different experiences,
their answers to me showcase a through line that even in the international context,
the most important thing for any job hunt
is to talk to people and build relationships.
So
if you'll indulge me,
look to your left,
look to your right,
these people next to you,
uh, they could become your new best friends, your future boss, your coworkers,
someone who will help you navigate your next obstacle with,
or someone you'll just smile in the hallway after this,
maybe
introduce yourself after the talk.
Ok. My final and greatest piece of advice is
do your best to relax so that you can be
your genuine self and to put your best foot forward,
there is only so much that's under your control. At some point
you've prepared for everything
all you can do now,
uh, and now it's out of your hands.
The only thing left to do is make sure there aren't any red flags.
So I ran across this quote recently in Rob Bridget's book about audio.
I'm an audio person. Make everything audio.
Um, I really love the quote though, so I'm making it apply here.
Hm.
The thing about bullets is
you can dodge the easy ones
but not the others and you cannot dodge them all. So
dodge the easy bullets, the tell tale signs and leave the others in the hands of fate.
There's nothing you can do about those anyways,
you did your work,
you put in the effort, you have prepared what you can,
you've dodged the nastiest bullets.
Now sit back down,
have some tea and
let the winds take you
where they will.
Thank you.
I'm supposed to keep track of time, but I get so lost in these stories.
Thank you for sharing that. That was incredible.
Um
And uh
I want to emphasize that last part about the relax. That's uh it's really important.
We stress out so much about trying to get that next job.
Um So in a moment, we're going to hear from
Fauzi. Um And I, I didn't invite him here because of his title.
Um But because he cares about people.
And
when I've asked people, um I was looking to join this panel,
I was looking for people who've been inspired
um who support international communities. So I manage a team in
Europe and I've seen through action um Fauzi
supporting us, helping to elevate
people finding their best job fit.
So, welcome to the podium Fowzie.
Thank you so much for the humbling introduction. Hello, everybody, Marhaba.
My name is Fauzi
um
21 years in the business in uh game design and creative direction roles.
I'm currently the VP of Global Creative at uh Ubisoft.
So oversee uh and help uh CRE creative uh
uh teams across uh Europe bring their uh creative visions to life.
Um I'm Xeax King and other companies shipped a bunch
of games from Mario Rabbits to Star Wars to battlefields.
And then, uh I'm on the board of Education for Future Games,
which is one of the leading uh schools in uh uh Sweden.
And um I wrote uh Al
Galab Art of game design, one of the first books,
if not the first one to be written about game design in Arabic.
And I just got the ambassador award a couple of days ago.
Thank you. Thank you.
So, um
I've been asked to do 22 very difficult tasks.
One of them is to recount all of my mistakes in five minutes, which is impossible.
I could have been here for a long time
and also to speak only for five minutes, which is also impossible.
I tend to like to do that quite a bit. So I'm gonna try my best here.
And uh Doctor Jen, you can always kick me when I'm over time
and I've also listened to Angelo's advice.
There's a lot of memes in this presentation.
So I want to, um, to walk you through like some very anecdotal uh,
stuff that happened to me early on in my career,
some mistakes that I believe that I made or like, you know,
tough stuff that I've been through.
So hopefully you don't have to.
Um, I started my career in Jordan and here we go, this is one of the first tough ones.
If you can help it, try to be born somewhere with an industry, it makes sense,
it makes things a lot more easier for you. Um But if you can't
uh control where you're born, um consider relocating entirely uh
to be close to the industry where there
are schools where there are companies where there are
places where you can join the people that have done this stuff that you can learn from
or otherwise do what I did.
You keep learning, doing the things, make mistakes and pick up from them.
Um
uh My first project, for example, me and my friends, um this is me when I had here.
Uh We started our own studio,
there were nine of us and we started working on
the vertical slide for Gameboy Advanced RPG of the time.
Uh One of the first is uh kind in the region and
there's a lot of mistakes in the center that I just mentioned.
Um
Because if you um if you can join an already existing
team or company so that you can learn from their experience.
Um Even if it's not the type of game you want to work on or
like the type of project you were like dreaming to join the industry to do.
Um You get to learn what it's like to be in a game team,
you get to learn what it's like to work on a game and you
get to learn from those people's mistakes and that will make things a lot,
a lot easier for you when you like actually get to work on the stuff that you like.
Um you get to see what it's really like to be
on the ground in a studio regardless of its size.
But if you do want to start your own studio, um we started as nine people,
I would probably say you don't want it to be a large team.
Um Something like anything, anything over five people
as you can imagine will cause a lot of complexity.
And especially when it comes to coordinations, communication,
unifying the vision and not to mention cost,
it's really hard to get five people to agree what to have for lunch.
Imagine if you have to, like, you get more people involved, right?
Um And also like, don't start with an RPG, you know,
um or a relatively large project. Um,
what you want from your first project is that you want to finish it.
Um You start with something that is the smallest possible. So you can learn,
finish and then move on to the next one,
grow your skills, one project at a time
and also try not to let your first project be your magnum opus.
Um If you just started running,
it would be ridiculous if I asked you to win the golden medal in the Olympics.
Uh making games just like any other skill
is something that you grow.
So you show up every day and you do the work and you grow your skills one day,
you will have the skills and the person on insight
to make that magnum
opus.
Um And so when my first project inevitably failed, um
uh we were never able to finish it and release it.
I took that very hard on myself and almost left the business altogether.
And here's one of the bigger mistakes
is I was not kind to myself, you know,
and you really need to be kind to yourself because putting a lot of stress on trying
and tying your failure to your ability to continue in your career
is a sure pathway to burnout.
Um So, you know, fail fast, move on be kind to yourselves.
Mistakes are part of the learning process.
And even though I'm here standing telling you about the mistakes I made,
they are part of who I am and why I'm standing here in front of you today.
have not failed. I have tried 10,000 ways that did not work.
And you know, when I was in the indie team, I was wearing many hats, you know,
like I could write music, I could code, I could do two D art,
I could do U I level design and all kinds of stuff.
So therefore I thought I qualify for all of this.
So I started applying to all of these jobs from
prac, from particle effects to level design, to game design.
And uh at some point,
I was getting more rejection letters than there were days in the month.
And that's, that's AAA mistake. So like what,
what you want to do is that um
I see a lot of people make the same mistake
and uh while it's great to explore so that you
can finally pick the area that works for you.
Um
And what you find in your heart and ultimately, you need to focus your efforts.
Um There are only so many hours in the day and when you're growing your skills,
as we spoke about it earlier,
having a defined focus allows you to focus on the time and the results.
So be result oriented,
visualize the end goal and then pour all of your effort towards it.
What is the skill set that you want to grow
and how can I focus on learning that skill set that I'm missing?
What are the knowledge gaps,
behavioral changes and experience gaps that I need to add to my skill set
to be able to be on my path to my end goal.
Who in the,
I'm gonna ask you a couple of questions for you
to ponder on who in the industry inspires you.
What do they
have that you don't?
And how do you get
it?
Simple example
uh say that you want to work on company X. Company X probably has employees.
Those employees has employee uh uh internet presence, portfolio,
linkedin profiles, et cetera.
Have a look.
See what are the things that made them employable
for that employer that you really wanna work with?
Uh How can you get your portfolio similar to this?
What are the skills, the behaviors, the experience
that you need to grow to match?
And uh the only thing I didn't do wrong is that I wanted to persevere no matter what,
no matter the setbacks, I knew what I wanted to go.
There was a person that inspires me.
I knew the skill set that I wanted to grow and I persevered,
you show up every day and you do the work but you be kind to yourself.
So to summarize my advice to you,
you show up every day,
you do the work,
you pick projects that you can finish.
You don't overestimate your skills
and underestimate your projects.
You go to where the jobs are,
you become undeniable by making yourself desirable for the roles you want
and you be kind to yourself.
Thank you very much.
I think your message of being kind to
ourselves segues perfectly to an inspiring and important talk
from Trento about authenticity.
Thank you, Trento.
I didn't trip on the way up here, so that's a great start.
Hello, everyone. My name is Trento Von LBG.
I'm the CEO of Mob Breaker Interactive.
A new company founded in November 2023 and sorry f
we didn't take your advice. We are a 10 person studio.
So
we'll see how that one turns out in here.
But
a year ago,
I was in the same position that at least a third
of you were where I was looking for a new job.
And four years ago I had just graduated.
So today I'd like to talk to you a bit about the mistakes that led me to where
I am today in my first few jobs
and why the importance of being authentic matters, especially in landing the job.
That's right for you.
Now,
as a quick note,
there is no magic solution.
Nothing that I say today will get you hired tomorrow.
And I trust me,
I wish I could
nothing
but
I hope that you can learn from my mistakes
and that in listening to what we're about to share
that the job that you do get
will be the right one for you.
So let's talk about my mistake,
one of them at least,
and specifically my mistaken approach to interviews
now we've all heard the recommendations of you have to make
sure you review exactly everything that's on the application page.
Look at what they're saying, what they want on their resumes,
edit your resume to the skills,
do everything to be the perfect person that they want
because there's thousands of people competing for that job.
We've all heard that. Right.
And while that is true, you do want to develop your skills towards something.
What can often feel like is
I have to edit myself.
I had to be and sell something that I am not entirely comfortable being.
And you start to say things in interviews that maybe you don't really feel and think
at least for me, one thing that I often hid was
I really, really care about work life balance.
I want to protect my team above all else.
No,
I'm not going to stay here until eight pm every day or work on
Saturdays because I have hobbies and passions outside of this that I care about.
Instead, when asked, would you be willing to pull an all nighter?
Would you be willing to work over hours?
Are you willing to do everything and anything
you can to make the best product possible?
I say yes.
Y
yes.
But that inevitably led to
the realization I made the wrong career choice
that I would land myself in a culture where I didn't fit in.
I sold myself as this person that they wanted
but not who I wanted to be.
And I did this because I was desperate for a job.
I needed something.
Even if it landed me somewhere, I really,
really didn't want to be.
So eventually I burnt out. I left, I couldn't take that job for more than a year.
And I thought it was time to approach with a new tact.
I started with interviewing the interviewer.
We'll get on that one in a second
and realizing that I had to be
truly authentic
and let my inner gremlin the thing that I was afraid of showing show.
Let's start with the interview, the interviewer.
I'll share a similar thing to what Tony shared earlier
and say I applied to over 275 jobs last year.
These are the only ones that I had tracked
and we're gonna ignore the fact that I got
rejected or ghosted from all but three of them
and focus on the fact that even though I was being authentic in answering
and asking all the questions, I possibly could.
I still got three offers.
But
I also turned down those three offers
because I asked them questions. Like, what's your production philosophy?
What do you care the most about?
What is something that you can't stand about this job and you would change
the answers I got were not satisfying. They had me realize,
wow, even if I get this job, I actually really
don't want to work here
and even in this economy,
that meant that I saved myself possibly getting laid off within the first
three months or getting burnt out all
over again and possibly leaving industry entirely
being authentic. On the other hand, can mean a number of things
you mean telling the truth
and being honest with what matters to you.
It can mean sharing your flaws
and being able to articulate your growth.
This is what people mean when they say,
don't be afraid of being honest about the mistakes that you have made
as a hiring manager.
I want to hear that
that will tell me more than anything about the thousands
upon thousands of successes that we share every single day
which ties in with knowing yourself
and being willing to be vulnerable.
Now, I know this is scary
because I've been there
being vulnerable, means being open to critique,
but being vulnerable is a very key part of someone knowing who you are.
At the end of the day,
people hire people,
people will hire you for who you are.
At least where you want to be. We'll hire you for where you are.
I know it's a tough ask
being vulnerable, hurts,
but it is necessary
for an example.
At a recent posting, we put out for a social media manager, part time role,
new studio
20 hours a week.
Not as much pay as I would have loved to have given.
We got over 400 applications
in the first week
we only were able to interview six and the six
that we picked were the ones that were the most
authentic to themselves.
Not just the people who had great skills.
They all did.
The people who told me about their passion with the Neopets community
or about a Hindu mythology comic series.
They want to write in the future for a community marketing position.
That was what got me
convinced.
Those are the people I want to interview.
It helps you stand out.
Not like one of the hundreds of others,
which is why being authentic really matters,
be authentic, not to get hired
but be genuine to get hired in the place. That's right for you.
I want to pause with this. Thank you. Slide because I think
it's really important and I appreciate you
including all the people who supported you,
Trento.
Um So I know we have some career changers in the room
and it is a great honor to invite our last speaker
uh for hope and honest sharing.
Uh So I think there's no better way to end G DC 24 with
Lara.
Wow, y'all are just wonderful. Thanks for being here.
Um
OK. Hi,
I'm Laura.
I have had four careers before landing in games.
My kittens are named Nocturne and Fiddlesticks.
I had no idea they were league names before I chose them.
I,
I craft, I play games. I have a DH D
I have uh anxiety.
I sometimes suffer from imposter syndrome.
Uh And I'm a development coordinator on Fortnite br
as a dreamer who once wrote a list of 63 careers that I thought might make me happy.
I've always hated the question. What do you want to be when you grow up?
How could I possibly limit myself to just one option?
When I said I did.
When I said I didn't know people always responded with some version of, oh,
that's ok.
You'll figure it out one day.
What they didn't say is it's ok to change your mind.
During a coveted acting mentorship in college, I went through a bout of depression.
I knew I was good.
I knew I could do it. But
could I actually, was it a mistake to be there
when I finally got the courage to talk to my mentor about this?
Their response, unfortunately, completely drained my morale.
They said
if you think you can be somewhere else and do it,
you probably should.
There's a whole bunch of people who want
to be here and can't imagine doing anything else
completely destroyed me.
I actually left a career that I loved a lot because I took that word
as the only option.
In hindsight, the path wasn't actually the problem.
The problem was the group of people I was with.
Honestly, my career would probably look very different today if I had
been with a different company or asked a second opinion.
It took me years to feel comfortable to ask that question again.
And when I did the answer was incredibly uplifting and
it propelled me further in my career at Epic.
If you find yourself suffering from imposter syndrome,
it's worth checking in and asking yourself these following questions,
you can answer no to any of these questions and still deserve to be where you are.
It might be
good to check if a different version of here could help you, thrive
the voices in your head. Can will and will lie to you,
the voices outside your head will also lie to you.
Even if they think they're trying to protect you.
I did want to take time to make a special call out
while everyone deserves their place to be here. And really
everyone does.
Marginalized groups tend to suffer from imposter syndrome more than
groups that are already well represented in this industry.
So
this one's for you,
you deserve to be here
and for everyone else. How are you making your here the right space to be
down the line at a job shadow.
I was very excited about,
I was talking to a person that about how
I loved two separate disciplines at that company.
And I inquired if, if I could switch one day,
I was very passionate about both. I had studied both in college.
They replied,
I have plenty of people who just want this track and
they worked really hard if you want to be somewhere else.
Why would I hire you? It's not fair to them.
I feel like I worked really hard too, but I took that as a rule of success.
Again. Second mistake,
I stopped being curious. Then
I stopped. Uh I pretended like my dreams didn't exist
and I burnt out
really, really hard
pigeonholing myself caused so much heartache and I lost years of growth.
I shied away from opportunities and I know that there are companies
out there that lost out on an incredibly passionate and driven employee.
After over a decade of that, something finally had to give.
Echoing some of Trento S points. It
is more than OK to ask vulnerable questions,
but take care to recognize the answers you've given
are just a data point. They are not the entire story.
No one gets to tell you what your path is.
Only you get to decide what the right one feels like.
I absolutely love my current career,
but I don't think the journey getting there needed to be so painful.
My first G DC in 2022 I didn't fully engage with anyone because I
was worried I would say something stupid and get blacklisted before I got in.
I went to a wiggy event. I met the dream person in my dream career at my dream studio.
And the only thing I remember saying is, oh,
that's cool. Thanks.
So take my advice. It will always be easier.
To interact with people, not with job titles,
not with, uh
not with job titles, not with their job, not with their title.
You may think that they're the rock stars of this industry,
but they are also just people.
The memories that will stick are the moments that you
have a chance to genuinely connect with each other.
Uh, compliment a patch that someone has on their bag.
Compliment someone's gaming tea.
Talk about a talk that you noticed you both were in.
I've had hundreds of conversations since that G DC three years ago.
But the ones I remember are the ones where we actually
stopped and took a minute to see each other and connect.
It can be easy to feel like you're losing your identity when you
get pushed out of a career that you or doubt your choices.
You are not one thing.
You are not your job,
you are not your title.
You aren't even this industry.
You are, you,
you are made up of hundreds of likes and dislikes and interests
and hobbies and opinions just like every other person in this room.
That's the stuff that will make a lasting impression.
You can lose your job.
You can get pushed out of a career or you can change your mind and you can still be you
on my intro slide.
You'll note that my title was just one of the things on
there and it wasn't even the one that I value the most.
Lastly, I'm gonna leave you with my favorite piece of advice.
If you remember nothing else. I hope you remember this
care. 10% less.
10% less is still an a
no one will notice that you are caring less except for you.
And the only thing that you'll notice is more energy,
less stress and more sustainable actions that will lead
to a better you and a better industry.
So take it from someone who jumped from theater to barista to bookseller into games.
It is ok to follow winding paths. It's ok
to change your mind. It's ok to try and fail.
It's ok to ask questions and be curious about your options.
It's ok to ignore advice that doesn't work for you.
I promise you will still be hirable.
I promise you'll be hirable if you pivot again.
I actually think that my job, I'm better at it because of my varied experience.
And I've heard that from more than just myself. I've heard it from so many people.
It's not always easy and some might scoff at your path,
but it is always going to be worth it.
And as long as you're approaching things with a sense of curiosity,
passion and authenticity,
you're gonna be just fine.
Thank you
all. I saw lots of heads nodding. Yeah.
And uh
I will try that uh care 10% less. I love that advice. And
um
I really appreciate you establishing
that we belong
and
now we will open up
to some questions. We won't have time for every question
here,
but we will stay around and we'll be able to answer it after we have to get off the mic.
Um But we do have some microphones over there if you're welcome to
and we'll, we'll alternate places and
we'll take the first question.
Hi. Uh Thank you so much for being here. It's really uh
great to see all these insights into the industry that we just really don't get
in a professional level.
You can just want to be your best self, but sometimes that's just um
not the best approach. Um So this one goes to policy. Um
I really enjoyed your talk and so you say you want to
build a skill and you also mentioned that like time is limited,
there are just only so many hours in the day, say you're,
you have a day job or you're a student
and then you arrive home
late in the afternoon, you're really tired.
How do you keep cultivating the skill set that you need
in a kind of limited time
or limited schedule?
Can you repeat the
question?
So the question is you have limited time,
how can you cultivate these skills? Did I capture that correctly?
Yes,
you can start and then we'll open it up.
Wonderful. Thank you for your question.
So I think like the way I approach it, I think I, I
go
little bit almost literal to the topic.
How much time
do I have?
And how much time will it take for me to acquire that skill?
So I try to actually literally get the number of hours.
I do a time audit regularly for myself, which is a weird thing to do. I admit.
Um, and I, I see how much time I have a week that is available for me for growth.
And, um, I will, you know, whether it's an hour, half an hour, 20 minutes,
five minutes, you know,
what is, how much time can I allocate a week for growth
and for the skill set, how much time
uh would it require me to learn that?
And it's amazing how you can like actually find
a lot of quantifiable information to this topic.
For example,
I was learning Japanese and discovered that
need 550 hours to be adequate at Japanese
when I looked at I have 2000 hours in dota too. I was like,
I could probably do that
and, and I saw you leaning and I was just curious if you wanted to jump in there or?
-- Ok. No, -- I'm just listening.
Anyone else want to jump in on that question?
Ok. Thank you for that question. Thank you so much
over here. Thank you f
uh hello.
So
my question was
ok. So two years postgrad, no job prospects yet. What advice?
Because you, you touch on a little bit. What advice.
Would you overall have to say like,
hey, don't give up yet?
Like how do you keep that momentum going?
-- So -- the job search is taking a long time. How do we keep going?
So we do agenda then Trent.
So for me, I always wanted to find out what I really want
and then I'm going to really check what should I do?
Like, for example, the Hong Kong job
I should have been on a learning service tutor. I was, I had no clue what it was.
I just search on Google. Oh OK. I guess this and this has connection with it.
So uh that was the way how I approach it. I really search, what do I want, what do I need?
And that's the way II I look at it. Yeah,
this is not actionable in the oh, this will get you the job,
the same
caveat.
I I
did audio in the past. I should know how to do that.
Uh
It's not actionable in the,
this will get you the job but it will hopefully help you feel better.
And that's find community,
find a friend, find hopefully multiple people who are in the same position as you
and
find camaraderie. And the we're all looking for this together.
They'll also be able to help you develop your own skills.
Maybe you can make a game jam, do projects together,
do something small and continue to develop your skills. Like was mentioned before.
Um I, I have a little bit of like somewhat scientific approach to that,
which is,
um,
find out what you're doing
and sort of like
list everything that you're doing and, and your varying levels of success
and then start changing the patterns of each thing and how you approach it
and see what kind of result you get as you start to change things.
Um If you continue to do the same things and approach things the same way
and get the same results, then you need to change your approach.
And if you change too much,
you won't actually know what led to the success.
But if you start changing one thing at a time,
you can actually see the difference that it will make
and then you can start tweaking the other things that aren't working
even
five.
Yeah.
Uh to repeat the comment.
Uh What are you a designer?
And then we have another question over here. Um
Hi. Uh
I'm, I'm a high school student. I'm a junior in high school right now.
I, I live in Colorado. Um For
this is my first time at G DC.
Probably won't be here for another few years.
Um I don't get to do things like this very often. So, networking for me is difficult.
I'm
pretty young still. So I, you know, I don't get to meet a lot of people in the industry.
Um A lot of internships start at like I keep hearing, sophomore,
junior year of college, I'm not even there yet.
Um Do you guys have any like, tips or advice for? Is there a way to network online
or instead of like having to travel everywhere or?
I don't know, I just don't have that much access
first of all, way to, way to take the step to come here. That's incredible.
So,
the quest,
the question is, how do we network
online when we cannot be in these spaces?
So I thought I saw someone lean in over here.
I did lean in. It's oh Angela also
there was that lane.
I'm gonna give you one for just like a year down the line.
You see all these lovely humans in the pink shirts.
They are a part of something called the conference associate
program and it is how I got my job.
Um It is a wonderful community that I
definitely couldn't have done this without.
So applications normally open up in October
and you decide or you, you get picked if you are lucky um in December.
And uh
yeah, it is one of the greatest networking opportunities of a lifetime,
highly recommend
Angela.
So online spaces there are resources.
I'm worried about you because you're in high school.
So I'm going to focus on other things like local, especially like you said,
Colorado, right?
There's probably schools around you or something.
I find that reaching out to people, especially professors or something,
they're really receptive if you want to learn,
they want to help you learn.
If you can find also, if there are other professionals
in your area,
they want to help you if you want to reach out.
-- Uh -- Yes, I, I do know a few, there's a few game developers in Denver.
um
I, I mean, I do go to a game development program. I talked to my teacher about it.
Um
but it's just,
I know, you know, I don't just want to walk up to serenity and forage and be like, hey,
are you guys doing internships or like come like, can I, can I talk to you?
It's I feel like that's
kind of difficult.
Well, why not be a little brave and just email them and be like, hey,
does anyone have a couple of minutes to talk?
Like I'm super interested, I just have a couple of questions,
prepare a couple of questions.
Do you have 15 minutes
and like, just leave it at that if it's super low stakes,
like keep it low stakes for yourself, keep it low stakes for them.
Everybody has 15 minutes here and there. You know what I mean?
And if all it takes is to respond to an email to you, maybe they'll do it.
And Trento
final thoughts on that question,
uh I think Angela you mentioned earlier, but
everything is about making friends ask honest, genuine questions.
And if you don't go into it with an agenda of, I want a job
and just, hey, I'm a student. I'd really like to learn more about this.
Can I ask you some questions?
I think 99% of developers will be more than happy to make the time for that.
-- Ok, perfect. Thank you so -- much. So, thank you everyone for coming.
We will stick around. I know there's another question for
um that you probably all have a question. So we will stay around and answer questions
uh for the conference associates. Do we, we need to leave
room?
Is that correct? There? There, this is like the last talk in this room for the day.
They will be
closing the
building
soon.
They're ending early today.
So
if you
can
clear
the
room,
so the answer
is yes,
we will meet you in the hallway.