[music]
With that said, our next talk is Randy Smith from Tiger Style. And with that,
Smith from Tiger Style. And with that, just going to go ahead and start.
just going to go ahead and start. [applause] That's That's
[applause] That's That's Thank you. Uh, hi, I'm Randy. I'm in
Thank you. Uh, hi, I'm Randy. I'm in Tiger Style, the studio made that that
Tiger Style, the studio made that that made Spider, the secret of Bryce Manor,
made Spider, the secret of Bryce Manor, which you might have seen at last year's
which you might have seen at last year's IGF. And, uh, this is my friend Rob. Rob
IGF. And, uh, this is my friend Rob. Rob is an avid gamer. He's also a very funny
is an avid gamer. He's also a very funny and creative guy and he loves the
and creative guy and he loves the Apocalypse, of course. So, his favorite
Apocalypse, of course. So, his favorite game is Fallout 3. This is his Fallout 3
game is Fallout 3. This is his Fallout 3 character. Uh, but most of the time his
character. Uh, but most of the time his character doesn't look like this because
character doesn't look like this because if you know Fallout 3, you know that you
if you know Fallout 3, you know that you can have different pieces of equipment
can have different pieces of equipment that might like a helmet that might give
that might like a helmet that might give you a special ability or extra
you a special ability or extra protection or something. Uh, but also
protection or something. Uh, but also changes the way you look. And Rob
changes the way you look. And Rob chooses his equipment for looks. And so
chooses his equipment for looks. And so most of the time his character actually
most of the time his character actually looks like this, which is he's wearing a
looks like this, which is he's wearing a ghoul mask and he's got um a George
ghoul mask and he's got um a George Washington wig on, although normally he
Washington wig on, although normally he sort of prefers the Abraham Lincoln top
sort of prefers the Abraham Lincoln top hat. And so Rob has completed all of the
hat. And so Rob has completed all of the good as opposed to evil side quests in
good as opposed to evil side quests in Fallout 3. So everywhere he goes,
Fallout 3. So everywhere he goes, everybody's always like praising him and
everybody's always like praising him and thanking this ghoul headed Abraham
thanking this ghoul headed Abraham Lincoln guy. And at some point after he
Lincoln guy. And at some point after he had finished the game and all the
had finished the game and all the optional content, Rob uh decided his
optional content, Rob uh decided his character had gone crazy looking for
character had gone crazy looking for more good deeds to perform in the world
more good deeds to perform in the world and thought that all the teddy bears
and thought that all the teddy bears were victims in need of saving all these
were victims in need of saving all these teddy bears you can find around the
teddy bears you can find around the Capital Wasteland. So he would, for
Capital Wasteland. So he would, for example, perform home invasions on
example, perform home invasions on innocent civilians to like liberate the
innocent civilians to like liberate the teddy bear hostages. Uh ideally in a
teddy bear hostages. Uh ideally in a stealthy way, but if necessary, you
stealthy way, but if necessary, you know, he would mop up the victims and
know, he would mop up the victims and sorry, mop up the witnesses so nobody
sorry, mop up the witnesses so nobody knew what happened.
knew what happened. Uh, here's a wonderful scenic vista Rob
Uh, here's a wonderful scenic vista Rob made with his teddy bears. Here's him
made with his teddy bears. Here's him chilling out with them. So, this is what
chilling out with them. So, this is what I mean when I talk about player
I mean when I talk about player expression. Like, there's something very
expression. Like, there's something very uniquely Rob about the way he's
uniquely Rob about the way he's approaching Fallout 3. And I'm sure all
approaching Fallout 3. And I'm sure all of you can think of similar examples.
of you can think of similar examples. Uh, to me, player expression includes
Uh, to me, player expression includes anytime the player makes a choice from a
anytime the player makes a choice from a range of valid options. So, it includes
range of valid options. So, it includes stuff like customizing the look of your
stuff like customizing the look of your avatar. Um, it includes customizing the
avatar. Um, it includes customizing the gameplay abilities that your player has.
gameplay abilities that your player has. It can involve picking dialogue from a
It can involve picking dialogue from a menu. It can involve crafting and
menu. It can involve crafting and manipulating the world. Um, it also
manipulating the world. Um, it also includes uh where you place your webs in
includes uh where you place your webs in our game spider. Uh so there's this
our game spider. Uh so there's this interesting thing that um when you take
interesting thing that um when you take these level complete screens at the end
these level complete screens at the end of a spider level uh and you take one
of a spider level uh and you take one level but multiple players and you start
level but multiple players and you start to overlay their level complete screens,
to overlay their level complete screens, you notice that there are certain spots
you notice that there are certain spots on these maps that every player has
on these maps that every player has placed a web. And then there's other
placed a web. And then there's other spots where no player has ever placed a
spots where no player has ever placed a web. But if you go to a different level
web. But if you go to a different level in our game, you that's not always the
in our game, you that's not always the case. So, in this level, for example, uh
case. So, in this level, for example, uh there's only one spot that every player
there's only one spot that every player has placed a web. And so, this is really
has placed a web. And so, this is really fascinating to me because it shows that
fascinating to me because it shows that player expression is the kind of thing
player expression is the kind of thing that you can get a little bit of a
that you can get a little bit of a objective measurement on, like sort of a
objective measurement on, like sort of a temperature gauge on whether your game
temperature gauge on whether your game is expressive and where it might be
is expressive and where it might be expressive. So, you might be sitting
expressive. So, you might be sitting there wondering, you know, does this
there wondering, you know, does this have anything to do with the game I'm
have anything to do with the game I'm working on now?
working on now? And that's a bit of an overstatement. Uh
And that's a bit of an overstatement. Uh but I I did want to bring this topic to
but I I did want to bring this topic to the Indie Summit for a few reasons. Uh
the Indie Summit for a few reasons. Uh the first of all, um unlike something
the first of all, um unlike something like a big fancy renderer, uh player
like a big fancy renderer, uh player expression is the kind of thing that's
expression is the kind of thing that's mostly uh the output of thoughtful
mostly uh the output of thoughtful design and it's it's pretty easy uh to
design and it's it's pretty easy uh to implement a lot of the time. So that
implement a lot of the time. So that makes it within the reach of even like a
makes it within the reach of even like a modest indie studio. two is I think as
modest indie studio. two is I think as an example like Minecraft shows us um
an example like Minecraft shows us um there's a lot of you know I believe that
there's a lot of you know I believe that player expression is an area for
player expression is an area for innovation and growth. It's like a
innovation and growth. It's like a frontier and it's hard to imagine the
frontier and it's hard to imagine the mainstream studios backing something
mainstream studios backing something risky like that you know like having
risky like that you know like having been the studios that made Minecraft. So
been the studios that made Minecraft. So I feel like indies are the one who are
I feel like indies are the one who are more likely to come up with these new
more likely to come up with these new ideas. And lastly because uh player
ideas. And lastly because uh player expression is really close to the heart
expression is really close to the heart of what makes our medium unique. idea,
of what makes our medium unique. idea, you know, the promise that you can not
you know, the promise that you can not just passively observe, but also
just passively observe, but also participate in the art form. So, how do
participate in the art form. So, how do you do it? Uh, I'm summarizing the
you do it? Uh, I'm summarizing the approach I like with this expression,
approach I like with this expression, leave enough room. And I'm going to
leave enough room. And I'm going to break it down into three parts. The
break it down into three parts. The first of which is a don't. It's don't
first of which is a don't. It's don't tell the player what to do. So, what are
tell the player what to do. So, what are some negative examples of cases where
some negative examples of cases where you might tell the player what to do?
you might tell the player what to do? Well, obviously there's, you know, the
Well, obviously there's, you know, the so-called string of pearl games, which
so-called string of pearl games, which are these like heavily gated, crafted,
are these like heavily gated, crafted, bottlenecked uh games explicitly for the
bottlenecked uh games explicitly for the purpose that every player has the same
purpose that every player has the same exact exquisite experience. Like
exact exquisite experience. Like obviously that's not leaving any room
obviously that's not leaving any room for the player's creativity. Um,
for the player's creativity. Um, similarly, you know, certain types of
similarly, you know, certain types of very mathematical mechanical puzzle
very mathematical mechanical puzzle games where the whole point is that
games where the whole point is that there's only one an right answer, also
there's only one an right answer, also not much room. But there's some more
not much room. But there's some more insidious stuff, too. Um, such as like
insidious stuff, too. Um, such as like in the case of Scrabble, when I first
in the case of Scrabble, when I first started playing Scrabble, uh, I felt
started playing Scrabble, uh, I felt like it must be like a really expressive
like it must be like a really expressive game, right? Because you're given this
game, right? Because you're given this random collection of letters and you get
random collection of letters and you get to make your own words. So, what could
to make your own words. So, what could be more expressive than that? But when
be more expressive than that? But when you really get deep in Scrabble and
you really get deep in Scrabble and you're trying to optimize for score, you
you're trying to optimize for score, you find that you need to be proficient in
find that you need to be proficient in in words like this. um which you, for
in words like this. um which you, for example, two-letter words are important
example, two-letter words are important for Scrabbles because they give you
for Scrabbles because they give you extra flexibility so that you can place
extra flexibility so that you can place your really high scoring tiles like Q's
your really high scoring tiles like Q's and Z's on the multiplier spaces on the
and Z's on the multiplier spaces on the board. And there's all these other sort
board. And there's all these other sort of um mechanical advantages to these
of um mechanical advantages to these types of words, but like you know,
types of words, but like you know, nobody who who knows who doesn't play
nobody who who knows who doesn't play Scrabble has ever heard of this word OE,
Scrabble has ever heard of this word OE, which is a whirlwind off the fairy
which is a whirlwind off the fairy islands. And that includes everybody who
islands. And that includes everybody who lives on the fair islands, wherever
lives on the fair islands, wherever those are, right? So you you wind up
those are, right? So you you wind up doing this thing that's not especially,
doing this thing that's not especially, you know, doesn't seem like your own
you know, doesn't seem like your own creativity. Um, if you go look at the
creativity. Um, if you go look at the worldwide global leaderboards for
worldwide global leaderboards for Scrabble and you check to see who has
Scrabble and you check to see who has played the highest scoring word of all
played the highest scoring word of all time, you find that there's a ton of
time, you find that there's a ton of people who are all tied for first place
people who are all tied for first place with this word oxifenazone.
with this word oxifenazone. And it turns out this is the theoretical
And it turns out this is the theoretical highest scoring possible word in
highest scoring possible word in Scrabble right now that they know of.
Scrabble right now that they know of. and actually takes a lot of game
and actually takes a lot of game mechanical contortions to prove that
mechanical contortions to prove that this could ever possibly be played in a
this could ever possibly be played in a in a Scrabble game. Um, leaderboards, I
in a Scrabble game. Um, leaderboards, I think, are very revealing. Like, uh, you
think, are very revealing. Like, uh, you know, Mario Kart's this other example of
know, Mario Kart's this other example of a game that you get to choose lots of
a game that you get to choose lots of different characters, lots of different
different characters, lots of different vehicles, but when you go look at the
vehicles, but when you go look at the global leaderboards, you see that people
global leaderboards, you see that people who are really heavily trying to
who are really heavily trying to optimize, uh, are have a much narrower
optimize, uh, are have a much narrower range of choice available to them. So,
range of choice available to them. So, this is the problem with score. you
this is the problem with score. you know, it it it takes a much more
know, it it it takes a much more open-ended experience and it applies
open-ended experience and it applies this numerical judgment to it and it's
this numerical judgment to it and it's kind of it's doing its job as a game
kind of it's doing its job as a game design tool. You know, it's us telling
design tool. You know, it's us telling the player what we think is right and
the player what we think is right and wrong in terms of how to play our games.
wrong in terms of how to play our games. Um, and there's some things beyond just
Um, and there's some things beyond just like the pure numerical score that can
like the pure numerical score that can also do this. Uh, stuff like the goals
also do this. Uh, stuff like the goals and tasks and objectives that we give
and tasks and objectives that we give the player, especially when those things
the player, especially when those things are connected to the players like
are connected to the players like success and failure and progress through
success and failure and progress through the game. So, this is a good point for
the game. So, this is a good point for me to start showing some of the stuff
me to start showing some of the stuff that Tiger Style is working on. Now, I
that Tiger Style is working on. Now, I just wanted to mention that it's it was
just wanted to mention that it's it was really intended in sort of this academic
really intended in sort of this academic context to to share with our fellow
context to to share with our fellow developers. So, if you're a press
developers. So, if you're a press person, we'd ask that you contact us. We
person, we'd ask that you contact us. We can give you some more appropriate
can give you some more appropriate materials. So, our uh new game is like
materials. So, our uh new game is like the concept is you're it's the future
the concept is you're it's the future and you're an astronaut and you're sent
and you're an astronaut and you're sent on this mission to Mars. Uh but
on this mission to Mars. Uh but something goes horribly wrong and you're
something goes horribly wrong and you're trapped in this cave where you
trapped in this cave where you discovered life on Mars. And not only do
discovered life on Mars. And not only do you discover life, but you find this
you discover life, but you find this whole ecosystem of these exotic alien
whole ecosystem of these exotic alien life forms that all have like different
life forms that all have like different strange behaviors. Um, and the structure
strange behaviors. Um, and the structure of the game is you're trapped in each
of the game is you're trapped in each area of the cave until you generate
area of the cave until you generate enough biomass to open this thing we
enough biomass to open this thing we call an airlock so you can proceed to
call an airlock so you can proceed to the next area. And so the types of
the next area. And so the types of activities the player might do involves,
activities the player might do involves, you know, throwing seeds to plant
you know, throwing seeds to plant plants, you know, to grow new plants or
plants, you know, to grow new plants or like growing them with their the light
like growing them with their the light that they have on their head or like
that they have on their head or like watering them as we're going to see
watering them as we're going to see here. There's watering this plant which
here. There's watering this plant which is then going to generate some more
is then going to generate some more seeds so the plants can reproduce. You
seeds so the plants can reproduce. You can feed the creatures in the world. Uh,
can feed the creatures in the world. Uh, and after they've eaten, they then
and after they've eaten, they then reproduce as well.
reproduce as well. So the different types of things the
So the different types of things the player can do to like generate this
player can do to like generate this biomass which then lets them proceed.
And I'll watch a video for a second.
So there are these activities in our game that are connected to the player's
game that are connected to the player's progress. They have to do things to
progress. They have to do things to proceed. Uh so it's a little bit like
proceed. Uh so it's a little bit like telling the player what to do. So what's
telling the player what to do. So what's our approach to avoiding telling the
our approach to avoiding telling the player what to do? Well, we're actually
player what to do? Well, we're actually uh extending this thing that worked
uh extending this thing that worked really well for us on Spider, which is
really well for us on Spider, which is essentially that there's a very low
essentially that there's a very low threshold for success. Like the player
threshold for success. Like the player in this case um you know doesn't have to
in this case um you know doesn't have to grow much biomass in order for the
grow much biomass in order for the airlock to open. And every single plant,
airlock to open. And every single plant, creature, life form in the game
creature, life form in the game contributes at least a little bit of
contributes at least a little bit of biomass. So, the player really just
biomass. So, the player really just we're kind of just asking the player
we're kind of just asking the player like, "Look, we don't care what you do.
like, "Look, we don't care what you do. Just make sure you at least play the
Just make sure you at least play the game. All right? And then you can keep
game. All right? And then you can keep going." Um, and there's a ton of depth
going." Um, and there's a ton of depth on demand attached to it as well where
on demand attached to it as well where like uh you can always exceed the
like uh you can always exceed the minimum requirements by quite a lot.
minimum requirements by quite a lot. There's all these different types of
There's all these different types of bonus objectives like balancing the
bonus objectives like balancing the ecosystem in certain ways that you might
ecosystem in certain ways that you might be able to do as well. So that's one
be able to do as well. So that's one example of trying not to tell the player
example of trying not to tell the player what to do. A potentially more
what to do. A potentially more interesting example is this this thing I
interesting example is this this thing I call agnostic unit design, which is
call agnostic unit design, which is essentially like unlike uh designing um
essentially like unlike uh designing um enemies in a game where the only thing
enemies in a game where the only thing they are is enemies and the only thing
they are is enemies and the only thing they mean to the player is something to
they mean to the player is something to fight. uh we tried to be more agnostic
fight. uh we tried to be more agnostic like it's hard to tell if a given life
like it's hard to tell if a given life form in our game is an enemy or an ally,
form in our game is an enemy or an ally, if it's a tool you can use to accomplish
if it's a tool you can use to accomplish something or if it's a hazard. And the
something or if it's a hazard. And the answer is always that it depends. It
answer is always that it depends. It depends on what the player's current
depends on what the player's current goals are and it depends on what context
goals are and it depends on what context they're in. So, for example, these
they're in. So, for example, these little yellow blobs that you can see um
little yellow blobs that you can see um attached to the walls are these
attached to the walls are these creatures that we call crabs. And crabs
creatures that we call crabs. And crabs like to eat seeds. So, when plants spit
like to eat seeds. So, when plants spit out seeds like this plant is about to
out seeds like this plant is about to do, uh the crabs will come and eat them.
do, uh the crabs will come and eat them. And after they've eaten the seeds,
And after they've eaten the seeds, they'll reproduce. So this is terrible
they'll reproduce. So this is terrible if you're trying to grow plants because
if you're trying to grow plants because they're kind of like the crabs are the
they're kind of like the crabs are the enemy to the plants in this context. Um,
enemy to the plants in this context. Um, but crabs also uh get eaten by other
but crabs also uh get eaten by other types of creatures in the world, such as
types of creatures in the world, such as this thing.
this thing. Um, which will then cause this thing to
Um, which will then cause this thing to spit out seeds and reproduce. So this
spit out seeds and reproduce. So this this this behavior right here is great
this this behavior right here is great if you're anti- crab at the moment. Um,
if you're anti- crab at the moment. Um, and you're pro this thing if you're
and you're pro this thing if you're trying to grow more of these and less
trying to grow more of these and less crabs.
crabs. So, it all just depends on what you're
So, it all just depends on what you're trying to accomplish. The behaviors are
trying to accomplish. The behaviors are always the same. It's just that the
always the same. It's just that the player's goals change from time to time.
player's goals change from time to time. And if you watch that crab on the left,
And if you watch that crab on the left, he's going to after he gets done eating
he's going to after he gets done eating a seed, he's going to reproduce, which
a seed, he's going to reproduce, which isn't very sexy. I'm sorry. We're
isn't very sexy. I'm sorry. We're working on that part.
working on that part. It's like little porn music. Okay. Um,
It's like little porn music. Okay. Um, so the second part of leave enough room
so the second part of leave enough room is give the player tools to say things.
is give the player tools to say things. I like to say that when the player is
I like to say that when the player is being expressive, they're trying to say
being expressive, they're trying to say something, you know? Um, but I'm going
something, you know? Um, but I'm going to phrase it a little differently. I'm
to phrase it a little differently. I'm going to say empower the player to
going to say empower the player to generate data because it's going to
generate data because it's going to match up better with point number three.
match up better with point number three. One of my favorite examples of this
One of my favorite examples of this comes from a series of games I worked on
comes from a series of games I worked on called Thief, which are these uh
called Thief, which are these uh adventure story stealth games. And you
adventure story stealth games. And you know, here's a really typical mission in
know, here's a really typical mission in Thief is that you're breaking into this
Thief is that you're breaking into this guy's castle and you're here to steal
guy's castle and you're here to steal his special treasure and there's all
his special treasure and there's all these guards that you have to sneak
these guards that you have to sneak around, right, that he hired. And so we
around, right, that he hired. And so we found that this one player um went
found that this one player um went around the entire castle and knocked out
around the entire castle and knocked out every single guard in the whole place
every single guard in the whole place and dragged them all into the dining
and dragged them all into the dining room, their unconscious bodies, and sort
room, their unconscious bodies, and sort of like left them on the tables and, you
of like left them on the tables and, you know, leaning on each other and
know, leaning on each other and everything. And then he went and got all
everything. And then he went and got all the wine bottles in the level, and he
the wine bottles in the level, and he threw those in the dining room, too.
threw those in the dining room, too. And so, you know, the idea is that when
And so, you know, the idea is that when the Lord of the Manner comes home, he's
the Lord of the Manner comes home, he's going to find all of his treasure
going to find all of his treasure missing, and he's going to find that all
missing, and he's going to find that all of his guards apparently had this long
of his guards apparently had this long debaucherous night, and that's why the
debaucherous night, and that's why the thief gots to break in, right? So, I
thief gots to break in, right? So, I really love this example. It's pretty
really love this example. It's pretty similar to the example with Rob and his
similar to the example with Rob and his teddy bears. And it can only happen
teddy bears. And it can only happen because uh you know, unlike some games
because uh you know, unlike some games where all of the detail in the
where all of the detail in the environment is sort of baked into the
environment is sort of baked into the walls or it's only destroyable, um we
walls or it's only destroyable, um we actually supported the player uh you
actually supported the player uh you know, picking objects up, moving them
know, picking objects up, moving them around, putting them in different
around, putting them in different places, changing their state a little
places, changing their state a little bit, which seems like an extravagance
bit, which seems like an extravagance sometimes, but it is an example of
sometimes, but it is an example of empowering the player to generate data.
empowering the player to generate data. The problem with something with like
The problem with something with like dialogue trees is yeah, the player gets
dialogue trees is yeah, the player gets to give you some data here, but it's
to give you some data here, but it's easily enumerated. You know, there's
easily enumerated. You know, there's just three choices. And by that same
just three choices. And by that same rationale, you know, our our game on
rationale, you know, our our game on Mars, um it it has a lot of expression
Mars, um it it has a lot of expression in the sense that you can take any seed
in the sense that you can take any seed that you find to bring it to any other
that you find to bring it to any other part of the cave. You can plant any
part of the cave. You can plant any plant in any level, which is a lot of
plant in any level, which is a lot of freedom. Um but you can only actually
freedom. Um but you can only actually plant things in certain spots that we
plant things in certain spots that we call fertile terrain. So theoretically,
call fertile terrain. So theoretically, you could enumer en enumerate all the
you could enumer en enumerate all the different combinations that were
different combinations that were possible in this level. 2 million is a
possible in this level. 2 million is a nice number, but we can do better than
nice number, but we can do better than that. So there's other ways that you can
that. So there's other ways that you can modify the plant's data. So there's even
modify the plant's data. So there's even more data available to the player. In
more data available to the player. In this case, you know, this this creature
this case, you know, this this creature spits out water, and if he spits it off
spits out water, and if he spits it off to the right, then he's going to water
to the right, then he's going to water this other plant, and that thing's going
this other plant, and that thing's going to reproduce. If he spits to the left,
to reproduce. If he spits to the left, he's going to hit the fertile terrain,
he's going to hit the fertile terrain, and then he'll be reproducing himself.
and then he'll be reproducing himself. And the player has control over which
And the player has control over which way this thing is facing by using their
way this thing is facing by using their headlamp as we just saw. We thought
headlamp as we just saw. We thought about doing a few other things too, like
about doing a few other things too, like maybe you can experiment with different
maybe you can experiment with different plants and feed them different things
plants and feed them different things and they would wind up with different
and they would wind up with different abilities. Like maybe this guy winds up
abilities. Like maybe this guy winds up being able to spit his seeds much
being able to spit his seeds much further or like he actually spits them
further or like he actually spits them out in a balloon so it floats up. Either
out in a balloon so it floats up. Either way, this would have a pretty
way, this would have a pretty significant impact on how this life form
significant impact on how this life form proliferates through the space. Um,
proliferates through the space. Um, we've talked about giving the player
we've talked about giving the player like some pretty subtle types of uh
like some pretty subtle types of uh visual aesthetical control over the
visual aesthetical control over the creatures, just enough to give them a
creatures, just enough to give them a sense of like organic variation so they
sense of like organic variation so they don't all look identical. Um, and really
don't all look identical. Um, and really the point of all this stuff is that in
the point of all this stuff is that in addition to which plant is where, you
addition to which plant is where, you have this little packet of data that's
have this little packet of data that's very much under the player's control
very much under the player's control associated with each plant. And so uh it
associated with each plant. And so uh it gives the player much more range to
gives the player much more range to express different solutions or different
express different solutions or different types of combination behaviors that
types of combination behaviors that they're trying to create or just you
they're trying to create or just you know craft the way the environment looks
know craft the way the environment looks and it becomes like very you know
and it becomes like very you know impossible to to find all the potential
impossible to to find all the potential combinations. It's no longer
combinations. It's no longer innumerable.
innumerable. And so the last part of leave enough
And so the last part of leave enough room is responding to that data. Like
room is responding to that data. Like the player has said something and you're
the player has said something and you're going to notice the player has generated
going to notice the player has generated data and then you're going to try to
data and then you're going to try to make use of it. So, kind of an obvious
make use of it. So, kind of an obvious example of this is, hey, if you
example of this is, hey, if you customize your avatar and Rock Band,
customize your avatar and Rock Band, then it he doesn't just disappear. You
then it he doesn't just disappear. You get to see him up there on stage doing
get to see him up there on stage doing his thing all the time. It includes, you
his thing all the time. It includes, you know, the level complete views in
know, the level complete views in Spider, which are like the special view
Spider, which are like the special view mode that you only get when you finish a
mode that you only get when you finish a level. It's the only way to get it. And
level. It's the only way to get it. And we're sort of saying like, "Hey, look at
we're sort of saying like, "Hey, look at all the cool stuff you did." And of
all the cool stuff you did." And of course, in games like uh Fallout, you
course, in games like uh Fallout, you have a lot of camera control. And when
have a lot of camera control. And when you give that to the player, it, you
you give that to the player, it, you know, they're able to generate their own
know, they're able to generate their own screenshots and share them with people.
screenshots and share them with people. This is a great another great metric of
This is a great another great metric of when you know you've been successful at
when you know you've been successful at uh player expression. You know like
uh player expression. You know like Minecraft is is clearly you know
Minecraft is is clearly you know successful in as much as players are
successful in as much as players are sharing their creations with each other.
sharing their creations with each other. I really like achievements as a way to
I really like achievements as a way to notice what the player is doing. So if
notice what the player is doing. So if you you know if a player is playing on
you you know if a player is playing on one of the very small levels in spider
one of the very small levels in spider and they start to say like hey I wonder
and they start to say like hey I wonder if I can fill up this entire space with
if I can fill up this entire space with my webs at some point they're going to
my webs at some point they're going to get an achievement called crowded house.
get an achievement called crowded house. Um, you know, and that's just us saying
Um, you know, and that's just us saying like, "Hey, we saw that you're doing
like, "Hey, we saw that you're doing that thing. We noticed. We think it's
that thing. We noticed. We think it's cool." Um, you can take achievements a
cool." Um, you can take achievements a little bit too far, right? Like the
little bit too far, right? Like the problem with achievements is that they
problem with achievements is that they make it really clear that the designer
make it really clear that the designer already thought of this creative thing
already thought of this creative thing that the player thought maybe that they
that the player thought maybe that they were the first person to think of,
were the first person to think of, right? So, you have to be you have to be
right? So, you have to be you have to be a little careful with it. The point
a little careful with it. The point isn't to anticipate every single thing
isn't to anticipate every single thing that the player might do. instead, you
that the player might do. instead, you know, we like to use achievements as a
know, we like to use achievements as a way to sort of like suggest different
way to sort of like suggest different directions that the player can explore,
directions that the player can explore, you know, uh so we, you know, giving the
you know, uh so we, you know, giving the player style points for trying to play
player style points for trying to play the game in this cool way or we're
the game in this cool way or we're noticing that they're, you know, trying
noticing that they're, you know, trying to accomplish something really
to accomplish something really difficult, but we still leave like lots
difficult, but we still leave like lots of room for them to sort of follow up
of room for them to sort of follow up and and explore more space. I like stats
and and explore more space. I like stats as well. I think they're even more
as well. I think they're even more open-ended than achievements. Um,
open-ended than achievements. Um, they're kind of like this measuring
they're kind of like this measuring stick, you know, that you give the
stick, you know, that you give the player that they can use to sort of
player that they can use to sort of validate their own ideas about what
validate their own ideas about what might be possible in the game. So,
might be possible in the game. So, Spider Tracks stats like the largest web
Spider Tracks stats like the largest web the player has ever managed to create or
the player has ever managed to create or the longest jump they've ever done and
the longest jump they've ever done and also tracks uh their score. Um, so I
also tracks uh their score. Um, so I mentioned before like in Scrabble that
mentioned before like in Scrabble that score has this profound psychological
score has this profound psychological impact on the player. And I think one of
impact on the player. And I think one of the things we did well in spider is that
the things we did well in spider is that we sort of tried to position it more
we sort of tried to position it more like a stat. Like it never blocks your
like a stat. Like it never blocks your progress. We only call so much attention
progress. We only call so much attention to it. So it's another one of these
to it. So it's another one of these depth on demand features that's
depth on demand features that's available to players who are interested
available to players who are interested in that kind of mastery. Um the concept
in that kind of mastery. Um the concept of noticing and responding to the
of noticing and responding to the player's data is the area in all of this
player's data is the area in all of this stuff where I feel like there's the most
stuff where I feel like there's the most potential for innovation. It's like the
potential for innovation. It's like the frontier because I don't I don't think
frontier because I don't I don't think we're doing nearly as much as we could.
we're doing nearly as much as we could. So uh here's just some ideas that we've
So uh here's just some ideas that we've been thinking about lately. we have
been thinking about lately. we have this, you know, idea that um one way you
this, you know, idea that um one way you can respond to the player's data is by
can respond to the player's data is by sort of like heaping more data on top of
sort of like heaping more data on top of it when conditions are are certain
it when conditions are are certain conditions are met. So like in the case
conditions are met. So like in the case of our Mars game, if you plant, you
of our Mars game, if you plant, you know, sort of like a combo of three
know, sort of like a combo of three plants right in a row, maybe that
plants right in a row, maybe that attracts ambient creatures that have
attracts ambient creatures that have some sort of gameplay significance or it
some sort of gameplay significance or it could change the the plants in any of
could change the the plants in any of those ways I talked about before, the
those ways I talked about before, the the appearance of them, their movement,
the appearance of them, their movement, their, you know, gameplay relevant
their, you know, gameplay relevant abilities, all that stuff. Um, so the
abilities, all that stuff. Um, so the idea is that you're taking the player's
idea is that you're taking the player's data and you're you're bringing it even
data and you're you're bringing it even more to life in ways that they might
more to life in ways that they might have not have anticipated. Uh, this is
have not have anticipated. Uh, this is something that Dwarf Fortress does
something that Dwarf Fortress does really well. Like any little object that
really well. Like any little object that you drop into Dwarf Fortress, your
you drop into Dwarf Fortress, your little, you know, ant farm of dwarves
little, you know, ant farm of dwarves that you're working on will always
that you're working on will always respond to it and have something to say
respond to it and have something to say and do about it, you know?
and do about it, you know? And, you know, here's some some
And, you know, here's some some questions I'm still wondering like what
questions I'm still wondering like what what is the appropriate response to this
what is the appropriate response to this scenario? Like what what did this player
scenario? Like what what did this player want? like maybe they wanted to get to
want? like maybe they wanted to get to the mission debriefing and and hear that
the mission debriefing and and hear that the the lord of the manor has fired all
the the lord of the manor has fired all of his guards, but much like you know
of his guards, but much like you know the achievement that feels like a very
the achievement that feels like a very specific response. It's very limiting.
specific response. It's very limiting. It it tells the player that somebody
It it tells the player that somebody already thought of that. So, you know,
already thought of that. So, you know, that's assuming we could even detect
that's assuming we could even detect that case. And if we could, you know,
that case. And if we could, you know, maybe we could make a stat out of it,
maybe we could make a stat out of it, like number of guards fired, you know,
like number of guards fired, you know, and uh that would be maybe cooler
and uh that would be maybe cooler because unlike the sort of the dead end
because unlike the sort of the dead end of the achievement, this feeds back into
of the achievement, this feeds back into the player's sense of creativity, like
the player's sense of creativity, like oh, now they have a new stat to explore.
oh, now they have a new stat to explore. And if we could do if we could do that,
And if we could do if we could do that, then what else could we do? What you
then what else could we do? What you know, what are the different ways that
know, what are the different ways that we can respond to the player? And in
we can respond to the player? And in this case, like what did Rob want? Like
this case, like what did Rob want? Like if somebody walks up to him when he's
if somebody walks up to him when he's doing this, like does he want them to
doing this, like does he want them to say, "Hey, why did you collect all those
say, "Hey, why did you collect all those teddy bears?" Well, I think probably not
teddy bears?" Well, I think probably not because again that's sort of a dead-end
because again that's sort of a dead-end achievement kind of a response. Um, and
achievement kind of a response. Um, and also it seems like it'd probably be
also it seems like it'd probably be impossible to implement, right? But you
impossible to implement, right? But you could imagine implementing AIS that can
could imagine implementing AIS that can detect collections of objects. So you
detect collections of objects. So you can imagine him saying, "Wow, lots of
can imagine him saying, "Wow, lots of teddy bears." In which case Rob might
teddy bears." In which case Rob might think to himself, "What else can I
think to himself, "What else can I collect and get them to respond to?" Um,
collect and get them to respond to?" Um, you could imagine AI knowing that
you could imagine AI knowing that different objects have different
different objects have different properties. And so they could say, "That
properties. And so they could say, "That looks soft." And then, you know, maybe
looks soft." And then, you know, maybe Rob thinks I should knock the guy out
Rob thinks I should knock the guy out and throw him on top of my collection of
and throw him on top of my collection of teddy bears because he obviously needs
teddy bears because he obviously needs an app. Um, and lastly, you could do a
an app. Um, and lastly, you could do a sad. You can imagine this guy saying
sad. You can imagine this guy saying like, "You are the sixth craziest person
like, "You are the sixth craziest person I've ever met." At which case, Rob might
I've ever met." At which case, Rob might wonder how to become the first craziest
wonder how to become the first craziest person that guy has ever met. And that
person that guy has ever met. And that is it. Thank you very much.
is it. Thank you very much. [applause]
We got five minutes for questions.
You got to use the mic. That's how we know it's legit.
Question.
Okay. Uh, when you think of a game then, do you think of this aspect first or do
do you think of this aspect first or do you think of the concept itself first or
you think of the concept itself first or how linked are they? When I think of
how linked are they? When I think of what?
what? When you think of when you start a game.
When you think of when you start a game. When I when I'm in the conceptual stages
When I when I'm in the conceptual stages of a game,
of a game, right? When you in the conceptual stages
right? When you in the conceptual stages of a game, do you just think of an idea
of a game, do you just think of an idea for a game first or do you actually
for a game first or do you actually think I want to make this type of game
think I want to make this type of game first?
first? Um, you know, I'm sure this answer
Um, you know, I'm sure this answer varies from designer to designer. For
varies from designer to designer. For me, I think at the very origin of a
me, I think at the very origin of a game's idea, it's a lot of different
game's idea, it's a lot of different things. It's sort of like fictional
things. It's sort of like fictional concept. It's mechanic. Uh, and I would
concept. It's mechanic. Uh, and I would think of these things are more like the
think of these things are more like the principles or philosophies that are sort
principles or philosophies that are sort of like in the DNA of me as a designer
of like in the DNA of me as a designer in my studio.
in my studio. Um, they come pretty naturally. I I
Um, they come pretty naturally. I I would never make a string of pearls
would never make a string of pearls game. Did you have a follow-up?
game. Did you have a follow-up? Uh, no. Thank you.
Uh, no. Thank you. Okay, cool. Another question, please.
Okay, cool. Um, how crazy would it be in your opinion to
your opinion to five?
five? Excellent.
Excellent. Next question. Sorry. right
Next question. Sorry. right to to to try and create an AI that can
to to to try and create an AI that can respond to these customizations in such
respond to these customizations in such a way where I mean conceivably if you
a way where I mean conceivably if you had a smart enough system and uh it
had a smart enough system and uh it might respond to the exoggy circumstance
might respond to the exoggy circumstance of the wine bottles and the and the
of the wine bottles and the and the guards being there now that would be a
guards being there now that would be a pretty robust system like you know
pretty robust system like you know beyond Watson level um but uh if you can
beyond Watson level um but uh if you can respond to things that that in the way
respond to things that that in the way that a person would it can actually have
that a person would it can actually have creative responses uh that that uh are
creative responses uh that that uh are are deeper than just a programmer trying
are deeper than just a programmer trying to outthink the possibilities that uh
to outthink the possibilities that uh that a person could come up with.
that a person could come up with. I'm not sure what your question was. I
I'm not sure what your question was. I mean, I guess I a pretty important
mean, I guess I a pretty important caveat, right, is I I don't know if it
caveat, right, is I I don't know if it would be smart to pursue any of those
would be smart to pursue any of those things at the end. Like, they seem like
things at the end. Like, they seem like they would be really challenging, but
they would be really challenging, but also, as I said, I really do think this
also, as I said, I really do think this is like one of the frontiers. Like I
is like one of the frontiers. Like I think uh Minecraft kind of shows you
think uh Minecraft kind of shows you that people are really interested in
that people are really interested in expressing themselves and people really
expressing themselves and people really like the the features in Minecraft that
like the the features in Minecraft that are more responsive where like you place
are more responsive where like you place an object that has gameplay meaning as
an object that has gameplay meaning as opposed to just is visual or whatever.
opposed to just is visual or whatever. Um and the things at the end I was
Um and the things at the end I was suggesting were like some more
suggesting were like some more sophisticated potential thoughts
sophisticated potential thoughts concepts about ways we might respond.
concepts about ways we might respond. Some of them might be more possible than
Some of them might be more possible than others. Uh, one thing I didn't mention
others. Uh, one thing I didn't mention is that um, you know, I'm not going to
is that um, you know, I'm not going to give any spoilers, but we're thinking
give any spoilers, but we're thinking about using some of the ideas that were
about using some of the ideas that were present in the thief example to try to
present in the thief example to try to drive multiple endings in the game we're
drive multiple endings in the game we're working on now in the Mars game.
working on now in the Mars game. Okay,
Okay, cool.
cool. Hi Randy Tren Custers. Um, basically I'm
Hi Randy Tren Custers. Um, basically I'm just wondering in terms of the
just wondering in terms of the generating data and what it sounds like
generating data and what it sounds like to me is it's just ensuring that there
to me is it's just ensuring that there are those feedback loops for player
are those feedback loops for player behaviors that they go out and they
behaviors that they go out and they design an experience themselves. So it's
design an experience themselves. So it's about them reaching into the game and
about them reaching into the game and the game I guess touching them back when
the game I guess touching them back when they put their hand out. So with
they put their hand out. So with something like Minecraft, you could
something like Minecraft, you could imagine that the feedback loop is
imagine that the feedback loop is actually in the community where
actually in the community where Minecraft doesn't actually provide the
Minecraft doesn't actually provide the feedback to you for building these, you
feedback to you for building these, you know, building the USS Enterprise to
know, building the USS Enterprise to scale. It's the community that does
scale. It's the community that does that. Is there a way that you could
that. Is there a way that you could balance this between say for example
balance this between say for example stats are a brilliant thing to put into
stats are a brilliant thing to put into the community onto leaderboards and
the community onto leaderboards and stuff like that? I guess my question is
stuff like that? I guess my question is where do you how do you know from the
where do you how do you know from the start and whereabouts do you start in
start and whereabouts do you start in development planning whether these
development planning whether these things are social community feedback
things are social community feedback loops this data or whether it's actually
loops this data or whether it's actually in the game and coding these systems.
in the game and coding these systems. Um no you know anybody's guess might be
Um no you know anybody's guess might be as good as mine. One thing I would say
as good as mine. One thing I would say is that um the feature there's sharing
is that um the feature there's sharing features, right? There's features which
features, right? There's features which are like take a screenshot, post it on
are like take a screenshot, post it on Facebook, like hey, here's the Tony Hawk
Facebook, like hey, here's the Tony Hawk video capture editing suite. Like those
video capture editing suite. Like those are clearly features which are intended
are clearly features which are intended to help the player record and share
to help the player record and share their experience. Those are obviously
their experience. Those are obviously always going to to generate more
always going to to generate more involvement with the community. Um, on a
involvement with the community. Um, on a personal level, I'm I'm more interested
personal level, I'm I'm more interested uh I think I think multiplayer and
uh I think I think multiplayer and sharing and community and all that stuff
sharing and community and all that stuff is great, but I would really like the
is great, but I would really like the games even on a single player capacity
games even on a single player capacity to be able to respond more to the
to be able to respond more to the player.
player. Yeah.
Yeah. Um because then you're just multiplying
Um because then you're just multiplying when you add the community, you know.
when you add the community, you know. Yeah, exactly.
Yeah, exactly. Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you. I think we got one time for
Thank you. I think we got one time for one more question.
one more question. Um, Evan Bolster,
Um, Evan Bolster, um, what are your thoughts on sort of
um, what are your thoughts on sort of the the incompatibility between single
the the incompatibility between single player gaming and expressive gaming
player gaming and expressive gaming whereas as opposed to um
whereas as opposed to um the incompatibility between a single
the incompatibility between a single place single player goal-based game and
place single player goal-based game and um an expressive game,
um an expressive game, a single player controlbased game in an
a single player controlbased game in an expressive game.
expressive game. Goal goal based game.
Goal goal based game. Goal based game
Goal based game based on a specific objective the player
based on a specific objective the player needs to accomplish as opposed to these
needs to accomplish as opposed to these more
more I'm gonna I'm gonna try this answer and
I'm gonna I'm gonna try this answer and if it doesn't work just come back up
if it doesn't work just come back up after and talk to me. Um
after and talk to me. Um I mean I think it's just kind of a
I mean I think it's just kind of a question of how strongly you're
question of how strongly you're suggesting what the player needs to do.
suggesting what the player needs to do. Like if you're very specific about what
Like if you're very specific about what the player is supposed to be doing and
the player is supposed to be doing and there's only a small number of ways to
there's only a small number of ways to accomplish those goals, then of course
accomplish those goals, then of course you're narrowing the range of options
you're narrowing the range of options for the player, which is really just
for the player, which is really just leaving less room for them to be
leaving less room for them to be expressive. It's only telling them like
expressive. It's only telling them like here's how you're supposed to play our
here's how you're supposed to play our game. Um whereas if you give them much
game. Um whereas if you give them much more open-ended goals or if uh you know,
more open-ended goals or if uh you know, you don't give them goals at all, which
you don't give them goals at all, which is sort of the Minecraft approach or the
is sort of the Minecraft approach or the Dwarf Fortress approach is like the you
Dwarf Fortress approach is like the you know, there's kind of ambiguous goals.
know, there's kind of ambiguous goals. um you're you're much there's much more
um you're you're much there's much more room for them to be creative. The thing
room for them to be creative. The thing is the player will sort of decide for
is the player will sort of decide for themselves what the game is, what
themselves what the game is, what they're supposed to be doing. You know,
they're supposed to be doing. You know, Minecraft it needs a lot of of guidance,
Minecraft it needs a lot of of guidance, but one of the things that works is like
but one of the things that works is like once you realize your job is to stay
once you realize your job is to stay alive. Then you're like, well, now I'm
alive. Then you're like, well, now I'm staying alive. Like what else should I
staying alive. Like what else should I do? I've learned I've learned how to
do? I've learned I've learned how to build stuff. Maybe I'll build some more
build stuff. Maybe I'll build some more stuff. Like superficial stuff. I don't
stuff. Like superficial stuff. I don't know. I'll I'll check it out. So
know. I'll I'll check it out. So I Well, you should follow up just
I Well, you should follow up just because we got to keep rolling because
because we got to keep rolling because we got really tight presentations. Thank
we got really tight presentations. Thank you guys very much and come up and talk
you guys very much and come up and talk to me if you have more questions.
to me if you have more questions. [applause]