Hello and welcome to loud and clear,
improving accessibility for low vision players in Cosmo
as high.
My name is Peter Galbraith. I'm the senior accessibility engineer at Alchemy Labs.
I've been with Alchemy for 7.5 years and have worked on all of the VR titles.
Our team has shipped.
I am also the primary programmer and one of the
main designers for the update we will be discussing today.
And hello everyone. I'm Jasmine Cano,
the senior accessibility product manager at Alchemy Labs.
So I've worked for two years.
I own the production on the project we'll be discussing today.
I really worked on design and leading plate testing.
Alchemy labs is an amazing team with around 70 S.
It's thanks to everyone's efforts and commitment to accessibility that
we can be here today to share this with you.
Accessibility is core to what we do
and is a big part of
Alby's mission of VR for everyone.
You might recognize alchemy labs from our previous VR games job simulator,
vacation simulator.
While those games contain a variety of accessibility features.
We're here today to talk to you about a
specific update to our most recently released game Cosmo
is High
Cosmo.
As high is a VR game where you crash land into your first day at an alien high school,
you unlock powers that help you compete class or sorry, complete classes,
make friends and save the school from cosmic chaos.
And this talks focus will be about the game's vision accessibility update.
We'll go over the challenges we faced and the design choices we made.
We also want to acknowledge
that when most people think of VR,
they think of putting on a headset and being immersed in the visual experience.
It makes sense why they imagine this, the headset goes over their eyes after all.
So why even try to add vision accessibility to a VR game?
Well,
the answer to that is VR has been
largely inaccessible to blind and low vision players,
but
we believe it doesn't have to stay that way.
There's more to VR than simply what is on the screen just like
there is more to life than what can be experienced through visuals alone
and everyone should be able to experience all of what VR has to offer.
So with that in mind, we set ourselves a lofty goal.
We wanted to allow people with partial or total
vision loss to play and enjoy all of cosmos
high without sighted assistance.
When we started this project,
we weren't sure if we could make the entire
game accessible to blind or low vision players.
But
in our mission to make VR for everyone
we knew we had to try.
So we started by asking ourselves the big questions,
what challenges do blind players face when trying to enjoy? VR
and what barriers can we remove for them?
Before we started the project,
we reached out to Steve Saylor to be
our primary primary accessibility consultant on the project.
In our first meeting,
he outlined potential challenges blind players
might face information they might need
and possibly interactions to try. In VR
this helped inform many of the early
versions of features we'll be talking about today
since no one had ever tried something like this on
the scale of a commercial VR game before we knew the
would only get us so far.
What was most clear to us was that
well from that meeting was that blind players had
less access to important information than sighted players.
So the first problem we decided to tackle was the inequality of knowledge
line players are missing crucial information about the world
due to how much was conveyed through visuals alone
from the type of objects and interactions available to
whether or not the player was holding an item.
There is a clear gap in knowledge that was going to hold players back.
If we were going to make the game accessible,
we knew we needed to level the playing field.
When we started asking ourselves, what information do players need?
We also asked ourselves, how do we deliver that information to them.
The former would turn out to be a complex question.
Fortunately, though we already had an idea for the latter,
our proposed solution was to provide detailed information about
the virtual world to the player through descriptive audio.
But unlike movies where a single unchanging descriptive audio
track could be used to aid in the experience,
we were going to need audio to react dynamically to wherever the
player chose to go and whatever the player chose to do.
And the obvious candidate tool to help us achieve that
was text to speech,
text to speech has been a tool used in digital accessibility for many years.
Almost every modern computer or smartphone
has built in screen reader functionality.
And more recently,
we have begun to see text to speech used in games
to help aid players through set up and menu navigation.
Impressed by the work others have done with TT S in their games.
We wanted to find out
if we could take these ideas a step further.
We decided to try to implement our own made
for VR version of the accessibility object model.
A om for short
A om is a framework designed to
make web pages compatible with assistive technologies.
However, instead of the contents of a two D web page,
our implementation would attempt to expand the concept
to a fully immersive and interactive 3d world.
We first started this process by implementing a tool for working with text to speech
we then made it so that we could send that tool information that
uh about the items. A player could pick up
any time a player hovered over, grabbed,
dropped or pointed at an object with either of their hands.
That object would have its text sent to the text to speech tool.
This text was actually pulled from a pre existing
system in our game called the world item system
which contained information such as the name
and a comedic inga description of the objects.
Then we would play back the generated audio and voila.
We now had audio describing all of our interactive objects.
Well,
not
all of our interactive objects,
we quickly realized that we had other interactive objects that
weren't able to be picked up but still required descriptions.
So we got those hooked into the tool as well.
At the same time,
we also developed a new system that we called the describable item system
that would allow text that appeared on objects to be read,
such as the text on posters, book pages and journals found around the school.
This also allowed us to describe other interactive
objects where adding a world item wasn't possible.
This was our equivalent of adding alt text to images.
So
now we could have tt s on nearly
all interactive and important objects in the environment
at this point. Surely we were done, right.
Well,
when we began internal testing,
we realized that we had overlooked some major aspects of the game.
The most notable example was our tutorial
pop ups that were just animated pictures and
didn't use the World item system and
wouldn't work with the describable item system.
So after a bit of reworking and tweaking,
we got tutorials to trigger att s
description automatically upon being shown to the player
and instantly ran into another blocker. During testing.
We hadn't yet accounted for how the player would know where they were.
As they tried to navigate around their space,
we decided to make it so that while the player was aiming the teleport cursor,
the system would provide information about key locations of interest.
We would also provide an additional text to speech confirmation after teleporting
to let the player know where they had arrived.
Uh And when they arrived at the desired destination.
However,
once we began running external tests,
it became apparent that we still hadn't provided enough location information
internally, we knew the layout of our game, but
external accessibility testers who were not familiar with the game
were getting lost because there weren't enough marked up areas.
So we went back and flushed out even more
locations throughout the game with additional teleport zones.
Unlike some of the other aspects of getting this text to speech, working on objects,
there wasn't a simple way of automating this process and these
zones had to be hand authored by our technical designers.
Shout out.
Uh
But the good news is that after the new zones had been added,
the frequency with which our testers got lost decreased.
So
we took that as a win.
Finally, we had achieved a pretty thoroughly described world.
There was some content that was less detailed than we would have liked.
But this part of the project took much more time than initially expected.
So we reduced our scope to focus on what was required
for the player to reach the end of the game.
By the end of this process,
a huge amount of the game had been hooked up to play tt s descriptions.
We did. It,
players could learn nearly anything they wanted about the game world.
Unfortunately,
merely offering descriptions
uh on objects wasn't enough.
Players had to be able to find the objects
we identified early on
that it would be difficult or even impossible for
blind players to locate objects in the game world.
We knew we were going to have to provide more information
to the player in order for them to play the game.
Sightless players were a particular concern at this point.
Since one of the main way sighted players found
objects was by simply looking around the room.
And even if the players had some vision,
it was important that they could
distinguish interactive objects from the environment
with object interactions being a core part of alchemy games.
We knew that if we couldn't provide people with the resource they needed to play,
then the dream of making our game work for blind
players would be over before it ever really started.
Fortunately, our previously, our previous accessibility knowledge
gave us a general idea on what we could do and what was needed to make this happen
in accessibility and across all design.
It's generally a good idea
to convey information in multiple ways.
This increases the chance that users will be able to access your content
in a spatial computing environment Like VR
this becomes even more important
for players to locate objects.
We are going to have to take advantage of every feedback channel available to us.
And that started with auditory feedback.
Though virtual 3d environments present an access present
accessibility challenges that aren't present in other mediums.
VR affords us some unique opportunities as well.
Traditional screen readers don't indicate the position of text
on the screen because they don't really need to.
But for our implementation,
we realize that we could provide more location context
without adding more text to our spoken descriptions.
As it turns out people are pretty decent at
detecting the direction a sound is coming from.
Additionally, volume is a good indicator of how far away or close an object is.
If you've ever lost your phone and tried finding it by listening to it ringing.
Uh You've used these techniques
now this isn't going to be perfectly accurate.
But
by using specialized audio that plays from the location of an object in the world,
we could give our players, a general idea of the location of an object.
So
that's what we did.
And with that players could gain a sense of
the approximate position of objects in the virtual world,
which meant that we could begin using other
methods to help them narrow their search.
Now on to haptic feedback
in the physical world, people can reach out and feel nearby objects.
One of the limitations of VR is that there's no physical resistance that
allows you to feel that those objects are there in the virtual world.
Since we can't change that,
we chose to take a lesson from white cane users.
Some blind folks use white canes to help them navigate the environment
as they're walking, they may sweep their cane across the space in front of them.
Feeling for obstacles and changes in texture or elevation,
detecting the change from one object or surface to
another was something that we could do as well.
In an attempt to recreate the functionality.
We added a haptic pulse for when the player
moved the teleportation cursor into a different area.
By doing this, we were able to signal the boundaries of those zones to the player
in an attempt to recreate the functionality.
I just said that. Sorry about that.
Furthermore, we made it so that when a player moved their open hand over something
it could be interacted with and the controller would also give a short vibration,
this little bit
of added context meant that players knew that their hand was near something
that they could attempt to interact with
or get more information about it too.
There was still one feedback channel we had yet to address
visual feedback.
Steve Sailor suggested we implement a high contrast mode.
Since blindness doesn't always mean sightless,
it was important to add clear visual indicators to the world as well.
Some of the most accessible implementations of
high contrast modess drastically changed the visuals
of an entire game to help highlight the most important things on screen.
And though we wanted to do this,
we didn't have the available resources for a feature like this.
Thankfully,
a complete reskin isn't the only way to improve contrast and object definition.
Since
as early as job simulator,
we used a system that added a light
blue highlight around objects that could be grabbed.
And
since there are static objects that the player needed to know about,
we decided to extend that system to add
a light green highlight on important environmental objects,
we chose light green as the color because it stood out
well against the mostly purple in the in the mo the
mostly purple environment.
But more more important than the hue is making sure that
the contrast is clear enough to show that something changed.
Now that players could position themselves near interactive
objects that were providing different forms of feedback.
We had a new problem,
assistive descriptions were being constantly and unintentionally triggered
and this was happening with just about any
inter any interaction that the player took.
So for example, a player could grab their backpack
when they're teleporting or even simply reaching their hand out.
There is
very little a player could do without setting off the TT s.
Now that players could learn about anything and
everything and essentially had no other choice.
The synthesized speech became a dominant and cacophonous nightmare.
It drowned out subtle sounds and all the
audio and it made it sound incomprehensible.
It was an unpleasant experience
and it felt like drinking from an auditory fire hose. It was simply too much.
It was like happening all at once, all the time
and something had to be done to
prevent players from being constantly bombarded with information
that eventually eventually just became noise.
So our plan was to improve player agency by
giving them more direct control over their individual experience.
But what could we do to put the power back into the hands of the player?
What tools did we have at our disposal?
Lucky for us, we had an ace up our sleeve for just such an occasion
for all our supported platforms and their different controllers.
We had reserved one button per hand
that had no existing functionality.
These reserve buttons would quickly find their new purpose. As the assist button,
the assist button was designed to be a simple yet context sensitive action button
that would allow the player to be in control of what information they received.
And when they received it
now, instead of automatically playing audio,
when hovering over or grabbing an object,
players could choose if and when to have the object's
description read aloud by simply tapping the assist button.
And more importantly,
the player could also now tap the same
button to cancel currently playing TT S descriptions.
This meant that players no longer had to listen to the
entire description before getting back to whatever they were doing.
Now,
we did briefly experiment with having the assist button
function as a toggle rather than a tap.
But during testing, play, players would often forget that they had toggled it on,
on one hand but not the other.
And this led to the original problem where they
would be accidentally triggering audio at unwanted times again.
So we chose to revert back to using the original tap behavior instead
overall,
though the introduction of the the assist button appeared
to be a noticeable improvement to the experience.
However,
this still didn't quite solve the problem of overlapping audio.
It was definitely frustrating to have a character
speak while trying to listen to assistive information.
But delaying a character speaking
wasn't always an option for us
and delaying the assistive audio.
Until after all the characters were finished speaking,
would make the feature feel unresponsive and broken.
So in sticking with the principle of respect, respecting players choices,
we made it so that when assistive information was playing,
we would duck the rest of the game's audio,
lowering the volume so that the audio from the text to speech,
description could be heard clearly.
This allowed players to still be aware of other audio playing and cancel
the assisted information if they wanted to hear what was being said,
they could choose to ignore N PC dialogue
and instead listen to the information they had
chosen to seek out.
And since the game already allowed players to waive it in N PC
to get a reminder of what they are likely supposed to be doing.
Uh The exact audio might be missed but important game information
wouldn't be lost
as an added benefit of using audio ducking.
The player now knew when the description had finished
playing because the game audio would return to normal levels
and in circumstances where the audio could take a little longer to be generated,
the player could tell that their request was actually being processed and wouldn't
impatiently tap the assist button over and over.
Unsurprisingly,
testers were universal universally on board with these new additions,
players were now able to use assistive audio as much or as little as they wanted.
They wouldn't have to worry about accidentally missing information.
Now that players had greater control over their experience,
a new issue began to reveal itself in testing.
Testers weren't activating assistance on objects very often. At
first,
we were concerned that they were forgetting which
button on the controller they had to press.
But during post play test feedback sessions,
it became clear that using assistance didn't always feel beneficial.
Testers noted that it was hard to determine
what information in the assistive audio was actually important to them
and it was a valid criticism
in our efforts to bridge the knowledge gap for these players.
We had over corrected and provided more information than they really needed.
Another issue was that some testers would try to
patiently wait to hear every part of the description
so that they wouldn't miss crucial information.
But it became a problem since some of the important information
was sometimes mixed in with superfluous information.
That means that if a player got distracted
or disinterested part way through,
they'd have to really listen to the whole thing all over again.
We figured the solution to this problem
was just to make sure we presented the information more clearly and concisely
to do that first, we had to identify what specifically needed clarifying
and where we can make changes without losing information.
The first thing we identified was that the order we were presenting
the information mattered.
We knew we wanted to present the most relevant and valuable information first and
decided it would be helpful to standardize the order that information was read.
It made sense to put information that was the shortest and always present first.
So interaction state information like whether or not the object was grabbed
and the object's name were prioritized.
Next,
we added a short description that contained
the most commonly needed information about the object
and would play that immediately after the object's name.
Finally,
the in universe descriptions were placed at the end
due to typically being the longest component of
the description and including a lot of lore.
Uh
And this format was more logical and flowed more nicely
uh or as an example, the audio that would play,
you can look at the uh if you see the
uh image on this slide,
it would now sound something like hovering star shades,
sunglasses with star shaped lenses clearly the
only accessory for the next ultra violet.
But
even when placed at the end,
that in universe description proved to be a source of confusion and frustration,
some players would get hung up thinking that jokes and
flavor text were important clues to beating the game.
And after talking with James Rath,
who was both one of our testers and an accessibility consultant in his own right.
He recommended that we follow the guidelines used for image alt
text on the web and remove information that wasn't important.
At first,
we were hesitant to take the suggestion since
this information was available to cited players through other
uh areas and means in the game.
But
when we took a step back to think about it,
it was clear that these in universe descriptions provided very little actual
value to the player and were doing more harm than good.
So we opted to remove them entirely.
This ended up being a worthwhile trade because in addition to
improving the signal to noise ratio in the assistive descriptions,
this also meant that less text would have to be turned into speech,
speeding up the audio processing time and making everything feel more responsive.
It was a win win
after reorganizing the information and trimming the excess,
we observed that players were interacting with the feature and the
game at large with a higher degree of confidence and speed,
knowing the information,
sorry, knowing the information
uh order allowed players to feel
confident in canceling the audio description sooner
and allowed players to stay in that flow state.
Additionally,
text to speech processing time and audio clip plays were now shorter,
which seemed to keep players more engaged.
So all of these features seemed like they worked
and we believe that they would help our players.
But there was one major outstanding problem
that had been presented from the beginning,
turning on this assist mode,
it still required cited assistance.
And what good is an assist mode if it's inaccessible to the people who need it?
The mode was enabled by a light switch like toggle in the game
uh in the game world where the player initially started as
well as one that was available in the player's virtual backpack.
But players couldn't simply feel around for this
switch like they could in the real world,
even if they knew it was there,
our work around for this uh during the earlier
stages of accessibility testing was to provide a keyboard,
hot key that could be used to turn this mode on which
worked well enough for players using VR on their PC.
But we planned for this feature to ship on stand alone and console headsets
where it was all but guaranteed that a player would not have a keyboard
throughout the development process. This issue weighed on our minds.
We needed a way to turn this mode on
with only things that were common across all platforms.
And we wanted it to work with our existing
accessible accessibility features like our one handed mode.
So
we took stock of what we still had left to work with,
which amounted to one spatially tracked
controller and one spatially tracked headset.
It didn't seem like a lot
until we turned the problem on its head.
If players couldn't figure out where they were in our world,
maybe we could figure out where they were in their own.
We have forgotten one of the things that makes VR special
proprioception
for those who are unfamiliar with.
The term proprioception is the sense a person has
of where their body is in relation to itself.
It's why if I asked you to close your eyes and touch your nose, you could,
once we began considering a player's proprioception,
it meant that both the game and the player could
know where the controller was relative to the headset.
With this information, we could ask the player to perform
uh an action relative to their own body,
attempt to detect that action
and turn on the vision assistance mode for them.
But what kind of actions could we consistently identify?
Gestures were one option
around the time of the vision accessibility update being in development?
I had been slowly playing through horizon forbidden West in my spare time
and one day while I was playing it, hit me
in the game,
the main character uses a small device worn near her ear that she
taps to get additional context uh uh uh information about the world.
The answer had been in front of my face for months.
We could infer the approximate location of the player's head
and have the player perform an action near their ear.
We already were using a similar action to allow the
player to pull their backpack from over their shoulder though.
So grab wasn't an option.
We could however
have the player double tap the assist button.
This idea worked
and the result was that players now
could activate the mode without sighted assistance.
Kind of
in truth,
we should have done a better job making sure players knew
right away about this method of activating the vision assistance mode.
There is explanatory audio that tells the player about this shortcut,
however, it doesn't trigger automatically upon starting the game.
So unless a player had heard about this action through word of mouth,
they might still need sighted assistance.
And though this may not have been the ideal situation,
blind players faced another challenge
before even that one
launching the game.
Unfortunately, no matter what we did with this update,
certain players would still require assistance to
navigate the process of setting up a headset
and launching the game.
So with complete independence still unavailable to some players,
we decided that we would keep this feature as is for the time being,
we had to ship it and hope it still provided benefit to some players,
which meant
it was time for us to face the scariest question.
Was it all worth it?
Would this update actually help blind and
low vision players who wanted to experience Cosmo
is high
while conducting external play tests with people who
were legally blind or had low vision.
We sent them a survey afterwards to get their sentiment about this mode.
We were ecstatic to see that when asked if they would recommend
this feature to a friend or colleague who also has low vision.
Their results on a scale from 1 to 5 with
five being highly likely to recommend were mostly five.
No one was on the lower range of one and two.
When talking to accessibility experts,
we heard a lot of praise and got a lot of great feedback that
would help us create even better versions
and have better insights for future games.
Looking at March 14th of last year.
That's why we pushed the button. We shipped it,
we shipped the vision accessibility update to Steam for
P CV R Quest two and playstation VR two.
From that point forward,
we've had a steady amount of people reach out to us over time.
People who played Cosmo
as high and played with the feature.
They let us know that they found the feature useful and have expressed
their gratitude for making a game that they are able to play.
We received some periodic updates from meta about how
many TT S requests the system had received.
A request is made each time a player uses that accessibility button
to your description
when they teleport with that vision assistance on
and
for March through September 2023 9 million text to speech requests were made
and that's just coming from quest data alone.
I've heard other developers ask why even do this if they can't see it,
maybe it's not meant for them.
And I would point out to those people that first of all,
excluding people because of their disabilities is just wrong.
People who are blind also play games.
Additionally, we have proof that blind people want to play VR too.
And I'm pretty sure we are all here because we like to make games,
we want as many people to enjoy them
and experience that feeling that comes with gaming.
So going back to what we said early on,
we had alchemy labs want to make VR
for everyone and everyone includes people with disabilities.
So let's go over with uh I'll go over where we're at now with VR accessibility
is VR accessible to everyone. No, absolutely not.
The good news is that it's improving and we're seeing progress all around.
We learned so much from this experience
and there's way more that we didn't have time to cover
our hope is that by educating you about some of the ways
we approach solving the challenges that blind and low vision players face,
you'll be able to work uh uh to build upon this
work and help us make VR a more inclusive medium.
Thank you. If anyone has any questions or wants to connect with us,
we'll be in the wrack of rooms outside.