[Music] Let's get started here. This is the new
Let's get started here. This is the new Steam rules. Uh new Steam rules. I just
Steam rules. Uh new Steam rules. I just realized it's kind of a double inandra
realized it's kind of a double inandra like uh maybe a single entandra. I don't
like uh maybe a single entandra. I don't know. Um okay. So um just like on
know. Um okay. So um just like on Thursday, just this recent last
Thursday, just this recent last Thursday, Steam published this blog
Thursday, Steam published this blog called the Steam Year in Review 2024.
called the Steam Year in Review 2024. And they had this really really kind of
And they had this really really kind of interesting graph in there and it's uh
interesting graph in there and it's uh this new release revenue and it's like
this new release revenue and it's like up and to the right. Yeah. Up and to the
up and to the right. Yeah. Up and to the right. Um this is new releases how much
right. Um this is new releases how much revenue they make. Okay. Right. And uh
revenue they make. Okay. Right. And uh if if you look the 2023 oops uh they
if if you look the 2023 oops uh they didn't make enough revenue the previous
didn't make enough revenue the previous year. It they actually went down. It
year. It they actually went down. It went down just a little bit. Um they
went down just a little bit. Um they didn't label their access their axes. Uh
didn't label their access their axes. Uh so I had to get in and zoom in. They
so I had to get in and zoom in. They lost seven pixels worth of revenue in
lost seven pixels worth of revenue in 2023. I don't know how much that
2023. I don't know how much that translates to, but that's a big oops.
translates to, but that's a big oops. Now, Valve famously flat structure.
Now, Valve famously flat structure. Somebody got called into somebody's
Somebody got called into somebody's office and like, why do we have seven
office and like, why do we have seven pixels of lost revenue? Answer me that.
pixels of lost revenue? Answer me that. I don't know if it was all the way up to
I don't know if it was all the way up to the top. I don't know. Somebody got in
the top. I don't know. Somebody got in trouble because if you look, I wrote a
trouble because if you look, I wrote a weekly blog. I couldn't keep up with all
weekly blog. I couldn't keep up with all the changes in 2024 to fix up the seven
the changes in 2024 to fix up the seven pixel loss that they had last year. They
pixel loss that they had last year. They released so many features. So many
released so many features. So many features last year. And if it the tail
features last year. And if it the tail end of the blog, it went back up profit
end of the blog, it went back up profit in 24 2024 for new release games back up
in 24 2024 for new release games back up again. No axis. So it went from 7 pixels
again. No axis. So it went from 7 pixels down to 154 pixels up. That's a big
down to 154 pixels up. That's a big increase. That's a good job, Valve. Or
increase. That's a good job, Valve. Or whoever was in charge there, whoever got
whoever was in charge there, whoever got the talking to took their lesson. Okay,
the talking to took their lesson. Okay, so now if Valve adds a bunch of features
so now if Valve adds a bunch of features and they get a 154 pixel increase, that
and they get a 154 pixel increase, that probably means you too should implement
probably means you too should implement those changes that they did so that you
those changes that they did so that you also can get 154 pixel increase. Okay.
also can get 154 pixel increase. Okay. So, um I bought my kid one of those
So, um I bought my kid one of those choose your own adventure books. Uh, I
choose your own adventure books. Uh, I don't know. Did you all read Choose Your
don't know. Did you all read Choose Your Adventure? Pretty good, right? I just
Adventure? Pretty good, right? I just randomly picked on The Abominal Snowman.
randomly picked on The Abominal Snowman. Um, and it's it's, you know, classic kid
Um, and it's it's, you know, classic kid adventure. Kid climbs up Mount Everest.
adventure. Kid climbs up Mount Everest. You shouldn't go up Mount Everest if
You shouldn't go up Mount Everest if you're a kid. Um, but it was really
you're a kid. Um, but it was really weird. Like one of the site I haven't
weird. Like one of the site I haven't read a choose your own adventure for a
read a choose your own adventure for a very long time since I was like 10 years
very long time since I was like 10 years old. And so we're reading it together.
old. And so we're reading it together. And there's a ch one of the choices gets
And there's a ch one of the choices gets to this part where all of a sudden these
to this part where all of a sudden these space alien cats show up and they they
space alien cats show up and they they convince children to get into their
convince children to get into their spaceship and all these kids are like
spaceship and all these kids are like and then uh and then this line this is
and then uh and then this line this is how it ends. This is the end of this
how it ends. This is the end of this chapter. It says remove your body and
chapter. It says remove your body and let your mind float free. Fear vanishes
let your mind float free. Fear vanishes and before it know before you know it
and before it know before you know it you are free. that I had to have a
you are free. that I had to have a father-son conversation about don't get
father-son conversation about don't get into weird vehicles with strangers. I I
into weird vehicles with strangers. I I don't know. This actually has nothing to
don't know. This actually has nothing to do with the talk. I just thought this
do with the talk. I just thought this was really weird. Um but um very
was really weird. Um but um very concerning. Very concerning. But okay,
concerning. Very concerning. But okay, the the reason I brought this up was at
the the reason I brought this up was at the back of the choose your own
the back of the choose your own adventure, they actually had the
adventure, they actually had the timeline because this was a reprint, a
timeline because this was a reprint, a modern reprint, and they had a history
modern reprint, and they had a history of Choose Your Own Adventure, right? And
of Choose Your Own Adventure, right? And they were like, "Oh, okay." Um, so they
they were like, "Oh, okay." Um, so they they first came out in ' 77 and for
they first came out in ' 77 and for three years no sales. They couldn't get
three years no sales. They couldn't get any publishers. Nothing was working. And
any publishers. Nothing was working. And what do they do? What they do is in 1980
what do they do? What they do is in 1980 they find a publisher and the publisher
they find a publisher and the publisher seeds America's libraries with a 100,000
seeds America's libraries with a 100,000 free copies of Choose Your Own
free copies of Choose Your Own Adventures. And then in three short
Adventures. And then in three short years, 10 million unit sales of this
years, 10 million unit sales of this thing. And it's basically okay. So, like
thing. And it's basically okay. So, like every every post on r/gamedev is
every every post on r/gamedev is basically somebody saying, "Marketing's
basically somebody saying, "Marketing's changing all the time. Everything's
changing all the time. Everything's different. Oh, I can't keep up. I'm
different. Oh, I can't keep up. I'm that's why my game's failing." Um,
that's why my game's failing." Um, here's the universal truth with an
here's the universal truth with an interactive media like games of any
interactive media like games of any form. Any interactive media, whether
form. Any interactive media, whether it's a book or something, you need to
it's a book or something, you need to give away something because to play it
give away something because to play it is to understand it. And you really
is to understand it. And you really don't know how a game plays and whether
don't know how a game plays and whether you like it until you try it. I I'm
you like it until you try it. I I'm convinced that's that's a universal
convinced that's that's a universal truth. Okay. So, demos. This talk is
truth. Okay. So, demos. This talk is basically a lot of people mention demos.
basically a lot of people mention demos. Demos have the biggest impact for fixing
Demos have the biggest impact for fixing low visibility. That's what it comes
low visibility. That's what it comes down to, folks. Valve knows it. I know
down to, folks. Valve knows it. I know it. And you need to know it. Okay?
it. And you need to know it. Okay? That's the only thing I want you to come
That's the only thing I want you to come away from here is you need to know that
away from here is you need to know that demos are cool, kids. All right. Right.
demos are cool, kids. All right. Right. Good. Now, there's three big changes in
Good. Now, there's three big changes in 2024 that increased that 174 pixel
2024 that increased that 174 pixel profit that they saw. Um, one is demo
profit that they saw. Um, one is demo dominance, number two is post-launch
dominance, number two is post-launch boost, and three is nextfest visibility.
boost, and three is nextfest visibility. Those are the big three changes that
Those are the big three changes that we're going to go through. Okay, so for
we're going to go through. Okay, so for the rest of this talk, when I say
the rest of this talk, when I say launch, don't ask the question. It's the
launch, don't ask the question. It's the same thing. Whether you're doing early
same thing. Whether you're doing early access or full launch, whatever, this
access or full launch, whatever, this applies. It's the same thing. Early
applies. It's the same thing. Early access is your launch. There's no
access is your launch. There's no difference there. Okay? All the data
difference there. Okay? All the data that I show here is from me basic or
that I show here is from me basic or here's where it comes from. Basically,
here's where it comes from. Basically, it's either I surveyed all of you and I
it's either I surveyed all of you and I said, "Hey, how did you do in nextfest?"
said, "Hey, how did you do in nextfest?" all that kind of stuff. People submit
all that kind of stuff. People submit their data to me. Sometimes I scrape
their data to me. Sometimes I scrape steam using like VG insights, that sort
steam using like VG insights, that sort of thing. Sometimes I reference other
of thing. Sometimes I reference other writers who've done this research too,
writers who've done this research too, like game discover code or push to talk.
like game discover code or push to talk. Great blogs you should be following. Um
Great blogs you should be following. Um Steamworks documentation. Sometimes it
Steamworks documentation. Sometimes it has this data like my pixel chart. And
has this data like my pixel chart. And then um just individual stories on my
then um just individual stories on my Discord. Okay, so that's where it comes
Discord. Okay, so that's where it comes from. So this is going to be a wild talk
from. So this is going to be a wild talk that's going to take a lot. I'm going to
that's going to take a lot. I'm going to go fast. You do not have time to take
go fast. You do not have time to take notes and take all the screenshots that
notes and take all the screenshots that you need to. I'm uploading this
you need to. I'm uploading this presentation to how
presentation to how tomarketagame.com/gdc2025.
tomarketagame.com/gdc2025. I want you all just to release your
I want you all just to release your bodies and just just soak this in. You
bodies and just just soak this in. You don't have to raise your your phones all
don't have to raise your your phones all the time. Just soak it in. Release your
the time. Just soak it in. Release your bodies. We're all going to release our
bodies. We're all going to release our bodies. Ready? Release your bodies.
bodies. Ready? Release your bodies. Okay. Demo dominance. All right. So,
Okay. Demo dominance. All right. So, here's just a game. I'm going to show a
here's just a game. I'm going to show a lot of examples that are just awesome.
lot of examples that are just awesome. Okay. Uh Eden Crafters releases a demo
Okay. Uh Eden Crafters releases a demo and their wish list go crazy. That big
and their wish list go crazy. That big flatline, that's when they try the
flatline, that's when they try the social media, the Reddit posting.
social media, the Reddit posting. Nothing really works until you release a
Nothing really works until you release a demo. Here's Parcel Simulator. Nothing
demo. Here's Parcel Simulator. Nothing really worked. They release a demo and
really worked. They release a demo and their wish list chart goes crazy. I
their wish list chart goes crazy. I asked the developer, Dan, of Parcel
asked the developer, Dan, of Parcel Simulator. He said, "My Steam page has
Simulator. He said, "My Steam page has been live for 2 years and gathered 7,000
been live for 2 years and gathered 7,000 wish lists." Then he released a demo and
wish lists." Then he released a demo and he got 17,000 wish lists. In one week,
he got 17,000 wish lists. In one week, he got as many wish lists as he did for
he got as many wish lists as he did for an entire two years before that place.
an entire two years before that place. You have to release a demo. Many Lane,
You have to release a demo. Many Lane, another great game. flat social media
another great game. flat social media trailers, all that blah blah blah.
trailers, all that blah blah blah. Release a demo and the wish list go
Release a demo and the wish list go crazy. And this is what the developer,
crazy. And this is what the developer, his name's Duke. It's It's not like I
his name's Duke. It's It's not like I forgot it. His name is Dup. Uh he said
forgot it. His name is Dup. Uh he said the demo launch was also at the time
the demo launch was also at the time when Wholesome Games started
when Wholesome Games started communicating on them, sending out to
communicating on them, sending out to content creators. And let me just be
content creators. And let me just be clear, demos unlock visibility. It
clear, demos unlock visibility. It allows you to get content creators. It
allows you to get content creators. It allows you to get festivals, word of
allows you to get festivals, word of mouth, Steam, algorithm boost. This just
mouth, Steam, algorithm boost. This just comes for free with your demo. It's not
comes for free with your demo. It's not by itself. Okay, so the big change that
by itself. Okay, so the big change that Valve introduced was they added front
Valve introduced was they added front page visibility when you launch your
page visibility when you launch your demo. It looks like this. There's a new
demo. It looks like this. There's a new tab on the front page of Steam called
tab on the front page of Steam called new and trending free. Okay, if you
new and trending free. Okay, if you launch a demo and you hit the numbers
launch a demo and you hit the numbers right, you can get up on this thing.
right, you can get up on this thing. Here's one of the first games to do it.
Here's one of the first games to do it. It's called Clean Fall. Look at that
It's called Clean Fall. Look at that last spike. I don't know if you can see
last spike. I don't know if you can see it, but their wish list shot up when
it, but their wish list shot up when they got onto the new and trending free
they got onto the new and trending free charts. It's huge, folks. You need to
charts. It's huge, folks. You need to get on this chart. Now, we don't know
get on this chart. Now, we don't know exactly what it takes, the thresholds,
exactly what it takes, the thresholds, but I've been interviewing a lot of devs
but I've been interviewing a lot of devs who get it, and it seems like you got to
who get it, and it seems like you got to get about a hundred concurrent users
get about a hundred concurrent users playing your game, and it seems like
playing your game, and it seems like it's a winner stage. So, you'll pop on,
it's a winner stage. So, you'll pop on, and you'll kind of float on there for a
and you'll kind of float on there for a little while, and then you'll drop off
little while, and then you'll drop off if you're not meeting your numbers. What
if you're not meeting your numbers. What those numbers are, I don't know, but you
those numbers are, I don't know, but you got to get up there. So, this is the
got to get up there. So, this is the tricky part. You need visibility to get
tricky part. You need visibility to get on the new and trending, and you got to
on the new and trending, and you got to get a demo to get visibility. It seems
get a demo to get visibility. It seems like a circular logic. Okay, so here
like a circular logic. Okay, so here this is how you actually do it. I'm
this is how you actually do it. I'm going to give you the full thing. Um,
going to give you the full thing. Um, this plan would cost you thousands of
this plan would cost you thousands of dollars from a PR firm or you just take
dollars from a PR firm or you just take a screenshot. So, get get your phones
a screenshot. So, get get your phones ready. I told you to release your
ready. I told you to release your bodies. Get your bodies back engaged and
bodies. Get your bodies back engaged and then take the screenshot and then I'm
then take the screenshot and then I'm going to we're going to keep going.
going to we're going to keep going. Okay, so here it is. Get ready. This is
Okay, so here it is. Get ready. This is how you can launch your demo. Get ready.
how you can launch your demo. Get ready. Here comes the timeline and we'll go
Here comes the timeline and we'll go through it. We'll go through it. Take
through it. We'll go through it. Take your picture and then I'm going to move
your picture and then I'm going to move on. Okay, ready? Get ready. Three, two,
on. Okay, ready? Get ready. Three, two, one. Screenshot again. and it's on how
one. Screenshot again. and it's on how to marketame.com/gdc2025.
to marketame.com/gdc2025. As soon as this talk's over, I'm going
As soon as this talk's over, I'm going to upload. So don't don't yell at me
to upload. So don't don't yell at me right away. Okay, so here's step by step
right away. Okay, so here's step by step how you do it. You launch your Steam
how you do it. You launch your Steam page. You need genre, art direction, 36
page. You need genre, art direction, 36 of gameplay, 30 second gameplay trailer.
of gameplay, 30 second gameplay trailer. That's what you need to get your Steam
That's what you need to get your Steam page up. Do it. Don't delay. Get your
page up. Do it. Don't delay. Get your Steam page up. Okay? Then develop like
Steam page up. Okay? Then develop like you're on fire. You need to get your
you're on fire. You need to get your demo playable as soon as possible. The
demo playable as soon as possible. The longer you wait on getting your demo up,
longer you wait on getting your demo up, the longer that flat line where you
the longer that flat line where you don't get any visibility despite posting
don't get any visibility despite posting on Reddit, Facebook, whatever, any
on Reddit, Facebook, whatever, any social media platform that doesn't
social media platform that doesn't really work. It's not until you get your
really work. It's not until you get your demo that you get your visibility. So,
demo that you get your visibility. So, get that demo playable. Now, remember
get that demo playable. Now, remember how I said you can only launch your demo
how I said you can only launch your demo once to show up on new and trending?
once to show up on new and trending? That's the rule from the new Steam
That's the rule from the new Steam rules. But play tests don't count. You
rules. But play tests don't count. You can do a play test. It's a new feature.
can do a play test. It's a new feature. It's not new. It's it's been around, but
It's not new. It's it's been around, but a play test feature doesn't count as you
a play test feature doesn't count as you can just upload it. And when you do
can just upload it. And when you do that, you can also upload on H.io. But
that, you can also upload on H.io. But you can also use your play test, reach
you can also use your play test, reach out to streamers, get streamers to cover
out to streamers, get streamers to cover that play test. Okay? Then test, patch,
that play test. Okay? Then test, patch, do marketing beats. Just just keep
do marketing beats. Just just keep repeating your play test like every
repeating your play test like every month or every week, however fast you
month or every week, however fast you can develop. Keep doing the cycle and
can develop. Keep doing the cycle and you're patching it. You're making your
you're patching it. You're making your demo better, your play test better.
demo better, your play test better. You're just making your game better.
You're just making your game better. Here's a game called Nomad Idol. They
Here's a game called Nomad Idol. They did a play test. Look, that huge spike
did a play test. Look, that huge spike looks just like a demo launch. You can
looks just like a demo launch. You can get that same visibility boost from a
get that same visibility boost from a play test that you can from a demo or
play test that you can from a demo or just about. Now, the whole reason you're
just about. Now, the whole reason you're doing this play test cycle is to prep
doing this play test cycle is to prep for your demo. Okay? Now, when you go to
for your demo. Okay? Now, when you go to Steam, this is new. This is the new
Steam, this is new. This is the new thing. When you upload your demo,
thing. When you upload your demo, there's a popup that comes up and says,
there's a popup that comes up and says, do you want a separate Steam page or
do you want a separate Steam page or not? And when you do a separate Steam
not? And when you do a separate Steam page, if you search your name of your
page, if you search your name of your game, you actually get two results. Now,
game, you actually get two results. Now, um one one page is for the demo, one
um one one page is for the demo, one page is for your game. I did a study
page is for your game. I did a study from the Steam NextFest of all the
from the Steam NextFest of all the people who some people did the separate
people who some people did the separate page, some people didn't. It doesn't
page, some people didn't. It doesn't make a difference. I saw almost no
make a difference. I saw almost no difference in wish list gain from those
difference in wish list gain from those two different pages. It's the same. The
two different pages. It's the same. The difference is that you can get reviews
difference is that you can get reviews when you do a separate Steam page. And I
when you do a separate Steam page. And I think that is more valuable than
think that is more valuable than anything. You need those reviews. I know
anything. You need those reviews. I know it's going to be painful. People are
it's going to be painful. People are going to say stuff sucks, but it's
going to say stuff sucks, but it's better when it sucks during a demo
better when it sucks during a demo because you can fix it for the main
because you can fix it for the main game. So, I highly recommend separate
game. So, I highly recommend separate demo page. Okay. Now, you're not
demo page. Okay. Now, you're not launching your demo yet. You're going
launching your demo yet. You're going out to big festivals. PC Gaming Show is
out to big festivals. PC Gaming Show is one. Whatever festival you can get into,
one. Whatever festival you can get into, okay? You want to launch your demo with
okay? You want to launch your demo with a big event like one of these festivals
a big event like one of these festivals if you can, if you can get into it. Um,
if you can, if you can get into it. Um, Zoliver Nelson Jr. launched I am your
Zoliver Nelson Jr. launched I am your beast on the PC Gamer Show. Immediately
beast on the PC Gamer Show. Immediately launched his demo at the same time.
launched his demo at the same time. Perfect synergy. It just like blew up.
Perfect synergy. It just like blew up. You can also coordinate with streamers
You can also coordinate with streamers to cover your demo launch. You want to
to cover your demo launch. You want to do that. And then you want to do this
do that. And then you want to do this new feature. This is the new feature.
new feature. This is the new feature. There's a new button where you can
There's a new button where you can launch when you launch your demo. You
launch when you launch your demo. You push this button and everybody who
push this button and everybody who wishlisted your demo before now gets an
wishlisted your demo before now gets an email that says, "Hey, a demo's live."
email that says, "Hey, a demo's live." That's the secret. Okay. So, what you're
That's the secret. Okay. So, what you're doing is they get this email. This is
doing is they get this email. This is what the email looks like. Just looks
what the email looks like. Just looks like that. So, what you're doing is
like that. So, what you're doing is you're you're coordinating all those
you're you're coordinating all those things, the festival, the streamers,
things, the festival, the streamers, that email wish list button, all those
that email wish list button, all those things hit at the same time. Hopefully,
things hit at the same time. Hopefully, everything works and you end up on that
everything works and you end up on that new and trending thing. That's the whole
new and trending thing. That's the whole goal. That's why we're doing all this.
goal. That's why we're doing all this. That's how you get on there. Okay, so
That's how you get on there. Okay, so here's Nomad Isle. Remember, they did
here's Nomad Isle. Remember, they did the play test. This is what it looks
the play test. This is what it looks like when they later launched their demo
like when they later launched their demo and then they shortly after that went
and then they shortly after that went into NextFest. See, you get that double
into NextFest. See, you get that double spike. That's why you do these two
spike. That's why you do these two different things. You get you get twice
different things. You get you get twice as much visibility from these two
as much visibility from these two different beats. And then uh from once
different beats. And then uh from once your demo's launched, you just keep it
your demo's launched, you just keep it up. And then you just do an endless
up. And then you just do an endless cycle of applying to festivals, applying
cycle of applying to festivals, applying to streamers, just trying to get
to streamers, just trying to get festivals and streamers, festivals and
festivals and streamers, festivals and streamers. That's how you get
streamers. That's how you get visibility, folks. It's the demo,
visibility, folks. It's the demo, festivals, and streamers. my website how
festivals, and streamers. my website how toarketame.comfree
toarketame.comfree or how tomarketaggame.comfestestivals.
or how tomarketaggame.comfestestivals. Our community curates for free. It's not
Our community curates for free. It's not like I'm charging to do this stuff. You
like I'm charging to do this stuff. You just get a free list of festivals that
just get a free list of festivals that you apply for. Just do that. Just apply
you apply for. Just do that. Just apply for as many as you possibly can. And
for as many as you possibly can. And then after a while of doing streamers
then after a while of doing streamers and festivals, streamers and festivals,
and festivals, streamers and festivals, you then do NextFest. Okay, that's at
you then do NextFest. Okay, that's at the end. It's the grand finale. Don't
the end. It's the grand finale. Don't launch your demo just before Steam
launch your demo just before Steam NextFest. Okay, everybody launches
NextFest. Okay, everybody launches during Steam NextFest. And remember how
during Steam NextFest. And remember how I said that that new and trending chart
I said that that new and trending chart is kind of ranked and it's competing.
is kind of ranked and it's competing. Everybody launches their demo like the
Everybody launches their demo like the last minute before NextFest. So if you
last minute before NextFest. So if you try and launch your demo before
try and launch your demo before NextFest, you're fighting with everybody
NextFest, you're fighting with everybody else for that limited slot on the new
else for that limited slot on the new and trending charts. It's too much
and trending charts. It's too much competition. Don't do it. Your uh
competition. Don't do it. Your uh NextFest appearance is your grand
NextFest appearance is your grand finale. That's the end of your demo.
finale. That's the end of your demo. You've done all this marketing up to
You've done all this marketing up to this point. The final thing is NextFest.
this point. The final thing is NextFest. It's not the debut of your demo. Hold
It's not the debut of your demo. Hold it. All right. So, here's what you do
it. All right. So, here's what you do when I do the big red. This is all stuff
when I do the big red. This is all stuff you got to do, but release your bodies.
you got to do, but release your bodies. Keep your bodies released. Start
Keep your bodies released. Start thinking about your demo as soon as you
thinking about your demo as soon as you begin development. The faster you get
begin development. The faster you get your demo out, the better. Get that demo
your demo out, the better. Get that demo out as soon as you reach the necessary
out as soon as you reach the necessary quality bar. What is it? I don't know.
quality bar. What is it? I don't know. That's up to you to figure out. You're
That's up to you to figure out. You're the game designers. Okay. Demos done
the game designers. Okay. Demos done right. That's another talk I gave about
right. That's another talk I gave about how to design a demo. Some basic facts.
how to design a demo. Some basic facts. How long? I know somebody's going to ask
How long? I know somebody's going to ask how long should I make my demo? As long
how long should I make my demo? As long as you can. Um, do look at demos done
as you can. Um, do look at demos done right. I explain some of this stuff.
right. I explain some of this stuff. It's another It's on the GDC vault. It's
It's another It's on the GDC vault. It's free. Uh it's my other talk. Um and then
free. Uh it's my other talk. Um and then some people say, "Oh, publishers will
some people say, "Oh, publishers will hate me. They're not going to sign me.
hate me. They're not going to sign me. I'm looking for a publisher. How can I
I'm looking for a publisher. How can I get signed if I publish my demo?" This
get signed if I publish my demo?" This is the game. He is coming. They
is the game. He is coming. They published their demo. They got covered
published their demo. They got covered by Splattercat. And he said, "Some This
by Splattercat. And he said, "Some This is the This is the title of this video.
is the This is the title of this video. Something tells me this Dark Rogike is
Something tells me this Dark Rogike is going to be a big hit." Um guess who saw
going to be a big hit." Um guess who saw that? Hooded Horse, one of the best
that? Hooded Horse, one of the best publishers in the world, saw that
publishers in the world, saw that SplatterCat video and was like, "Yeah,
SplatterCat video and was like, "Yeah, you know what? I think this is going to
you know what? I think this is going to be hit. I'm going to sign them. And they
be hit. I'm going to sign them. And they got signed. And I know for a fact, I
got signed. And I know for a fact, I talked to Tim and he said, "We signed
talked to Tim and he said, "We signed this game because of Splattercat's
this game because of Splattercat's video." Your demo drives the visibility.
video." Your demo drives the visibility. It's not the other way around. You guys,
It's not the other way around. You guys, you all have to get a demo out. Okay,
you all have to get a demo out. Okay, just get a demo out. All right, let's
just get a demo out. All right, let's talk about post-launch boosts. Okay,
talk about post-launch boosts. Okay, this is how Steam works. I'm going to
this is how Steam works. I'm going to explain it real quick. I get this
explain it real quick. I get this comment a lot. Hey, we just launched
comment a lot. Hey, we just launched your game. We we we sales are a little
your game. We we we sales are a little slow, but we're ready to start
slow, but we're ready to start marketing. Okay, how do we promote it?
marketing. Okay, how do we promote it? Here's the deal. There's something
Here's the deal. There's something called real steam. Okay, real steam is
called real steam. Okay, real steam is where stuff actually happens. This is
where stuff actually happens. This is your goal. You're trying to get over
your goal. You're trying to get over real steam.
real steam. The actual promotion you do after launch
The actual promotion you do after launch is locked behind this barricade of real
is locked behind this barricade of real Steam. Valve only gives you access to
Steam. Valve only gives you access to all these tools. These are the tools you
all these tools. These are the tools you use to promote your game after launch.
use to promote your game after launch. They're only available if you've reached
They're only available if you've reached certain sales goals. Okay? It's locked.
certain sales goals. Okay? It's locked. Okay? You don't get to use them until
Okay? You don't get to use them until you land in Real Steam. Real Steam is
you land in Real Steam. Real Steam is the goal. Don't tell Valve I told you
the goal. Don't tell Valve I told you this. It's around $150,000
this. It's around $150,000 gross revenue pre- Steam cut within the
gross revenue pre- Steam cut within the first six to9 months. And the reason I
first six to9 months. And the reason I say don't tell Valve is because they
say don't tell Valve is because they always are like there's no there's no
always are like there's no there's no benchmarks. There's no delineation.
benchmarks. There's no delineation. They're right. Their code never has like
They're right. Their code never has like a number. There's none. People always
a number. There's none. People always say like, "Oh, I heard you get an extra
say like, "Oh, I heard you get an extra boost at $500,000." There's none. That's
boost at $500,000." There's none. That's not true. Valve never codes in hard
not true. Valve never codes in hard numbers. But statistically, like I've
numbers. But statistically, like I've seen enough games, I'm like, "How much
seen enough games, I'm like, "How much have you made?" And they're like, "Oh,
have you made?" And they're like, "Oh, 150." I was like, "Go ask Valve for a
150." I was like, "Go ask Valve for a daily deal." And they're like, "I did
daily deal." And they're like, "I did and they gave me it. It's around
and they gave me it. It's around $150,000." Okay, that's what Real Steam
$150,000." Okay, that's what Real Steam basically is. Okay, so back to our oops
basically is. Okay, so back to our oops where Valve kind of messed up in 2023
where Valve kind of messed up in 2023 and then fixed it in 2024. The way they
and then fixed it in 2024. The way they fixed it, the way they got that 174
fixed it, the way they got that 174 pixel recovery was they did two things.
pixel recovery was they did two things. Okay, they pushed more games into Real
Okay, they pushed more games into Real Steam. They didn't change, they didn't
Steam. They didn't change, they didn't lower the bar, they just did more to get
lower the bar, they just did more to get more games into Real Steam. And then
more games into Real Steam. And then they added more tools to Real Steam. Let
they added more tools to Real Steam. Let me explain it. Okay, so I did this. This
me explain it. Okay, so I did this. This is my graph. Every year, every January,
is my graph. Every year, every January, I look at all the games that released in
I look at all the games that released in the previous year and I do some
the previous year and I do some estimation to figure out how many games
estimation to figure out how many games made it into real Steam. I've been doing
made it into real Steam. I've been doing it since 2022. And when I was going
it since 2022. And when I was going through January 2024, I was like, I
through January 2024, I was like, I think they're doing more games. Like I
think they're doing more games. Like I saw it there. I counted 91 more games
saw it there. I counted 91 more games than 2023. And I was like, something's
than 2023. And I was like, something's up. Something is up. And Valve pushed
up. Something is up. And Valve pushed it. That's why I wasn't I'd like to say
it. That's why I wasn't I'd like to say I wasn't surprised when they released
I wasn't surprised when they released the oops chart. They were just like that
the oops chart. They were just like that explains so much. Um here's what it is.
explains so much. Um here's what it is. They just pushed more games. How did
They just pushed more games. How did they do it? Demos. I They really push
they do it? Demos. I They really push demos. They added all those new demo
demos. They added all those new demo features that I just described. That
features that I just described. That whole system. And they also allowed more
whole system. And they also allowed more festivals from these third parties. They
festivals from these third parties. They said this is from their blog post. They
said this is from their blog post. They said we had 900 festivals in 2024 like
said we had 900 festivals in 2024 like Wholesome Direct and stuff like that.
Wholesome Direct and stuff like that. This is what I mean by festival. And um
This is what I mean by festival. And um basically people always say like I wish
basically people always say like I wish Steamer curated. It would fix everything
Steamer curated. It would fix everything if Steamer curated. Well, it is. It's
if Steamer curated. Well, it is. It's just Valve outsourced the curation to
just Valve outsourced the curation to these festivals like Wholesome Direct or
these festivals like Wholesome Direct or something. Like do you really want
something. Like do you really want somebody valve telling you whether your
somebody valve telling you whether your game's wholesome or not? No. It's better
game's wholesome or not? No. It's better to let Wholesome decide what's
to let Wholesome decide what's wholesome. Okay. So, um that's that's
wholesome. Okay. So, um that's that's basically what they did. That's what
basically what they did. That's what they did. They were outsourcing
they did. They were outsourcing curation. And so, you apply to wholesome
curation. And so, you apply to wholesome games and they they curate whether
games and they they curate whether you're worth if you're wholesome enough
you're worth if you're wholesome enough or not. That's up to them. Uh, but Valve
or not. That's up to them. Uh, but Valve does do some like idlerfest. These are
does do some like idlerfest. These are these fests that boost games into real
these fests that boost games into real Steam. Okay, so get a demo and apply to
Steam. Okay, so get a demo and apply to festivals. How to market
festivals. How to market agame.com/festivals.
agame.com/festivals. Free list. All right, so if they push
Free list. All right, so if they push more games into real Steam, isn't that
more games into real Steam, isn't that wish list inflation? Wish inflation. Um,
wish list inflation? Wish inflation. Um, this is what I think. This is this is my
this is what I think. This is this is my mental model of how wish list actually
mental model of how wish list actually work. Okay, if your game's a paper
work. Okay, if your game's a paper airplane and the further you get it, the
airplane and the further you get it, the more into real steam you are, wish lists
more into real steam you are, wish lists are basically like going up floors in a
are basically like going up floors in a building and then throwing it your paper
building and then throwing it your paper airplane off that floor. So, if you go
airplane off that floor. So, if you go to 50,000 wish lists, you can throw it
to 50,000 wish lists, you can throw it pretty far, but then it coasts. If you
pretty far, but then it coasts. If you go up 100,000, your chances are better
go up 100,000, your chances are better of getting all the way over there. But
of getting all the way over there. But every game's different. There's
every game's different. There's different types of games, right? You
different types of games, right? You could be a crumpled ball. That could be
could be a crumpled ball. That could be your game. Who knows? Maybe that works.
your game. Who knows? Maybe that works. Nobody's ever tried it. So when you go
Nobody's ever tried it. So when you go to launch, you are standing when you get
to launch, you are standing when you get that many wish lists, you are standing
that many wish lists, you are standing on that floor and your your launch is
on that floor and your your launch is basically throwing that game and
basically throwing that game and figuring out whether it works or not.
figuring out whether it works or not. And then the paper ball didn't work. It
And then the paper ball didn't work. It didn't work. Um that's essentially what
didn't work. Um that's essentially what it is. And so the paper airplane says,
it is. And so the paper airplane says, "I got 20% conversion. This is great. I
"I got 20% conversion. This is great. I love Steam. I got so many wish lists and
love Steam. I got so many wish lists and it converted and it worked." But the 2%
it converted and it worked." But the 2% conversion is what it looks like when it
conversion is what it looks like when it fell off. And so that guy is going to
fell off. And so that guy is going to post on the paper guy is going to write
post on the paper guy is going to write on on r/gamedev.
on on r/gamedev. That guy's gonna say, "Wish lists are
That guy's gonna say, "Wish lists are inflated." It's like, "Well, you kind of
inflated." It's like, "Well, you kind of had a paper ball." Um, but then the
had a paper ball." Um, but then the other guy I And here's the thing, folks.
other guy I And here's the thing, folks. Here's the thing, folks. I see lots of
Here's the thing, folks. I see lots of games that have very good conversion and
games that have very good conversion and they launched like a month ago. It's
they launched like a month ago. It's still You can still convert wish lists.
still You can still convert wish lists. It just valists aren't a guarantee.
It just valists aren't a guarantee. They're just like I said, going up to
They're just like I said, going up to the top story and throwing your game
the top story and throwing your game off. That's that's all a wish list is.
off. That's that's all a wish list is. So, why do some convert at two versus
So, why do some convert at two versus 20? Why? It's the magic.
20? Why? It's the magic. magic. I'm a filthy marketer. I have no
magic. I'm a filthy marketer. I have no idea what art is. I have no concept of
idea what art is. I have no concept of art. That's there's no stats. I can't
art. That's there's no stats. I can't draw a graph that says, "Well, if you
draw a graph that says, "Well, if you add if you make your character blue, 25%
add if you make your character blue, 25% chance of increasing." No, it's art.
chance of increasing." No, it's art. This is art. We are making art in its
This is art. We are making art in its design. Ask an artist. Ask a poet why
design. Ask an artist. Ask a poet why one game doesn't work. Don't ask a
one game doesn't work. Don't ask a filthy marketer like myself. Okay? And
filthy marketer like myself. Okay? And I'm just going to handwave it. It's the
I'm just going to handwave it. It's the magic. There's some games have the magic
magic. There's some games have the magic and I I don't know what it is. Okay, so
and I I don't know what it is. Okay, so but we can see it. I can see the results
but we can see it. I can see the results of the magic. Okay, Discovery Q is huge.
of the magic. Okay, Discovery Q is huge. Discovery Q makes up about half I've
Discovery Q makes up about half I've surveyed tons of games about the
surveyed tons of games about the Discovery Q. It's this widget that
Discovery Q. It's this widget that nobody no game designer has ever used,
nobody no game designer has ever used, but every player uses. Um and it gets
but every player uses. Um and it gets about 45% of your traffic comes from it.
about 45% of your traffic comes from it. Okay. Now, um we're going to follow uh I
Okay. Now, um we're going to follow uh I can look at the stats that came from
can look at the stats that came from Discovery Q. whether uh discovery Q gen
Discovery Q. whether uh discovery Q gen generated a wish list or not. And we can
generated a wish list or not. And we can look at the impressions generated by the
look at the impressions generated by the discovery queue. And here's two games
discovery queue. And here's two games that got into the discovery queue. If
that got into the discovery queue. If you do decent with wish list, I'm saying
you do decent with wish list, I'm saying like 10,000 wish list, you get your 10
like 10,000 wish list, you get your 10 reviews. Valve when you launch a game
reviews. Valve when you launch a game gives you 25,000 impressions pretty much
gives you 25,000 impressions pretty much thereabouts. The first two days, day
thereabouts. The first two days, day one, day two, you both both days you get
one, day two, you both both days you get 25,000. Then they watch how those two
25,000. Then they watch how those two days do. And what happens in Discovery Q
days do. And what happens in Discovery Q if you as a developer you've never used
if you as a developer you've never used this but everybody else does add click.
this but everybody else does add click. Some people click add to wish list some
Some people click add to wish list some people say ignore. Some people buy the
people say ignore. Some people buy the game. Valve watches how those stats go.
game. Valve watches how those stats go. And if your game performs well in the
And if your game performs well in the discovery queue they give you more. The
discovery queue they give you more. The hot games get 70,000 wish lists on the
hot games get 70,000 wish lists on the third day. It's really the third day
third day. It's really the third day that's the magic day. And if the game
that's the magic day. And if the game doesn't convert well, it goes down. You
doesn't convert well, it goes down. You get dropped. And it goes on and on and
get dropped. And it goes on and on and on for the days and days after your
on for the days and days after your launch. The games that get the magic,
launch. The games that get the magic, Valve knows and they just keep funneling
Valve knows and they just keep funneling more and more visibility. And so really
more and more visibility. And so really um the discovery queue, you can't
um the discovery queue, you can't influence it. You can't like tweet and
influence it. You can't like tweet and say, "Hey everybody, do the discovery
say, "Hey everybody, do the discovery queue and wish list my game and and buy
queue and wish list my game and and buy it." You can't. Nobody knows about your
it." You can't. Nobody knows about your game. The discovery Q is for new people
game. The discovery Q is for new people just to see it. So it's your game versus
just to see it. So it's your game versus potential customers. There's no in
potential customers. There's no in between. You have no say in it. So, you
between. You have no say in it. So, you might say, "Well, that's probably just
might say, "Well, that's probably just just clickbait games that get it. All
just clickbait games that get it. All those cheap games." No, I look at the
those cheap games." No, I look at the again, I look at every game every year,
again, I look at every game every year, every January that make it into real
every January that make it into real Steam. Wide diversity of games. So many
Steam. Wide diversity of games. So many different types of games. Real nice
different types of games. Real nice games, not stupid clickbait, easy, hyper
games, not stupid clickbait, easy, hyper casual games. No, real games make it
casual games. No, real games make it into real Steam. So, if you recently
into real Steam. So, if you recently launched and you're like, "Oh my god,
launched and you're like, "Oh my god, what happened? Why are inflated?" Look
what happened? Why are inflated?" Look at your discovery Q traffic. Look at
at your discovery Q traffic. Look at your week. Look at your discovery queue.
your week. Look at your discovery queue. Look at your third day. Did it go up or
Look at your third day. Did it go up or did it go down versus day two? That
did it go down versus day two? That tells you so much. That tells you
tells you so much. That tells you whether you've had the magic. Okay. Um,
whether you've had the magic. Okay. Um, when Valve Valve is basically, well,
when Valve Valve is basically, well, Steam is an engine that turns magic into
Steam is an engine that turns magic into money. Okay, that sounds like
money. Okay, that sounds like that's actually that sounds really good.
that's actually that sounds really good. I should tell them to say that. Okay.
I should tell them to say that. Okay. Basically, what happens is if Valve
Basically, what happens is if Valve detects that your game has the magic,
detects that your game has the magic, they will give you all the visibility
they will give you all the visibility they can muster. Okay. And I looked at
they can muster. Okay. And I looked at the games that got into real Steam, all
the games that got into real Steam, all the games of last year that got into
the games of last year that got into real Steam, 74% of the games that got
real Steam, 74% of the games that got into Steam or into real Steam did it
into Steam or into real Steam did it within 3 months or less. 74%. Okay. The
within 3 months or less. 74%. Okay. The next set of games, it took them six
next set of games, it took them six months, but they still got it. And then
months, but they still got it. And then it's a much smaller for the rest of the
it's a much smaller for the rest of the year. It happens very fast. You know
year. It happens very fast. You know immediately whether your game has the
immediately whether your game has the magic like within a week, maybe a month.
magic like within a week, maybe a month. But what about Among Us? People are
But what about Among Us? People are saying, "Uh, our game failed, but what
saying, "Uh, our game failed, but what about Among Us?" You know, Among Us,
about Among Us?" You know, Among Us, they they sold later, not right away.
they they sold later, not right away. You know, it's like we just pushed the
You know, it's like we just pushed the ball into real Steam. Okay, I looked at
ball into real Steam. Okay, I looked at 100 had 14,000 games that released last
100 had 14,000 games that released last year that didn't have the magic, that
year that didn't have the magic, that didn't get into real Steam. Only one
didn't get into real Steam. Only one recovered. I found it. I found the one
recovered. I found it. I found the one game that pulled the Among Us last year.
game that pulled the Among Us last year. It's called Beltmatic. Okay, this is
It's called Beltmatic. Okay, this is what happened. In three months, they had
what happened. In three months, they had 51 reviews. That is not real Steam.
51 reviews. That is not real Steam. A thousand reviews after 9 months, they
A thousand reviews after 9 months, they somehow pulled it off. Okay, it was
somehow pulled it off. Okay, it was streamers and they didn't market their
streamers and they didn't market their game in the original, but whatever. But
game in the original, but whatever. But here's the thing. No other games, one
here's the thing. No other games, one game. I found the one game that did it.
game. I found the one game that did it. Nobody else did it. Okay, here's I'm
Nobody else did it. Okay, here's I'm going to be honest with you all. If you
going to be honest with you all. If you don't hit 250 reviews in your first
don't hit 250 reviews in your first month, it's more than likely not going
month, it's more than likely not going to happen. It's just not. It's time to
to happen. It's just not. It's time to move on. plan B, whatever. It doesn't
move on. plan B, whatever. It doesn't work. You can't do it afterwards. One
work. You can't do it afterwards. One game. Belmnatic was the only one that
game. Belmnatic was the only one that pulled this off. I'm just going to be
pulled this off. I'm just going to be honest. I'm sorry. It's not me. It's a
honest. I'm sorry. It's not me. It's a data. I just pulled in the data. I'm
data. I just pulled in the data. I'm really sorry. That's not me. I didn't
really sorry. That's not me. I didn't make Steam. All right. Increased
make Steam. All right. Increased benefits of Real Steam. This is how
benefits of Real Steam. This is how Valve fixed it all up. They just added
Valve fixed it all up. They just added more money to Steam. Once you get into
more money to Steam. Once you get into Real Steam, they have six titles per
Real Steam, they have six titles per day. They added six titles to be
day. They added six titles to be appearing in the daily deal. If you
appearing in the daily deal. If you don't know the daily deal, this is it.
don't know the daily deal, this is it. It's on the front page of Steam. Um,
It's on the front page of Steam. Um, Miami Lane when they got a daily deal,
Miami Lane when they got a daily deal, they've sold as many copies basically as
they've sold as many copies basically as their launch day. Daily deal is a big
their launch day. Daily deal is a big deal. You get about 10,000 to $30,000.
deal. You get about 10,000 to $30,000. Um, I worked with Lombbe of totally
Um, I worked with Lombbe of totally human.io, really good guy. Follow that
human.io, really good guy. Follow that guy. 400 reviews, six months. That's
guy. 400 reviews, six months. That's basically if you hit that number, ask
basically if you hit that number, ask for a daily deal. Valve has added part
for a daily deal. Valve has added part of their new deal, their new Steam
of their new deal, their new Steam deals. Uh, they just give you a
deals. Uh, they just give you a calendar. You get to pick your daily
calendar. You get to pick your daily deal. They automatically do it. You'll
deal. They automatically do it. You'll just get a note. It says you can now
just get a note. It says you can now pick a daily deal. Wow, do it. Um, but
pick a daily deal. Wow, do it. Um, but in all that scraping, I found there were
in all that scraping, I found there were some games, 10% of games that got a
some games, 10% of games that got a daily deal didn't really seem like they
daily deal didn't really seem like they were real Steam. Okay, so if you're at
were real Steam. Okay, so if you're at about a 100red reviews, why not just let
about a 100red reviews, why not just let Valve tell you no. Just apply for it.
Valve tell you no. Just apply for it. What you do is you go to Steam support,
What you do is you go to Steam support, just open a support ticket and say, "I'd
just open a support ticket and say, "I'd like to be in real Steam." No, don't say
like to be in real Steam." No, don't say that. Just say, "Can I get a daily
that. Just say, "Can I get a daily deal?" Tell them that. Can I get a daily
deal?" Tell them that. Can I get a daily deal? But al access games can do it,
deal? But al access games can do it, too. So don't you don't have to wait for
too. So don't you don't have to wait for full release. You're translated, right?
full release. You're translated, right? Because Valve really daily deals are
Because Valve really daily deals are public everywhere. So they got to do
public everywhere. So they got to do that. Okay. Um uh so featuring during
that. Okay. Um uh so featuring during Steam sales, this is a new change. Now
Steam sales, this is a new change. Now during a Steam sale, they'll put games
during a Steam sale, they'll put games in there. How do you know? You'll just
in there. How do you know? You'll just get an email. See, there's that
get an email. See, there's that featuring right there. Um you'll just
featuring right there. Um you'll just get an email a few days before it just
get an email a few days before it just says, "Hey, you're invited to the Steam
says, "Hey, you're invited to the Steam sale. Do you want to do it?" Always say
sale. Do you want to do it?" Always say yes. Don't you don't even have to do it.
yes. Don't you don't even have to do it. You make so much money. This is a game
You make so much money. This is a game that got that featuring. Look at that.
that got that featuring. Look at that. It looks kind of like a cat, but uh
It looks kind of like a cat, but uh that's what it is. So, if you get that
that's what it is. So, if you get that email, always say yes. And this is not
email, always say yes. And this is not for you all. I know all of you would say
for you all. I know all of you would say yes. I've literally had devs coming in
yes. I've literally had devs coming in and they say, "Our publisher said no."
and they say, "Our publisher said no." Was that smart? That is so wrong. Okay?
Was that smart? That is so wrong. Okay? If your publisher ever says, "We don't
If your publisher ever says, "We don't know if we're going to opt into this."
know if we're going to opt into this." You send them this video. Okay? When
You send them this video. Okay? When this goes up on YouTube or the vault,
this goes up on YouTube or the vault, send them this video. Publisher, I'm
send them this video. Publisher, I'm talking to you now. Let your developers
talking to you now. Let your developers into this. This is free money. I don't
into this. This is free money. I don't know why publishers always do this. So,
know why publishers always do this. So, say yes. Okay. Longer launch discounts.
say yes. Okay. Longer launch discounts. You can now do two weeks as your default
You can now do two weeks as your default when you launch your game for the
when you launch your game for the discount. Do it. It's two weeks. Just do
discount. Do it. It's two weeks. Just do it. That's the thing. Um, you should
it. That's the thing. Um, you should pair your second week with a big
pair your second week with a big festival like a Steam winter sale or
festival like a Steam winter sale or something. It it it's a good boost.
something. It it it's a good boost. Okay. So, in short, Valve fix the oops
Okay. So, in short, Valve fix the oops by increasing the number of the games
by increasing the number of the games that get into it and how much money you
that get into it and how much money you make. Okay. I've had devs ask me, "We
make. Okay. I've had devs ask me, "We made about $300,000, so we're ready to
made about $300,000, so we're ready to move on to our second game." Getting
move on to our second game." Getting into real Steam is like finding true
into real Steam is like finding true love. It's true love. Don't let it away.
love. It's true love. Don't let it away. Don't give it up. It's It's true love.
Don't give it up. It's It's true love. Some people never even find true love.
Some people never even find true love. So many devs want to be in Real Steam.
So many devs want to be in Real Steam. If you ever get into Real Steam, you can
If you ever get into Real Steam, you can live your rest of your life on Steam.
live your rest of your life on Steam. Okay? Every year you can update it. DLC.
Okay? Every year you can update it. DLC. Hire an intern to just keep adding DLC.
Hire an intern to just keep adding DLC. Never give up real Steam. Steam will
Never give up real Steam. Steam will promote you for years if you get into
promote you for years if you get into real Steam. Your mission is to get a
real Steam. Your mission is to get a demo, then get into real Steam. Okay,
demo, then get into real Steam. Okay, finally, let's go real quick through
finally, let's go real quick through NextFest. Um, basically, Nexfest, the
NextFest. Um, basically, Nexfest, the new the new way they do it, it works
new the new way they do it, it works exactly like the discovery queue. They
exactly like the discovery queue. They just took they must have copied and
just took they must have copied and pasted the Steam discovery Q algorithm
pasted the Steam discovery Q algorithm and they just pasted it into Steam
and they just pasted it into Steam NextFest.
NextFest. I looked at this is the median wish list
I looked at this is the median wish list that you typically get in NextFest and
that you typically get in NextFest and those tiers are how you know how how
those tiers are how you know how how much of the magic the game has. Um if we
much of the magic the game has. Um if we follow four games you'll notice that the
follow four games you'll notice that the top tier games all get 50,000 visit
top tier games all get 50,000 visit impressions on next the first day.
impressions on next the first day. Silver bronze games are kind of like if
Silver bronze games are kind of like if you come in with lower wish list you
you come in with lower wish list you kind of end up at 15,000 but it works
kind of end up at 15,000 but it works just like the discovery queue. The first
just like the discovery queue. The first day huge increase. They show every game
day huge increase. They show every game no matter the tier no matter how weird
no matter the tier no matter how weird it looks. They put you on nextfest.
it looks. They put you on nextfest. They'll show you this is the next next
They'll show you this is the next next fest impressions. In fact, journalists
fest impressions. In fact, journalists got freaked out. They're like, "Why are
got freaked out. They're like, "Why are there garbage AI games on Steam? What is
there garbage AI games on Steam? What is this? This like a guy from I think he's
this? This like a guy from I think he's in Kotaku." And he was like blue skying
in Kotaku." And he was like blue skying about this. And it's like, "No, this is
about this. And it's like, "No, this is this is real. This is all the weird
this is real. This is all the weird stuff you find in Steam." Um, but what
stuff you find in Steam." Um, but what happens is the Steam algorithm, just
happens is the Steam algorithm, just like on the discovery queue, if that
like on the discovery queue, if that bronze tier, if they see that people are
bronze tier, if they see that people are clicking away and not liking the game,
clicking away and not liking the game, they hide it. They really hide it.
they hide it. They really hide it. That's the way NextFest works. And so
That's the way NextFest works. And so this is the stats that came from my
this is the stats that came from my community. They they share their data.
community. They they share their data. This is what it looks like on NextFest.
This is what it looks like on NextFest. What that tells me is you need to get a
What that tells me is you need to get a high quality game into NextFest. You do
high quality game into NextFest. You do NextFest at the very end. It discovers
NextFest at the very end. It discovers the magic in games. In real games like
the magic in games. In real games like the seat taking your Yeshua Graves, they
the seat taking your Yeshua Graves, they got into the diamond tier. They did very
got into the diamond tier. They did very well because they're wonderful game.
well because they're wonderful game. Steam turns attractiveness into money.
Steam turns attractiveness into money. That's the engine of dreams. Okay. So,
That's the engine of dreams. Okay. So, always do the last NextFest. Okay. Um,
always do the last NextFest. Okay. Um, and finally, Trailer TV on NextFest.
and finally, Trailer TV on NextFest. This is all new. It's wonderful. Just
This is all new. It's wonderful. Just make a good trailer. Don't make a long
make a good trailer. Don't make a long slow in a world trailer. Just get right
slow in a world trailer. Just get right to gameplay right away. No logos. Take
to gameplay right away. No logos. Take all that garbage out. Just go straight
all that garbage out. Just go straight into it and launch your demo months and
into it and launch your demo months and months and months and months before
months and months and months before NextFest. Again, NextFest is the final
NextFest. Again, NextFest is the final say. It's not the beginning. Okay? And
say. It's not the beginning. Okay? And then they cleaned up Steam pages so that
then they cleaned up Steam pages so that you can't do all these links. All you do
you can't do all these links. All you do is create a developer page. Everybody
is create a developer page. Everybody needs to create a developer page.
needs to create a developer page. Everybody forgets to do it. create a
Everybody forgets to do it. create a franchise and then link to your other
franchise and then link to your other games from within your game. That's the
games from within your game. That's the only way that Steam now allows you to
only way that Steam now allows you to crossromote that way. Grey Alien Games
crossromote that way. Grey Alien Games did a study. Their best link was a
did a study. Their best link was a pop-up that when you start the game
pop-up that when you start the game says, "Hey, try our new game." It works.
says, "Hey, try our new game." It works. It works. Also, you can just sell merch.
It works. Also, you can just sell merch. Baldersgate 3 just sells you merch when
Baldersgate 3 just sells you merch when you start the game. Why not? Why not?
you start the game. Why not? Why not? Let's just do it. Also, bundle with your
Let's just do it. Also, bundle with your friends. Bundle with your friends. It's
friends. Bundle with your friends. It's good. Every marketing activity is a blip
good. Every marketing activity is a blip compared to demos. Get your demos out,
compared to demos. Get your demos out, folks. Just make them. All right. remove
folks. Just make them. All right. remove your bodies. You can bring them back,
your bodies. You can bring them back, but go sign up from the mail list. How
but go sign up from the mail list. How toarketame.comfree.
toarketame.comfree. I don't have time for questions, but
I don't have time for questions, but I'll be out there. Thank you so much.
I'll be out there. Thank you so much. Thank you.
Thank you. [Applause]
[Applause] [Music]