So, thank you for coming. Uh, my name is Barry Goenova. I'm the platform
Barry Goenova. I'm the platform technical lead at Bungie. I'm going to
technical lead at Bungie. I'm going to talk about multi-threading the Destiny
talk about multi-threading the Destiny engine. To start off, um, this talk is
engine. To start off, um, this talk is not about multi-threaded primitives.
not about multi-threaded primitives. We're not going to be talking about
We're not going to be talking about atomics. We're not going to be talking
atomics. We're not going to be talking about semaphors. It's more about the
about semaphors. It's more about the engine structure and strategies to
engine structure and strategies to increase parallelization in the engine.
increase parallelization in the engine. And we're also going to describe our our
And we're also going to describe our our system to help program in multi-threaded
system to help program in multi-threaded ways to prove that it's
ways to prove that it's safe. So this section's a brief overview
safe. So this section's a brief overview and I'm going to talk a little bit about
and I'm going to talk a little bit about multi-threading. I'm going to follow it
multi-threading. I'm going to follow it up with how we did multi-threading in
up with how we did multi-threading in Destiny, what our our philosophies are,
Destiny, what our our philosophies are, and then how we ended up mapping that to
and then how we ended up mapping that to the hardware for the different platforms
the hardware for the different platforms that we shipped. I'm going to talk a
that we shipped. I'm going to talk a little bit about how we proved that our
little bit about how we proved that our code codebase was thread safe and then
code codebase was thread safe and then how we deployed that into our engine and
how we deployed that into our engine and then the lessons learned from that.
then the lessons learned from that. Finally, I'll just wrap that
up. So, Destiny is a shared world shooter. Uh we want to provide low
shooter. Uh we want to provide low latency action that's a fast-paced game.
latency action that's a fast-paced game. It's basically the start of a new
It's basically the start of a new generation for us. Uh we're suns setting
generation for us. Uh we're suns setting Halo. We're starting with new two two
Halo. We're starting with new two two new consoles, the PS4 and Xbox One. And
new consoles, the PS4 and Xbox One. And then of course we're still shipping on
then of course we're still shipping on 360 and
360 and PS3. Um there's a little bit of gameplay
PS3. Um there's a little bit of gameplay footage in case you're one of the people
footage in case you're one of the people who aren't the 16 million people who've
who aren't the 16 million people who've played our game
yet. Of course,
So, I'm going to talk a bit about multi-threading, uh, why we needed to do
multi-threading, uh, why we needed to do um how we knew it was going to be hard.
um how we knew it was going to be hard. Uh basically, we determined that we
Uh basically, we determined that we couldn't ship without multi-threading.
couldn't ship without multi-threading. The gameplay needs to be the same across
The gameplay needs to be the same across all of our platforms. We want everybody
all of our platforms. We want everybody to have the same experience regardless
to have the same experience regardless where they're playing it. Um if they're
where they're playing it. Um if they're playing it on last gen or current gen.
playing it on last gen or current gen. Uh but we've already shipped on last
Uh but we've already shipped on last gen. uh this workload is now much more
gen. uh this workload is now much more than we've done in the past because
than we've done in the past because we're both we're doing both AI and
we're both we're doing both AI and networking in the same game modes
networking in the same game modes instead of just networking for PVP and
instead of just networking for PVP and PVE being single player or PVE is now
PVE being single player or PVE is now shared. And so we have to basically be
shared. And so we have to basically be able to extract as much CPU as we can
able to extract as much CPU as we can out of the whole system, especially on
out of the whole system, especially on those last gen platforms like PS3 with
those last gen platforms like PS3 with the the two PPUs that aren't very
the the two PPUs that aren't very powerful.
powerful. But we knew multi-threading was going to
But we knew multi-threading was going to be hard. So we had to figure out a good
be hard. So we had to figure out a good way to do it. Um you know there's
way to do it. Um you know there's basically three big hard things in it.
basically three big hard things in it. Splitting the workloads. You never
Splitting the workloads. You never really know what uh what the right way
really know what uh what the right way is to split things. Uh preventing the
is to split things. Uh preventing the data dependency misses. Uh knowing how
data dependency misses. Uh knowing how your data is going to interact with each
your data is going to interact with each other and then tracking down those
other and then tracking down those issues when you've missed all of that
issues when you've missed all of that and figuring it out.
and figuring it out. So as an example for splitting the
So as an example for splitting the workload, uh I'll take a look at our
workload, uh I'll take a look at our object move. Uh basically object move
object move. Uh basically object move calculating the positions and the
calculating the positions and the skeleton uh positions by combining, you
skeleton uh positions by combining, you know, physics update, animation, IK,
know, physics update, animation, IK, etc. And so this is usually difficult to
etc. And so this is usually difficult to parallelize code. It tends to be very
parallelize code. It tends to be very branchy. You want it to be branchy
branchy. You want it to be branchy because you want to be able to improve
because you want to be able to improve the responsiveness, but you have that
the responsiveness, but you have that trade-off. Maybe you don't want to do
trade-off. Maybe you don't want to do that. Maybe you want to make it so it's
that. Maybe you want to make it so it's easier to to thread by making everything
easier to to thread by making everything the same uh and getting rid of those
the same uh and getting rid of those branches. But you know, at the end of
branches. But you know, at the end of the day, each each object is going to
the day, each each object is going to want to do something different. Uh the
want to do something different. Uh the objects are interacting with the other
objects are interacting with the other objects in the system. How do you deal
objects in the system. How do you deal with that across the the threads? And
with that across the the threads? And then as they're moving through the
then as they're moving through the system, the things that they're
system, the things that they're interacting with are changing all the
interacting with are changing all the time.
time. It's just a difficult problem to
It's just a difficult problem to actually figure out the right way to
actually figure out the right way to split. And then you're missing data
split. And then you're missing data dependencies. So let's say you have some
dependencies. So let's say you have some workloads that you've got here like your
workloads that you've got here like your AI update which triggers raycasts and
AI update which triggers raycasts and triggers the physics update. Um physics
triggers the physics update. Um physics updates can then trigger the audio
updates can then trigger the audio update because maybe you've got
update because maybe you've got obstruction or occluders that needs to
obstruction or occluders that needs to be aware of what's going on in the
be aware of what's going on in the physics world. And so you can see this
physics world. And so you can see this this part here with the physics box
this part here with the physics box that's moving back and forth. I mean
that's moving back and forth. I mean that that job can start late. It can run
that that job can start late. It can run long. You don't really know what it's
long. You don't really know what it's going to actually overlap with,
going to actually overlap with, especially if you're just dependency
especially if you're just dependency bound here. And so there's this this
bound here. And so there's this this missing dep data dependency on the
missing dep data dependency on the raycast reading your physics world
raycast reading your physics world versus the physics world actually being
updated. And then the rare bugs, you know, you get a a bug from QA, they send
know, you get a a bug from QA, they send you a video, that's all you got. It's
you a video, that's all you got. It's not a crash. You don't have a core dump.
not a crash. You don't have a core dump. You can't inspect anything. You just get
You can't inspect anything. You just get this video that says, "Hey, the rocket
this video that says, "Hey, the rocket effect on this player is is the wrong
effect on this player is is the wrong one. It's the same as this other player.
one. It's the same as this other player. Uh what's going on here?" And that's
Uh what's going on here?" And that's another bug that's just how are you ever
another bug that's just how are you ever going to debug that? You know, you don't
going to debug that? You know, you don't know if it's ever being reproduced in
know if it's ever being reproduced in house. You don't know how many times
house. You don't know how many times it's actually gone on. And then QA can't
it's actually gone on. And then QA can't really tell you anything. Maybe they
really tell you anything. Maybe they told you, "Hey, there join in progress
told you, "Hey, there join in progress happened.
So I'm going to talk a little bit about the multi-threading that we built for
the multi-threading that we built for Destiny
Destiny principles. First and foremost, we
principles. First and foremost, we wanted to keep it simple. Uh we wanted
wanted to keep it simple. Uh we wanted our complexity to be necessary and
our complexity to be necessary and there's definitely complexity that we
there's definitely complexity that we have, but anything that we could keep
have, but anything that we could keep simple definitely helped us out. We
simple definitely helped us out. We wanted to keep everything as
wanted to keep everything as crossplatform as possible. with the four
crossplatform as possible. with the four platforms that we're shipping on, it's
platforms that we're shipping on, it's just it's a nightmare to have to keep
just it's a nightmare to have to keep separate implementations and keep
separate implementations and keep maintenance on those. It just doesn't
maintenance on those. It just doesn't make sense. And then the big biggest
make sense. And then the big biggest important thing was having to understand
important thing was having to understand our data access patterns. If you don't
our data access patterns. If you don't know what your data is doing, it's just
know what your data is doing, it's just going to be really difficult to to
going to be really difficult to to multi-thread. Uh we also didn't want to
multi-thread. Uh we also didn't want to wait for
wait for synchronization. Synchronization just
synchronization. Synchronization just takes time. We don't necessarily have
takes time. We don't necessarily have the CPU time to actually do that. Uh
the CPU time to actually do that. Uh basically we shied away from using
basically we shied away from using synchronization primitives wherever we
synchronization primitives wherever we could. We just wanted to express
could. We just wanted to express everything via dependencies. So work
everything via dependencies. So work that could start would start and if it
that could start would start and if it wasn't ready to start yet, we would just
wasn't ready to start yet, we would just start some other piece of
work. Uh like many other engines, it's basically the flow of the of the system
basically the flow of the of the system is running from simulation to rendering.
is running from simulation to rendering. You want your game world to be
You want your game world to be simulated. You want to put it on screen.
simulated. You want to put it on screen. uh we pipeline that so our rendering is
uh we pipeline that so our rendering is overlapping our simulation but you'll
overlapping our simulation but you'll have the previous frames rendering
have the previous frames rendering finishing off while your next frame
finishing off while your next frame simulation is going vice
versa we use a job system they're pretty well described by now definitely seen
well described by now definitely seen lots of talks on them Ron's talk from
lots of talks on them Ron's talk from GDC 2010 definitely a good one um a job
GDC 2010 definitely a good one um a job if you're unfamiliar it's just a
if you're unfamiliar it's just a self-contained task it's got some
self-contained task it's got some parameters tells you what to do for our
parameters tells you what to do for our system We have them at half a
system We have them at half a millisecond to 2 milliseconds and that
millisecond to 2 milliseconds and that reflects that our jobs do not get
reflects that our jobs do not get preempted and that we have a
preempted and that we have a significantly high overhead on the jobs.
significantly high overhead on the jobs. It's not like making a bunch of SPU jobs
It's not like making a bunch of SPU jobs where you have that sea of jobs because
where you have that sea of jobs because you can run two microscond jobs and not
you can run two microscond jobs and not really worry about
it. It's uh priority based first in first out. Nothing really fancy there.
first out. Nothing really fancy there. Um our job graph again it's takes into
Um our job graph again it's takes into account all the different types of cores
account all the different types of cores that we have. So on PS3 that's going to
that we have. So on PS3 that's going to be both the CPU and the SPU jobs and we
be both the CPU and the SPU jobs and we use dependencies between our jobs. We
use dependencies between our jobs. We don't do fences. So in this example we
don't do fences. So in this example we have our AI kickoff and AI finish
have our AI kickoff and AI finish bookends that have the dependencies for
bookends that have the dependencies for those actor update jobs that would be
those actor update jobs that would be running in parallel there.
What we did find though is most systems tend to do the same work every frame.
tend to do the same work every frame. You're just going to run that code over
You're just going to run that code over and over again and it's basically pretty
and over again and it's basically pretty linear uh kind of reflective from olden
linear uh kind of reflective from olden days where you're using a single thread
days where you're using a single thread to to do that work. And then most of
to to do that work. And then most of that work is using the same data and
that work is using the same data and that data access pattern is going to be
that data access pattern is going to be the same across frames. So we formalized
the same across frames. So we formalized this into a first- class
this into a first- class citizen which we call the fiber system.
citizen which we call the fiber system. So we took this industry standard word
So we took this industry standard word fiber and totally corrupted it. I'm
fiber and totally corrupted it. I'm sorry. Uh for us a fiber means a set of
sorry. Uh for us a fiber means a set of jobs that are going to run in sequence.
jobs that are going to run in sequence. They will not run in parallel with each
They will not run in parallel with each other. They can run with other fibers
other. They can run with other fibers but these ones will always run. And
but these ones will always run. And we'll call that that sequence of jobs.
we'll call that that sequence of jobs. So in this case, network update, network
So in this case, network update, network send, network receive. Those would be
send, network receive. Those would be three jobs that that form an iteration
three jobs that that form an iteration for our fibers. And then the other piece
for our fibers. And then the other piece that goes with our fiber system is
that goes with our fiber system is there's a set of data that's associated
there's a set of data that's associated with it. So in this case, the network
with it. So in this case, the network state that's accessible by all of the
state that's accessible by all of the network jobs inside that
fiber. For Destiny, we have uh three to four fibers. Basically, uh our
four fibers. Basically, uh our simulation contains all the game logic
simulation contains all the game logic as you would expect. Uh similarly the
as you would expect. Uh similarly the networking is all of the networking code
networking is all of the networking code and then we have a couple of fibers for
and then we have a couple of fibers for rendering that covers all of our all all
rendering that covers all of our all all of the work of extracting that game
of the work of extracting that game state from simulation and pushing it all
state from simulation and pushing it all the way into the GPU getting it on
screen. Fibers really are are acting as a convenience for us here. Um, it's not
a convenience for us here. Um, it's not like they're really buying us anything
like they're really buying us anything apart from having jobs because the
apart from having jobs because the underlying representation is just a
underlying representation is just a sequence of jobs. But what it does allow
sequence of jobs. But what it does allow us to do is communicate with people. Um,
us to do is communicate with people. Um, when you look at a big job graph and you
when you look at a big job graph and you want to know and you want to talk to
want to know and you want to talk to other people about it, if you're not on
other people about it, if you're not on the same page, then it's really
the same page, then it's really difficult to talk about, oh, this
difficult to talk about, oh, this specific job over here, we need to work
specific job over here, we need to work about this. and getting somebody ramped
about this. and getting somebody ramped up to understand that is a lot easier if
up to understand that is a lot easier if you basically say, "Hey, in the render
you basically say, "Hey, in the render fiber when we're kicking off the work to
fiber when we're kicking off the work to extract things out of the frame, people
extract things out of the frame, people can catch that very quickly. Um, it
can catch that very quickly. Um, it gives us common ground basically to talk
gives us common ground basically to talk about. It also gives you an expectation
about. It also gives you an expectation of how the data is going to be used
of how the data is going to be used because you know what data is associated
because you know what data is associated with it. So there's that general feel of
with it. So there's that general feel of of this data is owned by this fiber
of this data is owned by this fiber versus I'm never going to touch the
versus I'm never going to touch the network data inside the rendering fiber.
network data inside the rendering fiber. And then the other big key thing that it
And then the other big key thing that it gave us is because all of our our big
gave us is because all of our our big systems are fibers, the cross-system
systems are fibers, the cross-system dependencies can be documented in one
dependencies can be documented in one location in our code. I don't know if
location in our code. I don't know if you've ever had to work in a codebase
you've ever had to work in a codebase where the dependencies between the
where the dependencies between the systems are spread through the hundreds
systems are spread through the hundreds of CPP files that you've got, but it's a
of CPP files that you've got, but it's a big pain to try to figure out what's
big pain to try to figure out what's going on, especially after the fact. So
going on, especially after the fact. So being able to have that in a single
being able to have that in a single function as you know 20 to 30 lines is
function as you know 20 to 30 lines is is a great way to be able to look and
is a great way to be able to look and and see where that's all
and see where that's all going. Uh time control is the only real
going. Uh time control is the only real thread that we have in our system. It's
thread that we have in our system. It's responsible for kicking off all the
responsible for kicking off all the iterations of the fibers. It's queued
iterations of the fibers. It's queued off of VSYNC for the different
off of VSYNC for the different platforms.
platforms. Um, we had tried to do this as a job to
Um, we had tried to do this as a job to keep the entire system as a job, but it
keep the entire system as a job, but it basically added a bunch of overhead into
basically added a bunch of overhead into our job manager. Was the only job that
our job manager. Was the only job that was trying to execute with accurate
was trying to execute with accurate timing and so cutting that out just cut
timing and so cutting that out just cut out a lot of overhead in our job
out a lot of overhead in our job system. It's also responsible for
system. It's also responsible for serializing all the fibers, which
serializing all the fibers, which basically just means draining the
basically just means draining the current iterations. You wait for them
current iterations. You wait for them all to complete. You're going to do this
all to complete. You're going to do this if you need to run something in a single
if you need to run something in a single threaded type context. So for us that
threaded type context. So for us that basically means hey we're changing
basically means hey we're changing destinations. You're going to Mars,
destinations. You're going to Mars, you're going to Venus. Uh we basically
you're going to Venus. Uh we basically need to do a few things where the rest
need to do a few things where the rest of the game can't run at that time. Uh
of the game can't run at that time. Uh we'll also use it for system events like
we'll also use it for system events like suspend resume or some of our debugging
suspend resume or some of our debugging events where we're doing patching and
events where we're doing patching and developer mode patching. We don't really
developer mode patching. We don't really care if it works multi-threaded. We just
care if it works multi-threaded. We just want to have it work.
So, how do we map this to the hardware? Well, first off, this is a
hardware? Well, first off, this is a picture of one of our job graphs. This
picture of one of our job graphs. This is from Cosmo Drrome on Xbox One. It's
is from Cosmo Drrome on Xbox One. It's pretty much an average frame. It gets a
pretty much an average frame. It gets a lot more complicated. Uh, I grabbed this
lot more complicated. Uh, I grabbed this frame from Natasha's talk and it's
frame from Natasha's talk and it's basically a lot of rendering and a
basically a lot of rendering and a little bit of simulation. Here we've got
little bit of simulation. Here we've got over a 100 types of jobs.
over a 100 types of jobs. uh basically hard to really see what's
uh basically hard to really see what's going on unless you can zoom in and and
going on unless you can zoom in and and move around, which again comes back to
move around, which again comes back to that the fibers being easier to describe
that the fibers being easier to describe what's going
on. So for us, we wanted to keep all the platforms as similar as we could and
platforms as similar as we could and that goes in with our hardware
that goes in with our hardware utilization as well. Basically, most of
utilization as well. Basically, most of the principles apply to all of the
the principles apply to all of the platforms. We usually have one job
platforms. We usually have one job thread per core. Um, and the simulation
thread per core. Um, and the simulation fiber, we want to keep that latency
fiber, we want to keep that latency really low. We're particular about our
really low. We're particular about our input latency. So, we need to make sure
input latency. So, we need to make sure that we get our simulation work done as
that we get our simulation work done as fast as possible with as little
fast as possible with as little interrupts as we possibly can. So, we're
interrupts as we possibly can. So, we're going to try to put this on a high
going to try to put this on a high priority job thread across the
platforms. So, we also have async job threads. A lot of the platforms have
threads. A lot of the platforms have tasks that we don't really have control
tasks that we don't really have control over. They go to sleep. You want to
over. They go to sleep. You want to query for your network friends list.
query for your network friends list. Hey, that might take 20 seconds. You're
Hey, that might take 20 seconds. You're sending an HTTP request to log into a
sending an HTTP request to log into a server or you're loading data off of
server or you're loading data off of disk. And so these ones run in our async
disk. And so these ones run in our async job threads which are allowed to run
job threads which are allowed to run across the the serialization events. Uh
across the the serialization events. Uh they can go to sleep, they can take
they can go to sleep, they can take locks. It's basically just calling OS
locks. It's basically just calling OS level stuff. And then of course we try
level stuff. And then of course we try to keep that data self-contained so that
to keep that data self-contained so that if it does need to get serialized we
if it does need to get serialized we don't want to wait for those 20 second
don't want to wait for those 20 second second
jobs. So I'll start with PS3. Um basically this is a layout of what we've
basically this is a layout of what we've done for the the hardware threads. Um
done for the the hardware threads. Um there's no affinity on PS3. So it's not
there's no affinity on PS3. So it's not like we could say hey this job thread
like we could say hey this job thread only runs on ppu zero. So we kind of
only runs on ppu zero. So we kind of cheated a little bit and we just cranked
cheated a little bit and we just cranked up the priority as high as we possibly
up the priority as high as we possibly could and that helps minimize a lot of
could and that helps minimize a lot of the preeemption that we're seeing on it.
the preeemption that we're seeing on it. And then that job thread is only allowed
And then that job thread is only allowed to run the simulation jobs most of the
to run the simulation jobs most of the time. Uh the other pu thread is another
time. Uh the other pu thread is another job thread. Uh but that job thread has
job thread. Uh but that job thread has the lowest priority that we could put in
the lowest priority that we could put in the system. And we basically crammed all
the system. And we basically crammed all the other threads, the middleware and
the other threads, the middleware and the async jobs in between there so that
the async jobs in between there so that they can take up time when they need to.
they can take up time when they need to. And then across all of the SPUs, we use
And then across all of the SPUs, we use the six SPUs. They're just running job
the six SPUs. They're just running job threads to consume those
jobs. So here's a capture from Tuner. Uh this is job thread
zero. You can see here that the preeemption, there's not a lot of
preeemption, there's not a lot of preeemption events. There's still some,
preeemption events. There's still some, but it gets a pretty good
but it gets a pretty good utilization. And that allows us to keep
utilization. And that allows us to keep that that high priority set of
that that high priority set of simulation jobs going which essentially
simulation jobs going which essentially are are these jobs here. So it's
are are these jobs here. So it's the
the the
the second these red jobs that have been
second these red jobs that have been marked off here are all the simulation
marked off here are all the simulation work that's either simulation fiber work
work that's either simulation fiber work or uh jobs kicked off from simulation.
or uh jobs kicked off from simulation. And so they're all running during this
And so they're all running during this time frame up to here. And then this red
time frame up to here. And then this red line that goes down marks the end where
line that goes down marks the end where the simulation is completed for that
the simulation is completed for that frame. And so we've now opened it up so
frame. And so we've now opened it up so that other jobs or other work can run on
that other jobs or other work can run on this hardware thread. And so you can see
this hardware thread. And so you can see a rendering job sneaked in here on the
a rendering job sneaked in here on the as this red job
here. On the other job thread, uh you can see up top
can see up top here, this job thread is preempted a
here, this job thread is preempted a lot. uh totally reflecting what I said
lot. uh totally reflecting what I said earlier where we put everything else in
between. The SPUs are fairly fairly well utilized. We get about 50 to 70%
utilized. We get about 50 to 70% utilization which I think is actually
utilization which I think is actually pretty good for our first shipped PS3
pretty good for our first shipped PS3 title and we're a little bit behind uh
title and we're a little bit behind uh given that other people are on their
given that other people are on their like seventh or eighth PS3 title. But,
like seventh or eighth PS3 title. But, uh, this one's our first one, and I
uh, this one's our first one, and I think we've done a a pretty solid job on
think we've done a a pretty solid job on moving work to the SPUs. We've got about
moving work to the SPUs. We've got about 20 different job types that cover most
20 different job types that cover most of most of the code base. I mean, we've
of most of the code base. I mean, we've got audio, AI, animation, physics,
got audio, AI, animation, physics, networking, all running on the the SPUs.
networking, all running on the the SPUs. And of course, we have graphics going
And of course, we have graphics going there, too. Uh, SP8, lighting, uh, other
there, too. Uh, SP8, lighting, uh, other other aspects of the graphics. I think
other aspects of the graphics. I think the entire graphics pipeline is running
the entire graphics pipeline is running on the SPU for the most part.
Moving on to 360. So you've got your three cores uh with the two hardware
three cores uh with the two hardware threads each. Uh the interesting one is
threads each. Uh the interesting one is the first core. So this one's not being
the first core. So this one's not being preempted by ZAM. You don't have that 1
preempted by ZAM. You don't have that 1 millisecond time that's getting in. So
millisecond time that's getting in. So we're putting all of our simulation jobs
we're putting all of our simulation jobs there. And then we've gone one step
there. And then we've gone one step further and hardware thread one is idle
further and hardware thread one is idle for most of the time. And that allows
for most of the time. And that allows the the contended hardware elements not
the the contended hardware elements not to be used by hardware thread one,
to be used by hardware thread one, enabling a little bit of a speed up on
enabling a little bit of a speed up on some of the code for hardware thread
some of the code for hardware thread zero. That allows our simulation to
zero. That allows our simulation to finish just a little bit earlier.
finish just a little bit earlier. Hardware threads two and three are just
Hardware threads two and three are just regular job threads. Uh all our
regular job threads. Uh all our middleware is crammed onto hardware
middleware is crammed onto hardware thread 4 with the ZAM update. And then
thread 4 with the ZAM update. And then hardware thread 5 is also a job thread
hardware thread 5 is also a job thread and some asynchronous jobs.
and some asynchronous jobs. These threads don't move around because
These threads don't move around because 360 has Affinity that we can lock the
360 has Affinity that we can lock the threads to the hardware
threads to the hardware threads. So, this is a capture from Rad
threads. So, this is a capture from Rad Game tools telemetry, uh, one of their
Game tools telemetry, uh, one of their older versions. This is a frame from the
older versions. This is a frame from the 360. Uh, it's a little bit harder to see
360. Uh, it's a little bit harder to see what's going on here because we're not
what's going on here because we're not zooming in and whatnot, but this red
zooming in and whatnot, but this red circled section here, this is all the
circled section here, this is all the simulation work. uh everything past that
simulation work. uh everything past that is is moving on to different jobs where
is is moving on to different jobs where we finished the sim frame for
we finished the sim frame for 360. You can see in these circled spots
360. You can see in these circled spots here, this is the spots where we've left
here, this is the spots where we've left the the second CPU idle so that we can
the the second CPU idle so that we can actually get the better performance on
actually get the better performance on the first CPU. And then this red line
the first CPU. And then this red line over here again marking where simulation
over here again marking where simulation is complete for that frame and we've
is complete for that frame and we've opened it up for the rest the rest of
opened it up for the rest the rest of the the jobs to be able to execute on
the the jobs to be able to execute on that thread.
So on PS4 and Xbox One, uh there's the two clusters. Basically use cluster one.
two clusters. Basically use cluster one. So core zero through three to run all of
So core zero through three to run all of our jobs. Again, core zero, it's our
our jobs. Again, core zero, it's our simulation jobs. That's the only jobs
simulation jobs. That's the only jobs that's going to be running. Want to keep
that's going to be running. Want to keep those as high priority as possible just
those as high priority as possible just like on all the other platforms. Uh
like on all the other platforms. Uh we're able to set the affinity so we
we're able to set the affinity so we don't have to worry about the threads
don't have to worry about the threads moving around. And on the second
moving around. And on the second cluster, we basically run all of our
cluster, we basically run all of our middleware and any of our async
jobs. So here's a again a telemetry capture. This is from Xbox One. The PS4
capture. This is from Xbox One. The PS4 is fairly similar, although it's uh a
is fairly similar, although it's uh a little bit more idle than than the the
little bit more idle than than the the Xbox One
Xbox One is. You can see again at the top here,
is. You can see again at the top here, these jobs are a simulation workload. On
these jobs are a simulation workload. On nextG, we are able to complete the frame
nextG, we are able to complete the frame relatively quickly and then we've got
relatively quickly and then we've got our rendering that starts in after that
our rendering that starts in after that and we actually finish the rendering
and we actually finish the rendering almost within 33 milliseconds. We almost
almost within 33 milliseconds. We almost don't need to pipeline for
nextg. So you're going to move on a little bit. Uh you're going to see how
little bit. Uh you're going to see how we prove that our codebase is thread
we prove that our codebase is thread safe because all that that job graph is
safe because all that that job graph is fairly complicated. We basically want to
fairly complicated. We basically want to be able to say, "Hey, this is totally
be able to say, "Hey, this is totally safe,
safe, right?" Um, so the big requirements here
right?" Um, so the big requirements here to be able to say that is we need to be
to be able to say that is we need to be able to get actionable bugs when we're
able to get actionable bugs when we're getting it. We can't have those bugs
getting it. We can't have those bugs like I talked about earlier where it's
like I talked about earlier where it's like here's a video that says that the
like here's a video that says that the rocket looks the same. We need to be
rocket looks the same. We need to be able to know when that's actually
able to know when that's actually happening, how often it's happening, and
happening, how often it's happening, and then why it's actually happening. And
then why it's actually happening. And then we need the tools to actually be
then we need the tools to actually be able to debug it.
And really we need to enforce our data patterns. So I bring up this this
patterns. So I bring up this this picture that we had at the beginning and
picture that we had at the beginning and you see the the physics going where it's
you see the the physics going where it's it's conflicting with the raycasts.
it's conflicting with the raycasts. Again, we want to be able to robustly
Again, we want to be able to robustly detect this this bug and how do we do
detect this this bug and how do we do that? And we need to do that because we
that? And we need to do that because we have 50 client engineers all banging on
have 50 client engineers all banging on the
code. So we came up with our execution environment. This is our solution to
environment. This is our solution to this, the thing that let us ship across
this, the thing that let us ship across all of our platforms and it's really a
all of our platforms and it's really a system to validate resources and make
system to validate resources and make sure that the patterns used with those
sure that the patterns used with those resources are actually going to be
resources are actually going to be thread safe. Um, our goal is really to
thread safe. Um, our goal is really to satisfy those multi-threaded
satisfy those multi-threaded requirements that I just
said. So, it's going to be identifying unsafe patterns, but it's going to be
unsafe patterns, but it's going to be doing it during development. You're not
doing it during development. You're not going to be waiting to find out later
going to be waiting to find out later after you've checked in. It's not going
after you've checked in. It's not going to be three months later. It's going to
to be three months later. It's going to be before you've actually submitted and
be before you've actually submitted and unleashed it upon the rest of the people
unleashed it upon the rest of the people who are de developing in that code. Um,
who are de developing in that code. Um, it's also going to find the potential
it's also going to find the potential issues without you actually having to
issues without you actually having to hit them. So, we want to make sure that
hit them. So, we want to make sure that if it's possible to have this race
if it's possible to have this race condition, we found it, not only when
condition, we found it, not only when the race condition
the race condition occurs. It's going to detect any of the
occurs. It's going to detect any of the patterns that lead to the weirdness that
patterns that lead to the weirdness that you're going to see that's hard to
you're going to see that's hard to debug. like those things where hey if
debug. like those things where hey if this job runs in a different order from
this job runs in a different order from this job you get a different result but
this job you get a different result but you can't tell and you can't really
you can't tell and you can't really debug that because how do you control
debug that because how do you control which jobs run in the different order
which jobs run in the different order without having putting dependencies
without having putting dependencies between them and then if you did put
between them and then if you did put dependencies between them then you've
dependencies between them then you've already fixed the problem. Uh it'll also
already fixed the problem. Uh it'll also catch any of the data race conditions or
catch any of the data race conditions or any of the other crazy bugs that you're
any of the other crazy bugs that you're trying to find that are all based off of
trying to find that are all based off of code running at the same time banging on
code running at the same time banging on the same data.
the same data. But I do want to stress that this is
But I do want to stress that this is verification only. We don't ship with
verification only. We don't ship with this. It's totally compiled out inside
this. It's totally compiled out inside of our release builds. Uh we're not
of our release builds. Uh we're not doing any synchronization as a result of
doing any synchronization as a result of what we find. It's strictly we're going
what we find. It's strictly we're going to assert when we've detected that
to assert when we've detected that you're able to do some sort of access
you're able to do some sort of access that's not
good. So I'll talk a little bit of terminology. We have a resource. It's
terminology. We have a resource. It's just really a theoretical concept. It's
just really a theoretical concept. It's nothing specific. It's not a data
nothing specific. It's not a data structure, but it's it's anything that
structure, but it's it's anything that you would want to have protected. So,
you would want to have protected. So, you know, anything from our havoc world
you know, anything from our havoc world to uh actor data, uh maybe your input
to uh actor data, uh maybe your input controller, anything that would be used
controller, anything that would be used in a multi-threaded
in a multi-threaded fashion. We have policies and these
fashion. We have policies and these policies describe what you can do with a
policies describe what you can do with a resource. We want to be able to say,
resource. We want to be able to say, hey, this job is allowed to pull the
hey, this job is allowed to pull the controller. this job is allowed to read
controller. this job is allowed to read physics. Um those policies are
physics. Um those policies are associated with a job and it's really
associated with a job and it's really just explicit markup that you have to
just explicit markup that you have to add into the
code. And then we have to provide resource access checks for everything.
resource access checks for everything. Any resource that you want to have
Any resource that you want to have protected needs to be able to look up
protected needs to be able to look up into that policy to see if it has
into that policy to see if it has permission to do that work. And so you
permission to do that work. And so you need to be able to put in all of the
need to be able to put in all of the hooks. And then of course you have to
hooks. And then of course you have to actually have a lot of code coverage to
actually have a lot of code coverage to be able to go through all of those if
be able to go through all of those if statements and all the different
statements and all the different pathways through your code to make sure
pathways through your code to make sure that your policies are actually properly
that your policies are actually properly protecting that
protecting that data. And then for our access checks,
data. And then for our access checks, we're going to assert as I mentioned
we're going to assert as I mentioned before when you don't have access. And
before when you don't have access. And that's going to be a clear assert that
that's going to be a clear assert that basically says, hey, no, you can't read
basically says, hey, no, you can't read game time from here. You're the renderer
game time from here. You're the renderer thread. You have to get it some other
thread. You have to get it some other way.
the policies can overlap. This is when you have resource usage that conflicts.
you have resource usage that conflicts. So maybe you're like the example before
So maybe you're like the example before ray casting but you're also updating the
ray casting but you're also updating the havoc world at the same time. That's not
havoc world at the same time. That's not a good thing. Uh these also trigger an
a good thing. Uh these also trigger an assert and it's going to be a clear
assert and it's going to be a clear assert that says hey your raycast job is
assert that says hey your raycast job is trying to read the physics world but
trying to read the physics world but you're also writing to the physics world
you're also writing to the physics world from your havoc update job.
These are really to detect potential race conditions. You didn't necessarily
race conditions. You didn't necessarily hit the race condition. Maybe it was
hit the race condition. Maybe it was totally safe to read the havoc world and
totally safe to read the havoc world and and do those raycasts when you were
and do those raycasts when you were updating it because the jobs that or the
updating it because the jobs that or the parts in the physics world that you were
parts in the physics world that you were updating weren't the parts that the
updating weren't the parts that the raycast was actually looking at. But it
raycast was actually looking at. But it could happen in the future.
could happen in the future. And then we're going to check this
And then we're going to check this against all of the jobs in the job
against all of the jobs in the job graph. We basically integrated the
graph. We basically integrated the execution environment to be able to know
execution environment to be able to know the dependencies between those jobs so
the dependencies between those jobs so that we can actually tell which jobs are
that we can actually tell which jobs are capable of running at the same
time. And this basically makes us provably safe. So, as long as you have
provably safe. So, as long as you have instrumented all of your data
instrumented all of your data access, exercised all the pathways
access, exercised all the pathways through your code, and you're only using
through your code, and you're only using jobs, then it's perfectly proven. I
jobs, then it's perfectly proven. I realize that that's, you know, a hard
realize that that's, you know, a hard tall order to ask for, but it's not as
tall order to ask for, but it's not as bad as you
bad as you think. So, I'm going to talk a little
think. So, I'm going to talk a little bit about how we actually implemented
bit about how we actually implemented that, got it into our engine.
that, got it into our engine. to start off writing code. You know,
to start off writing code. You know, this is how we basically write all of
this is how we basically write all of our code. And you're going to start off
our code. And you're going to start off doing your your planning. You're going
doing your your planning. You're going to plan what data access you're going to
to plan what data access you're going to have. You're going to add access checks
have. You're going to add access checks for all the resources that you're going
for all the resources that you're going to need. And then you're going to add
to need. And then you're going to add policies to all the new code that you're
policies to all the new code that you're writing that basically expresses what
writing that basically expresses what you're going to do and how you're going
you're going to do and how you're going to access that data. You're going to run
to access that data. You're going to run through all the code pathways and then
through all the code pathways and then you're going to resolve any of the
you're going to resolve any of the overlaps that it's found. So, I'm going
overlaps that it's found. So, I'm going to talk about these pieces in a little
to talk about these pieces in a little more
more detail. The first part, catching every
detail. The first part, catching every resource. You know, you can't really
resource. You know, you can't really just say, "Hey, everybody, mark up every
just say, "Hey, everybody, mark up every single pointer dreference that you're
single pointer dreference that you're going to do." That's kind of crazy talk.
going to do." That's kind of crazy talk. Uh, nobody's going to do it unless
Uh, nobody's going to do it unless you're forced to actually do it. And if
you're forced to actually do it. And if you don't have compiler support to force
you don't have compiler support to force those people, you pretty much have to
those people, you pretty much have to put a wrapper around every every piece
put a wrapper around every every piece of data inside your engine. But
of data inside your engine. But thankfully for us uh from previous
thankfully for us uh from previous titles, we actually use handles for all
titles, we actually use handles for all of our our data access. So we had a
of our our data access. So we had a single point that we were able to put
single point that we were able to put those access checks in and be able to
those access checks in and be able to verify that we had the the safe spot. Uh
verify that we had the the safe spot. Uh handles have been great for us. It's
handles have been great for us. It's used for every piece of data in our
used for every piece of data in our engine. We just found cache pointers are
engine. We just found cache pointers are are very often causing bugs. you know,
are very often causing bugs. you know, you can't tell that this thing has been
you can't tell that this thing has been deleted frames ago. But with handles,
deleted frames ago. But with handles, we're able to actually see that we have
we're able to actually see that we have salt in the handle that basically says
salt in the handle that basically says this is this has been deleted. It's not
this is this has been deleted. It's not the same one as when you took the handle
the same one as when you took the handle from before it. So, we can have a nice
from before it. So, we can have a nice easy assert that says, "Hey, this
easy assert that says, "Hey, this simulation object that you dreferenced
simulation object that you dreferenced is no longer up to date."
So the data types that we have global data this is your standard structure
data this is your standard structure that you would normally use. We've
that you would normally use. We've wrapped it with a handle. The only piece
wrapped it with a handle. The only piece that's actually really global in this
that's actually really global in this case is the pointer into the data
case is the pointer into the data structure that we've backed in the fiber
structure that we've backed in the fiber memory area. And so that's that area
memory area. And so that's that area that I said the network state at the
that I said the network state at the beginning where we had that associated
beginning where we had that associated with the fibers. And that helps group
with the fibers. And that helps group the memory that's used a little bit more
the memory that's used a little bit more cache coherent as well. And this
cache coherent as well. And this accounts for about 10% of all of the
accounts for about 10% of all of the data in our game
data in our game state. We also have arrays. These are
state. We also have arrays. These are our typical C style array. We call them
our typical C style array. We call them DATM arrays. The only difference between
DATM arrays. The only difference between this is it's got an element of sparity
this is it's got an element of sparity to it. You can have different elements
to it. You can have different elements that are not allocated. So in this
that are not allocated. So in this example, DATMS three and four, the gray
example, DATMS three and four, the gray ones are not allocated, but DATM 5 is.
ones are not allocated, but DATM 5 is. So there are holes in there. These are
So there are holes in there. These are also accessed with handles. And this
also accessed with handles. And this accounts for the bulk of our game state
accounts for the bulk of our game state about
80%. Data array with heap is our solution for variable size data. Uh the
solution for variable size data. Uh the big usage case of this is all of our
big usage case of this is all of our content memory. All of the resources
content memory. All of the resources that you're going to see of course are
that you're going to see of course are different different sizes throughout the
different different sizes throughout the game. And it's really just a data marray
game. And it's really just a data marray that indirects into a heap.
So with those data resources, these are the access checks that we've actually
the access checks that we've actually chosen to provide. There's your basic
chosen to provide. There's your basic protection which is just read and write
protection which is just read and write which is exactly what you would expect.
which is exactly what you would expect. We provide array protection for the data
We provide array protection for the data arrays and the data array with heap.
arrays and the data array with heap. It's array modify, array iterate which
It's array modify, array iterate which I'll talk about shortly. And then
I'll talk about shortly. And then there's some advanced protection
there's some advanced protection producer consumer and whitelisting that
producer consumer and whitelisting that I'll talk about after that.
I'll talk about after that. So array modify is really protecting the
So array modify is really protecting the life cycle of data. It's about whether
life cycle of data. It's about whether or not that allocated status can be
or not that allocated status can be changed or written to. And so in this
changed or written to. And so in this example, it's hey datim zero going from
example, it's hey datim zero going from unallocated to allocated. And it covers
unallocated to allocated. And it covers the destruction side as well going the
the destruction side as well going the other
other way. Array iterate is the read side of
way. Array iterate is the read side of this allocated status. It's anything
this allocated status. It's anything that you can do to discover data. So,
that you can do to discover data. So, it's meant for the typical loop that
it's meant for the typical loop that you're going to have where you're
you're going to have where you're walking over all of your data doing
walking over all of your data doing something for every single element, but
something for every single element, but it also covers being able to count or
it also covers being able to count or query whether or not a data a piece of
query whether or not a data a piece of data inside that data array is available
data inside that data array is available for
usage. The producer consumer is our solution to allow things to create and
solution to allow things to create and remove elements while other jobs are
remove elements while other jobs are capable of reading or writing from that
capable of reading or writing from that data.
data. And so this is the case where you
And so this is the case where you typically you're loading all of your
typically you're loading all of your assets into the game. You need to still
assets into the game. You need to still be able to read every other asset when
be able to read every other asset when you're loading new ones or creating new
you're loading new ones or creating new ones. U in this example, the object
ones. U in this example, the object update is running. The actor update
update is running. The actor update rendering objects. They're all going to
rendering objects. They're all going to read into the the the content. And so
read into the the the content. And so they still need to be able to read that
they still need to be able to read that content when your assets are loading. Or
content when your assets are loading. Or another example, you've got AI. Maybe
another example, you've got AI. Maybe you have a job that's spawning new AI
you have a job that's spawning new AI while you've got other jobs in parallel
while you've got other jobs in parallel that are updating the existing AI.
that are updating the existing AI. You're going to want to be able to do
You're going to want to be able to do that without having to serialize those
that without having to serialize those operations. And the producer consumer
operations. And the producer consumer allows us to represent that in the
allows us to represent that in the execution
environment. Whitelisting is our solution for data parallel jobs. It's
solution for data parallel jobs. It's about breaking up one data array and
about breaking up one data array and allowing different access for each
allowing different access for each element within it. So you can see here
element within it. So you can see here we have three actor update jobs that are
we have three actor update jobs that are taking two actors from the data array
taking two actors from the data array above it. Um it doesn't need to have the
above it. Um it doesn't need to have the exact same thing. It's not saying hey
exact same thing. It's not saying hey these ones all have right access. It
these ones all have right access. It could be that the actor 2 and actor 3
could be that the actor 2 and actor 3 are only read access in this case
are only read access in this case whereas the actor zero actor one is
whereas the actor zero actor one is right
access. So you take all of these permissions. Here's an example of what a
permissions. Here's an example of what a policy looks like in our engine. I
policy looks like in our engine. I apologize for showing code but uh gets
apologize for showing code but uh gets the point across. Basically, we have a
the point across. Basically, we have a policy builder. You add access to it
policy builder. You add access to it with writes or reads for the different
with writes or reads for the different pieces of data and then you associate it
pieces of data and then you associate it at the end with one of your
jobs. So, you've taken all of that and we get to the point where we have to
we get to the point where we have to exercise all of our code. So, this is a
exercise all of our code. So, this is a picture of our stress lab or one of the
picture of our stress lab or one of the parts inside of our stress lab. We do a
parts inside of our stress lab. We do a lot of automation in our in our
lot of automation in our in our building. We have 150 machines that are
building. We have 150 machines that are dedicated just to doing stress for PC
dedicated just to doing stress for PC side of things. We've got 200 machines
side of things. We've got 200 machines that are dedicated to doing builds
that are dedicated to doing builds across the studio. And then another 200
across the studio. And then another 200 machines that are doing content builds
machines that are doing content builds for
for us. In addition to that, we've got 600
us. In addition to that, we've got 600 different consoles inside there that's
different consoles inside there that's running test cases on it as well. And so
running test cases on it as well. And so every time you check in code, we
every time you check in code, we actually run a stress run for your
actually run a stress run for your build. And then we have overnight stress
build. And then we have overnight stress runs or sometimes longer that run a more
runs or sometimes longer that run a more exhaustive test suite on it. And this is
exhaustive test suite on it. And this is to cover all of those cases. And those
to cover all of those cases. And those stress things aren't just, hey, run the
stress things aren't just, hey, run the same test over and over again. Some of
same test over and over again. Some of them are monkey scripts where we
them are monkey scripts where we basically just provide random input to
basically just provide random input to controllers that you are capable of
controllers that you are capable of exercising code paths that you wouldn't
exercising code paths that you wouldn't normally use.
normally use. In our last month, I think we've done
In our last month, I think we've done about 12,000 hours of stress run and
about 12,000 hours of stress run and then 2,000 runs of just check-ins where
then 2,000 runs of just check-ins where we've done stress against
we've done stress against those. So, you found the overlaps, you
those. So, you found the overlaps, you need to resolve them in some way.
need to resolve them in some way. There's really only four ways to resolve
There's really only four ways to resolve these issues, and they're the standard
these issues, and they're the standard ones that you're used to. You can add a
ones that you're used to. You can add a dependency between the jobs. If the two
dependency between the jobs. If the two jobs are dependent on each other, then
jobs are dependent on each other, then they're not going to run at the same
they're not going to run at the same time. The data is not going to be
time. The data is not going to be overlapping. You can double buffer cache
overlapping. You can double buffer cache your data. So maybe you want to read at
your data. So maybe you want to read at the same time. Maybe you duplicate that
the same time. Maybe you duplicate that data in a prejob and pass that in to the
data in a prejob and pass that in to the jobs that read it while you've got the
jobs that read it while you've got the other jobs updating it. You can do the
other jobs updating it. You can do the opposite. You can cue write messages so
opposite. You can cue write messages so you know you want to update the actors.
you know you want to update the actors. So you build up a big list of operations
So you build up a big list of operations to proceed and you do that at a point
to proceed and you do that at a point where the actors aren't being used
where the actors aren't being used else-wise. You're basically making it a
else-wise. You're basically making it a single threaded part in the in the
single threaded part in the in the future of that frame. Or the worst case
future of that frame. Or the worst case scenario, you have to restructure your
scenario, you have to restructure your algorithm. You just fundamentally can't
algorithm. You just fundamentally can't do it. And that's the hard part. And
do it. And that's the hard part. And those are the parts that you want to
those are the parts that you want to find early on where it's just not going
find early on where it's just not going to
work. I'm going to talk a little bit about the overlap algorithm.
about the overlap algorithm. It's a fairly simple algorithm, but it's
It's a fairly simple algorithm, but it's not really obvious until you've really
not really obvious until you've really thought about it. And so in our case,
thought about it. And so in our case, we're going to take this this example
we're going to take this this example frame where we've got our AI kickoff and
frame where we've got our AI kickoff and finish with our actor update jobs in
finish with our actor update jobs in between. We've got another job that's
between. We've got another job that's not part of this dependency chain, the
not part of this dependency chain, the network send. And then after the AI is
network send. And then after the AI is finished updating, we're going to update
finished updating, we're going to update the rest of the objects in the frame. So
the rest of the objects in the frame. So the question here is which jobs can
the question here is which jobs can overlap with this actor update job here
overlap with this actor update job here at the
top. And so step one, we're going to traverse down the dependency tree. We're
traverse down the dependency tree. We're going to mark all of the children of
going to mark all of the children of this job. So all the jobs that can't run
this job. So all the jobs that can't run until this job is completed, those ones
until this job is completed, those ones clearly can't overlap.
clearly can't overlap. So in this case, AI finish is dependent
So in this case, AI finish is dependent on the actor update job and then
on the actor update job and then afterwards the object update is
afterwards the object update is dependent on the AI
finish. Step two, we're going to go the opposite way in the dependency graph.
opposite way in the dependency graph. Going to make sure that all of our
Going to make sure that all of our parents, so the jobs that need to
parents, so the jobs that need to complete before we can run have been
complete before we can run have been marked off as non-over overlapping as
marked off as non-over overlapping as well.
that case. This is just the AI
kickoff. For the third step, we're going to union all of the jobs that we haven't
to union all of the jobs that we haven't marked and we're going to take the
marked and we're going to take the policy from each of those jobs and build
policy from each of those jobs and build one big giant global policy that
one big giant global policy that encompasses all of the access that those
encompasses all of the access that those jobs can
jobs can have. In that case, this is the two
have. In that case, this is the two actor update jobs and the network send
actor update jobs and the network send job that we've got here.
For step four, we check that policy to see if that policy has any conflicts
see if that policy has any conflicts with our current actor update. And so
with our current actor update. And so for this example, we're going to say,
for this example, we're going to say, hey, maybe the actor update job just
hey, maybe the actor update job just gave full write access to all of the
gave full write access to all of the actors instead of doing a white list. So
actors instead of doing a white list. So in that case, there will be a
in that case, there will be a conflict. and we take the conflict and
conflict. and we take the conflict and we're going to walk all of the jobs that
we're going to walk all of the jobs that we just finished unioning the policies
we just finished unioning the policies for that to check those individually so
for that to check those individually so that we can get finer detail information
that we can get finer detail information about what's actually
overlapping. So we walk it. We see that the actor update as I mentioned before
the actor update as I mentioned before it's conflicting with the first actor
it's conflicting with the first actor update. So we take note of that.
update. So we take note of that. Likewise with the other actor update,
Likewise with the other actor update, it's also
it's also conflicting, but the network send job
conflicting, but the network send job isn't. It's not using any data that the
isn't. It's not using any data that the actor update job is. So we can mark that
actor update job is. So we can mark that as not
as not conflicting. And so for the final step
conflicting. And so for the final step here, we basically just report the
here, we basically just report the errors and assert out. So you're going
errors and assert out. So you're going to get those nice clear errors that I
to get those nice clear errors that I was mentioning before that says, hey,
was mentioning before that says, hey, the actor update is busy writing to the
the actor update is busy writing to the actors while the other actor update is
actors while the other actor update is also busy writing to the actors. So you
also busy writing to the actors. So you know what to go and look for from the
know what to go and look for from the get-go.
get-go. and you didn't spend time trying to
and you didn't spend time trying to figure out later why your actors were
figure out later why your actors were being clobbered by other
jobs and talk about the lessons that we learned from actually implementing
this. Retrofitting this system into an existing codebase takes a long time. We
existing codebase takes a long time. We should not account for how much time it
should not account for how much time it was going to take to mark up our
was going to take to mark up our codebase. Um, it was actually longer to
codebase. Um, it was actually longer to write markup for jobs that already
write markup for jobs that already existed and the multi-threading that was
existed and the multi-threading that was already there than new jobs. You just
already there than new jobs. You just don't know all of the nuances of what's
don't know all of the nuances of what's going on in the code. You haven't looked
going on in the code. You haven't looked at it for who knows when. You may not
at it for who knows when. You may not have even been the person who wrote the
have even been the person who wrote the code in the first place. So you end up
code in the first place. So you end up with this tale of bugs that you get
with this tale of bugs that you get where you're getting those asserts that
where you're getting those asserts that say you don't have permission to read
say you don't have permission to read this piece of data because you didn't
this piece of data because you didn't realize that it reads this piece of data
realize that it reads this piece of data on the off chance that your player is
on the off chance that your player is looking up while
jumping. And then you know it was just this unending feel where we kept going
this unending feel where we kept going at it and kept going at it. I'm pretty
at it and kept going at it. I'm pretty sure it took us multiple months with
sure it took us multiple months with multiple people to do
multiple people to do it. So, we learned we really needed a
it. So, we learned we really needed a relief valve. As soon as we put the
relief valve. As soon as we put the stuff in, we were getting asserts all
stuff in, we were getting asserts all over the place. We had issues in our
over the place. We had issues in our codebase that we've been skating by for
codebase that we've been skating by for a while now. And then that workload just
a while now. And then that workload just explodes on all the other people's teams
explodes on all the other people's teams because you're saying, "Hey, oh, maybe
because you're saying, "Hey, oh, maybe there's an issue in rendering. Maybe
there's an issue in rendering. Maybe there's an issue in in the AI update or
there's an issue in in the AI update or animation." And you're basically saying,
animation." And you're basically saying, "Hey, you now need to stop what you're
"Hey, you now need to stop what you're doing and fix this multi-threaded bug."
doing and fix this multi-threaded bug." But you can't really do that and you
But you can't really do that and you can't really do that all at once across
can't really do that all at once across your entire studio. So you need to have
your entire studio. So you need to have a way to ignore the issues or filter out
a way to ignore the issues or filter out the issues so that you can basically add
the issues so that you can basically add a bug, forget about it, let the game
a bug, forget about it, let the game run, and then at least know that it's
run, and then at least know that it's going to get fixed when you triage your
going to get fixed when you triage your bugs
later. We also had this great experience where we thought we were smart. We're
where we thought we were smart. We're going to roll this out in phases. We're
going to roll this out in phases. We're going to start off by adding all of our
going to start off by adding all of our resource protection to every piece of
resource protection to every piece of data that we've got and we're going to
data that we've got and we're going to enable resource checks first. We won't
enable resource checks first. We won't enable overlaps. We can deal with that
enable overlaps. We can deal with that later. It'll be our second phase of
later. It'll be our second phase of rolling it out. But if you don't educate
rolling it out. But if you don't educate your team on what's going to happen,
your team on what's going to happen, then your team goes ahead and just gives
then your team goes ahead and just gives full permission to every single
full permission to every single job. And then you turn on overlaps later
job. And then you turn on overlaps later thinking it's going to be an easy time.
thinking it's going to be an easy time. and every single job in your system
and every single job in your system overlaps with every other job even
overlaps with every other job even though the data is not being used. And
though the data is not being used. And so that's comes back to trying to keep
so that's comes back to trying to keep your policies tight with what you're
your policies tight with what you're actually doing because the issue may not
actually doing because the issue may not be a real issue. It may just be that
be a real issue. It may just be that you've overs subscribed that job to
you've overs subscribed that job to different data that it can use even if
different data that it can use even if it's not using that
data. And there's a balance there. You can't protect all of your
You can't protect all of your resources. I suppose you could if you
resources. I suppose you could if you really wanted to spend all of the time,
really wanted to spend all of the time, but it's hard to represent all of the
but it's hard to represent all of the safe operations that you can do. There's
safe operations that you can do. There's a lot of things that's really easy. You
a lot of things that's really easy. You can be clever and try to pack data into
can be clever and try to pack data into different fields. You can try to do
different fields. You can try to do substructure allocations and think that
substructure allocations and think that it's safe for two jobs to be able to
it's safe for two jobs to be able to write to a different field inside of a
write to a different field inside of a structure when really it's not because
structure when really it's not because it's going to clobber it from some weird
it's going to clobber it from some weird read from the compiler because you
read from the compiler because you didn't do it on a atomic level for the
didn't do it on a atomic level for the the
the chip. And so this really helped
chip. And so this really helped discourage that cleverness. But you
discourage that cleverness. But you really do need to figure out what level
really do need to figure out what level you're willing to go to actually
you're willing to go to actually protect. And we did that by restricting
protect. And we did that by restricting what programmers could actually do in
what programmers could actually do in some cases just to make it
simpler. Validation is not fast. It gets slower and slower every time you add
slower and slower every time you add another job. Those overlap checks are
another job. Those overlap checks are essentially n
essentially n squ. And so we really just do the full
squ. And so we really just do the full validation steps inside automation. when
validation steps inside automation. when you're checking in, you're doing you're
you're checking in, you're doing you're doing a validation, but it's not the
doing a validation, but it's not the full exhaustive validation that you're
full exhaustive validation that you're getting from our automated
farms. But we also found that it improved communication with within our
improved communication with within our studio. You think that you've planned
studio. You think that you've planned out your data well and everything seems
out your data well and everything seems fine, but then you go and you implement
fine, but then you go and you implement it and it just doesn't work. Somebody's
it and it just doesn't work. Somebody's using that data in a way that you didn't
using that data in a way that you didn't know. The person who originally designed
know. The person who originally designed it didn't know that people were using
it didn't know that people were using the data that way. And then of course
the data that way. And then of course the engineer who originally wrote the
the engineer who originally wrote the code and thought that the data was only
code and thought that the data was only going to be used in one way now finally
going to be used in one way now finally has a way to assert that that's going to
has a way to assert that that's going to happen. You don't have to wait for some
happen. You don't have to wait for some bug that you get 6 months down the road
bug that you get 6 months down the road that says hey Joe Blow decided to use
that says hey Joe Blow decided to use this data and I don't want him to use it
this data and I don't want him to use it right now because I'm busy I'm busy
right now because I'm busy I'm busy writing to it. So really engineers ended
writing to it. So really engineers ended up talking to other engineers. you ran
up talking to other engineers. you ran into an assert from this, you got an
into an assert from this, you got an overlap and you wanted to find the right
overlap and you wanted to find the right solution. So, you ended up working with
solution. So, you ended up working with the people who architected the original
the people who architected the original system and that was fantastic,
system and that was fantastic, especially for new hires or contractors
especially for new hires or contractors because those people have just come into
because those people have just come into your codebase and they don't really know
your codebase and they don't really know anything. They're trying to get in and
anything. They're trying to get in and they're trying to do the best that they
they're trying to do the best that they can and sometimes that just turns into
can and sometimes that just turns into I'm just going to make it work. And this
I'm just going to make it work. And this system was a good way of saying you
system was a good way of saying you think it's working but it's not and
think it's working but it's not and we're not going to let you keep that
we're not going to let you keep that code checked
in. It's actually faster than fixing it later. It seems like the up upfront time
later. It seems like the up upfront time is huge. It feels like you're spending
is huge. It feels like you're spending more time overall, but you're really
more time overall, but you're really not. You're actually doing the fixes for
not. You're actually doing the fixes for this right away. right? When you're
this right away. right? When you're doing the the code in the first place,
doing the the code in the first place, you actually know what's going on. It's
you actually know what's going on. It's not the three months later I've come
not the three months later I've come back. What the hell was I thinking? I
back. What the hell was I thinking? I don't know what I did in this function
don't know what I did in this function and I'm never going to remember it
and I'm never going to remember it without reading through the whole thing.
without reading through the whole thing. But you haven't even check the code in
But you haven't even check the code in at this point. And it's telling you that
at this point. And it's telling you that it doesn't run because it has data
it doesn't run because it has data conflicts over here or data conflicts
conflicts over here or data conflicts over there.
over there. But it also has the the advantage that
But it also has the the advantage that when you walk away from the system, you
when you walk away from the system, you can actually walk away from the system.
can actually walk away from the system. The bug tail ends. You get all of the
The bug tail ends. You get all of the issues up front. It's not going to last
issues up front. It's not going to last for the next 2 years of your life when
for the next 2 years of your life when you try to figure out why the renderer
you try to figure out why the renderer can't work with the particle
system. The other interesting piece that we had is reorganizing our frame was
we had is reorganizing our frame was actually really easy. We had multiple
actually really easy. We had multiple occasions where people just decided,
occasions where people just decided, hey, I want to be able to get more use
hey, I want to be able to get more use of the CPU during this area. So, let's
of the CPU during this area. So, let's just figure out what runs over here. And
just figure out what runs over here. And the easiest way to do that now is by
the easiest way to do that now is by trial and error. You can try 20
trial and error. You can try 20 different places where this piece of
different places where this piece of code can run. And the system will just
code can run. And the system will just tell you, no, you can't run there, you
tell you, no, you can't run there, you can't run here, or it'll let you through
can't run here, or it'll let you through for the one place that's there. And you
for the one place that's there. And you know that you can just leave it there
know that you can just leave it there without having to think about it. And
without having to think about it. And so, you're not in those meetings trying
so, you're not in those meetings trying to discuss maybe it'll work here. let's
to discuss maybe it'll work here. let's try this out. And then you've got those
try this out. And then you've got those three or four days when you have tests
three or four days when you have tests banging on it to hope that you find some
banging on it to hope that you find some crash. But you can actually do something
crash. But you can actually do something crazy like change it just before
beta. So to wrap things up in conclusion, we shipped four
up in conclusion, we shipped four platforms. We didn't have any threading
platforms. We didn't have any threading issues that we were aware of. We had
issues that we were aware of. We had fewer threading bugs overall coming out
fewer threading bugs overall coming out of test than we had on our previous
of test than we had on our previous titles. And those previous titles were
titles. And those previous titles were only on one platform. So four four
only on one platform. So four four platforms with fewer bugs than one
platforms with fewer bugs than one platform was pretty awesome. We're
platform was pretty awesome. We're pretty confident that we wouldn't have
pretty confident that we wouldn't have been able to ship without the execution
been able to ship without the execution environment. But the execution
environment. But the execution environment can't actually protect
environment can't actually protect everything in the
system. Was it worth it? Absolutely. We had to do it. No
questions. We have some other Bungee talks. Uh Natasha's talk on the
talks. Uh Natasha's talk on the rendering architecture is next at 5:30
rendering architecture is next at 5:30 room
room 3005. Butcher has a talk tomorrow on uh
3005. Butcher has a talk tomorrow on uh the core architecture of Destiny and the
the core architecture of Destiny and the learnings that we had from it, which was
learnings that we had from it, which was fairly interesting. And Justin Truman
fairly interesting. And Justin Truman has a talk on how we did our mission
has a talk on how we did our mission architecture for
architecture for multiplayer. We're hiring. Come work on
multiplayer. We're hiring. Come work on the platform team, work in this
the platform team, work in this environment. It's
environment. It's awesome. Any questions?
awesome. Any questions? [Applause]
Hey, that was really cool. What uh language features do you use to declare
language features do you use to declare the dependencies of jobs when you write
the dependencies of jobs when you write jobs? So it was just in C++. Uh so a
jobs? So it was just in C++. Uh so a dependency from one job. We had a
dependency from one job. We had a command A depends on B and you pass in
command A depends on B and you pass in the handle for the A job and the B job.
the handle for the A job and the B job. And do you I'm assuming you do this uh
And do you I'm assuming you do this uh like via some sort of dynamic analysis
like via some sort of dynamic analysis that tries to just
that tries to just Yes. At at runtime we check the job
Yes. At at runtime we check the job graph. That was the the overlap
graph. That was the the overlap algorithm. Um and then every time the
algorithm. Um and then every time the handle references it's checking whether
handle references it's checking whether or not you have a policy permission.
or not you have a policy permission. Have you explored doing uh like static
Have you explored doing uh like static analysis or something instead?
analysis or something instead? There's a certain element that you can
There's a certain element that you can do in static analysis, but you can't
do in static analysis, but you can't cover everything. So you end up needing
cover everything. So you end up needing the dynamic analysis as well. So at the
the dynamic analysis as well. So at the end of the day, it's you can cover 80%
end of the day, it's you can cover 80% one way, but you really do need that
one way, but you really do need that final 20%. So there's an area that you
final 20%. So there's an area that you can explore so you can catch it at
can explore so you can catch it at compile time, but you know, you catch it
compile time, but you know, you catch it pretty fast at runtime. Thank you.
pretty fast at runtime. Thank you. Did uh threading your client in this way
Did uh threading your client in this way uh present any like challenges trying to
uh present any like challenges trying to share gameplay code between the client
share gameplay code between the client and the server?
and the server? It's a good question.
It's a good question. Um we certainly had issues for you know
Um we certainly had issues for you know pretty much everything that we did
pretty much everything that we did right. Um any threading had consequences
right. Um any threading had consequences from one place or another. As for the
from one place or another. As for the server side, I mean, most of that
server side, I mean, most of that stuff's already serialized via the
stuff's already serialized via the networking code. You're sending packets
networking code. You're sending packets to it. It's a big buffer. So, I don't
to it. It's a big buffer. So, I don't know of anything that comes to my mind
know of anything that comes to my mind is this was a real big issue for the
is this was a real big issue for the server client architecture doing it this
server client architecture doing it this way.
Hello. This side, this side. And I I I have two questions. First, how to define
have two questions. First, how to define a complete code path? Sorry. How do you
a complete code path? Sorry. How do you define the a complete code path to test?
That's this the same problem that you have with any case where you're trying
have with any case where you're trying to get full coverage over your codebase.
to get full coverage over your codebase. Uh for us, most of that was done via
Uh for us, most of that was done via explicit testing where we knew, hey, if
explicit testing where we knew, hey, if you do this, this covers all of this. Uh
you do this, this covers all of this. Uh getting rid of branches that seem
getting rid of branches that seem unnecessary if you don't need them. our
unnecessary if you don't need them. our stress farm again with the monkeys that
stress farm again with the monkeys that I mentioned earlier where it's just a
I mentioned earlier where it's just a big stream of random input that helps
big stream of random input that helps get that coverage. I can't guarantee
get that coverage. I can't guarantee that we hit 100%. But how long machine
that we hit 100%. But how long machine hours will you test?
hours will you test? How long in hours was the unit test? Um,
How long in hours was the unit test? Um, it depends on the level of testing that
it depends on the level of testing that you're doing, but like a check-in job is
you're doing, but like a check-in job is probably about one to two hours. The
probably about one to two hours. The full BVT test suite is easily you know
full BVT test suite is easily you know 20 hours if not more. Okay. And another
20 hours if not more. Okay. And another question uh we are putting our engine to
question uh we are putting our engine to the multip thread architecture and we
the multip thread architecture and we face the same problem that there are a
face the same problem that there are a lot of old systems they doing multi-
lot of old systems they doing multi- threading in older ways and we found
threading in older ways and we found that it's better to port the entire
that it's better to port the entire system uh to the new architecture in one
system uh to the new architecture in one time. So we open up a branch and when we
time. So we open up a branch and when we finished doing this when and porting
finished doing this when and porting back we find uh a lot of new bugs uh
back we find uh a lot of new bugs uh flyed out. So I want to know how do you
flyed out. So I want to know how do you change your old systems to this new
change your old systems to this new architecture step by step or any other
architecture step by step or any other suggestions?
suggestions? So if I get the question right, as
So if I get the question right, as you're adding this to an existing
you're adding this to an existing architecture, how do you catch all the
architecture, how do you catch all the bugs without older systems? You just
bugs without older systems? You just mentioned that the the older systems.
mentioned that the the older systems. Yeah. So I mean for us it was mark up
Yeah. So I mean for us it was mark up all the data and make sure that the the
all the data and make sure that the the access checks are going. As you find
access checks are going. As you find that you're going to see overlaps. We
that you're going to see overlaps. We had a system to filter out those
had a system to filter out those overlaps. So we would know about it.
overlaps. So we would know about it. we'd create a bug in our database and
we'd create a bug in our database and basically just say don't report this
basically just say don't report this overlap to any user who's doing it until
overlap to any user who's doing it until the person who's gone responsible for
the person who's gone responsible for that bug actually fixes it. So that's
that bug actually fixes it. So that's allowed us to basically turn it on for
allowed us to basically turn it on for the old systems without without
the old systems without without exploding it everywhere. Okay. So you
exploding it everywhere. Okay. So you have uh two system running
have uh two system running simultaneously at certain points the
simultaneously at certain points the older system and the new system. So, I
older system and the new system. So, I mean you you have a toggle in in some
mean you you have a toggle in in some way to switch between those systems,
way to switch between those systems, right? Like um you're just going to hit
right? Like um you're just going to hit that as you toggle between the systems.
that as you toggle between the systems. Okay. Thank you. Thank you. All right.
Okay. Thank you. Thank you. All right. So, if you had all these really nice
So, if you had all these really nice systems for determining when data
systems for determining when data contention happened, uh why did you
contention happened, uh why did you build this like gigantic uh validation
build this like gigantic uh validation test system?
test system? Well, the validation test system is the
Well, the validation test system is the thing that's telling us about data
thing that's telling us about data contention. Well, doesn't it doesn't it
contention. Well, doesn't it doesn't it just tell you upfront whether or not you
just tell you upfront whether or not you have contention? It does, but it's the
have contention? It does, but it's the only piece of our system that is telling
only piece of our system that is telling us about that contention. It's not. So,
us about that contention. It's not. So, the handles would tell you whether or
the handles would tell you whether or not they've been deleted. The handles
not they've been deleted. The handles don't tell you whether or not somebody
don't tell you whether or not somebody else is accessing it. This is the piece
else is accessing it. This is the piece that takes that information from the
that takes that information from the handles and then cross references what
handles and then cross references what every other piece of data is doing.
every other piece of data is doing. So it's doing that at like after the
So it's doing that at like after the fact. It's doing part of it is is
fact. It's doing part of it is is upfront. So every time that you access
upfront. So every time that you access the data, it's checking dynamically
the data, it's checking dynamically right there and then for whether or not
right there and then for whether or not you have permission. And then the
you have permission. And then the overlap checking is after the fact. We
overlap checking is after the fact. We keep about three frames queued up so
keep about three frames queued up so that you can see uh which jobs within
that you can see uh which jobs within there could be running long. And that
there could be running long. And that piece is just done whenever the jobs are
piece is just done whenever the jobs are being added to the graph. it'll go
being added to the graph. it'll go across all of the other jobs that are
across all of the other jobs that are previously there.
previously there. Thanks.
Thanks. Um, hi. So, also related to this uh
Um, hi. So, also related to this uh question that was just asked. Um, so
question that was just asked. Um, so once you have handles, once you have
once you have handles, once you have policies that specify what data you can
policies that specify what data you can access and how and handles that let you
access and how and handles that let you track the data as you access it.
track the data as you access it. um how do you deal with like normally
um how do you deal with like normally every engine is going to have a certain
every engine is going to have a certain amount of third party software that is
amount of third party software that is not going to have handles in the code.
not going to have handles in the code. So like once you have a some some
So like once you have a some some components that just use row pointers.
components that just use row pointers. Yes. Um there is lots of middleware that
Yes. Um there is lots of middleware that just use raw pointers. Um we've done
just use raw pointers. Um we've done things where we've embedded like our raw
things where we've embedded like our raw pointers for the user data is just
pointers for the user data is just pointing into a handle. Uh we've had
pointing into a handle. Uh we've had other parts where inside that actual
other parts where inside that actual call back that you might get you
call back that you might get you actually are explicitly calling into the
actually are explicitly calling into the execution environment saying hey check
execution environment saying hey check this access. Uh there's a few spots
this access. Uh there's a few spots where you know I've simplified some of
where you know I've simplified some of the details where it's not just in the
the details where it's not just in the handle access. There's there are those
handle access. There's there are those places where that thread that's running
places where that thread that's running in havoc that's calling your code is not
in havoc that's calling your code is not actually a job and so the system does
actually a job and so the system does handle that via other mechanisms. Okay.
handle that via other mechanisms. Okay. So it's like on a case by case basis
So it's like on a case by case basis basically pretty much. Okay, cool.
basically pretty much. Okay, cool. Thanks.
Thanks. I had a question. Um, what types of data
I had a question. Um, what types of data did you end up double buffering?
did you end up double buffering? What types of data did we end up double
What types of data did we end up double buffering?
buffering? Um, you know, there's a lot of stuff
Um, you know, there's a lot of stuff that we ended up doing. There was the
that we ended up doing. There was the the weirder esoteric ones like a bunch
the weirder esoteric ones like a bunch of simulation state for timing
of simulation state for timing information for networking because of
information for networking because of the time frame when networking ran. It
the time frame when networking ran. It ran where simulation was going but it
ran where simulation was going but it could have lagged over the frame. So it
could have lagged over the frame. So it couldn't actually directly access that.
couldn't actually directly access that. That was most of the time that we were
That was most of the time that we were doing the caching. Uh if you go and you
doing the caching. Uh if you go and you see Natasha's talk, you'll find a big
see Natasha's talk, you'll find a big section that we double buffered from the
section that we double buffered from the game state for rendering. uh not the
game state for rendering. uh not the entire game state but portions that went
entire game state but portions that went out and that probably encompasses the
out and that probably encompasses the bulk of what's there. Yeah, it seems
bulk of what's there. Yeah, it seems like if you're updating game entities
like if you're updating game entities all in parallel, don't you need to
all in parallel, don't you need to double buffer their states? So that so
double buffer their states? So that so in that case we actually the way that we
in that case we actually the way that we update those entities we have families
update those entities we have families uh object families. So if an object is
uh object families. So if an object is likely to touch another object, it's
likely to touch another object, it's going to be updated in the same job.
going to be updated in the same job. Okay. And then furthermore, if it has to
Okay. And then furthermore, if it has to touch a job or an object that's outside
touch a job or an object that's outside of that job, it'll just cue a message
of that job, it'll just cue a message and we have a a final message drain at
and we have a a final message drain at the end that can process interactions
the end that can process interactions like that so that we don't have those
like that so that we don't have those problems. Okay.
problems. Okay. Okay. Um, so do you only detect bad
Okay. Um, so do you only detect bad accesses on um like dynamic tests or do
accesses on um like dynamic tests or do you do it on like commit as well? So we
you do it on like commit as well? So we don't need to do it on commit because
don't need to do it on commit because the scope of a policy is within the
the scope of a policy is within the entire job. So in order to actually
entire job. So in order to actually commit you need to dreference the handle
commit you need to dreference the handle and in order to read you have to
and in order to read you have to dreference the handle. We do
dreference the handle. We do differentiate those with different
differentiate those with different functions so that we can choose whether
functions so that we can choose whether or not it's a read or a write but that's
or not it's a read or a write but that's just done at the time that you're
just done at the time that you're dreferencing it and it's safe because
dreferencing it and it's safe because later in the scope you still have the
later in the scope you still have the same e policy. So by commit I meant like
same e policy. So by commit I meant like a git commit.
a git commit. Oh, I see. Um, so yes, uh, for our our
Oh, I see. Um, so yes, uh, for our our submission process runs through the
submission process runs through the automation, uh, and that's our our
automation, uh, and that's our our gauntlet process, and that's done where
gauntlet process, and that's done where you'll get kicked back. You won't be
you'll get kicked back. You won't be able to to submit if, uh, your code
able to to submit if, uh, your code doesn't run. So, this is um, a pretty
doesn't run. So, this is um, a pretty inherently complex uh, system and you
inherently complex uh, system and you acknowledge that. has this add a what do
acknowledge that. has this add a what do you guys do for code like how do you
you guys do for code like how do you code review code like fabricator or
code review code like fabricator or GitHub or so on and has it added a lot
GitHub or so on and has it added a lot of uh overhead or time on your people on
of uh overhead or time on your people on your team having to review a lot of code
your team having to review a lot of code for people that aren't as familiar with
for people that aren't as familiar with the system as you guys are so I mean
the system as you guys are so I mean depending on the time frame where we're
depending on the time frame where we're in within the production cycle the
in within the production cycle the amount of code review that we do is
amount of code review that we do is different uh the closer we are to our
different uh the closer we are to our release po point we have more code
release po point we have more code reviews going on
reviews going on But for the added amount of code review,
But for the added amount of code review, for the extra policy, it's not usually
for the extra policy, it's not usually too much. There was definitely a lot
too much. There was definitely a lot right up front when we were rolling out
right up front when we were rolling out the system. And it did add a lot of work
the system. And it did add a lot of work for a lot of teams, but in the current
for a lot of teams, but in the current state, it's basically, hey, did you run
state, it's basically, hey, did you run this in the test build? Did you actually
this in the test build? Did you actually check that it's it's working? They say
check that it's it's working? They say yes. You generally look through their
yes. You generally look through their policy to make sure that it looks like
policy to make sure that it looks like it's doing the right thing. You know,
it's doing the right thing. You know, it's it's not a huge amount of time. And
it's it's not a huge amount of time. And uh this might be a naive question, but
uh this might be a naive question, but if you uh if all of your jobs
if you uh if all of your jobs declaratively declare what their uh data
declaratively declare what their uh data dependencies are, why do you need to uh
dependencies are, why do you need to uh dynamically run them?
dynamically run them? So you don't need to dynamically run
So you don't need to dynamically run them in order for that portion because
them in order for that portion because you've got that piece already running.
you've got that piece already running. Um that piece is actually statically
Um that piece is actually statically checked. Um it just happens to be that
checked. Um it just happens to be that some of the jobs are run in different
some of the jobs are run in different orders on different frames. So we do
orders on different frames. So we do check that at the frame level. But for
check that at the frame level. But for the pieces like the question earlier
the pieces like the question earlier where it's like hey what do you do when
where it's like hey what do you do when middleware is calling into this code
middleware is calling into this code that actually needs a dynamic check
that actually needs a dynamic check going on it because you don't know the
going on it because you don't know the dependencies between that piece with the
dependencies between that piece with the rest of your game frame.
rest of your game frame. Cool. Cool.
Cool. Cool. Hi. Hey, I was wondering if uh in
Hi. Hey, I was wondering if uh in addition to your sort of built-in system
addition to your sort of built-in system that you tried using uh third party
that you tried using uh third party thread checking software like thread
thread checking software like thread sanitizer with clang or Intel inspector.
sanitizer with clang or Intel inspector. Sorry, can you repeat the question a
Sorry, can you repeat the question a little bit louder? Sorry. Uh I was
little bit louder? Sorry. Uh I was wondering if you tried using third party
wondering if you tried using third party thread checking software in addition to
thread checking software in addition to what you've been doing. So clang's
what you've been doing. So clang's thread sanitizer or Intel's inspector
thread sanitizer or Intel's inspector which will do runtime checks for so we
which will do runtime checks for so we do have some uh static analysis that we
do have some uh static analysis that we run offline. Uh we didn't investigate a
run offline. Uh we didn't investigate a huge amount of the other pieces. Um a
huge amount of the other pieces. Um a lot of those times you get a big bucket
lot of those times you get a big bucket of work items that you know filtering
of work items that you know filtering the signal through the noise is really
the signal through the noise is really hard in that those systems. Yep. Okay.
hard in that those systems. Yep. Okay. Thank you.
Thanks everybody for coming. Please fill out your uh form survey thing.