To get started.
Um
Just a quick note, we have a sign up sheet that's circulating.
So if you could please fill it out so that we can keep in touch,
that would be absolutely fantastic.
So
that's going around the room right now,
just fill it out and we'll get in touch with you.
Uh But welcome everybody.
Uh I'd like to welcome you to our panel discussion and also introduce myself.
My name is Chrissy
Fu and I am an international representative and an
organizer with the International Alliance of Theatrical stage employees.
That's a long word,
otherwise known as the Iaeak a the entertainment union.
Previously, I spent 17 years working in series television animation. And in 2022
I came together with my coworkers to form a union at our studio,
which was a place in New York called Tit Mouse.
You might know us
um that led to my involvement with organizing and working with the
iatse to help workers in games form unions at their own studios.
I'm joined today by my fellow panelists, Andrew Lauren Vinny and Dan,
and we're only here to discuss about to discuss today.
Why now is the time for us to unionize
and how we can get started today.
We're also here to address any questions that you might have.
First of all, I would like to extend an extreme.
Thank you to our union kin at local 16,
the stagehands and trade show workers who are behind the scenes of
G DC working hard this week to make this event a success.
So a big round of applause
for all of their incredible work. This week,
we're so happy to be at a union event in a union town.
So why is now the time for us to form unions
with all the things that are going on in the news?
It seems like every day there's yet another
announcement of layoffs at a games company,
workers are getting cut from their jobs
regardless of how long they've dedicated their
life to working at a company or how well they've performed at their job.
People are scared that they're next,
that their livelihood could be taken away at any time,
which is exactly why we should form unions now.
Forming a union, gives you the right to have consent over your working conditions.
Why should we continue to live our lives in
fear of the layoff hammer coming down when we
can stand strong together and protect ourselves from the
unilateral changes that get made without our input.
We're the ones that affects the most. So why do we not have a say?
Should we wait until things are good
and then we become complacent to form our unions
in good times and in bad, we deserve a seat at the table.
So, first off, what is a union? A
union is you?
It's an organization formed by you and
your coworkers coming together to use your power
as a worker to negotiate with your employer about the things that matter to you.
Are you forced to work crunch?
Do you have the ability to negotiate an annual raise? Forming a union?
Creates an ability for you and your coworkers to
bargain with your employer to improve your working conditions?
So what is in a union?
They're not a separate group that operates without
the will of the workers they represent.
Unions are democratically run organizations that are run by those in their ranks.
Also, that's a picture of my tit mouse crew.
If you find me in there, it's a where's Waldo.
So the first step to forming a union is talking to one
of your coworkers to see how they feel about a union.
Try talking to someone you already know and trust and ask them if
they too are concerned about the way things are going at your company
or your futures in the games industry.
Do they feel they have the power to
negotiate for change on an individual level or would
coming together with your coworkers to win a
seat at the negotiating table with your boss?
Be a better approach?
You can reach out to an organizer at
Ayats or at Game workers.org or at or at our booth. This week, we're at uh P 1861
to help you get started.
We'll be with you every step of the way
to offer guidance training and our strategy to win.
Organizing your workplace is complicated
if it were easy. We would have done it already. Right.
Teaming up with an organizer at Ayat helps us strategize the best way for us to win.
We'll talk to all of your coworkers who are
eligible to vote in an NLRB election and find
out if we have a supermajority of support for a union by talking to them one on one.
And then we will file for a petition at, oh my God, my notes fly,
they disappeared. OK.
Um
We'll file for an
for uh petition with the National Labor Relations Board.
Um At which point your boss has two options.
One of them is to voluntarily recognize you as a union.
They basically say, I believe you, you have the numbers that you say you have.
Uh And we get to the negotiation table as soon as possible or
they could force us to an election with the National Labor Relations Board,
which gives them a period of time for them to launch an anti union campaign
which can sway some people into voting no for their union.
Um But with our strategy to win,
um we can still win your union regardless of an anti union campaign.
So
Iati or the I A for short is the international alliance
of theatrical stage employees also known as the Entertainment Union.
As I said,
we represent over 100 and 60,000 workers in jobs like animation, design,
visual effects, camera, stage,
live events and even trade show. Just like G DC.
With our strategy and organizing methods.
We've been successful in areas of entertainment where
unions historically have not been present before.
In visual effects, we formed the first
Ayoze
Visual Effects Union at Marvel Studios in August of
2023 followed shortly thereafter by visual effects workers at Disney
and more recently at J James Cameron's studio for the new Avatar movies
we've won at an animation studio in a
right to work state powerhouse animation in Texas
as well as at Gladius Studios in Puerto Rico. I wonder if any of y'all are here.
I don't think so. Bummer.
We've also recently won for remote animation workers at Disney who live
all across the country and work fully remote mote for the studio.
The most poignant one we have for game workers is
that we have formed a union at Work Man Entertainment,
which Viy
was a part of and he is here today to talk about that effort as well.
So today we're here to talk to you about what you
can do right now to start forming a National Game Worker Union
what are the things we're currently facing and how can we
use our power as laborers to change it for the better?
How can we frame this as a win, win for everyone involved, including our employers.
We'll talk about why we aren't able to enact change as things stand right now.
We'll also discuss the things that have been
holding us back from moving forward with a
union for games and how we can overcome the false narratives we've heard for so long
to move forward with the truth and win.
So with me today
are the people who work in games just like you and
are also working to change the industry for the better.
So to kick off our discussion today,
I would love to pass it over to our four incredible
panelists who are helping work towards a national Game Worker Union.
So I would love to kick it off to Lauren to introduce herself.
Hello, Check, check. Hey, um I'm Lauren.
Um I'm an animation director and I've been in games for about seven years
and I think uh
I really love this industry and I want it to thrive and grow and
be better than it is. So that's, I think this is the essential way to make that happen.
Oh, yeah.
But
hi, I'm Matthew
Wili. I'm a project manager at Workman Interactive.
I've been in the games industry for 10, almost 11 years.
Uh And we're here to just tell you and I can tell you for
a fact all of you are capable of forming unions at your studios.
It's possible and it's doable and it's fun.
Love that.
Andrew.
Hi. Uh, my name is Andrew
Paki. I've been in the industry for, oh, gosh, 15 years now.
Um, and my sort of radicalization moment was the, uh,
a BK walkouts over the lawsuits and the allegations that came out
and the thing that was really frustrating about that was knowing that
this was an attempt
to sort of sweep things under the rug and, and get these stories out of the press.
And these were stories that needed to be told.
And over my time in the industry,
there has been some positive change, but there are still a lot of things that suck.
And the only way we're going to fix those things is by using our collective power to
get what we want.
Um Hi, everyone. I'm Dan Belove. I'm a narrative designer at censor
and Team Gramps.
I've been in the industry for about three years,
so I'm still relatively new and that is
actually the reason why I started volunteering with
the EI A which is to represent the
interests of newcomers and juniors in the industry,
especially those of marginalized backgrounds.
Because um as my experience and I'm sure others experience has shown
uh those people are very vulnerable to exploitation
due to their passion um for games.
And um I want people to
be able to enter the industry with,
um,
with
like a long career and, um, like a long and safe career, basically. Yeah.
As you can tell these people are absolutely incredible and I'm so pri
privileged to be up here with them today. Um,
so Dan, kind of going off of what you were just talking about. Um,
what are some things within,
uh,
union contracts that you've heard of or seen before
that you think could help protect workers who are
the workforce?
Yeah. One thing is standards around applications, uh specifically around tests.
Um as a game writer,
I'm sure if there's any game writers or narrative designers in the audience,
you have uh filled out an unpaid writing test
uh and have maybe multiple.
Uh and that's something that
is I, I find pretty unethical and uh I would like to change that and
the I A has um shown in film and TV, that
this uh like writing tests can be paid.
Uh And because it's labor so it has
to be compensated and essentially just streamlining the process
of lying to the industry which can be very up to and kind of opaque at times.
Yeah, definitely. Um You know, kind of going off of that as well. Andrew. Um
thinking about what something that union workers get
uh through their contract would be beneficial to you.
Yeah, absolutely.
The thing that I
being in the industry for a while, what, what's the average statistic now,
it's like,
I think it used to be five and now it's seven
years for like the average tenure in the game industry,
that number needs to be way higher.
And a lot of that comes from
stability, security, talking about things like health care that we,
if you lose your job, that you can still get your medications that you need
or, uh,
being able to retire, right.
Being able to collect, uh, we have some people have 401k S, some people have,
but there's no, there are no guarantees.
There's no real sort of long term stability other than what you're able to kind of,
uh,
claw out for yourself and even just,
and having these things and not having them sort of swept out from under your feet,
like quick show of hands who here has like, cool company benefits and perks
that are then taken away or changed or removed.
Uh, and you, did you get it? Did you get a say in those things changing?
Yeah, I didn't think so.
Yeah, I think that is a, a great segue and something that I'll ask Lauren about. Um,
you know, a lot of people who work in animation because you're also an animator.
Right?
Oh, absolutely. Uh, I
mean,
that's how I became interested and involved with the IAS because as an animator,
um, you know, there's a whole,
uh,
animation guild in Los Angeles
and, uh I was always jealous of all of the
power that they had with their employers.
And I thought, well, why don't we have that in games?
And I'm, I'm an animator too and, uh,
I want my fellow coworkers to have that power as well.
Um,
so, yeah.
Yeah, definitely. And I, I think for me that also resonates with you. Right.
Uh,
yeah. But I, I can't relate to Andrew's issue right now because, um,
I don't have to worry about a lot of my benefits being taken away.
We got our uh recognition, our union recognized past in the past October
and while we're still in contract negotiations and that could take a while.
Um in the short term, all of our bene
benefits that we have, they are locked in our company can't change them.
So yeah,
so recently uh was the Activision Blizzard or some
company they had like their remote working policy revoked,
right?
And that's something everyone's worried about.
And at our company,
we still have that remote work policy and we're taking advantage of it.
Uh We have a very generous vacation package,
just lots of really great benefits that
were always like something we're worried about disappearing
and that worry is gone.
Um And it's incredibly empowering because we take so much ownership over our work,
we work on games uh with small teams, we put our heart and souls into these things
and when you put so much ownership into your work,
like it just made sense for our company,
especially that you would put that same
amount of care into your working conditions.
We have ownership over our working conditions
and it feels great.
Yes,
I
love it. Hell yeah.
So going off of that, I mean, I'm just gonna throw it right back to you. Um But
what, what now that you have your union,
you have the ability to negotiate terms around your job.
So what was it like before that?
Um
So we have a kind of small company culture.
Um Our CEO we'd hang out with them pretty regularly.
Some of our executive staff, like we go on hikes together.
Um So we always just kind of thought if you wanted changes in the company.
Well, we just talk to our friends, you know,
we're hanging out with them all the time.
We can make asks, but we found over time like just changes didn't happen that way
you can ask for things, but friends are well within their rights to say no because,
you know, it's
a, you know, nice relationship you have with a friend
and they felt they could just say no.
The only time we really found things that our company
change was when we accidentally found ourselves doing collective action.
Um One year, uh we decided, hey,
let's just share salary numbers because we feel
like some of us aren't getting paid enough.
So all of us got together.
We just started sharing what everyone made and we found out, oh, some people are,
they're making a good amount of money and it was never like, oh,
you're making too much.
It was always like, oh,
you should ask for more.
So, we shared this information and we all ended up having, like,
really nice raises that year because we were able
to go into those negotiations with that knowledge.
Um, yeah, you should all do it at your workplace. You should try it out.
It's wonderful.
Um, we also had uh parking passes revoked at one point.
Uh They didn't wanna because, you know, remote work policy,
not everyone was coming in.
Uh They decided, ok, well,
we'll just take them back and we'll reimburse you for parking.
Well, at our company,
not the best at reimbursement at the time.
And all of us had just independently of each other,
emailed the same message to our CEO S to our
producers because we didn't know who made the decision.
And all of a sudden, within an hour, this was like changed.
They took that back.
So when we found all these, you know, bits of collective action working over time,
all of a sudden once the union question came up,
it was, will this work?
Well,
it's historically worked at our company in the past and we've all benefited from it.
So
why would this turn out any different?
100%?
Um
So I'm gonna throw it over to you, Andrew.
Um, as someone who doesn't
work under a union contract?
Have you found any venues for yourself to make change at your workplace?
Uh, venues? Yes. But are they effective? Uh, not at all?
The, the, the analogy I like using is that it's like AAA pachinko machine. Right.
But all, but there's no way to win where everyone's doing active, you know, the,
the CEO S are listening,
they've got an open door policy come in and tell us your
woes and your problems and we'll hold active listening sessions and,
and we'll, we'll definitely make some changes around here.
Right?
And then
what happens? Right.
Maybe you get some token gestures, but by and large it kind of falls on deaf ears
and there's also the fear that you're kind of ending up on someone's list.
Uh And so there's a, there's sort of a power dynamic and a social pressure there to,
to not really voice your actual concern
in that case.
And I think that really the only power that we have as individuals still
that is commonly practiced in our industry is quit, leave.
You have to go to a place where the grass is greener,
where that level of corporate BS that
they have is
more palatable than whatever you're currently
dealing with at your current workplace.
And it's just this crapshoot of,
is this gonna be the next company that can take care of
me or am I gonna have to just keep hopping around?
So it is really sort of AAA trap that you can
fall into if you're
not, if you're not paying attention to it.
Lauren, do you feel like that is something similar to what you've experienced?
Yeah. Very similar. Um, back when I was kind of a junior just getting started.
Um, I was unaware of all the different ways that
an employer can take advantage of you.
Um,
and I realized that the whole studio was going through a tough time because
everyone was kind of complaining and mumbling
amongst ourselves about things and management had,
uh,
started quote unquote listening to us
and kind of gave us these meetings or like we wanna hear what's uh what you're,
what you guys are dealing with and we want to try to help you out.
Um And I was naive and thought, oh, that's awesome.
They're listening to us, you know, I can sit next to the, uh CFO and,
and say like this or that and like we need to
change this and I felt like I was being heard,
but uh
a month, two months, three months past nothing changed,
there was no actual accountability for my uh employers.
Um
And that was very frustrating
and, and I want to add to like,
even when things did change and when it seemed like they did listen, that's great.
But again, the count, there is no like real accountability that they have to,
that they have to do anything that
you say, or that you want them to do so?
Yeah.
And Dan is, is somebody who's new, right?
Feeling that ability to hold your employer accountable
for stuff is kind of a challenge.
Right.
Yeah, absolutely.
Uh, so in, in my short tenure in the industry so far I've been pretty lucky to have, uh,
people who are interested in my professional
development on like the managerial side.
But at the end of the day,
um if the organization isn't interested in changing things,
then um like one manager can't really do much.
So,
collective action is really the only way to get kind of pressure
like on the collect, like on the, like, I guess the industry scale,
like setting the precedent
for things to change because like at the end of the day, one person can only do so much.
-- True. -- Um
So
with that in mind,
you know,
if we're going to our employers to ask for these changes collectively, right?
We form our union and we're ready to ask for change.
How can we frame that as like a good thing for both sides?
So, um collective bargaining between workers and management sets a precedent,
right?
It sets a standard
um and standards create stability and stability is needed for long term,
like productive growth for companies.
So any com any company that's interested in long term growth
uh and like a beneficial relationship with its workers needs to have some sort
of agreement and like a union agreement is exactly that kind of agreement.
Definitely. Um, how does that resonate with you
vy,
I want to look at this a little bit from my boss's perspective because,
you know,
running a business is a morally complex sort of situation.
Making the best business decisions are not always like the best moral decisions.
Um, and it's a balancing act of, you know, trying to do right by your,
not just the people that you employ,
but the people that you hopefully want to
keep employed over the long term and sometimes
they think it's ok to maybe
the people who are gonna be leaving, maybe not treat them so well.
But for the rest of us, like, we don't see it that way,
but management isn't seeing it from our perspective all the time.
They have to worry about the decisions they need to make and they're
going to justify their actions for that greater good that they're doing.
Um One of the things that uh is gonna happen once our unions, like go through,
we have the contract is we're gonna have a labor committee.
Uh And this is very standard for a lot of unions
where it's a group of coworkers that we're just gonna trust
uh to communicate with management and management will have to talk to them.
So if there's any major changes that happen or even just every six months or so, like,
you know, hey, we have an influx of money.
What's a good way
to, you know, manage this?
Well,
let's talk with the labor committee and figure out a way to move this stuff around.
Um, it gives us a seat at the table so that management really does have to listen.
They're not doing this from a weird black box where they're
thinking about everyone is just like components of this business.
Mathematics.
They have to look us in the face and they need to see if they can make those judgments.
Uh
-- And I think that'll end up pretty good for everybody. -- Yeah, definitely.
Um
Lauren, I think that also you've mentioned things in the past to me about
some things that Dan was talking to about sustainability
but also like
diversity within
games. Can you elaborate on that?
Yeah,
totally. Um
I think diversity is, is just a small piece of the pie,
but I think it's probably one of the most important pieces.
Uh And if we can, if we can bargain to have a more diverse industry as a whole,
we'll have a more profitable industry as a whole.
Um We make games that people play all around the globe
and everybody wants to see themselves represented
and you can't make something if it's not coming from a genuine place, like if,
if we're not a diverse workforce, then we can't create a diverse
uh
crack. We can't, we can't make diverse games. Um
So if we can start to do that if I think a union is
what we need to help us start to do that more and more,
uh then we'll have a more profitable industry as a whole.
Would you agree with that? Andrew, do you think that um
ultimately
forming unions will help us
kind of like diversify within games?
Uh Definitely,
especially in the sense that by creative to kind of um what Dan was talking about in,
in this answer And, and Lauren in the previous answer,
the idea that you're being able to hold your
employer accountable for the promises that they sell you,
right?
When they try to get you over there,
and they've got their mission statement on their website and
their values and their pillars that they believe in.
But,
and when push comes to shove, they're more than willing to
uh
conveniently ignore those because it's not legally binding, right?
You're, it's just a puff piece on a website.
So
when you're able to get these,
uh when you're able to hold an employer accountable and when
the employer is willing to allow themselves to be held accountable
in a negotiating setting, then at, at the very least you have a dynamic where
I think that is an attractive thing for an employer to offer.
Because if I'm going to go look for a company
and the company promises me something and they say,
and we'll put it in writing legally,
we are going to give you these perks and there's nothing, you know,
and there's nothing that we can do about it without your say.
So I think that that will attract a lot of talent in uh
the industry because they know that there's that safety and security there.
Well, said Andrew, um
so kind of going off of that
thinking about how,
like there's that myth that we're forming unions because we're here to like,
rip it to the ground and set it on fire and
start everything all over.
But what we're really trying to do here is build sustainability and,
and longevity in our careers.
So like,
what's a,
what's a common misconception that you had
about unions before you started getting involved?
Yeah. But the, the one, the, the big one is the idea that the union is this alien.
You're,
you're swapping out the company contract for this alien
third party contract that the union is this,
this entity that's going to come in and sweep you
off your feet and solve all of your current problems,
but replace them with another set of problems.
And the big thing that was eye opening for me about
that was uh I found out that that is anti union propaganda
that is called third partying.
And that is absolutely a tactic that they use to divide and conquer where they say no,
no, no.
The U
union is
uh this other that is going to come in and,
and just muck everything up and you don't,
you don't get any guarantees and learning that the union
is something that you form with your coworkers from the ground up.
Uh, you're,
you're there the whole every step of the way and that's really empowering.
Yeah. Absolutely.
Um,
vy
as somebody who's organized their workplace,
I'd love to know what you thought was a misconception about unions.
Um, a concept misconception that I got, uh,
bombarded with every time I had one on one conversations with my coworkers,
uh was the idea that joining a union had like a series of like, you know, 123,
here are the things that happen now that we're a union.
Here are the things that we have to accept. People wondered.
Well, is it gonna be like in teachers unions?
Like, are we gonna have tenure and then like, it's gonna be hard to like,
go with somebody or something?
Are we gonna have like all these crazy regulations of who can do what?
Like I'm not allowed to touch a chair because I'm not in this right union.
Um
And really we had to keep telling them no, it's what we want.
We're the ones that are setting those conditions and
now that we're going through a lot of the,
a long process creating that contract.
We have long conversations with you guys about the way that we
want our workplace to run and the way that we like it.
Uh And I think we've confused you guys on a few things, at least.
Um But the contract is incredibly specific to our workplace,
it's incredibly specific to our culture.
Um And that's just been a really great thing to see.
Yeah, definitely.
Um
Lauren.
And what makes you, what, what, what did you have as a, as,
as a thing that you didn't fully understand about unions before you started?
Yeah.
Before I learned about unions,
I kind of also thought it was this third
party situation where um it was just yet another
uh big group that was going to take advantage of my passion, right?
Like we, we're all passionate workers, you know,
why else would be we be putting up with this crazy industry, right?
We love,
we do,
we're passionate, some of us are creative. Some of us are technical.
It doesn't matter what we do, but we love, we love it and that's easy to exploit,
unfortunately.
And that's been my experience um a lot of the time
so far and I kind of was weary of unions because I'm like, oh great.
It's just another entity that's going to,
you know, exploit my passion and I don't want another one to deal with, right?
Um But yeah, I mean, as everyone else has been saying,
uh I was pleasantly surprised to learn that um that the union is us and
uh as long as we're all participating and
we're all learning together how this works and,
and literally like the union is us, we're not going to exploit ourselves.
So,
-- yeah, -- definitely,
Dan, again, as somebody who's, who's new and is concerned about exploitation,
is that something that you were concerned about before you got involved?
Yeah. Absolutely.
Um, as someone who's entering the industry, I'm always like, it,
it's natural to be wary about, like, a big organization kind of stepping in and,
like, dictating your interests basically. But that's
again, not at all.
Uh, What a union is a union is uh us, the workers, it is up to us to establish it,
it is up to us to negotiate it and it is up to us to
um maintain it.
Uh I also would like to touch on another thing.
Um A lot of people who are even like, interested in,
in unionizing and have like beliefs about like collective action,
uh see kind of striking as uh the be all and end all of unions, like, uh
something that's something that really comes up in the media a lot when
unions are mentioned as like specifically, like last year.
Uh But that is not nearly everything that a union can like, help you with.
Uh It is a last resort that has proven effective,
but union can offer you so much more than that,
like from negotiating your health care
benefits. Uh Like all sorts of mutual aid are
something that a union can help you with if you
uh put in the work to establish and maintain it
-- absolutely -- 100%.
Um
So
kind of like diverting to a whole another subject now. But
um Vy, I'd like to ask you
why the I A was the choice for you.
So it's kind of a special case for us. Uh We,
man interactive, we work with a lot of clients like
uh Disney
uh Marvel Nickelodeon.
Uh and we kind of noticed they all had associations not only through the
uh unionizing efforts through the V FX that we were aware of.
So like Marvel Disney, uh you know, Avatar are
involved with that.
But also, you know, many of our,
we worked with some of the showrunners on some of these
shows and we knew that they were like animation guild members.
So we were like, oh, maybe if we work with the Iatse May, maybe they'll
reach out like once we go public and they did,
we got so many nice messages from so many of these different people.
Um I won't name any names.
I won't name any companies, but like, they didn't just send them to us.
They send them to my CEO saying congratulations on your game union.
Yeah,
100%.
Um
Lauren, I, I feel like you have that connection to folks at the animation Guild.
But for, for games work, why do you believe the I A is best positioned?
Uh There's a lot of reasons but yeah, ob obviously,
I can see uh that there the I A is well, well versed in crafts, right?
Um Specifically animation.
I, I see how things are going there and I,
I know that they understand the kind of work that we do in games.
Um And then I, I also, I have just been really impressed by like
the ias uh uh strategy of like informing, right?
We're here now, like just learning and,
and making sure that all of the workers understand what a union is.
Um Because I think a union is so much stronger when we're all a big part of it.
Otherwise like, II, I don't know,
I wouldn't want to be part of a union that just like does the work
for everyone because then no one would understand and we wouldn't have the power.
That is the point. It's the whole point of a union. So I, I really, really
uh get behind that aspect of the I A that it really is the workers and um
they're there to help us and inform us how
this even works and make sure we're prepared.
So, yeah, it's cool.
Unionism is highly participatory. Um
Andrew is somebody who doesn't necessarily have that connection to folks
who work in already established a,
graft. So how do you feel about the I A?
Uh Yeah, the thing that I like about uh the I A is that ultimately
they know the games industry, even if they don't know that yet,
in the sense that making games is a highly create.
I'm I'm preaching to the choir here, right? But uh
yeah, you're, you're uh games are art, right?
Highly creative, highly uh these,
these beautiful works that made it's also highly technical.
You need very specific skill sets,
you need to learn how to use an editor or you need
to learn how to make your own editor or you know,
all of these different things and,
and disciplines and there's the spectrum
of uh creative craft to technical discipline
that games,
it lives and breathes all the time and navigating that and forming a union.
You need to be able it, it needs to, the union needs to work for all of us, right?
It needs to work for the super creative designers.
It needs to work for the super crunchy programmers.
It needs to work for artists and all of
these different disciplines that come together to make a game
and uh navigating that water and making sure that
one group isn't left out in these negotiations.
Uh is something that I think that the, the I A has experience with,
-- with the FX unions and the animation guild and things like -- that.
Um
How about you, Dan as a narrative designer? How does the I A resonate with you?
Um I would like to just uh echo Andrew's point about like benefits like that.
This should benefit everyone from like the most
crunchy programmers to narrative designers and artists.
Um but I think uh like I
particularly respect ayat
bottom up approach to making sure everyone in the studio gets a
voice uh and gets the opportunity to vote on their union.
Um And I think the long term goal is to establish uh a
industry wide union presence that can stand
up to management demands across companies.
And I think
the I A has the best strategy to achieve that
with holistically getting in as many people as possible.
Like one studio at a time.
Yeah.
Um I say hell yeah, a lot. I apologize.
Um So a question for all of the panelists and also for everybody in the audience. Um
If you had a union vote today,
would you vote? Yes.
Hell yeah. Raise those hands. Love to see it.
Let's do a vote right now. Everybody.
We're a union. We did it.
This is great. Um
Just small fires, just small fires.
Um Well, that's fantastic.
I'm so glad that there's so many of you in this room that are
open and supportive of, of forming unions and
we can't do this work without you. We have to do it together.
Um It's y'all at your studios, forming your unions.
Uh We're here to help and support and make sure that happens.
Uh But we can't do it without you.
Um So I'd love to open it to the floor for questions.
If anybody has any, please step up to the mics that are available.
Oh, I love it. A long line.
Let's start on the left side and then we'll go to the right side.
Hi there.
Um,
so I work as a sound designer, um, out of Canada.
Um, and a lot of my work is typically through contract.
It's very hard to get in-house work.
Um, so I'm just wondering like, what power do I have as a contractor, uh,
if any power at all to make unionization happen and, or, or work for me in any way,
-- does anybody want to answer -- that?
So the question was,
what power do you have as a contractor to be able to form a union at your company?
Or, or just in general, like working through my life as a contractor
or how can I
facilitate unionization?
Yeah, I, I can take that.
Um, yeah,
not quite the same power as like full time employees,
but like way more than you think you can establish, uh, uh,
an agreement with the company that you're working at.
Uh, if you and your contracts, uh, coworkers, I mean,
you have to reach out to the other contractors
if you reach out to your employer and say,
hey,
uh, we are only going to work under these set conditions.
Uh,
you can do that
and they can have you, they'll,
I mean, they don't have to go with that, but you can, you know,
do stuff to make sure that like they'll go along with it.
Not necessarily strike. You can do like a one day thing.
You could even just like, you know, hey, let's just tamper down stuff a little bit.
Um, I have seen this happen with some other, uh, uh, game folks, uh, uh,
in other areas of the industry.
Um, I've talked to them about it and it's honestly the same process.
You were just talking to
people, you trust fellow contractors, you're talking to them one by one,
you're getting a game plan together and then once you're ready,
you go ahead and announce,
um, you can reach out to a
Yati and they're gonna have all the recommendations
for how you can go about that process.
Um And they'll have some amazing resources to make sure that
you guys are trained and you can handle that properly.
They did an amazing job training us,
uh and we felt really prepared. So I'm, I'm sure you'd be uh in, in good hands
also. Um, correct me if I'm wrong.
But I believe that IOTC is like all
of our preexist union contracts are largely uh contract
based anyways, contract based employees. So,
yeah. Um
That's a, a lot of entertainment work is gig work.
It's project-based, it's contract based.
And um, historically for over 100 years,
we've written contracts for workers who are
under that project-based sort of working model.
Um But definitely come by our booth when you talk more about that.
Great.
Thanks a lot.
Yeah,
over on this side.
Um The previous questioner was from Canada and the first letter of
AYI is international.
Um
So what can Ayat do to help with unionizing
studios and coordinating unionization that are across countries?
Uh I
feel like I'm just gonna answer that.
Um So uh the inio say you're right is inter is international.
We are international in the United States, Canada and Puerto Rico.
Um But that does not necessarily mean that we do not work
globally to help people around the globe form unions in their countries.
Um Labor law varies wildly from country to country
and our jurisdiction remains within the United States, Canada and Puerto Rico.
Um So that's like the law language we know.
Um but we have consistent conversations with a group called Uni Global,
which is a global unionization effort.
Um Because
again, like we're talking about
game workers worldwide and we want to make sure that labor around the globe is,
is protected.
Um All workers deserve rights regardless of, of their location.
So it, it is a really important conversation to be having to talk about
unions in other countries and how we can collaborate.
-- We -- were also talking with the uh the I, I forget the acronym but the,
the Great bri uh the one in the UK, right?
The
independent workers of Great Britain. Yes. Um
They're awesome folks. Let's go on this side.
Um I know there's a massive line. So I'm definitely gonna try to keep it short.
But, um,
I'm, I'm currently a student
and, um, I feel like I really, um, enjoyed hearing you guys talk about, uh,
people who are newer in the industry.
Um,
just because I feel like a lot of the
time they're kind of left out of the conversation.
Um, I feel like it's pretty fair to say as a student.
Um, a lot of, a lot of us feel like,
feel like it's really easy to take advantage of students.
Um Just because there's this sort of like desperation and like fear
that like plagues a lot of students trying to break in,
you know, there's so many, it's kind of a very messy, messy time,
like I feel like that's fair to say.
Um
So I was just kind of curious um
specifically about like Dan's um experience is kind of
something newer to the industry about whether you've
faced like kind of um what kind of reaction
was given to you when you kind of expressed interest in uni
unionization. Um Or if there was even some kind of like push back
to the interest and then how A
Aze supports.
Um Just a little bit more information maybe about how a Tze supports
like people newer to the industry or people trying to break in.
Um We're like kind of where to, where to start if that's where you are. Thank you.
-- Uh -- Absolutely. Um Great question. Yeah, I would love to take that. Um So
as students and newer people in the industry, you're entering like a very opaque,
like I said, and sometimes pretty hostile place.
But um the thing is your peers, as students, they will end up like getting jobs,
some of them.
And once you have a job,
you are a worker that can unionize.
And as a student right now, you can start having these conversations with people.
Um because a union like starting a union is all conversation based.
Uh and like ones since you're like preparing to enter the industry,
you can start learning about your rights as a worker.
So that when you do enter the industry, you
don't
fall prey to like the exploitation
that um some like management uh inflicts on a newer and like people and students.
Uh but also just like keeping in contact with everyone
in your network once they get jobs at studios,
talk to them about unionizing
in the meantime, like learn about it and
get ready to start doing it once you do it for the workforce. But also, um
Aze has been incredibly supportive.
Um Like, I've, since I've started volunteering at the
AC at A TC,
they've been incredibly supportive of um me as
like as a junior um narrative designer.
And they've like consistently heard me out
about like the particular interests that like
newer people in the industry have had as opposed to like veterans.
It's a very different set of concerns.
But at the end of the day, we are all workers and we all want to
um
have the industry that benefits us all.
Yes.
Former student union, I always told my students that.
Yes. Yeah, thank you for mentioning that.
Um Yeah, as a student, you do also have like a right to form a union,
especially like if you are employed in any capacity, you can unionize.
Yeah.
And with regards to like retaliation or like that,
that fear that that is something that employers can uh have, have tradition
relied on to kind of keep you quiet.
And uh the important thing is knowing your rights, they,
they cannot threaten you with, with firing over organizing.
That is a, that is a protected right that you have.
So by learning, like Dan was saying, learning these things and knowing,
knowing what you're allowed to do
uh
will just give you that much more of a leg up.
So the, the, the union busting playbook is
uh remarkably stale for the, the companies they pull out.
They've been pulling the same tricks for the last 100 years or so.
And uh yeah, and I, and I
knows how to combat those.
Hell yeah, I'm still terrified, but thank you,
-- you can do -- it.
Hell
yeah,
-- we'll take this one. So -- I wanted to ask a very similar question. Um
how have, has Ayat
uh
treated the idea of maybe going at a guild level
for, you know, career paths? Because there is so much turnover.
There are small companies that will maybe make one game and then disappear
and there'll be 30 other companies in that town.
You're going to hop around between all these companies.
You can't make a union every time
you need a union that you are already in.
That'll help you get into the places, stay in places and afterwards.
Oh, I would, I would.
Ok. If you're looking at me, I'll answer it. Um So uh
a, a great model for us to look at,
for that sort of idea is, is the animation guild.
And while there are really large employers within that,
there are also really small employers within it.
Um So it's not to exclude
small employers and it,
and it's also not to say that if one shutters that
the there aren't others that are part of that union,
that other, that those union workers can go to.
Um you know, it, it's about building that large network
with
employers of all sizes,
small to large so that we can have that mobility
to go from place to place and still be union.
Um And while that doesn't happen overnight,
we need the people that are working at those studios to
form the unions at their studios so that we can have that
kind of like mobility within jobs. Does that answer your question
or do you want to
add?
Ok.
Um
So a matter of creating an industry wide union for
game workers doesn't involve just going to that end point.
Uh
There is a lot of work involved with just getting independent companies to
go along because once you have unions set up at certain shops,
like all of a sudden, like the demands that they make,
they become standardized across the industry.
And you see that like in a lot of different industries, if you look historically,
uh the things that workers fight for eventually
just kind of become taken for granted,
you know, weekends that came out of, you know, union efforts, you know, workers,
you know, revolting in the streets, making sure that it happened.
Um when we reach the point where we have like an industry wide guilds, like
that's kind of the point where like you are dealing with,
uh the publishers have to start having their own like
union to try to like fight against our power.
Um That is a long goal. Uh that probably is gonna come faster than I imagine.
I'm very conservative when it comes to this sort of stuff. And my, I, a
lot of my coworkers are way more acceleration is about it than I am.
Um It's a thing that'll happen,
but there's a lot of really amazing transformational things that
are gonna happen when these just happen at company,
company company.
So those are the steps I'm really excited about. You.
Look at these places as like they'll rise and fall. Uh I don't see it falling.
I see those workers all of a sudden going to other places where they're like, well,
I'm used to this,
I'm used to having these work conditions
and I have the tools necessary to fight for it again.
Uh and make it faster this time, make it better.
This is something that's going to spread like wildfire.
See, you didn't need me to answer that.
-- Um Lauren, did you want to add anything to -- that?
want to hear more questions. I, I think it's a good place to end.
So
to add on top of,
on top of that. What,
what about um
like,
OK,
so to on top of both that and the international question, what
and what if it, what if it's some like an organization that's technically not,
not a union but can,
but can operate like, like one to try to like basically
an, an unofficial union to try to bypass the who
the whole thing with, with different countries having different,
an unofficial union
bypass like the, the whole thing about,
about different contracts having different labor laws.
Um
That's a really in depth question.
Um I have a bunch of other, I a reps here who could definitely help answer that.
So I would encourage you to meet us out in the hall. We all have these shirts on
um so that I can get the best answer for you.
Um I apologize that I don't have that answer for you right now.
Um We'll go to this side.
Hey,
uh so I'm actually with a local 28 up in Portland, Oregon. So
glad
to have you.
And we do stage and trade and it is
so exciting
to be here and see you guys here because it means that
what we get the good stuff we get,
you guys are gonna get
and that you can do it.
I
can help you do it
and it's worth it.
But I got a question too.
Absolutely.
So the question is basically
how does aot
support workers through more contentious organization or labor dispute issues?
What are some examples of that?
I don't want to go into the examples of that.
I mean, you don't have to give examples but
OK. Um
Interesting.
Yeah,
I, I will say, and I'm gonna give a lot of credit to my CEO.
Um
We don't have as many contentious issues as I think like we were expecting.
Um
once you have a big organization kind of enter in,
like there's a level of respect there that like, I wasn't ready for our CEO,
lets our union know ahead of time about like almost anything
uh that's going on, anything where they think the union might need to get involved.
Um It's been
a little bit more chivalrous than I was expecting going in.
Um As far as the contentious issues, they got lawyers who are very good at talking.
Uh
and they are very good at communicating with us and letting us
letting us know,
uh, what the company said.
Um, it's,
you know, we'll have things happen.
Uh, but it's just been like a very smooth process for the most part.
Like, I don't, I don't worry, day to day about a lot of things, they worry about it.
Sorry. Keeps me up at night,
two in the morning once. I'm pretty sure
it's ok.
Um,
yeah, I mean, we have the, the power of the, of all the um
I A behind it. So
our legal team, um our organizing team,
um we're all here to help and support and facilitate as much as we can.
So,
um,
yeah,
100% behind it.
Well, thank you very much.
I appreciate you being here.
Uh We'll have time for just one more question. I apologize.
But anybody else who's still in line, please?
I encourage you to meet us out in the hallway or come by our booth
to ask your questions to us directly because we're,
we're here to help and answer your questions.
So please definitely come by, we'll hang out in the hallway afterwards.
I really appreciate what you guys do.
I appreciate the Twitch streams, the outreach.
Thank you.
Um I'm actually just here to say if any of you work at
electronic arts or if you know anyone who works at electronic arts,
come talk to me.
Ok, thank you.
Get in there.
If he,
if he was the last one.
Mulligan,
ah,
Magic, the gathering reference. Nice.
All right.
Andrew Jorgenson Junior game design student at Indiana University,
Indianapolis.
Um,
as someone with, uh, neurodivergent, uh, disabilities and stuff, I feel that, um,
for those, for those individuals like myself that are attending
here today, um,
I feel that, um,
when it comes to, um, uh, like entering the industry, particularly, like, um, with,
like, game design programming and stuff,
we tend like it
like a major issue for individuals like us, like overthinking and stuff and,
and it kind of hinders our ability to like, um
you know, kind of gives us, you know, insecurities or, you know,
h hurting our confidence when it comes to like,
you know, growing and soft game programming and stuff and like,
because there's so many different variables and stuff of like,
do we need to add this, does this need to be refined and stuff?
And,
and it's just not like
I was just curious about whether or not um
whether or not there is a need for neurodivergent, you know,
members of the gaming industry community
to be represented by a ac in the near future.
Yes,
I think that's a very important aspect of the,
yeah, it's an important aspect of the diversity that I think unions like us can,
can make sure that we can represent and, and write into our contracts.
So, absolutely, it's very important.
Yeah, because sometimes, you know, with overthinking and stuff
we can get so, you know, wrapped up in,
overthinking that we can't even think we can't even, you know,
program anything because like, we're just,
oh, I don't know what to do. It's like
individuals like us, we can relate to that. Can we?
Yeah,
it's like,
so I'm like,
would you mind if I edit something to that too? So
uh
I am like a neuro divergent person and like,
thank you for asking me those questions also like a very important thing to ask.
Uh But
like a union contract
can ensure that you have accommodations as a neuro divergent individual that
there um your employer can't impose things on you that would be
especially difficult on you as a member of the neuro divergent community,
which includes like
uh specific deadlines or um even like being able to be in the office which like for
uh neuro DeVol
people or like physically disabled folks can be really difficult.
So um having a union contract will
definitely like help you as a neurodivergent person.
I say as someone who is also that
yeah,
absolutely.
We need uh representation and like you, you,
you say you're worried about overthinking it, but really
what we are all game developers here and what do game developers
do best we solve really complex problems and we overthink a ton,
right?
Who I I can think of no better group of people to dismantle a find a broken system,
figure out what's wrong with it, dismantle it and build a new system that is robust.
Accounts for all of the different players in the game is uh you know,
Q A tested and approved
and has all of the pieces needed to be like an actual because that's, that's our job.
That's our day to day job. So I'm really excited to see what happens when
game developers really start digging and getting,
rolling up their sleeves and digging into
uh the particulars of, of rebuilding the system in a way that works for all of us.
Um Also just a quick note before I wrap this up for today. Um
that uh
sign in sheet is still circulating. So if you haven't signed in, please do
sorry,
Oh, fill out the evaluations. Yes, do that too.
Um Also we're going to have a party tomorrow night uh at Tempest Bar and Box.
If you have not RSVP, please do. If you've got a Zine that QR code in the Zine,
we'll take you to a link up top page. Hell yeah, right there, Diana.
Um
And uh it will take you to a link up top
page where you can find all of our stuff this week.
Um But please come by our booth.
Let's talk,
let's talk more about this because like this doesn't happen without you.
It's got to happen with you.
Um And again, big thank you to the local 16 folks who are here working this event
and, uh,
look forward to seeing y'all in the halls and at our booth
1861, we will see you all again very soon.