[Music] Hi, I'm Oliver Meow. I lead the team at
Hi, I'm Oliver Meow. I lead the team at Pixelberry Studios. Before we get
Pixelberry Studios. Before we get started, I was asked to remind everyone
started, I was asked to remind everyone to uh please put your phone on silent or
to uh please put your phone on silent or vibrate mode. Um,
vibrate mode. Um, we make games for teens, so I don't mind
we make games for teens, so I don't mind if you're playing a game during my talk
if you're playing a game during my talk and you can multitask, but just please
and you can multitask, but just please keep it in silent mode.
keep it in silent mode. Um, today I'm going to talk to you about
Um, today I'm going to talk to you about how our studio saved a life and how that
how our studio saved a life and how that event inspired us to work with
event inspired us to work with nonprofits to add features to our game
nonprofits to add features to our game that have affected thousands, if not
that have affected thousands, if not millions of lives. And hopefully many of
millions of lives. And hopefully many of you will leave the room inspired um by
you will leave the room inspired um by what we discovered and by the events
what we discovered and by the events that we encountered ourselves. But
that we encountered ourselves. But before I begin, I want to get a feel in
before I begin, I want to get a feel in the room of how many people in the room
the room of how many people in the room are actually game developers and make
are actually game developers and make games.
games. Great. Um, it's a large number.
Great. Um, it's a large number. Do you remember what it felt like when
Do you remember what it felt like when you first released your very first game?
you first released your very first game? Um, I think it's something that most
Um, I think it's something that most game developers will will always
game developers will will always remember. And for me, right after I
remember. And for me, right after I finished my first game, it was a web-
finished my first game, it was a web- based game that I put on the browser. I
based game that I put on the browser. I showed it to some friends and it was a
showed it to some friends and it was a really exciting feeling to have them
really exciting feeling to have them playing that game. And I was also really
playing that game. And I was also really nervous to see what their response was.
nervous to see what their response was. But fortunately they really enjoyed the
But fortunately they really enjoyed the game and they actually were inspired to
game and they actually were inspired to start creating games of their own. And
start creating games of their own. And then I launched the game and suddenly
then I launched the game and suddenly hundreds and then later thousands of
hundreds and then later thousands of strangers, people I never knew were
strangers, people I never knew were playing the game and leaving comments
playing the game and leaving comments for it. And I think as a game developer
for it. And I think as a game developer that's something really unique. We're
that's something really unique. We're creating something that gets played and
creating something that gets played and seen by all these people who we don't
seen by all these people who we don't know.
know. Now, my friends kind of caught that same
Now, my friends kind of caught that same bug. And so, later, a few years after
bug. And so, later, a few years after college, four of us started my first
college, four of us started my first company called Centercore. We were
company called Centercore. We were focused on web- based games. And
focused on web- based games. And although we never really talked about
although we never really talked about it, I think that one of our motivations
it, I think that one of our motivations of starting a game company was so that
of starting a game company was so that we could create a project that would be
we could create a project that would be played by millions and millions of
played by millions and millions of people. That was always our intention.
people. That was always our intention. And as we began um we actually started
And as we began um we actually started creating these multiplayer games that
creating these multiplayer games that our players really enjoyed. We get
our players really enjoyed. We get emails from people saying, "Can you
emails from people saying, "Can you change the IP address of your servers
change the IP address of your servers because our schools won't let us play
because our schools won't let us play those games anymore." Um and we tried to
those games anymore." Um and we tried to find a financial model. Um this was in
find a financial model. Um this was in 2000, so we tried to use subscription.
2000, so we tried to use subscription. Ended up being about 60% of our
Ended up being about 60% of our subscribers paid via PayPal, which was
subscribers paid via PayPal, which was pretty impressive for the time. 30% paid
pretty impressive for the time. 30% paid via check and the other 10% would
via check and the other 10% would actually send us dollar bills and in
actually send us dollar bills and in some cases coins. So we had a lot of
some cases coins. So we had a lot of kids playing our games. But that wasn't
kids playing our games. But that wasn't enough money for us to sustain our
enough money for us to sustain our company. So after about a year and a
company. So after about a year and a half, we were getting ready to shut our
half, we were getting ready to shut our company down. And on the very last day
company down. And on the very last day when we were planning to turn off our
when we were planning to turn off our servers, we had a friend give us a phone
servers, we had a friend give us a phone call and ask if we wanted to create cell
call and ask if we wanted to create cell phone games. So we leapt at that
phone games. So we leapt at that opportunity and we really tried to learn
opportunity and we really tried to learn from what we the mistakes we had made
from what we the mistakes we had made earlier and that was we didn't spend
earlier and that was we didn't spend enough time on business. We did have
enough time on business. We did have some business deals with other companies
some business deals with other companies uh but I only spent maybe a quarter of
uh but I only spent maybe a quarter of my time on business and the other
my time on business and the other founders they just spent all their time
founders they just spent all their time on art and programming and design.
on art and programming and design. And as we started creating games for
And as we started creating games for this one company it transitioned into
this one company it transitioned into creating games for more and more
creating games for more and more companies. And I went from most of my
companies. And I went from most of my time on programming to all of my time on
time on programming to all of my time on business. And I really had to step
business. And I really had to step outside my comfort zone because I was
outside my comfort zone because I was naturally an introvert. Um, but I go to
naturally an introvert. Um, but I go to conferences uh just like you are right
conferences uh just like you are right now. And before a session started, I
now. And before a session started, I talked to the person on my right and I
talked to the person on my right and I talked to the person on my left and
talked to the person on my left and usually it led to nowhere. But one time
usually it led to nowhere. But one time someone on my left was from Sega and
someone on my left was from Sega and someone on my other side was from Sony.
someone on my other side was from Sony. And we actually ended up making games
And we actually ended up making games for both those companies.
for both those companies. We grew our business, started creating
We grew our business, started creating our own games, and after five years, we
our own games, and after five years, we ended up selling that company to Vivveny
ended up selling that company to Vivveny Games, um, which owned Blizzard at the
Games, um, which owned Blizzard at the time. We were at Blizzard for about 2
time. We were at Blizzard for about 2 years, and then Blizzard and Activision
years, and then Blizzard and Activision merged, as many of you may know, but
merged, as many of you may know, but Activision didn't want to be in mobile
Activision didn't want to be in mobile games. So, I think we're the only studio
games. So, I think we're the only studio that Activision has ever sold to EA.
that Activision has ever sold to EA. um being that they're such fierce
um being that they're such fierce competitors.
competitors. And so I was at EA
And so I was at EA and up until then I was having a lot of
and up until then I was having a lot of fun making games and it wasn't because
fun making games and it wasn't because of EA that something started changing
of EA that something started changing for me. Um but something did change. But
for me. Um but something did change. But before I get to that, let me tell you
before I get to that, let me tell you why I loved making games. And some of
why I loved making games. And some of these reasons may carry over to many of
these reasons may carry over to many of you. First, I just love the creativity
you. First, I just love the creativity of designing a game. you really get a
of designing a game. you really get a chance to add new ideas, to think about
chance to add new ideas, to think about how to do things differently and see how
how to do things differently and see how they affect people.
they affect people. Second, I really loved working as a team
Second, I really loved working as a team with people. Um, it may sound kind of
with people. Um, it may sound kind of crazy, but in college I was a premed
crazy, but in college I was a premed major and when I decided to change to
major and when I decided to change to engineering, I actually told people it
engineering, I actually told people it was because I wanted to work with
was because I wanted to work with people. And you know, doctors see a lot
people. And you know, doctors see a lot of patients and they see a lot of people
of patients and they see a lot of people on a daily basis, but they don't get to
on a daily basis, but they don't get to spend as much time with a core group of
spend as much time with a core group of people creating something new. And as an
people creating something new. And as an engineer, even though I wouldn't see as
engineer, even though I wouldn't see as many people, the relationships I develop
many people, the relationships I develop with people and creating a project was
with people and creating a project was something that was really appealing to
something that was really appealing to me. And that's definitely a part of
me. And that's definitely a part of gaming that I love. And then the third
gaming that I love. And then the third thing is what I had talked about before.
thing is what I had talked about before. Just seeing something you've created
Just seeing something you've created played by millions of people and knowing
played by millions of people and knowing that they're enjoying your creation um
that they're enjoying your creation um just feels really really good.
just feels really really good. But something changed
But something changed around the same time that my studio
around the same time that my studio became a part of EA.
became a part of EA. I had twins,
I had twins, one boy and one girl.
one boy and one girl. And it may sound very cliche and it it's
And it may sound very cliche and it it's a movie type of moment and very
a movie type of moment and very stereotypical, but having kids really
stereotypical, but having kids really changed how I started thinking about
changed how I started thinking about life. Started making me feel like I
life. Started making me feel like I wanted to do something that would really
wanted to do something that would really make a difference so that I could leave
make a difference so that I could leave the world in a better place for my kids.
the world in a better place for my kids. And although the games we were making
And although the games we were making sometimes they did make a difference and
sometimes they did make a difference and people would tell us that our games
people would tell us that our games would get them through a hard time or
would get them through a hard time or that they really enjoyed what we were
that they really enjoyed what we were doing, I felt like there was more I
doing, I felt like there was more I could do. So I started thinking about
could do. So I started thinking about other professions and I explored
other professions and I explored opportunities in education in um in
opportunities in education in um in biotech and in green energy.
biotech and in green energy. And the one that seemed that it might
And the one that seemed that it might fit the best was educational gaming.
fit the best was educational gaming. But I had always created games for older
But I had always created games for older kids or teenagers and adults. And in the
kids or teenagers and adults. And in the educational game field, it's really
educational game field, it's really they're games that are successful are
they're games that are successful are really the ones geared towards
really the ones geared towards preschoolers or kindergarters, early
preschoolers or kindergarters, early elementary school. And I think it's
elementary school. And I think it's because at that age, kids just love
because at that age, kids just love being on the iPad and they'll basically
being on the iPad and they'll basically do anything that parents give to them.
do anything that parents give to them. But once kids start playing on a DS, on
But once kids start playing on a DS, on a console, on an iPad or iPhone, they
a console, on an iPad or iPhone, they start learning that there's
start learning that there's a lot of other fun games out there. And
a lot of other fun games out there. And educational games aren't as fun anymore
educational games aren't as fun anymore because educational game makers, they
because educational game makers, they focus on education first and then they
focus on education first and then they try and layer in elements of fun.
try and layer in elements of fun. But as I started thinking more about
But as I started thinking more about that, I realized there could be a
that, I realized there could be a different model.
different model. And that's why I started Pixelberry
And that's why I started Pixelberry Studios with two friends.
Studios with two friends. And our model was creating games with
And our model was creating games with heart. And what this meant is that we'd
heart. And what this meant is that we'd focus on the fun first. Really try and
focus on the fun first. Really try and make that game successful and played by
make that game successful and played by thousands and millions of people. And
thousands and millions of people. And then at that point, we'd start layering
then at that point, we'd start layering in elements of education in a way that
in elements of education in a way that we hopefully thought would be natural
we hopefully thought would be natural and conducive to the natural gameplay.
and conducive to the natural gameplay. So pulled a lot of people that I worked
So pulled a lot of people that I worked with previously and we worked on a game
with previously and we worked on a game for 18 months
for 18 months and we released High School Story. So
and we released High School Story. So High School Story, as you can tell, is a
High School Story, as you can tell, is a simulation builder type game where
simulation builder type game where you're creating your dream high school.
you're creating your dream high school. And we have a story at the beginning
And we have a story at the beginning that's really focused on a bunch of
that's really focused on a bunch of misfits who don't fit in at their old
misfits who don't fit in at their old schools. And they come together to help
schools. And they come together to help create this dream school. and you start
create this dream school. and you start becoming their leader and working with
becoming their leader and working with them. And that story really resonated
them. And that story really resonated with our players.
So you can see here for us story mattered. We had 87% tutorial completion
mattered. We had 87% tutorial completion rate which is really strong in the
rate which is really strong in the mobile games industry.
mobile games industry. And players were giving us four and a
And players were giving us four and a half star reviews.
And most importantly, we had players who would tell us how our
we had players who would tell us how our game was trying to affect them because
game was trying to affect them because of the storyline.
of the storyline. You know, this girl, she was from Japan.
You know, this girl, she was from Japan. Uh she had moved over there, didn't have
Uh she had moved over there, didn't have any friends, and didn't feel like she
any friends, and didn't feel like she fit in. She said, "High school story
fit in. She said, "High school story opened my eyes to be just myself in
opened my eyes to be just myself in front of everybody instead of just
front of everybody instead of just fitting in." And messages like this,
fitting in." And messages like this, they really affected our team. you know,
they really affected our team. you know, they make you feel good about the
they make you feel good about the product you're creating. They might have
product you're creating. They might have made us feel like we were headed in the
made us feel like we were headed in the right direction.
right direction. And because of these messages and the
And because of these messages and the story and all the elements we put into
story and all the elements we put into the game, the game started rising
the game, the game started rising quickly up the charts. We hit number 10
quickly up the charts. We hit number 10 in top grossing um in the app store,
in top grossing um in the app store, which was something that not a lot of
which was something that not a lot of games can do a week after launch.
games can do a week after launch. But we started going back down on the
But we started going back down on the charts because we needed a lot more
charts because we needed a lot more content. So for 2 months after we
content. So for 2 months after we launched the game, we were just running
launched the game, we were just running like crazy trying to get as much content
like crazy trying to get as much content in. And we had we didn't have time or we
in. And we had we didn't have time or we may have had time, but we didn't think
may have had time, but we didn't think about the educational aspects of things
about the educational aspects of things we could do.
we could do. Well, two months after we launched the
Well, two months after we launched the game, I was taking a break and surfing
game, I was taking a break and surfing the internet and I read two articles in
the internet and I read two articles in the same afternoon.
the same afternoon. The first was about a girl, Rebecca
The first was about a girl, Rebecca Sedwick. She was from Florida and she'd
Sedwick. She was from Florida and she'd been cyberbullied by people in her
been cyberbullied by people in her school over a fight about a boy
school over a fight about a boy and eventually she couldn't take it
and eventually she couldn't take it anymore and she committed suicide.
anymore and she committed suicide. The other s story was about a girl named
The other s story was about a girl named Audrey Pototts. For those of you here
Audrey Pototts. For those of you here from the Bay Area, she went to a school
from the Bay Area, she went to a school in Loscatoos
in Loscatoos and she went to a house party one day
and she went to a house party one day where she got drunk and she ended up
where she got drunk and she ended up passing out. And when she woke up, she
passing out. And when she woke up, she woke up in a bed with all of her clothes
woke up in a bed with all of her clothes off and Sharpie written all over her.
off and Sharpie written all over her. Um,
Um, and that's bad. That's already bad
and that's bad. That's already bad enough. But then the next day when she
enough. But then the next day when she went to school, she started getting
went to school, she started getting looks from almost everyone in her
looks from almost everyone in her school. And basically the kids who had
school. And basically the kids who had done that had taken pictures of her and
done that had taken pictures of her and started sending messages and f photos to
started sending messages and f photos to everyone else in the school. And she
everyone else in the school. And she started receiving more messages from
started receiving more messages from people talking about what happened and
people talking about what happened and she was being cyberbullied
she was being cyberbullied and she couldn't talk she felt like she
and she couldn't talk she felt like she couldn't talk to her parents about it
couldn't talk to her parents about it and she committed suicide as well. And
and she committed suicide as well. And normally when I read these type of
normally when I read these type of stories,
stories, you know, it just really bums me out.
you know, it just really bums me out. Um, and it still bums me out even
Um, and it still bums me out even telling you guys about it. But I
telling you guys about it. But I realized that we actually had a game and
realized that we actually had a game and a platform where we could start making a
a platform where we could start making a difference about this. And their stories
difference about this. And their stories really resonated with me because I was
really resonated with me because I was bullied when I was growing up. First in
bullied when I was growing up. First in elementary school and then later in
elementary school and then later in junior high. In fact, when I was in
junior high. In fact, when I was in junior high, I was a really small
junior high, I was a really small seventh grader. And whenever my Spanish
seventh grader. And whenever my Spanish teacher was late to class,
teacher was late to class, the biggest eighth grader in the class
the biggest eighth grader in the class would kick me up outside the classroom
would kick me up outside the classroom and dangle me over a trash can, you
and dangle me over a trash can, you know, and that felt embarrassing, but I
know, and that felt embarrassing, but I could deal with it. But then he'd also
could deal with it. But then he'd also put me in a headlock and sometimes I
put me in a headlock and sometimes I couldn't tell if he was joking or if he
couldn't tell if he was joking or if he was serious. And it was probably a mix
was serious. And it was probably a mix of both. You know, in hindsight, he
of both. You know, in hindsight, he probably had a lot of other issues that
probably had a lot of other issues that he was just trying to get out himself.
he was just trying to get out himself. But I was really scared.
But I was really scared. But I never talked to my mom about it.
But I never talked to my mom about it. And in fact, she never even found out I
And in fact, she never even found out I had been bullied until I told her about
had been bullied until I told her about the game and I told her about this
the game and I told her about this particular story. I was just too scared.
particular story. I was just too scared. I thought that if I told my mom, she'd
I thought that if I told my mom, she'd go tell a teacher or principal
go tell a teacher or principal and they would do something minor but
and they would do something minor but not enough. And the bully would take it
not enough. And the bully would take it out on me even more. And I know now in
out on me even more. And I know now in hindsight that I should have talked to
hindsight that I should have talked to someone, to my parents, to a teacher, to
someone, to my parents, to a teacher, to an adult, but when you're in middle
an adult, but when you're in middle school, you don't always think about
school, you don't always think about those things.
those things. And I told started telling the story to
And I told started telling the story to people in our studio.
people in our studio. And I started finding out that several
And I started finding out that several of them had been bullied, too.
of them had been bullied, too. Some they had forgotten about it, and
Some they had forgotten about it, and some had forgotten about it on purpose.
some had forgotten about it on purpose. But as we talked about it, we talked
But as we talked about it, we talked about how we could use our game to
about how we could use our game to actually start making a difference
actually start making a difference there. And so we decided that we would
there. And so we decided that we would write a cyber bullying storyline
write a cyber bullying storyline so that both victims of cyber bullying
so that both victims of cyber bullying as well as people who might be doing the
as well as people who might be doing the bullying would kind of understand more
bullying would kind of understand more what was going on and that we could
what was going on and that we could teach them what to do if they were being
teach them what to do if they were being bullied.
But because this is such a sensitive topic, we really wanted to work with a
topic, we really wanted to work with a nonprofit.
nonprofit. So we started sending a lot of emails
So we started sending a lot of emails out and started cold calling different
out and started cold calling different nonprofits.
nonprofits. And there was no response from anyone.
And there was no response from anyone. I don't think the nonprofits understood
I don't think the nonprofits understood that a game could make a difference. To
that a game could make a difference. To them, they probably thought games were
them, they probably thought games were part of the problem.
part of the problem. And then something happened
And then something happened that accelerated things even further.
that accelerated things even further. via our game's inssage support system, a
via our game's inssage support system, a girl messaged us and asked us, "Should I
girl messaged us and asked us, "Should I kill myself?"
My friends and I at the studio, we didn't know what to do. We were so
didn't know what to do. We were so scared by this. Um, this was totally
scared by this. Um, this was totally outside our realm of experience. And
outside our realm of experience. And when we started a game company, we never
when we started a game company, we never thought we'd actually need to be
thought we'd actually need to be answering a question like this. And of
answering a question like this. And of course, the answer is no. but we didn't
course, the answer is no. but we didn't know what we should tell her. So, we
know what we should tell her. So, we ended up calling the suicide prevention
ended up calling the suicide prevention hotline ourselves.
hotline ourselves. And they really pushed us to tell the
And they really pushed us to tell the player to get professional help.
player to get professional help. But we thought if all we were doing was
But we thought if all we were doing was telling her, you know, you should talk
telling her, you know, you should talk to someone, go talk to a psychiatrist or
to someone, go talk to a psychiatrist or a counselor, a teacher, and that was all
a counselor, a teacher, and that was all we did that she might feel like we were
we did that she might feel like we were just pushing her away and she might not
just pushing her away and she might not talk to anyone.
talk to anyone. And if we were at a bigger company,
And if we were at a bigger company, they'd probably tell us, "Don't talk to
they'd probably tell us, "Don't talk to her and don't engage in conversation."
her and don't engage in conversation." But we felt a responsibility that we
But we felt a responsibility that we should continue the conversation. So, we
should continue the conversation. So, we did tell her to get help, but we also
did tell her to get help, but we also told her that we were there to listen to
told her that we were there to listen to her. And for a week, and it was the most
her. And for a week, and it was the most nerve-wracking week I've ever had, we
nerve-wracking week I've ever had, we would exchange messages back and forth
would exchange messages back and forth with her. And sometimes we might go a
with her. And sometimes we might go a day and a half before she messaged back.
day and a half before she messaged back. And during that time was really scared
And during that time was really scared that she wasn't going to respond. But
that she wasn't going to respond. But then every time we saw a message, I got
then every time we saw a message, I got more scared because she would tell us
more scared because she would tell us more about what we she was thinking.
more about what we she was thinking. But finally after that week and a half,
But finally after that week and a half, she sent a message to us. And she
she sent a message to us. And she basically said, "I want to thank you for
basically said, "I want to thank you for saving me." And she told us that she had
saving me." And she told us that she had finally gotten help.
finally gotten help. And she followed on by saying, "All of
And she followed on by saying, "All of you at the studio should know you're the
you at the studio should know you're the reason I'm still here, as weird as that
reason I'm still here, as weird as that sounds."
sounds." And this showed us that games are
And this showed us that games are really, really powerful, right?
really, really powerful, right? We're part of an interactive medium that
We're part of an interactive medium that people really connect to.
people really connect to. And this girl felt comfortable enough
And this girl felt comfortable enough that she could reach out to us. And
that she could reach out to us. And because we paid attention to her, she
because we paid attention to her, she was getting help.
was getting help. Now, in the course of helping her, we
Now, in the course of helping her, we started doing more research on both
started doing more research on both cyber bullying and suicide. And we
cyber bullying and suicide. And we discovered that here in the US, one out
discovered that here in the US, one out of six teens has been bullied.
of six teens has been bullied. But what was even scarier than that is
But what was even scarier than that is that one out of 13 teens have actually
that one out of 13 teens have actually tried to kill themselves.
tried to kill themselves. One out of 13. I mean, that number is
One out of 13. I mean, that number is insane.
insane. And so after this incident, we decided
And so after this incident, we decided we really have to find a nonprofit. So
we really have to find a nonprofit. So we started trying to cold call people
we started trying to cold call people again.
again. Now, as it turns out, the very next day,
Now, as it turns out, the very next day, oh, sorry, skip that slide, but the very
oh, sorry, skip that slide, but the very next day, I had a friend who I had known
next day, I had a friend who I had known from the industry. He had just joined a
from the industry. He had just joined a new company
new company called Play Mob and he got in touch with
called Play Mob and he got in touch with me and he basically said Playmob
me and he basically said Playmob connects
connects game developers with nonprofits
game developers with nonprofits so that the developers can help the
so that the developers can help the nonprofits raise money as well as raise
nonprofits raise money as well as raise awareness for these nonprofits.
awareness for these nonprofits. And he also told me that the week before
And he also told me that the week before they contacted us, they had just signed
they contacted us, they had just signed a new nonprofit and that nonprofit was
a new nonprofit and that nonprofit was called the Cyber Smile Foundation and
called the Cyber Smile Foundation and they focus on cyber bullying and they
they focus on cyber bullying and they actually have a helpline with
actually have a helpline with counselors.
counselors. It was amazing, amazing timing.
It was amazing, amazing timing. And we got on the phone with both people
And we got on the phone with both people at Play Mob as well as Cyber Smile and
at Play Mob as well as Cyber Smile and we quickly hashed out an arrangement and
we quickly hashed out an arrangement and we decided to do four things to our game
we decided to do four things to our game to really help our players understand
to really help our players understand cyber bullying better.
So, the first is we've created a cyber bullying quest. And in the quest, we
bullying quest. And in the quest, we have a girl, Hope, a sister of one of
have a girl, Hope, a sister of one of our main characters,
our main characters, who's starting to have problems. But her
who's starting to have problems. But her brother doesn't know what the problems
brother doesn't know what the problems are. And you work with her to discover
are. And you work with her to discover over time that she's being cyberbullied.
over time that she's being cyberbullied. And she does some things that you're not
And she does some things that you're not supposed to do, like confront the bully
supposed to do, like confront the bully directly.
directly. But over time, she learns about the
But over time, she learns about the things you should do.
things you should do. Some of those things are to always tell
Some of those things are to always tell an adult, to save a record of the
an adult, to save a record of the bullying, and not delete the messages so
bullying, and not delete the messages so that you have proof of what happened,
that you have proof of what happened, to not retaliate or to talk directly to
to not retaliate or to talk directly to the bullies, but to hold back.
And the second thing we did was we put in-game
in-game facts on bowling
facts on bowling into our game.
into our game. The third thing we did is we actually
The third thing we did is we actually allowed Cyber Smile Counselors access to
allowed Cyber Smile Counselors access to our in-game support system. So whenever
our in-game support system. So whenever players would message us for help, Cyber
players would message us for help, Cyber Smile counselors could be the ones
Smile counselors could be the ones responding because they had the
responding because they had the training.
training. And then lastly, we put Cyber Smile
And then lastly, we put Cyber Smile specific items in our game so that
specific items in our game so that players who cared about this could
players who cared about this could actually buy these items and a portion
actually buy these items and a portion of the proceeds would go to Cyber Smile.
of the proceeds would go to Cyber Smile. So, our goal was to run the campaign for
So, our goal was to run the campaign for a month to raise $20,000 and hopefully
a month to raise $20,000 and hopefully educate hundreds of thousands of our
educate hundreds of thousands of our players.
players. And it turns out that our players loved
And it turns out that our players loved what we did with this campaign.
what we did with this campaign. One player said, "I love these creators.
One player said, "I love these creators. I feel like they actually care about
I feel like they actually care about their players and their opinions." And
their players and their opinions." And we actually saw
we actually saw the number of people playing our game
the number of people playing our game every day increased by 16% because of
every day increased by 16% because of this quest. So, this is an example of
this quest. So, this is an example of where you can do good and make money at
where you can do good and make money at the same time.
Our quest was so successful that we decided to keep it in our game for a lot
decided to keep it in our game for a lot longer than a month.
longer than a month. And so since then, we've educated over 5
And so since then, we've educated over 5 million players about cyber bullying.
million players about cyber bullying. We've raised $350,000 for Cyber Smile.
We've raised $350,000 for Cyber Smile. And we've connected thousands of players
And we've connected thousands of players to Cyber Smile. You know, some of these
to Cyber Smile. You know, some of these players were just sharing stories of how
players were just sharing stories of how they've been bullied, but some of these
they've been bullied, but some of these players had were being bullied or were
players had were being bullied or were self- hurting. We've had players who've
self- hurting. We've had players who've been abused by their parents or
been abused by their parents or concerned about abuse that they've seen
concerned about abuse that they've seen with a girlfriend or boyfriend.
with a girlfriend or boyfriend. And some of the players also were
And some of the players also were thinking about committing suicide.
thinking about committing suicide. Cyber Smile shared some stories. One
Cyber Smile shared some stories. One that really stood out was they were
that really stood out was they were helping a teen who was on the roof of a
helping a teen who was on the roof of a house chatting back and forth with them.
house chatting back and forth with them. And
And by the end of that chat conversation,
by the end of that chat conversation, they had been able to get the parents
they had been able to get the parents involved and the teen had come off the
involved and the teen had come off the roof and the parents knew what was going
roof and the parents knew what was going on so that they could find help and talk
on so that they could find help and talk to their kid about the problem.
And we had other people contact us and contact Cyber Smile and we were able to
contact Cyber Smile and we were able to save other lives as well.
save other lives as well. This was really powerful for our studio
This was really powerful for our studio and it inspired people on our team to
and it inspired people on our team to think up ways in which they could do
think up ways in which they could do things with our game to help people as
things with our game to help people as well. We had one designer who decided
well. We had one designer who decided that he wanted to focus on women in
that he wanted to focus on women in gaming and sexual harassment. And this
gaming and sexual harassment. And this was about a year before Gamergate.
was about a year before Gamergate. So, he wrote a storyline about one of
So, he wrote a storyline about one of our females in the game who is a gamer
our females in the game who is a gamer and talked about how guys would react to
and talked about how guys would react to her when she's playing in tournaments.
her when she's playing in tournaments. And this was a response from one of our
And this was a response from one of our players.
players. One of my favorites is a storyline about
One of my favorites is a storyline about sexism and sexual harassment in gaming.
sexism and sexual harassment in gaming. From start to finish, it was the
From start to finish, it was the ultimate response to gamer
ultimate response to gamer discrimination.
Two of the females in our studio, our COO and one of our writers, talked about
COO and one of our writers, talked about how when they were in high school, they
how when they were in high school, they had body image issues.
had body image issues. So, they reached out to the National
So, they reached out to the National Eating Disorders Association.
Eating Disorders Association. And we partnered with them in creating a
And we partnered with them in creating a storyline about eating disorders and
storyline about eating disorders and body image. And at the end of that, we
body image. And at the end of that, we gave players a chance who wanted to
gave players a chance who wanted to learn more, an opportunity to discover
learn more, an opportunity to discover more details about eating disorders.
more details about eating disorders. Our players really responded to this as
Our players really responded to this as well.
But one thing we learned, even when you're partnering with a nonprofit,
you're partnering with a nonprofit, they don't always understand how
they don't always understand how powerful a game can be. So, when we
powerful a game can be. So, when we first launched our eating disorder
first launched our eating disorder storyline, you know, the nonprofit had
storyline, you know, the nonprofit had told us there's specific things in the
told us there's specific things in the game you should not include because they
game you should not include because they may be triggers that cause someone who
may be triggers that cause someone who had an eating disorder before to
had an eating disorder before to relapse. And so, we pulled those things
relapse. And so, we pulled those things out, but they didn't realize that just
out, but they didn't realize that just the storyline and the emotional draw
the storyline and the emotional draw from that might be enough to start
from that might be enough to start triggering people. So once we launched
triggering people. So once we launched it within that same day, we had a number
it within that same day, we had a number of players tell us that the story hit
of players tell us that the story hit too close to home, was a little too
too close to home, was a little too traumatic, and we had to push out a
traumatic, and we had to push out a message immediately telling our players
message immediately telling our players that, you know,
that, you know, if this is something that you've
if this is something that you've struggled with, um, you may want to
struggled with, um, you may want to avoid the quest.
avoid the quest. And later we were able to get in a
And later we were able to get in a warning message to make sure that
warning message to make sure that players knew before they started the
players knew before they started the quest that it would be about um body
quest that it would be about um body image and eating disorder. So they
image and eating disorder. So they didn't even have to choose it if they
didn't even have to choose it if they wanted to.
wanted to. At the end of this quest,
At the end of this quest, we had over 50,000 players click to
we had over 50,000 players click to learn more about eating disorders.
So several months went by and we finally had time to focus on education.
had time to focus on education. One of the first features we put in our
One of the first features we put in our game
game was called your voice polling.
was called your voice polling. Now at its roots it was it's a very
Now at its roots it was it's a very simple feature. Basically we have a
simple feature. Basically we have a question and we have answers and we try
question and we have answers and we try and do a mix of different type of
and do a mix of different type of questions. A lot of them are just fun
questions. A lot of them are just fun and frivolous and focus on movies or
and frivolous and focus on movies or memes or trends or they just ask you,
memes or trends or they just ask you, would you rather be stung by a thousand
would you rather be stung by a thousand bees or bitten by a dog?
bees or bitten by a dog? But some of our questions we put in
But some of our questions we put in there are about serious topics like net
there are about serious topics like net neutrality, about Syria, about events
neutrality, about Syria, about events going on in our world that we think it's
going on in our world that we think it's important for people to know about.
and players can see the type of responses that other people in the game
responses that other people in the game are sharing.
are sharing. And our hope by doing this was that over
And our hope by doing this was that over time, as players started seeing more and
time, as players started seeing more and more serious topics, that even if they
more serious topics, that even if they didn't care about the topic at first,
didn't care about the topic at first, the next time they heard someone talking
the next time they heard someone talking about it or they caught a glimpse of a
about it or they caught a glimpse of a headline on a website, they might spend
headline on a website, they might spend some more time interacting with those
some more time interacting with those topics.
topics. And as this one player shows,
you know, our players really understood what we were trying to do.
And to date, we've had over 50 million questions that have been answered.
questions that have been answered. And the number of sessions since we
And the number of sessions since we introduced the feature went up by 12%.
introduced the feature went up by 12%. And one of our players said, "The
And one of our players said, "The political questions are only annoying
political questions are only annoying because I end up spending an hour
because I end up spending an hour researching them."
So the next feature we tried to introduce into the game was extra credit
introduce into the game was extra credit vocabulary.
vocabulary. So our thinking behind this was that
So our thinking behind this was that kids have a get really stressed out by
kids have a get really stressed out by the SAT. and we actually had a poll
the SAT. and we actually had a poll question about the SATs asking them
question about the SATs asking them about that and 30% of our players were
about that and 30% of our players were really stressed by it.
really stressed by it. The other thing we realized is that
The other thing we realized is that there's an income disparity and for 27%
there's an income disparity and for 27% of our players, they could afford prep
of our players, they could afford prep courses or private tutors,
courses or private tutors, but on average those courses now cost
but on average those courses now cost over $1,000.
over $1,000. And so for players who come from a lower
And so for players who come from a lower economic background and whose parents
economic background and whose parents can't afford those expensive prep
can't afford those expensive prep courses, we thought our game might be a
courses, we thought our game might be a way to help level the playing field for
way to help level the playing field for them.
them. And for everyone, it would be an
And for everyone, it would be an opportunity for them to learn vocabulary
opportunity for them to learn vocabulary and if they were in high school, study
and if they were in high school, study for the SAT while they're playing our
for the SAT while they're playing our game. And so we really wanted to put,
game. And so we really wanted to put, you know, game mechanics that would fit
you know, game mechanics that would fit this and try and make it as fun as
this and try and make it as fun as possible.
possible. So, we learned from a lot of the Sega
So, we learned from a lot of the Sega games out there like Candy Crush and
games out there like Candy Crush and Cookie Jam and all those other puzzle
Cookie Jam and all those other puzzle games and and we used a map and we
games and and we used a map and we created a series of different mini
created a series of different mini games. Some of the mini games were story
games. Some of the mini games were story based and they fall very much in line
based and they fall very much in line with what we already do with our game.
with what we already do with our game. And here we're trying to teach players
And here we're trying to teach players what the word potentially can mean just
what the word potentially can mean just via the context of the game. Rather than
via the context of the game. Rather than using a word in a definition, having
using a word in a definition, having them learn in the context of a story
them learn in the context of a story should help.
should help. And whether they get it wrong or right,
And whether they get it wrong or right, eventually they'll learn that verbose
eventually they'll learn that verbose means wordy.
means wordy. And then the second type of miniame we
And then the second type of miniame we have, it's it's a fast-paced action
have, it's it's a fast-paced action style miniame where you're trying to
style miniame where you're trying to match synonyms or antonyms.
match synonyms or antonyms. And this really reinforces the learning.
And we were afraid at first that players might shy away from our game because of
might shy away from our game because of the educational aspects,
the educational aspects, but our players are pretty smart and
but our players are pretty smart and they understood what we were trying to
they understood what we were trying to do, too.
do, too. And one player gave this an as an
And one player gave this an as an example
example of how the feature allowed them to keep
of how the feature allowed them to keep playing the game.
And we released the SAT functionality in December. So I don't have a ton of data
December. So I don't have a ton of data on it so far, but it's been really well
on it so far, but it's been really well received by our players in the forums.
received by our players in the forums. And all these type of features are
And all these type of features are features that over time our players feel
features that over time our players feel like we care about them and keep them
like we care about them and keep them more and more connected to our game.
So in conclusion, I wanted to talk about a little bit about the industry and how
a little bit about the industry and how especially how many of you are in the
especially how many of you are in the mobile games industry.
mobile games industry. So, in mobile games, and we're starting
So, in mobile games, and we're starting to see it in other areas of games,
to see it in other areas of games, we talk about numbers and data all the
we talk about numbers and data all the time, right? We talk about day one
time, right? We talk about day one retention, day 30 retention, ARP, Dow,
retention, day 30 retention, ARP, Dow, DAU, MAU.
DAU, MAU. And when we use these numbers, we think
And when we use these numbers, we think about our players not as people, but as
about our players not as people, but as whales, as people we can make money
whales, as people we can make money from, or people who can download and
from, or people who can download and play our games.
play our games. But the things that
But the things that that have happened with our game have
that have happened with our game have taught me that each one of our players
taught me that each one of our players is an individual.
is an individual. And it's something that we all should
And it's something that we all should know about, but we don't think about a
know about, but we don't think about a lot. And my hope is that from this talk
lot. And my hope is that from this talk that if just a few of you start thinking
that if just a few of you start thinking about how in your jobs you can use your
about how in your jobs you can use your game to start making a difference that
game to start making a difference that more and more games can take the
more and more games can take the mechanics we've done and the ways in
mechanics we've done and the ways in which we're already engaging players and
which we're already engaging players and we can use that to help create games
we can use that to help create games that have more and more of a social
that have more and more of a social impact. And as those games become more
impact. And as those games become more and more successful, bigger companies
and more successful, bigger companies will take notice.
And eventually, I hope that games are associated both with entertainment, but
associated both with entertainment, but also with making a difference. And that
also with making a difference. And that we remember that all of our players are
we remember that all of our players are people, too. Thank you.
So, if you have any questions, um, feel free to go up to the microphone. I can
free to go up to the microphone. I can talk about either events that happened
talk about either events that happened within the game or elucidate more on
within the game or elucidate more on some of those things or I can just
some of those things or I can just answer questions about our game or
answer questions about our game or things we did to to make our game more
things we did to to make our game more successful.
Hi. Um I was just wondering if uh first off I think this experiment of taking a
off I think this experiment of taking a really successful game and trying to
really successful game and trying to make it educational is awesome. Um and I
make it educational is awesome. Um and I was wondering if there were if you had
was wondering if there were if you had any stories of of like say failures um
any stories of of like say failures um that might we might also uh learn from
that might we might also uh learn from um when it comes to like making uh
um when it comes to like making uh making a feature that's more educational
making a feature that's more educational or making a feature that integrates with
or making a feature that integrates with you know or that hooks up with a uh
you know or that hooks up with a uh nonprofit or something like that.
nonprofit or something like that. Right. I mean, so I mean, the best
Right. I mean, so I mean, the best example was probably the one I shared
example was probably the one I shared where we didn't even realize how
where we didn't even realize how powerful the message would be and we had
powerful the message would be and we had to scramble at the last minute. Um, you
to scramble at the last minute. Um, you know, some of those players who had
know, some of those players who had eating disorders and started playing
eating disorders and started playing those quests, they were guessing that
those quests, they were guessing that something was coming like that. Um, but
something was coming like that. Um, but you could really see kind of their angst
you could really see kind of their angst and and their anxiety um, once we
and and their anxiety um, once we started triggering that. And so we we
started triggering that. And so we we felt really really really bad about
felt really really really bad about that. And I think one of the things, you
that. And I think one of the things, you know, we've learned over time with High
know, we've learned over time with High School Story, we release new quests
School Story, we release new quests every week and we've learned that, you
every week and we've learned that, you know, having downloadable systems and
know, having downloadable systems and basically online systems so that you can
basically online systems so that you can adjust things and change things and add
adjust things and change things and add messages um is super super helpful
messages um is super super helpful because inevitably if you're dropping
because inevitably if you're dropping new content um at that type of pace,
new content um at that type of pace, you're always going to have problems.
you're always going to have problems. Cool. Thank you. Yep.
Hey, uh I was wondering if you know the demographics of your game. Does it uh do
demographics of your game. Does it uh do you tend to have more like female or
you tend to have more like female or male players and
male players and Yeah.
Yeah. Okay.
Okay. Yeah, that's a it's a good question. So,
Yeah, that's a it's a good question. So, um she asked if um about the
um she asked if um about the demographics for our game. So,
demographics for our game. So, the the large majority of our players we
the the large majority of our players we believe are teen females. Um, when we
believe are teen females. Um, when we look at Facebook Connect, it says the
look at Facebook Connect, it says the number one group is 18 to 24 and then
number one group is 18 to 24 and then the number two group is 14 to 18, but we
the number two group is 14 to 18, but we think Facebook's um, reliability,
think Facebook's um, reliability, especially when it comes to um, people
especially when it comes to um, people under 18, isn't always the most
under 18, isn't always the most reliable. Um, and looking at our forums
reliable. Um, and looking at our forums and everything, we think our core
and everything, we think our core audience is probably 14 to 18 females.
audience is probably 14 to 18 females. And when it comes to females versus
And when it comes to females versus males, um, about 85% of our players are
males, um, about 85% of our players are females now. Um, I do think that's
females now. Um, I do think that's changed over time. When we first
changed over time. When we first launched, it was much more
launched, it was much more genderneutral, but over time, because of
genderneutral, but over time, because of all the advertising and targeting we've
all the advertising and targeting we've done, we've pulled in more and more
done, we've pulled in more and more females into the game.
females into the game. So, was that a purposeful choice or did
So, was that a purposeful choice or did it just happen?
it just happen? Um, I would say it was it was a
Um, I would say it was it was a purposeful choice to pursue the
purposeful choice to pursue the advertising that was most effective.
advertising that was most effective. Right? So, in the mobile games industry,
Right? So, in the mobile games industry, um, most mobile game companies will
um, most mobile game companies will spend a lot of money on what we call
spend a lot of money on what we call user acquisition, right? And so, you
user acquisition, right? And so, you want to do the most effective user
want to do the most effective user acquisition you can. And for us, um, the
acquisition you can. And for us, um, the ads that started working the best were
ads that started working the best were ones that appealed towards females.
ones that appealed towards females. Thank you.
Thank you. You're welcome.
You're welcome. Uh, inspiring talk, sir. Uh, have you
Uh, inspiring talk, sir. Uh, have you had any further contact with the young
had any further contact with the young one whose life you saved?
one whose life you saved? um we actually haven't had any contact
um we actually haven't had any contact with her since. Um so the question is if
with her since. Um so the question is if we had any contact with the young woman
we had any contact with the young woman since and one of the things that's our
since and one of the things that's our policy is
policy is all righty when we're talking back to
all righty when we're talking back to our players um and it's not about um
our players um and it's not about um it's not about game related issues but
it's not about game related issues but you know deeper or social issues like
you know deeper or social issues like this um
this um we have never talked to our lawyers
we have never talked to our lawyers about this. So, one of the first things
about this. So, one of the first things we started thinking about when we got
we started thinking about when we got this message and we thought about
this message and we thought about whether we should reply back or not,
whether we should reply back or not, someone in the studio actually brought
someone in the studio actually brought up, you know, legally, are we even
up, you know, legally, are we even allowed to talk to these people? And
allowed to talk to these people? And excuse me, we decided that
excuse me, we decided that even if we weren't sure if we were
even if we weren't sure if we were allowed to talk to them about this,
allowed to talk to them about this, especially if they may be underage, so
especially if they may be underage, so we made a point not to ask about her
we made a point not to ask about her age, you know, we wanted to engage with
age, you know, we wanted to engage with her. But after that point um when we
her. But after that point um when we knew she was getting help um you know we
knew she was getting help um you know we never wanted to be the one to initiate a
never wanted to be the one to initiate a conversation.
conversation. Yeah.
Yeah. Okay. Thank you.
Okay. Thank you. Welcome.
Welcome. Hello. Um I'm wondering what your
Hello. Um I'm wondering what your thoughts on the game being a value based
thoughts on the game being a value based game but also wanting the company
game but also wanting the company obviously to be profitable in the long
obviously to be profitable in the long run. Do you feel like you you have to
run. Do you feel like you you have to make sacrifices on either side and and
make sacrifices on either side and and how do you have that balance?
how do you have that balance? Yeah. So, I think that's a a really good
Yeah. So, I think that's a a really good question. He's asking about,
question. He's asking about, you know, because we're a value based
you know, because we're a value based company, but we're also trying to make
company, but we're also trying to make money. Um, you know, if if we've run
money. Um, you know, if if we've run into conflicts related to that and um we
into conflicts related to that and um we haven't. And the main reason is because
haven't. And the main reason is because we set as our guiding light, the first
we set as our guiding light, the first thing we want to try and do is have
thing we want to try and do is have commercial success. Um, and so, you
commercial success. Um, and so, you know, when we're designing our games,
know, when we're designing our games, right, um, we're always thinking about
right, um, we're always thinking about what type of features are really going
what type of features are really going to be fun and and entertaining for our
to be fun and and entertaining for our players first. Um, and then only after
players first. Um, and then only after that point do we start thinking about
that point do we start thinking about these other features. And as you can
these other features. And as you can tell, a lot of those features, like some
tell, a lot of those features, like some of them definitely tend more
of them definitely tend more educational, but what we've seen in most
educational, but what we've seen in most cases is that it's actually improved our
cases is that it's actually improved our game and helped with retention or with
game and helped with retention or with engagement from our players. Um, but you
engagement from our players. Um, but you know, I'm sure at some point that may
know, I'm sure at some point that may come up. And I guess as I think about
come up. And I guess as I think about it, um, you know, even when we decide
it, um, you know, even when we decide whether we should answer back to that
whether we should answer back to that girl or not, you know,
girl or not, you know, one of the other questions we had was
one of the other questions we had was what happens if we engage with her and
what happens if we engage with her and we say the wrong thing and she does end
we say the wrong thing and she does end up killing herself and her parents find
up killing herself and her parents find out that we were talking to her during
out that we were talking to her during that process, right? And we get sued.
that process, right? And we get sued. And so from that perspective and that's
And so from that perspective and that's why I think a lot of big companies would
why I think a lot of big companies would not be engaged in those type of
not be engaged in those type of conversations and they would tell you
conversations and they would tell you just to stop communicating. Um, so in
just to stop communicating. Um, so in that case, I guess, you know, we do put
that case, I guess, you know, we do put our company at the risk sometimes when
our company at the risk sometimes when we do this. But for us, it's worth it.
we do this. But for us, it's worth it. And, you know, it really makes a
And, you know, it really makes a difference in your studio when you're
difference in your studio when you're starting to to do things like this
starting to to do things like this because everyone on our team, you know,
because everyone on our team, you know, we love we all love making games, but
we love we all love making games, but now we actually feel like what we're
now we actually feel like what we're doing has more of an impact. So, even
doing has more of an impact. So, even when we talk to our parents and our
when we talk to our parents and our friends about it, it's something that
friends about it, it's something that they all really get. And um I think it
they all really get. And um I think it gives us kind of extra push in what we
gives us kind of extra push in what we do.
Uh yeah, I also agree this is a great talk. Um do you have any counselors on
talk. Um do you have any counselors on staff?
staff? No, we we don't have counselors
No, we we don't have counselors ourselves. Um that's one of the reasons
ourselves. Um that's one of the reasons we partnered with the nonprofits so that
we partnered with the nonprofits so that you know when we get those questions um
you know when we get those questions um we we redirect them to Cyber Smile. So
we we redirect them to Cyber Smile. So they do have counselors there. Um, we we
they do have counselors there. Um, we we have had people on our staff get more
have had people on our staff get more educated about this and we've actually
educated about this and we've actually thought about in the past uh putting
thought about in the past uh putting some of our support staff through
some of our support staff through training so that they'd be able to help
training so that they'd be able to help more. But it it's a lot easier and makes
more. But it it's a lot easier and makes a lot more sense for us to just have,
a lot more sense for us to just have, you know, them talk to someone who's at
you know, them talk to someone who's at a trained nonprofit.
Hi, sorry, quick question. Um, just because you've seen uh a good amount of
because you've seen uh a good amount of success from implementing these features
success from implementing these features into High School Story, um, do you guys
into High School Story, um, do you guys feel inspired to just create new games
feel inspired to just create new games that are really geared towards um,
that are really geared towards um, social good as the main feature,
social good as the main feature, right? So the question was, you know,
right? So the question was, you know, because of High School Story and the
because of High School Story and the success we've seen for our next games,
success we've seen for our next games, do we think a lot about creating games
do we think a lot about creating games that focus on social good? And
that focus on social good? And um the direct answer I'd say to that is
um the direct answer I'd say to that is is no. Um you know, because we still
is no. Um you know, because we still think about what's going to be most
think about what's going to be most successful in the marketplace because if
successful in the marketplace because if you're trying to create a game for just
you're trying to create a game for just social good, um you may not reach as
social good, um you may not reach as many people because not as many people
many people because not as many people are going to play that game, right? So,
are going to play that game, right? So, we're always thinking about how we can
we're always thinking about how we can create a game where we can make enough
create a game where we can make enough money to support our studio, hopefully
money to support our studio, hopefully more so we can keep growing the studio,
more so we can keep growing the studio, um, but at the same time reach more and
um, but at the same time reach more and more people. So, when we spend money on
more people. So, when we spend money on advertising, you know, where's a lot of
advertising, you know, where's a lot of companies will spend money to make sure
companies will spend money to make sure that they're always making a profit off
that they're always making a profit off that those ads, sometimes we push the
that those ads, sometimes we push the limit and we spend as much money as we
limit and we spend as much money as we think we're going to make um, from
think we're going to make um, from players who come in through those ads.
players who come in through those ads. And it's because of that kind of social
And it's because of that kind of social message, too. Um, but as an example for
message, too. Um, but as an example for our second game we released, it's called
our second game we released, it's called Hollywood U. Uh, which on its surface,
Hollywood U. Uh, which on its surface, you know, doesn't feel like it has much
you know, doesn't feel like it has much to do with social good at all. And right
to do with social good at all. And right now, you know, our storyline, we still
now, you know, our storyline, we still try and, um, keep it to the values that
try and, um, keep it to the values that that we believe in and we try and
that we believe in and we try and promote, you know, inclusion and people
promote, you know, inclusion and people being themselves in our story. Um, but
being themselves in our story. Um, but we don't have these elements of of
we don't have these elements of of working with nonprofits or doing things.
working with nonprofits or doing things. But we definitely have thought about
But we definitely have thought about those features and over the next few
those features and over the next few months we'll start rolling in those type
months we'll start rolling in those type of storylines. Um, one of the great
of storylines. Um, one of the great things about Hollywood is, you know,
things about Hollywood is, you know, celebrities actually a lot of them work
celebrities actually a lot of them work with different nonprofits. So, as part
with different nonprofits. So, as part of the game, you know, after you start
of the game, you know, after you start becoming a little more famous and
becoming a little more famous and connected within the game, you'll have
connected within the game, you'll have the opportunity to choose among
the opportunity to choose among different nonprofits to work with and to
different nonprofits to work with and to see which one you want to support. And
see which one you want to support. And in doing so, we're hoping we can educate
in doing so, we're hoping we can educate players about those particular causes.
Any other questions? Great. Thank you. And I hope some of you
Great. Thank you. And I hope some of you leave inspired and are able to make a
leave inspired and are able to make a difference with your games as well.
difference with your games as well. Thank you.