Good afternoon, everyone.
Thank you for tipping the waiter before
the meal. Uh Good afternoon, everyone. My name is Mi
Svenson.
About one console generation ago I worked on
lighting water effects and uh the spoiler on
play that's inside and even had the honor of doing a couple of talks about it.
Uh Today I get to represent
Geometric interactive and talk about our game Cocoon and show you some
lighting water fog effects and even the warp into some orbs.
Please silence your phones during the big sell of breath of the wild talk in 2017,
someone in the front center row had their phone blast off at full
volume in the middle of the talk and that someone was me.
All right.
Cocoon's development began with Jars
in 2017 and together with fellow
played alumni, Jacob Schmidt,
they formed geometric interactive early on,
they met our talented art director Irwin to
who, who
was brought on to solve some of the visual mysteries of the game's Cosic journey.
Then in late 2018,
I joined my nerd graphics to find solutions
to the technical puzzles of the production.
After years of hard work with a talented team of artists, designers and engineers.
The game was Ford and it looks a little something like this.
Normally, this is where I would switch from the opening shall of
our trailer to my
presentation slides
today. I'm going to do something a little different.
Still gonna talk about graphics and stuff. But instead of advancing slides,
we'll zoom out.
So
here in this canyon where the game begins is
the perfect place to show you the lighting.
The indirect lighting is a big light probes or
volumetric light maps or whatever you want to call sphere
harmonics ira and
stored in boxes by themselves, they look like this.
The game was shipped on Unity 2020 LTs using Euro P 10.
And our indirect lighting replaces the various
global illumination techniques found within the engine.
Before implementing our custom light baker, the game looked like this.
The indirect was just two directional lights
stored in a uniform uh spherical harmonic.
But we didn't want to use light maps because of the lack of support
for things for like transparent particles or fog or animated or skin meshes.
Uh We still wanted higher fidelity than just a spa
uniform directional ambient, you know lighting thing.
So
in ours,
we have I radiance,
which is a fancy term for incoming light or light that can be seen from a given point.
This is then turned into radiance by materials,
which is another fancy term for materials show
the lighting they saw bounds into your eyes.
Our ***
are first order, meaning that they have two bands,
one of an ambient component and another band of three directional components.
We tried second order,
but it showed diminishing returns on our mostly diffused surfaces.
Uh Each of these four components is full sign HTR color which is a lot
uh during baking,
it's stored as half precision floating point which adds up to 192 bits per
vel. That's a bit.
Luckily, lighting is always positive, which means that uh well,
the ambient part at least can be stored as BC six H
which is a hardware texture compression for unsigned HDR color textures.
This saves about 40 bits
but uh that brings us down to 152 bits per axel,
still quite a bit
uh directions however, are signed.
And while BC six H supports it,
we can remove that sign by adding the ambient part to the directional part and
use BC six H on the rest of them to get down to 32 bits per
axel.
Uh This is what that looks like. It's quite noisy and still quite J Pecky
BC.
One which is another hardware texture
compression technique used for normalized ranges would
help if the directional component was fixed range instead of floating range,
you can do that just by dividing the directional part by the ambient part,
making it normalized as we stored and
then multiplying again while we're reading it.
And that looks like this. It gets rid of most of the noise.
It's quite tolerable at this point and we're all the way down to 24 bits per
vel quite good.
So another reason that we use Voxels is because it
lets us avoid parameterizing our measures.
We don't have to do light map UV or anything like that.
Uh But light maps, uh we like light maps, we also use charts and
atlases. So
this is what one chart looks like.
It's just a bounding box around a particular sub scene.
And in the top right corner, you see what the data of that looks like.
And as we zoom out, you can see that the charts are then
you know,
multiple charts are in each scene and they together make up a Atlas
and you see what one ATLAS looks like on the right there.
Now to make one of these charts, we need ray tracing,
but I didn't want to implement and maintain an
API like optics or DXR or something like that.
Luckily, we already kind of have a ray tracer in the form of the
restorer because restoration if you think about it is
really just a ray tracer that traces a grid
of rays uh that uh share an origin point
in the prospective camera case or they share a direction
in the orthographic camera case.
So
in order to do this ray tracing, we simply render a camera
uh from an isometric
point of view uh with a texture to the
array.
And then our view and projection matrices are simply
defined by our charts transform and bounding volume.
Uh And then we just have it rendered out with as many instances as we have slices in our
Voxel texture.
Then in the vertex
shader, we simply just set the slice id to be the instance id
and add the position uh sorry, offset the position by the slice id.
So that each slice starts at that particular point.
Now this generates a ray trace that they can just look forward.
So we need to be able to, you know, store a direction and stuff like that,
which is where our ray matrix comes in.
This lets us uh control the ray direction
as well as an offset. And ATM T max which are basically just edits to the
near plane and far plane of this uh particular projection matrix.
And yeah, then we just uh set one of these ray matrices with a random direction,
a random jitter of about one Voxel
and also use a
near
plane offset of about one voxel size to avoid any
self shadowing. And that kind of problem that we don't really want to see.
And yeah, we just multiply this matrix. That's the last thing in our vertex shader.
So instead of maintaining DXR or Metta
passes, we just have to include this one macro in the vertex program
uh to make it compatible with the baker.
Uh All this is just, you know, so that we get things to be out of the box.
We don't need to have super complete
chairs. We can just use one shader for
everything,
avoids copy paste errors.
Anyway, finally, we have a little extra detail. You'll see,
maybe now
it looks good on the projector.
I've removed our vertex exclusion. So if you look at sort of like the strip of uh
what's it called rock down just below the surface, I'm gonna add it back now.
So that's what that looks like.
This is just um made using regular physics ray
rays that are just distributed randomly across
the triangle with some random directions.
But in the way that they're added is of course, this little trick.
So this is uh using a sper
harmonic triple product which is just a multiplication
product and a dot product that come together.
I think it's a neat way to like compose multiple
feral
data together.
Now,
these little details about the vertex cu
just means that we can like heavily reduce the resolution
of our voxels and get away with a lot less.
And we also allow them to be painted manually,
which just gives a nice way to like darken the ambient if need be.
Anyway, let's shift gears
right then.
So
we now just jumped out of the world contained within this world.
And we've been given this very bright and ponder
orb,
it's a bit of a church to light the way in our adventure.
And naturally it has a point light in it,
let me remove it and uh build that effect up again.
So
just turned off the point light and let's build up everything that makes the orb. Uh
we're gonna start with the sun directional light and I think we're gonna have
to zoom in a little bit just to see the details much better.
So first of course, the
just has to cast shadows and
that sounds trivial. But yeah, that looks like this. Now, it can cast shadows.
Uh The only trick that's applied here is that we make sure that
we only cast with the back face of the glass so that it
doesn't self shadow the interior and we get the interior next to the
then of course, the dynamic can cast shadows.
So there's no tricks there and then comes the point light.
So the point light also has some shadows from the diorama in it.
They're just made using a
baked shadow texture that's just particularly used for this fog effect.
Uh We don't want it to be casting on the environment around it that would be too noisy.
Anyway, then let's turn around because we're going to look at some uh some feet.
All right. So, uh
we still want the character that cast shadows on the
ground even though we don't have point light shadows.
And that looks like this. That's a little too subtle.
So let me just uh turn off the sunlight and try one more time.
Pay attention to the, to the, to the feet.
There you go.
So now that's clear. So this is just our take on capsule shadows.
Uh It's just two lines,
one line going from one toe to the head and the
other line going from the head from the other toe.
Uh And then it's got some thickness to it and a little bit of feathering to it.
So the way that this is done is we just project
these lines from the light source down to the Gramling,
get the distance to these lines and then add this feather blur.
Uh This looks much better than what shadow maps could otherwise provide for us.
And uh since they weren't supported in this particular version of the engine,
that's nice.
I don't think you have to sell anyone on the joy of a good capsule shadow
anyway.
So the mist that you find within the fog is uh this
noisy height and depth fog that just gives the interior of that
or some volume to it.
So let's just try to like peel back those layers one
more time and zoom in and now there's no fog.
All right. So the height fog itself is just to like sync the diorama into it so that
you know, hide where it stops.
And then the depth fog is to make it totally opaque which looks like this.
This is just because we don't want our orb
to be actually transparent for performance reasons also.
Uh So like that's just like,
yeah, making sure that it's opaque at the way back
and then we add some noise texture to that. And that's really it.
This is the ray marched effect.
The ray marching is simply done in, you know,
a fixed number of steps and to account for the step length.
When you're integrating this,
you just need to take the alpha to the power of the step length
in order to make sure that each step contributes a correct linear amount.
Finally, let's talk about the reflective glass.
So you know the drill by now,
I'm just gonna peel away these effects and just
build it up recipe step by recipe step.
That's, that's my favorite way to go about it.
All right.
Zoom in and no glass.
All right. So the first bit of it is just a specular highlight.
It's the same specular high that you would
expect on any other shader throughout the game.
Just uh works with any sort of light type, nothing fancy.
Then on the bottom, if you notice
there's a tiny, little bit of a little, little
fella going on there,
uh these things just add to this contribution so far, it kind of just milkies
a little bit reduces the contrast, makes it a bit less harsh.
Uh And then we have one final component which is this uh
fake screen space reflection.
So it's basically just wrapping the environment texture in over the orb.
We had real,
you know, screen space reflections at some point.
But this just uh look, the fake stuff looked a lot better than the real stuff.
Anyway, this is then the total contribution of that class.
And uh that's how it looks on the orb. Again. Now
all these bits are just so that the orb fits into,
you know, any environment, despite it being a very glo glowing emit
based orb,
I think it's nice that it just fits
into any environment regardless of lighting situation.
Now,
uh about that world within that world as we charge it up, it milks up opens up,
we jump through
and we're back,
right?
And
I was,
and there's the orb.
So
uh
that effect has a few steps. Let's break that down,
stop.
All right. So
uh rendering a world within the world is you
probably guessed it by now and in the camera
and you probably also guessed this one and
another camera and they're just composed with your,
that's it. Nothing.
Uh
There is a few performance considerations to just rendering two cameras.
So let's go about checking out the ways to optimize this one.
All right.
So for the in the camera, there's quite a lot going on.
Uh as we zoom out,
there's quite a lot of draw calls and quite a lot
of small geometry that we really want to be hygienic about.
So
uh when we are just wandering around the world at normal zoom levels,
the density of the world is perfectly fine.
But out here, this is a lot of geometry. So um
since we can't see behind the orbs edges,
it's very simple to just take the color matrix of the orb
and or sorry of the camera and
crop them down to the orb. So we don't run anything outside.
So now we don't have any draw calls that we can't see.
Now, obviously, you can't see those pixels either.
So you can just like um use a scissor rectangle
to get rid of those as well. Now, we don't have any fragments out there,
but you still see these little spiky sides there. Well, if we just take the
orb and use that to render
anything that's outside the orbs view
to the near plane depth boom, then we get a crop
tight crop and we don't render any fragments that we don't need.
The same thing goes for the other camera.
We just render the orb early in our depth prepa
so that there aren't any fragments that are shaded,
that don't need to be there and that looks like this.
And then of course, uh these are just uh composed using,
you know,
when you render two cameras and you just don't clear between the two of them,
that's what's going on.
So that just gets rendered behind it,
we rented the sub camera first and the other camera
and they kind of come together with a single resolve or single post effect
that
saves post effects. We like not doing post effects twice.
All right.
That is sort of the,
you know, essential performance hygiene, but there's just a couple more things.
Also I need to get back.
All right.
So to get the player to render in both sides,
we used to have a third camera but the third camera is bad.
So what we did was simply have the player rendered in the main camera.
And then we take the transform that's relative between the
two cameras to teleport it over to the other camera.
When we need it to be there,
then there is uh the couple of shadows
at this distance. That's an awful lot of shadow draw calls and shadow textiles. So
specifically for this, in any foreign environment,
we have this thing called the static shadow map, which is just um a very low
shadow map for the entire world that stored as BC six PC four.
And uh yeah, we, that doesn't change over the course of the whole game.
It's just a regular serialized acid and we get to use that for, for example,
in the uh in these orbs here.
Uh And then we have this fish eye effect. What do you mean by that?
Well, now it's off, let me turn it on again.
So
it's not just for looks, it's not just for the
effect. It's also because it helps us get rid of some more fragments.
So if I remove it again,
you can see that this is all the fragments we could actually get rid of since they get,
you know, outside the fish eye effect.
So what we do is you guessed it,
it's ac a rectangle.
So now we don't need like half the fragments of any of it frankly at this point.
And we can just get away with rendering just this part and then stretching that
out to fill the rest of the screen.
So that's another way we just like, I don't know, reduce the
load on the GP U doing a good warp. Finally, we use 16 bit depth during our depth pre
pass because some platforms that ran a lot faster.
Uh This does mean that you would get a lot of artifacts with 16 bit depth.
So we just move out the near plane
quite far when we're warping.
And the same thing goes for the fog. The fog is segway
fruct solution.
So we need lots of set depth in the fog and that's also
why we move out the near plane when we're rendering this bit here.
Um Yeah,
I I
there
anyway, so
about that fog.
Uh Like I said,
the fog is a foal
solution. It's about uh 128 by 64 by 256.
Uh It is doing single scattering in its shading.
So that means that at each voxel,
it is holding the color of the light and
the material and the alpha of that given point.
And that's just a regular shading function that you will find in any.
So the transparent shader throughout the game,
there's nothing fancy going on there.
The sort of gacha about this fog is that it is pre integrated,
meaning that we run a compute shader before we actually use anything. So that at any
given point in this Vauxhall volume, you not only you don't have like what
fog is at that point, you have all fog between that point and the eye.
This then means that when you're rendering some geometry,
either transparent or opaque,
you just sample the fog once and you get the
entire fog contribution between the eye and that point.
This then means that it's compatible with say MS A a and
all those types of things in sort of a naive implemented way,
which is kind of neat.
Anyway,
it also receives Vauxhall
lighting. This is a, this is another one of the motivations behind using Vauxhall
based lighting is that it can be received by the fog.
So it really helps to like grind it to the environment and stuff.
Let me just like turn it off to the wrong lighting. That's what that looks like.
It's subtle. But trust me, it really matters.
Anyway, let's open this door real quick and uh look at some shadows.
There are built in water bricks for me in this talk.
All right.
So sampling the shadows without in
o or spatial filtering yields this sort of like shimmery
box
stuff that I don't really like looking at.
So the way that we filter our fog is not temporarily,
there's no feedback effect going on whatsoever.
It's just pure spatial filtering which lets us do really like
quick effects on the fog for gameplay reasons when we want to
uh the spatial filtering is
mid maps. So
it's mid maps on shadows, which means you probably guess this,
it's the nearest filtering because it's not moment shadows or anything like that.
Um
And these uh M maps are simply generated the same way that
the classic or the kill zone two style stable cascades is done.
But at each resolution is also stable across the board
and they're sampled with ddxddy and DD set. The DD set isn't a hardware thing.
You just gotta find that analytically
anyway.
Um across the bridge, you find these uh some crystals here.
Let's not worry about those yet.
Uh But as I'm a big fan of this Vauxhall, you know, light on Vauxhall
fog. Let me just one more time like
turn the, turn the wrong lighting on to that one for a hot second.
If my,
there we go.
All right.
Uh So now it's got some random ambient color on it.
I don't like it here, this, with the right one. Anyway,
flying into the clouds up here with this cool crane, we'll see the fog
and for
all right,
so one more time, I'm gonna reiterate that. Uh, if you look at the,
uh, part of the fog that's sort of under the cliff over there,
it's currently like shadowed correctly by the voxel uh, lighting.
And if I return to just a uniform lighting situation,
you get this sort of like bright,
you know, typical distance fog effect. I'm not too fond of. So I'm just really
big old advocate of uh getting, you know, 3d spatial lighting on your fog.
I think it's pretty good predictable lighting, especially in
this world where fog makes up such a big part of the
the photons hitting your eyes.
Anyway,
volumes are defined by a regular box transform.
Let me zoom out and take a look at what I mean.
So this is this particular boxful fog volume here,
just a bounding box that you set up.
And of course, as we sort of zoomed up into it, the uh
the density increased,
but you can also do other things.
You can admit the color and you can add this like more turbulent noise to it,
make it all
crime
and stuff and like the shadows.
This is sampled with dvxddydd set for manual MP selection.
This just means that there is no texture
aliasing being produced by this particular effect,
which is good
now,
like I said, it's a localized fog solution.
So we have to vocalize these fog bounding volumes somehow.
And as you know, by now, I'm a big fan of abusing the raster ir for naughty things.
Uh Did you know that on top of being a great rate trace of the raster
is also a really good box
vizer?
So
when we are drawing the fog, what we do is um we render to a layer of buffer
and uh
we render out the boxes as quads instead.
And we want to do them as sort of
cross sections of a box essentially using these quads.
So
uh like our lighting
rear, so we assign the slice id to be the instance ID, the ver here that makes sense.
But now they sort of just draw us like full screen quads, which is not what we want,
we want them to draw within
the bounds of the box, of course.
So to only draw within the lines, so to speak, what we do is we trace a line,
we do a line trace from the back of the box to the front of the box.
And we find where that particular line intersects the slice plane.
And then we set our position to that and that then
yields being able to draw on the inside the left,
right top bottom side of the box.
And uh now that still leaves the back and front of box uh to be spilled out of.
So the way that we handle that is just to set the
fragment, set position to be the uh T value of that line trace.
And that then abuses the fact that the raster
has built in plane clipping for well, the new plane and the
plane of a camera
and that's what we're using to make sure that we only color in
the four sides of the box.
This is a pretty neat method of only generating fragment threads where we need them.
I think it's that the GP U is capable of just generating
threads where we need them.
It also lets us use the built in hardware blending, which I think is quite neat
and yeah, that's how we've been multiple fog volumes together.
Uh
And
this sort of concludes the base of our rendering
so much
more visual effects type stuff.
After each world orb you gain a new ability and the orb takes on a second role.
Well, at least if we had beaten the boss, I'm skipping all gameplay model
for,
you know, reasons
anyway,
from the orb, an asteroid belt appears and within it, you see within its orbit,
this crystalline bridge is revealed and this
isn't the first time we've seen this bridge
through the gate and over the bridge,
we saw these large deposits of crystals that I told you not to worry about.
Anyway, out here, the orb reveals it and within it,
you see these structures made up of cellular crystals.
It's a volumetric von
diagram which is made with a regular point grid. That regular point grid is then
just orbited around with a pseudorandom value.
What we can do is of course, we can find our nearest uh
cell that we're inside and we can intersect the next
cell that we would see along our view ray.
And then the interior position is just shaded using our regular lighting function.
And so is the exterior
and then there's just a refraction and some blending
going on between them to get this interior look.
And finally, this is sort of like monotonous looking in terms of color.
So to add a little bit of a splash,
we use some I radiance that's just a
scrolling texture along the Lambert and
um F
forel products of the uh of the um
of the top products. Anyway,
that's just multiply on top of the speculator and the diffuse color.
Uh since we use the regular lighting function,
it fits nicely nicely into the various worlds.
And even even there a little bit of a cute reflection there and some cute
a shadow drawing on the ground there could use of uh transparent cutouts.
Now,
the actual ability to reveal these bridges is an
alpha dissolved circle that's driven by the asteroid built
and it's quantized to just be per crystal.
So the way that this is handled is it just you
uh sample the alpha value just by intersecting the orbital plane
and then you get the orbital distance to this orbital plane
and then you move step at, at the range.
But of course, you make sure to sample this value with the center of a cell.
And that's really how that's done.
So that's our first orb.
And I think this trick of having interior rendering as an effect
on geometry is something that we enjoy using quite a bit.
Uh It's liberate
used on various I missive effects such as like just throughout the game.
But this is a particular like procedural example of it.
Anyway, here's a second. No.
All right now we splashed in here.
So in
this world is this baggish water that I just turned off and now it's back,
it adds this refraction and this reflection effect on
just the whole world.
And also within this uh water, you find this fog which I've just removed,
it's this mer that you see below and above.
And the way it's made,
it's just like with a regular fog volume that like the regular fog effect.
There's a bright one on top of the water and a dark one below.
And of course, the water surface itself starts with blurry refraction,
which um is just using a standard like grab or opaque pass texture thing
uh which works naively with the fog because the fog
is applied during like regular opaque or transparent passes.
So when that's when you grab a snapshot of that, that has the fog built into it.
Uh So
this is the pure perfection without any fog on it. And here it is with, I
think it's just neat that the water doesn't have its own
like bespoke fog system because it means that we get like
the nice shadows and the nice indirect shadows of the,
you know, built in fog system anyway.
So the actual normals of that refraction are using a little bit of a cute trick.
I wanted to do something to indicate the shore
and help ground the water to the environment.
But I didn't want to use like edge foam or something.
So
it's got these edge ripples which are made with something called a shore map,
which is basically like an SDF to the nearest shore as a as a vector.
Anyway, uh So you take the distance of that, you can animate the distance with a sign
and fade it with the distance of that,
that same SDF and then multiply the nearest direction onto it.
And uh yeah,
the texture is just an R GB texture with um
red and green for direction.
And in the blue channel, you find the fall off or distance.
It looks like this.
It's made with a offline tool that just generates it and compresses it.
It's rendered with just a giant camera above the entire world uh which then
uses a replacement shader uh geometry shader
that at each intersection of a triangle,
it generates a line that intersects and,
you know, expands the quad and
renders out the distance and direction of that particular point.
Now,
the actual like just wobbling normals on top of all,
this is just too scrolling normal.
It's kind of boring.
Uh But with one little little trick, what it does is it
stretches out the normals using the shore vector
uh to create this like sort of an isotropic stretching effect along the
shoreline which just slows down the scrolling along the beach line of it
and sort of helps it integrate into the actual ripples that then get layered on top.
So it doesn't just look like a linear blend between the two effects.
Anyway,
uh I think this contribution of like procedural ripples on top of like textured
uh normals makes for a nice mix,
especially with the an isotropic stretching along the side there.
Anyway. Uh Now,
naturally we have planar reflections and they're pretty normal, just a low res
planar reflection thing
with another camera. Uh And
it's using a lot of MS A to hide the coarseness of this uh planar reflection
and uh like the warps,
it's also using static shadows to make sure that
we don't do any shadow rendering in the reflections.
Speaking of warps,
I'm gonna avoid this guy
I can see.
So this diorama out here is also a plane of reflection.
It's handmade for each war point with a little bit of
diorama geometry that is made bespoke for this particular war point.
And this is what that looks like.
Um
to flatten the look, it's rendered with a green skybox behind it,
a green light and some fog.
Here they are without
the light in the fog just adds a bit of milkiness. So you can see the light.
There we go.
Add some colored milkiness and then the fog just sort of flattens
it all out to like sort of not distract the image too much
much like the warps. The reflections use the same sort of tricks like
pruning in the color matrix a little bit.
So we don't draw anything that's outside that boundary as well as ac a
rectangle kind of makes sense and of course,
a depth mask just to avoid any unnecessary graphics work.
And, and yeah, this effect idea
practically
for this particular puzzle.
So
that was a good, that was a good use.
Anyway, uh Let's see.
I think that was the only puzzle spoiler during this whole talk. Uh
Sorry about that.
Let's walk through the door
and it's
just so worry about that later.
All right, I'm gonna quickly touch on just like the specular light because um
we don't use a skybox sun.
Uh Instead we use an analytic specular light which I just removed.
If you look in the lower left corner,
you see a little bit of a shimmery shiny stuff that's now coming back there.
It is.
So
the only kind of funny trick with this is that uh I didn't really want to
sample the shadow texture.
Uh I just wanted to sample something else uh for gypsies.
And the trick here was just to
sample the depth buffer of the reflection and use
the sample comparison state on the far plane.
And uh yeah, that gets you frankly correct shadows in that
now ominously out here,
it's a kind of started to rain,
which is uh rippling out on the surface.
And I think it is so subtle that a mix of projector and
you know, impact compression has probably killed off no biggie
that's isolated.
So very similarly to the shore ripples, it's
like
this Verona
diagram texture that ID the rain map
uh where you can,
you know, animate a distance with sign
and then multiply direction on top of it.
And then we've got just to randomize it all. We've got an index that we can just,
you know, scatter around that animation a bunch
much like the short. It's also just got like red and green for direction
in the blue channel,
you have the distance that the sign is animating using
and that randomization index is in the alpha channel.
Luckily, we have four of those channels
anyway,
so
I kind of just thought it was fun that the crystalline bridges for Roni
diagram and the SDF of the shore
kind of come together for this one effect. Now, that box
are there.
It was really interesting.
But uh you have notice we were kind of skipping all of that.
All right.
So we now have a second orb ability and this one is kind of a,
a reversal of the last because instead of revealing crystalline bridges,
this one is a vanishing trick on these columns which we can now use to ascend.
So
when cloaked as it's called
the solid volumes,
turn into this transparent fog effect that you can just go in and out of it will.
And like the crystalline bridges, we've seen these things before, we saw them just
uh just past the door in the wet world
and out here uh they uh
sorry,
the shading is done in a similar way to the orbs
uh like them, it's a ray
March defect.
But instead of ray marching inside of the sphere,
this is ray marching inside of the bounding box,
but with some little bit of distortion on it,
which then also uh needs to have the bounding box, you know,
expanded a little bit to fit that distortion.
The shading is sporting much like the fog, a very simplified uh shading model
with the non directional indirect lighting.
So we don't have to sample the directional stuff
uh as well as just sunlight.
And of course, the orb light that's the most important, arguably speaking.
as usual,
I'm a big fan of visual effects that use the proper
lighting model because it helps things fit into the environment.
Uh Here you see that the indirect lighting being sampled
correctly kind of like lets it fit into this,
you know, sort of socket there.
And out here the sunlight helps it really, you know,
ground into this cliff face here.
Anyway, back on track. So one final point about the transition between these things
uh give it going from opa
transparent comes in a few layers. So I'm just gonna peel back one by one.
So let's go down again.
All right.
So
now there's none of it. And then we of course, fade in that uh foggy column.
There we go,
the fading is simply just you have the height of
this effect and do a smooth step kind of expected.
Uh And then the column itself
is uh comes in with a clipping plane. So this is uh
SV clip distance. It's a pretty good way to do that,
but then to hide that seam that weird cut there,
uh We then fade in on top of that sort of like a glow that's using the same clip plane.
It's just rendering the same mesh again. But now with a very simplified glowy shader
and then to get the other side of that thing, we then render that again.
But with the opposite clip plane and fade that on top of it,
now we have sort of like this transitional stick that
we can use to go between the solid and the
uh transparent versions.
And yeah,
that's another orb I think this idea of using like the clip plane
is a nice way to like do transitions between transparent and pick things.
I haven't really found any hardware that like cares
that you put a clip plane in there.
Uh
As long as you're not using it, you know, unlike something like
SV coverage or
discard or whatever, which the hardware does care if you use those things.
Anyway,
that is
now time for a third or I wonder what's in there.
So in
this alien world covered in translucent skin membranes, it's all about refraction
beneath its fleshy surface. You see this organic interior
and the exterior is quite simple, supporting a normal map and some
oscillating em missive textures for bioluminescence.
Uh But the important part really is the interior.
Uh it's partially using the same opaque grab pass as the
water when we need to see the player inside of it.
But when we want to see the player on top of it and avoid occlusion and dis
Olu are the facts.
It's using an offscreen texture
and that offscreen texture looks like this. It just has
like interior parts rendered into just this one part.
And then the actual refraction is kind of standard, you know, you sample the,
the offscreen texture
with some
uh refractive normals on top of it to sort of break it up a little bit
and some uh directional blur.
And this is to hide the fact that this is a heavily under or down sampled effect.
What I mean by that is that the offscreen
texture is rendered at a lower resolution because,
well, it's offscreen, we don't really want to spend too many resources on that.
And the
graph pass is then of course, uh down sample just to give it like some initial blur.
But this will create some inimitable uh bilinear artifacts if you don't
like, try to like just hide that with a little bit of a directional blur. Anyway,
um
I quite like this trip downtown
down here is one of the few places where there's no sunlight in the game.
It's just this big glow at the center where we find the transporter
and you see these organic interior membranes down
below and the interiors are even lit up.
I'm gonna make them dark.
So to do this, the membranes on the exterior,
just cast shadows with their back faces is nothing fancy.
It's just important that the interior is not shadowed by the exterior.
And of course, like above these things are things that the player can walk on top of.
So it's important that they use the
offscreen texture to avoid any occlusion artifacts.
Anyway, I know we've just taken a lift but uh this one's real cool.
So we're gonna take this one too.
So we're out of the cave and back on the surface and oh, what's this?
So foreshadowing the orb's ability
uh just beyond the gate, we have a bunch of well orbs.
Uh I'm, I'm gonna show you one more refraction thing just to knock the point home. So
inside this refraction,
the fact you also have this sort of like fog that's filling out this effect.
You probably guess that this is, you know, a depth range with some color on top.
And
when you're sampling a depth range,
especially an under or down sample depth range
down sampled with like the Memex filter uh
to get the depth range, you know, you'll normally do something with
bilinear filtering here.
If you just want something like a depth mask, you know,
obviously you use something like sample comparison state to like get a nicely anti
and filtered
mask
for shadows and stuff. But if you're doing something with a range, you know,
typically you'll, you know, do like
a linear sample of it and then do your smooth
step or inverse step or whatever you want to do.
But this creates this edge artifact around discontinuance of objects which
I'm not a fan of. So
uh the trick is instead to use gather red for those of you who are into that,
you probably guessed it already and then do your uh range
or smooth step or whatever operation and then interpolate it.
This is sort of like, I guess you could call smooth PC F or something.
Um And it's a tool that's come in hand in numerous times. Now, uh
we use these depth masks quite a lot throughout the game.
In this case, we're using it to ground reflections.
And here you see an example where we're doing the naive implementation and you'll
see some sort of stair steping artifacts around various places and I'm gonna do
that
to fix it.
So
uh here we just do the smooth step before we do any interpolation.
The same thing counts for refraction. You might see sort of
uh
some like fringes around objects that you know, have a few pixel shimmers in them.
And by doing the operation before we interpolate,
they go away, I
think in a game where MS A A is our only anti leasing.
It's important not to introduce any a
sampling effects.
So for this orbs
ability now the world is full of eggs
uh which um contain our orb,
all of them do. So this was what the foreshadowing from before was
uh back outside. You see around here are these weird stacks of creatures
and uh affectionately our speed runners call these guys bor
bo. But um
the canonical name,
his work drivers,
that's not a problem, but there's lots of X around so we can get it back.
Um
So if I hadn't skipped this bit,
this is where you would see these guys foreshadowed from just beyond the,
just before the door.
Um This organic thief like its mechanical cousin are members of this funny klepto
family
uh who just really love our property. So
before I hadn't really shown them how they steal our or
there we go.
It is now encased our key in amber. Uh But we can still see inside of it.
It's using the same offscreen texture as
the other refraction effects I showed earlier.
Um But instead of a fog inside what you see is inside this,
this volume light that's filling out the interior and you can
see it sort of spilling into the surroundings a little bit.
Uh This effect is ray marched inside a sphere and has two parts to it.
One of course,
the cookie texture naturally and the other part is the inverse square fall off
and marching is done. And you probably guess this
a angular fashion invented by Simon Brown,
meaning that rather than stepping linearly,
what we do is uh which would look like this is pretty noisy, pretty terrible.
Uh What we do is step in
angles along the line, of course
doing so steps linearly
uh in the cookies angular domain and important samples,
the inverse squared fall off.
Uh But I had a couple of texture and arithmetic optimizations to add to this.
So firstly, the heterogeneous part is affected by which is affected by fall off,
uh remains constant throughout the March.
So we can just move that out of the,
you know loop and just uh integrate the cookie alone in the loop which is kind of nice.
The second part is that we want to avoid cookie noise even with our low step count
uh by you know, tri
linear, we could use tri
linear but it's twice as expensive as bilinear.
So we just uh use bilinear with the worst case map.
And finally, uh since it's a linear rotation, we can actually avoid
having any trigonometry in our loop.
So we just, you know, move that out and do a linear rotation for each step,
which is kind of nice.
And yeah, we use volume lights for orbs or portals,
keys tons of other things where we want more like pixels,
sharp volume lighting than our
Foxal fog would otherwise give us
anyway.
Out here,
they've been fracking and processing this amber and storing it in these pools.
It's basically just water, but without planar reflections, just pure refraction.
But with a lot more fog and acting as an em missive during light B,
I might argue that light em missive has a lot to do with it.
So the this is not the first time we saw this either,
it's kind of endemic to this world.
And out here you see that they've, you know,
turned it into these amber pods out here which use the same uh shader as
our amber crystals that I just showed you with the volume light inside of them,
which we've also seen light the way across our adventure.
I'm especially fond of how it lights up the fog in
this particular shot here in this cauldron of fog here.
So far we've traveled to three
worlds in our other. What if
that wasn't
each world including the one we just came out of
take,
which just jumped into New York to, uh,
their rule.
And if I hadn't skipped them, this wouldn't be the first time ever seen these, these
during your adventure in Cantonese.
Yes.
And would any when you discover your world or and meet the?
Let me break that, let me break down the fact that that affect that one by bit bit
anyway. So back to neutral.
And before awakening, these ancestors get this uh statue appearance on them,
which is done with the same kind of shaded trick as the
uh what's it called? Yeah, cloak effect. But instead of a glowy green
Emis color, it's just using a dark blue lbi
do.
And as they prepare to jump in, uh
once they're frozen in this material, they dissolve into this cloud of particles.
Originally, this was done with two deadly shader s
uh
the turbulent dissolve was done using a geometry shader
and uh it was fed by a tesselation shader.
Uh The tessellation simply ensured equal particle size.
Uh I want to confess to this because it didn't, it didn't ship.
I wrote AC Pup processor that tessellates the mesh to avoid our Holland domain sins.
But what about the geometry?
Well, you can see that in the top of it, it's got this mid point
where it's like just averaging the three vertices of the primitive
and using that to drive the rest of the effect.
So
basically what, what I ended up doing was just in the preprocessor, I write this
um vector to the mid into the tangent of the mesh which then
even in the case of something like a skin
mesh will be transformed correctly into worlds space.
So whether we can just,
you know,
do this whole thing in the vertic shader without any geometry
shade that needs because really we just need the midpoint.
Uh anyway,
first,
this uh effect scales down each uh what's
it called triangle into a little smaller point,
then
gives them a little bit of a fuzzy random spin around
and then orbits them in some
like turbulent cloud kind of thing going on there
and then just translates them down to the point to like suck them into the orb there.
And
yeah, that's really how that works. So now where are we?
Well, we are out of the gray world and into the sun world which has this, you know,
faint warm glow in its the cold atmosphere.
Uh It's a world that plays heavily with light and fog in a bigger role.
It's kind of like we're floating somewhere
anyway, throughout the world,
you see these orbs that emanate this energy of like either light or in
this case, these ripples from them,
um
that we're not gonna look into a little bit and each of these
orbs also had a little bit of a secret inside of them.
The material uses the same shader as the amber we saw before with the
uh what's it called volume light.
But instead of it being the center,
the transform of that volume light is now an orb which I thought was a kind of a
neat recycling of an effect there. Anyway,
so the ripples on the ground here, uh They're done similarly to the water shore.
It's an SDF but uh to the spheres instead of to the shore.
So uh unlike the water surface,
this isn't a texture instead much like forward lights.
For example, this is done using a uniform array in the shader.
So this isn't the first time we've done it this way.
And it also won't be the last uh the waves emanating from the orb
on this portal here are also done such with such a uniform array.
And so the footsteps on the ground, in my opinion,
this is a neat or nice alternative to
something like an offscreen ripple or normal texture.
Anyway, back out here, the world is starting to heat up a little bit.
So let me just break down this lighting here that we got going on.
Uh Here it is without any fog or any bespoke lighting, it's very dark and barren.
You add the fog here is doing some of the heavy lifting,
separating the playground and the foreground quite a bit
and you add the lighting and
it, it's kind of doing the same task. It's
a big emits specifically for this world to get its hot under glow going
and without the fog, uh, it gets a little bit jarring.
So they definitely set up in tandem these two things.
But, uh, you see the cold from above and the hot from below,
that sort of helps separate playground and the
foreground a little bit better.
And we use this
baked Emmis quite a lot for lighting scenes in various places.
Uh In this case, we where we didn't have any sunlight,
uh It's used to light up this place quite a bit here. This without any of these baked
Emmis of things, it's quite jarring a little bit, uh a little bit dark.
And here this back again,
this is just two large soft boxes found on
either like extreme side of this big cave here.
Anyway, back out here again, once again, warmer, once again,
brighter temperatures increasing.
Now we're close to the end. So
deep breaths
for me.
Um
There's still one more big component of the worlds
within worlds puzzle and to show it to you,
we're gonna have to go on a small journey,
but it's my favorite part. So we're just gonna take this lift over there.
Things
get
here.
So
here is
a structure which our enemy called
yes,
-- much like Boris has -- made
cameras
being in the camera. It looks like this. You can see the duplicated environment.
On the other side, you have
a little
sand.
Of course, we've also
correctly
that we put a
rectangle
and also
mass
edge.
And the same thing on the other side, we make sure to do a nice depth
great pass out here
so that we don't
render any fragments, we don't want to render
this game did ship on the switch. So
anyway,
yeah,
uh before composing them together, just naively like the warms as well.
Anyway, bringing the worlds together,
we have this uh shadowed fog that's coming through, which is then, of course,
by this light that's also coming through the light.
Uh is because you see how now without the light,
the sun is uh being shadowed by the door and on the other side, it's also shadowed.
This is sort of the, the one spotlight is the only thing that's coming
in the sort of intersection to sort of hide the
seams of the sun or the seams of lighting, I guess you could say.
Anyway,
uh the light is simply duplicated on either side.
Uh
We also have the door shadowed here. I remove the door shadows,
the door shadows are simply done by having uh
there you go. There's two, these two planes that sort of like stick to the door frame
and yeah, just make sure that the duplicated light doesn't shadow around the sides.
Uh Anyway,
uh let's walk through naturally as we pass through the portal uh plane at some point,
we actually teleport but you can't see which frame
out here. Uh In the gray world is another bus that uh
I skipped up ahead. It's um it's a can of worms,
right?
So
let's uh let's get out of here. We have one more portal to look at,
sorry if this transition.
All right out here, once again,
lot brighter, a lot warmer.
None of our concern. We're just here on, let's stop to the other one
back in the purple world
and here's another door
and oh, there's water on the other side too. I hate this door anyway.
Um
On the other side, yeah, the other water introduces yet another recursive camera.
Luckily the coloring cropping all that masking really helps us a lot.
Uh On the outside here we see these um refractive
orbs and stuff just uh and ripples on the ground.
Oh, and yeah, we got a crystalline bridge that we're walking through across as well.
This, this scene was really the, the profiling benchmark of this game.
Uh And
Oh, sure, why not? I mean, we got the
Misty Columns there as well. Just everything expensive in one scene,
very nicely designed.
Um
As usually I won't spoil anything but uh over here is the final part
of the game
and I promise you it rules, it gets really, really weird,
but let's wrap this up.
Our cosmic journey is new.
Ok
in
the desert.
So it's quite foggy up here.
What I did was I really concentrated the fog
density around a number of the shadows to heavily
exaggerate. That shadow
are
giving us
at this time,
I like my n I'm
just trying to fill out the silence.
This
the
information. Is it
for the warning up front
once again the document.
So if you've seen our review trailer,
this shot here
and so
on,
the shot was actually worn in our rebe
trailer before it became our ending
back then we didn't have that world there
abrupt anyway.
So as things unfold, the sun's atmosphere is shadowed by the sun's architecture.
You have disabled that particular shadow
uh like the orbs, it's just shadowed with a regular,
regular cookie texture of sorts.
But instead of uh shadowing some bespoke Raymark defect,
this is just the regular fog that you find throughout the game.
Sorry, Jacob, this is rude
uh
cover is taken off of this planet representations made by Nikki
uh to reveal the the spotlight effect that's going on here,
that spotlight in particular.
So uh it's not a point light,
that's a spotlight because uh we really wanted these self shadows, I
remove them now they're back.
Uh
And of course, if it was a point light, even if they had shadows at, at this distance,
it would be like one degree.
So I think the resolution would be have to
be 2 million pixels to get anything done there.
Anyway.
Uh So anyway,
the planet's atmosphere is this round fog volume
that you find around the planet here.
This without now it's back,
it's shadow using a customs to the blob shadow function which uh now it's gone,
now it's back
and uh because our fog doesn't have any, you know,
temporal uh sampling thing going on it.
You know, we can just animate the fog like this.
And it's, it's, it's not gonna fall behind or anything like that.
It's not gonna ghost,
won't he let that play now anyway, to exaggerate this space fog a bit.
I added a shallow wall of higher density fog right at the intersection of the planet.
Here it is. Without now it's back.
The reason for this intersection is because then
I know that it's going to be 100% shadowed
on the left side and 100% not shadowed on the right side giving much higher contrast.
Use that fake blob shadow gone again and now it's back again.
I was
that concludes our journey.
Another war
-- understanding -- means
I
know that story
so
good.
Thank
you
so
good.
I would like to thank my colleagues for
supporting me making the most elaborate talk.
Uh I would like to thank ye
for egging me on to do it and I would like to thank AJ G does things for egging ye
on to egg
meal to do this thing.
Uh Thanks to Kisa and the advisory board for trusting me with content.
And thank you to Tuki for letting me liberally liberally borrow her Macbook.
And also thank you for saying yes. On Wednesday
credits, music really gets people clapping. I thought that would work.
All right.
Um I can see on the time that I have two minutes and 30 seconds.
So if anyone wants to be the brave soul to get the one question in,
otherwise I will be outside talking to you all and
so will the rest of the team over there?
Thank you to coming. One last housekeeping thing. Please rate my talk.
Give it five stars, you know. Thank you for coming. Have a great rest of your Friday.