[Music]
This is my talk. You can see its title right there. So, I'm not going to read
right there. So, I'm not going to read it out loud, but I am going to say my
it out loud, but I am going to say my name because, as I said, I'm a raging
name because, as I said, I'm a raging eoomaniac. Uh, my name is Todd Harper.
eoomaniac. Uh, my name is Todd Harper. I'm currently a visiting professor at
I'm currently a visiting professor at the University of Baltimore where I
the University of Baltimore where I teach in the program simulation and
teach in the program simulation and digital entertainment, which is a
digital entertainment, which is a mouthful. Uh, and I'm here to talk to
mouthful. Uh, and I'm here to talk to you about portrayals and pitfalls of
you about portrayals and pitfalls of fatness in games. Game games.
fatness in games. Game games. Uh just to give you a couple
Uh just to give you a couple disclaimers, there's not a lot of
disclaimers, there's not a lot of triggery stuff in this talk, but I do
triggery stuff in this talk, but I do discuss some fat phobia and other
discuss some fat phobia and other problem things. So just to forewarn
problem things. So just to forewarn things that may bother you. Um, also I
things that may bother you. Um, also I tried to bring up as much intersectional
tried to bring up as much intersectional stuff as I could, but a lot of the
stuff as I could, but a lot of the examples and uh topics that I'm thinking
examples and uh topics that I'm thinking of came from my life where I identify as
of came from my life where I identify as abled, cis, gay, male, and obviously
abled, cis, gay, male, and obviously uh so now you know, but just keep in
uh so now you know, but just keep in mind, right, that the impact of all the
mind, right, that the impact of all the things that I talk about can change
things that I talk about can change depending on lots of different like
depending on lots of different like confluent identity stuff. you know,
confluent identity stuff. you know, whether or not you're you identify in
whether or not you're you identify in any range of the gender spectrum,
any range of the gender spectrum, sexuality, etc., etc. So, what's up? I
sexuality, etc., etc. So, what's up? I love this shirt. And when I gave a
love this shirt. And when I gave a version of this talk at Gamer X last
version of this talk at Gamer X last summer, the people who made this shirt
summer, the people who made this shirt were like, "Our shirt was in a talk at
were like, "Our shirt was in a talk at Gamer X." That made me feel really good.
Gamer X." That made me feel really good. Uh,
Uh, so before we go anywhere in this talk,
so before we go anywhere in this talk, what do I even mean by fat? Uh,
what do I even mean by fat? Uh, generally speaking, at least in terms of
generally speaking, at least in terms of what I'm going to talk about, I mean
what I'm going to talk about, I mean obese rather than muscular. Uh, whoop,
obese rather than muscular. Uh, whoop, sorry. Uh, muscular has its own set of
sorry. Uh, muscular has its own set of potential problems, especially people
potential problems, especially people who are kind of like really heavy, like
who are kind of like really heavy, like a a range of muscularity that we
a a range of muscularity that we consider quote abnormal unquote. Also,
consider quote abnormal unquote. Also, warning, I use rabbit quotes/air quotes
warning, I use rabbit quotes/air quotes to talk about things that aren't really
to talk about things that aren't really true a lot. Uh, muscular has its own
true a lot. Uh, muscular has its own problems. Trust me, it really does. Um,
problems. Trust me, it really does. Um, but generally speaking, the stigma
but generally speaking, the stigma towards muscular bodies is not the same
towards muscular bodies is not the same as the stigma that gets attached to fat
as the stigma that gets attached to fat bodies. So, in general, I'm not talking
bodies. So, in general, I'm not talking about muscular bodies.
about muscular bodies. Uh, also, please remember our cultural
Uh, also, please remember our cultural ideas about bodies impact people that
ideas about bodies impact people that even aren't fat, which we'll talk about
even aren't fat, which we'll talk about later. So,
later. So, so what is this talk not about?
so what is this talk not about? I am not here to make you change your
I am not here to make you change your views on your body. Bam. I'm not here to
views on your body. Bam. I'm not here to make you go, I super wish I was fat at
make you go, I super wish I was fat at the end of this talk. Um, if that's
the end of this talk. Um, if that's where you are and you're happy with
where you are and you're happy with that, cool. I'm really pleased for you.
that, cool. I'm really pleased for you. But like, I'm not here. This isn't a
But like, I'm not here. This isn't a conversion thing, right? Just please set
conversion thing, right? Just please set that aside. I'm not here to change what
that aside. I'm not here to change what bodies you're attracted to if you're not
bodies you're attracted to if you're not into fat people. That's fine. That's a
into fat people. That's fine. That's a thing. That's okay as long as you
thing. That's okay as long as you respect them as people. Uh, on the other
respect them as people. Uh, on the other hand, I am pretty freaking adorable. So,
hand, I am pretty freaking adorable. So, if you have some sort of inexplicable
if you have some sort of inexplicable urge at the end of the talk, it's it's
urge at the end of the talk, it's it's just a power I have. Um, and also, I'm
just a power I have. Um, and also, I'm not really here to shame or blame any
not really here to shame or blame any particular game or dev. Uh, these are
particular game or dev. Uh, these are like pervasive, insidious cultural
like pervasive, insidious cultural things that hit all of us, even on a
things that hit all of us, even on a subconscious level. So, I'm not here to
subconscious level. So, I'm not here to like call a whole bunch of people out,
like call a whole bunch of people out, even though I have very specific
even though I have very specific examples from some games. What is this
examples from some games. What is this talk about? It's about cultural
talk about? It's about cultural attitudes. It's about what we think
attitudes. It's about what we think about bodies, specifically fat bodies.
about bodies, specifically fat bodies. But, as I said, it all loops around. um
But, as I said, it all loops around. um some mistakes and problems that we make
some mistakes and problems that we make when we make characters for games in
when we make characters for games in particular, but also sometimes
particular, but also sometimes storylines and ideas and uh some ways
storylines and ideas and uh some ways that we can maybe rethink how we talk
that we can maybe rethink how we talk about bodies to dial down some of that
about bodies to dial down some of that problematic stuff. Uh here's the entire
problematic stuff. Uh here's the entire talk in one slide. Spoiler alert.
talk in one slide. Spoiler alert. We are three minutes in. Here's the
We are three minutes in. Here's the whole talk. Everyone, regardless of
whole talk. Everyone, regardless of their body type, deserves to feel good
their body type, deserves to feel good about their body and not be the victim
about their body and not be the victim of abuse or shame, intentional or
of abuse or shame, intentional or otherwise. Congratulations.
Go home. Talk's over. Uh, so why are people like
Talk's over. Uh, so why are people like this? I made the really stupid mistake
this? I made the really stupid mistake of googling the phrase, "Why is it okay
of googling the phrase, "Why is it okay to hate people?" Um,
to hate people?" Um, uh, if you pick up my slides on the
uh, if you pick up my slides on the vault later, uh, because we make them
vault later, uh, because we make them available, you can click these links.
available, you can click these links. I'm not going to go through them, but
I'm not going to go through them, but that top blog from Matt Walsh where he
that top blog from Matt Walsh where he says, "It's not about shaming people. I
says, "It's not about shaming people. I don't want to shame people. Nobody
don't want to shame people. Nobody should be shamed, but here's all the
should be shamed, but here's all the reasons that being fat is shameful."
reasons that being fat is shameful." Thanks, bro. Uh that trivia.com story
Thanks, bro. Uh that trivia.com story where the 10 things I hate about fat
where the 10 things I hate about fat people. One of them is why is when did
people. One of them is why is when did fat become a dirty word? And I'm like
fat become a dirty word? And I'm like the start of this story. Uh The Atlantic
the start of this story. Uh The Atlantic had a really great story about um the
had a really great story about um the case for shaming fat people tastefully.
case for shaming fat people tastefully. So, you know, did do you ever feel bad
So, you know, did do you ever feel bad about your body? Well, you should. Uh,
no. Uh, and finally, um, Dan Savage, who just notoriously threw fat people under
just notoriously threw fat people under the bus to make a case for samesex
the bus to make a case for samesex marriage, which as a fat gay guy, I was
marriage, which as a fat gay guy, I was like,
like, uh, I was not pleased with that. He's
uh, I was not pleased with that. He's basically like, well, if gay people
basically like, well, if gay people can't get married because they don't
can't get married because they don't make because they wouldn't have kids,
make because they wouldn't have kids, which some do, so shut it. uh including
which some do, so shut it. uh including Dan Savage, right? Um then maybe we
Dan Savage, right? Um then maybe we shouldn't let obese people marry cuz
shouldn't let obese people marry cuz obesity is like contain I don't know
obesity is like contain I don't know whatever just click the link. It's
whatever just click the link. It's stupid.
stupid. Dan Savage can go [ __ ] himself. Sorry.
Dan Savage can go [ __ ] himself. Sorry. Uh the problem is that we get these
Uh the problem is that we get these pervasive attitudes and myths, right?
pervasive attitudes and myths, right? That fat is always ugly, right? You
That fat is always ugly, right? You could never feel attractive or uh or
could never feel attractive or uh or just good about how you look if you're
just good about how you look if you're fat, right? Uh that fat people deserve
fat, right? Uh that fat people deserve anything they get, right? Like the idea
anything they get, right? Like the idea of you did it to yourself. If you just
of you did it to yourself. If you just stopped eating or if you just exercise
stopped eating or if you just exercise or whatever, then I wouldn't be such an
or whatever, then I wouldn't be such an [ __ ] to you all the time.
Uh that fat people need you to intervene. I'm assuming that's the logic
intervene. I'm assuming that's the logic behind the guy when I lived in Milwaukee
behind the guy when I lived in Milwaukee and took walks in my neighborhood for
and took walks in my neighborhood for exercise decided to follow behind me in
exercise decided to follow behind me in his car with some of his friends
his car with some of his friends chatting fat insults at me and what and
chatting fat insults at me and what and at one point trying to run me off the
at one point trying to run me off the sidewalk. I mean, I'm guessing he
sidewalk. I mean, I'm guessing he thought I didn't know.
thought I didn't know. I was like, "Hey, you're fat." I'm like,
I was like, "Hey, you're fat." I'm like, "Congratulations,
"Congratulations, you win." Uh,
you win." Uh, there's lots of other different
there's lots of other different examples, right? Like the fact that um
examples, right? Like the fact that um doctors will frequently blame anything
doctors will frequently blame anything that happens to a fat person about their
that happens to a fat person about their health on their weight, even if it's not
health on their weight, even if it's not even remotely related. So fat people
even remotely related. So fat people will have a demonstrated tendency to
will have a demonstrated tendency to avoid medical care which then increases
avoid medical care which then increases complications for things that have
complications for things that have nothing to do with their weight. So
nothing to do with their weight. So actual demonstrable health negative
actual demonstrable health negative impact because of fat shaming by the
impact because of fat shaming by the medical profession. How messed up is
medical profession. How messed up is that? Um of shaming fat people helps
that? Um of shaming fat people helps them, right? It's just like, well, if I
them, right? It's just like, well, if I make them feel really bad about their
make them feel really bad about their body, they'll lose weight, and then
body, they'll lose weight, and then they'll be more in line with how I think
they'll be more in line with how I think their body should be instead of how they
their body should be instead of how they think their body should be.
think their body should be. H
H uh there are links to stories debunking
uh there are links to stories debunking all of this nonsense. Uh they're all by
all of this nonsense. Uh they're all by Melissa Mcuan, who blogs at Shakesville,
Melissa Mcuan, who blogs at Shakesville, um has really great uh uh series of blog
um has really great uh uh series of blog posts called Fastronauts. That's kind of
posts called Fastronauts. That's kind of a 101 level. here's all the things you
a 101 level. here's all the things you think about fat people and here's all
think about fat people and here's all the reasons that they're all wrong. Um
the reasons that they're all wrong. Um that third link and the this this and
that third link and the this this and this is just uh fat people need you to
this is just uh fat people need you to tell you that they're fat and her answer
tell you that they're fat and her answer was just no. That's the whole post by
was just no. That's the whole post by the way.
the way. Uh so we have some problem associations
Uh so we have some problem associations that come out of those myths, right? Fat
that come out of those myths, right? Fat automatically feels gluttonous or
automatically feels gluttonous or selfish or insatable, right? Like
selfish or insatable, right? Like mediated portrayals of fat pill is
mediated portrayals of fat pill is always you can't stop eating. You always
always you can't stop eating. You always want to eat. Food is your whole life,
want to eat. Food is your whole life, right? And that's why you're fat is
right? And that's why you're fat is because you can't stop eating. um that
because you can't stop eating. um that we're lazy, right? Because the
we're lazy, right? Because the assumption is, well, if you exercise,
assumption is, well, if you exercise, then you're not fat anymore. So, if
then you're not fat anymore. So, if you're fat, then you're not exercising,
you're fat, then you're not exercising, so you're just lazy, right? Circular
so you're just lazy, right? Circular logic. Uh that we're delusional, right?
logic. Uh that we're delusional, right? Especially about our attractiveness, cuz
Especially about our attractiveness, cuz remember, fat automatically equals ugly.
remember, fat automatically equals ugly. So, if you're fat and you think you're
So, if you're fat and you think you're attractive, then you're delusional
attractive, then you're delusional because you're automatically ugly,
because you're automatically ugly, right? Uh and that it's just considered
right? Uh and that it's just considered ugly, unattractive by other people.
ugly, unattractive by other people. Media portrayals kind of reinforce this
Media portrayals kind of reinforce this over and over. fat characters are
over and over. fat characters are frequently villainous or evil. And for
frequently villainous or evil. And for male IDing characters, it also crosses
male IDing characters, it also crosses over with kind of homophobia and fem
over with kind of homophobia and fem phobia, too. Um, this is a really
phobia, too. Um, this is a really specific example, but any fans of Fire
specific example, but any fans of Fire Emblem Awakening on the 3DS, remember
Emblem Awakening on the 3DS, remember the character Excelis, who's kind of
the character Excelis, who's kind of just this like big hulking guy with very
just this like big hulking guy with very feminine features who's just as evil as
feminine features who's just as evil as humanly possible, right? Because it's so
humanly possible, right? Because it's so othering, right? How do we let them know
othering, right? How do we let them know he's evil? Well, we can make him fat and
he's evil? Well, we can make him fat and look like a lady.
Uh, fat characters are often the punchline, right? Or the victim. Uh,
punchline, right? Or the victim. Uh, does anybody remember the movie Shallow
does anybody remember the movie Shallow Howal?
Howal? Uh, that's another one of those double
Uh, that's another one of those double deuce situations. Sorry. Um, right. So,
deuce situations. Sorry. Um, right. So, it's their it's their body is our punch
it's their it's their body is our punch line, right? It's that something bad
line, right? It's that something bad happens to them, but haha, they're fat.
happens to them, but haha, they're fat. That's just funny, right? Um, and the
That's just funny, right? Um, and the common goal of a fat character is
common goal of a fat character is usually not being fat anymore, right?
usually not being fat anymore, right? the diet storyline or the exercise
the diet storyline or the exercise storyline is a huge deal. The Biggest
storyline is a huge deal. The Biggest Loser is a television show entirely
Loser is a television show entirely based on that. Right.
based on that. Right. So, let's talk about fat characters in
So, let's talk about fat characters in video games. Uh, not always the best
video games. Uh, not always the best history. When I first made these slides,
history. When I first made these slides, I didn't even realize that King Hippo
I didn't even realize that King Hippo and Wario were doing the same gesture.
and Wario were doing the same gesture. So, that was kind of fun. Uh, if you
So, that was kind of fun. Uh, if you don't recognize these characters, it's
don't recognize these characters, it's King Hippo from Punch Out, Wario from
King Hippo from Punch Out, Wario from basically everything. uh fat princess
basically everything. uh fat princess and groggas from League of Legends.
and groggas from League of Legends. Can I just say I'm going to get this out
Can I just say I'm going to get this out of the way. Can we not do this anymore?
of the way. Can we not do this anymore? The fat character with the offensive
The fat character with the offensive fart mechanic. Uh offensive in lots of
fart mechanic. Uh offensive in lots of ways. Look, I'm not against a good fart
ways. Look, I'm not against a good fart joke, right? If you've ever played Zoe
joke, right? If you've ever played Zoe Quinn's realistic dating simulator, that
Quinn's realistic dating simulator, that is a weaponized fart joke and it's
is a weaponized fart joke and it's amazing. Uh but that's not what this is.
amazing. Uh but that's not what this is. These are all just kind of built on this
These are all just kind of built on this idea that these characters are gross and
idea that these characters are gross and offsetting or off-putting or offsetting.
offsetting or off-putting or offsetting. I guess maybe that they're gross and
I guess maybe that they're gross and off-putting, right? And their their
off-putting, right? And their their bodies are gross and so they attack with
bodies are gross and so they attack with their gross. Oh god, no. Just stop.
their gross. Oh god, no. Just stop. Stop. Don't do that anymore.
Stop. Don't do that anymore. Okay, so now I'm going to show you a
Okay, so now I'm going to show you a short video.
[Music]
It's you. Can I help you?
Can I help you? [Music]
[Music] K masters.
I told you I've got the wrong guy. Don't play. You think you can't beat
Don't play. You think you can't beat them? Join them and pick up a cool body
them? Join them and pick up a cool body like mine.
[Music] Uh, so does anybody recognize that? It
Uh, so does anybody recognize that? It was a promo trailer for Street Fighter
was a promo trailer for Street Fighter cross Tekken from a few years back which
cross Tekken from a few years back which actually came out around a GDC time.
actually came out around a GDC time. Those characters were Bob from Street
Those characters were Bob from Street Fighter 4 and Rufus or guess who's going
Fighter 4 and Rufus or guess who's going to get letters from the fighting game
to get letters from the fighting game community about that. Bob from Tekken
community about that. Bob from Tekken and Rufus from Street Fighter 4. Um, and
and Rufus from Street Fighter 4. Um, and they're kind of complicated characters
they're kind of complicated characters for me as fat characters. Uh, and I
for me as fat characters. Uh, and I thought there would be maybe a good
thought there would be maybe a good intro to some of the stuff we're going
intro to some of the stuff we're going to talk about. So, here's the good part,
to talk about. So, here's the good part, right? Bob and Rufus are really highly
right? Bob and Rufus are really highly skilled martial artists, right? And
skilled martial artists, right? And Rufus in particular is a martial artist
Rufus in particular is a martial artist who uses a style that is not necessarily
who uses a style that is not necessarily like a big guy style, right? He's not a
like a big guy style, right? He's not a wrestler. He's not a sumo. Uh, something
wrestler. He's not a sumo. Uh, something like that. He uses kind of Bruce Lee
like that. He uses kind of Bruce Lee inspired kung fu, right? It's very
inspired kung fu, right? It's very acrobatic. And of course, if you listen
acrobatic. And of course, if you listen to them, if you listen to the developers
to them, if you listen to the developers give interviews about Rufus, they talk
give interviews about Rufus, they talk about how they wanted an inongruous
about how they wanted an inongruous character, right? And so like, well,
character, right? And so like, well, he's fat, but he kung fu, right? So, but
he's fat, but he kung fu, right? So, but it is kind of cool. Um, they're not joke
it is kind of cool. Um, they're not joke characters, right? Like when Street
characters, right? Like when Street Fighter 4 came out, he was actually a
Fighter 4 came out, he was actually a very strong character in terms of that
very strong character in terms of that game's play. He was used in highle
game's play. He was used in highle competitive play. Um, and they seem
competitive play. Um, and they seem pretty okay, pretty comfortable with
pretty okay, pretty comfortable with their bodies. It's not like Bob wins a
their bodies. It's not like Bob wins a fight and then goes, "Wow, I should
fight and then goes, "Wow, I should really lose a lot of weight." Right? Um,
really lose a lot of weight." Right? Um, however, there are some downsides to
however, there are some downsides to Rufus and Bob. Rufus is pretty much seen
Rufus and Bob. Rufus is pretty much seen as delusional, right? That whole shtick
as delusional, right? That whole shtick right there is that Rufus Rufus' deal is
right there is that Rufus Rufus' deal is that he thinks he's a rival to Ken
that he thinks he's a rival to Ken Masters, who's kind of like a typical
Masters, who's kind of like a typical hot American blonde, right? Um, and so
hot American blonde, right? Um, and so he thinks every blonde guy he sees who's
he thinks every blonde guy he sees who's a fighter is Ken Masters
a fighter is Ken Masters and he confuses Bob for Ken Masters,
and he confuses Bob for Ken Masters, which blah blah blah. Then they fight.
which blah blah blah. Then they fight. It was probably hard to hear that he
It was probably hard to hear that he said during the fight like uh when Bob
said during the fight like uh when Bob says, "You've got the wrong guy." Rufus
says, "You've got the wrong guy." Rufus says, "No, you thought you can't beat
says, "No, you thought you can't beat him. Join him, so you got a cool body
him. Join him, so you got a cool body like mine." Right? The punchline there
like mine." Right? The punchline there is that we're looking at Rufus going,
is that we're looking at Rufus going, right? So any self-esteem he has is kind
right? So any self-esteem he has is kind of viewed as a product of of self-d
of viewed as a product of of self-d delusion rather than him actually having
delusion rather than him actually having good self-esteem or actually rather
good self-esteem or actually rather deserving good self-esteem. Right. Um
deserving good self-esteem. Right. Um Bob as a character got fat on purpose in
Bob as a character got fat on purpose in the Tekken backstory. Uh he felt like he
the Tekken backstory. Uh he felt like he needed more of a challenge so he made it
needed more of a challenge so he made it harder for himself. Right. Uh, although
harder for himself. Right. Uh, although hilariously, there is a side character
hilariously, there is a side character named Slim Bob, which is Bob as a thin
named Slim Bob, which is Bob as a thin guy who is incapably weak. I actually
guy who is incapably weak. I actually think that's pretty great. Um, that Bob,
think that's pretty great. Um, that Bob, non-fat Bob, is actually useless. Um,
non-fat Bob, is actually useless. Um, and Bob's moves are named after food.
and Bob's moves are named after food. Don't do this. Fat people think about
Don't do this. Fat people think about things other than food all the time.
things other than food all the time. Like, I don't know. Right now, I'm
Like, I don't know. Right now, I'm thinking about nervousness and giving a
thinking about nervousness and giving a GDC talk.
GDC talk. uh to talk about fat women in games for
uh to talk about fat women in games for a bit. Fatness and body image policing
a bit. Fatness and body image policing for women have this whole second layer
for women have this whole second layer that malecoded characters don't have,
that malecoded characters don't have, right? And it mostly kind of centers
right? And it mostly kind of centers around this idea of women's bodies as a
around this idea of women's bodies as a thing that men possess or want to
thing that men possess or want to possess. And so they have to be
possess. And so they have to be attractive to um to an imagined
attractive to um to an imagined heteromale gaze, right? And since fat
heteromale gaze, right? And since fat always equals ugly, attractive means
always equals ugly, attractive means thin, right? Uh, and often fat women are
thin, right? Uh, and often fat women are reduced to their need to be thin and
reduced to their need to be thin and then that's the defining characteristic
then that's the defining characteristic of themselves, right? Like I need to be
of themselves, right? Like I need to be thin so I can be hot or whatever, right?
thin so I can be hot or whatever, right? And men can kind of get away with being
And men can kind of get away with being fat in a way that women characters often
fat in a way that women characters often can't. I call it the sitcom effect. Like
can't. I call it the sitcom effect. Like watch a lot of late 80s, 90s, even early
watch a lot of late 80s, 90s, even early 2000s sitcoms in the US and you'll see
2000s sitcoms in the US and you'll see lots of kind of not hegeimmonically
lots of kind of not hegeimmonically attractive, sometimes pretty hefty guys
attractive, sometimes pretty hefty guys who are married to like supermodel hot
who are married to like supermodel hot wives, right, on sitcoms because we
wives, right, on sitcoms because we can't have a non-hot
can't have a non-hot slash fat woman on TV, right? But a guy
slash fat woman on TV, right? But a guy meh, right? It kind of all circles
meh, right? It kind of all circles around this idea of women women being
around this idea of women women being objectified reduced to being possessive
objectified reduced to being possessive objects that thus need to be thinned.
objects that thus need to be thinned. Um, Shadows of the Damned literally does
Um, Shadows of the Damned literally does everything wrong you could possibly do,
everything wrong you could possibly do, uh, with a side character named Justine
uh, with a side character named Justine Dangelo, who is an opera singer who's
Dangelo, who is an opera singer who's very, very large. Um, I was going to
very, very large. Um, I was going to play some of this video, but actually
play some of this video, but actually the language in it is pretty triggering
the language in it is pretty triggering even for me, so I'm gonna skip it. You
even for me, so I'm gonna skip it. You can watch it on your own if you want.
can watch it on your own if you want. Um, but her story is about how she's a
Um, but her story is about how she's a fat opera singer. Everyone loves her,
fat opera singer. Everyone loves her, but she doesn't love herself. She thinks
but she doesn't love herself. She thinks she's too fat. She wants to be thinner.
she's too fat. She wants to be thinner. Uh, there's a patron who really loves
Uh, there's a patron who really loves her and is trying to convince her that
her and is trying to convince her that she is attractive, but she rejects him
she is attractive, but she rejects him all the time. Um, so he leaves her and
all the time. Um, so he leaves her and then she kills herself in order to
then she kills herself in order to become thin, right? And the game then
become thin, right? And the game then presents her as this wild shrieking
presents her as this wild shrieking man-killing harpy who's now thinned, but
man-killing harpy who's now thinned, but she's also like an undead succubus or
she's also like an undead succubus or something. So that was the that's what
something. So that was the that's what she gets, right? Um, so all of these
she gets, right? Um, so all of these things, right? She's fat shamed. She
things, right? She's fat shamed. She they make frequent jokes about her being
they make frequent jokes about her being bulimic, which are really gross. Like
bulimic, which are really gross. Like eating disorders are a serious thing.
eating disorders are a serious thing. Don't make jokes about those. Um, the
Don't make jokes about those. Um, the fat auto equals ugly. uh they make fun
fat auto equals ugly. uh they make fun of the guy who's attracted to her
of the guy who's attracted to her because the idea of him being attracted
because the idea of him being attracted to her is thus delusional, right? And it
to her is thus delusional, right? And it validates her self harm in the pursuit
validates her self harm in the pursuit of being thin, right?
of being thin, right? There's Fat Princess, right? She's
There's Fat Princess, right? She's literally the ball in that game. If Fat
literally the ball in that game. If Fat Princess were soccer, she is the ball.
Princess were soccer, she is the ball. That's not cool, right? And they kind of
That's not cool, right? And they kind of conflate this link between, oh, we have
conflate this link between, oh, we have to make her fat, so you can't carry her,
to make her fat, so you can't carry her, right? But there's also this kind of
right? But there's also this kind of underscoring tone of but you wouldn't
underscoring tone of but you wouldn't want her either,
want her either, right? Uh she's actually a playable
right? Uh she's actually a playable character in PlayStation All Stars
character in PlayStation All Stars Battle Royale. I think that's the whole
Battle Royale. I think that's the whole name of that game. Um and it's diffused
name of that game. Um and it's diffused a bit where she gets some agency. She's
a bit where she gets some agency. She's actually a playable character. But on
actually a playable character. But on the other hand, she also has an attack
the other hand, she also has an attack where she kills people by running
where she kills people by running through them because she's trying to
through them because she's trying to reach a slice of cake.
reach a slice of cake. And most of her attacks actually involve
And most of her attacks actually involve summoning like the the the actors from
summoning like the the the actors from Fat Princess and just so terrible.
Fat Princess and just so terrible. Um, fat characters of color and queer
Um, fat characters of color and queer characters. These types of characters
characters. These types of characters are already so rare in AAA games that
are already so rare in AAA games that finding intersectional fat versions of
finding intersectional fat versions of them is actually quite a challenge. Um,
them is actually quite a challenge. Um, when we do find them, what do we see? We
when we do find them, what do we see? We see sumo guy, right? When do you
see sumo guy, right? When do you generally see fat Japanese male
generally see fat Japanese male characters in pop culture? sumo guys,
characters in pop culture? sumo guys, right? We also see the big bald black
right? We also see the big bald black guy um in the sense that often black
guy um in the sense that often black male bodies are portrayed as kind of
male bodies are portrayed as kind of like hulking, right? Which sometimes
like hulking, right? Which sometimes vacasillates between muscular and fat.
vacasillates between muscular and fat. It's a little weird. Um but it's also
It's a little weird. Um but it's also kind of a way to dehumanize their
kind of a way to dehumanize their bodies, right? It strips away their
bodies, right? It strips away their humanity by making them kind of weird
humanity by making them kind of weird and otherred instead of just treating
and otherred instead of just treating them as having a range of different body
them as having a range of different body types, right?
types, right? Uh, the very few examples of women of
Uh, the very few examples of women of color that were fat I could find tended
color that were fat I could find tended to be older women. Um, old lady Sheraki
to be older women. Um, old lady Sheraki from Persona 4, right, who owns the
from Persona 4, right, who owns the store. And when the in Persona 4 Golden
store. And when the in Persona 4 Golden when it turns to nighttime, right, she
when it turns to nighttime, right, she puts on a jewel tone dress and she has
puts on a jewel tone dress and she has what a friend of mine called drag queen
what a friend of mine called drag queen makeup, right? Like she she's a joke at
makeup, right? Like she she's a joke at our expense, right? Like why would an
our expense, right? Like why would an old fat woman want to look sexy and
old fat woman want to look sexy and attractive? She shouldn't be sexy and
attractive? She shouldn't be sexy and attractive. She's an old fat woman,
attractive. She's an old fat woman, right? Wampwamp. Uh, Plum Kataki. I have
right? Wampwamp. Uh, Plum Kataki. I have not actually played Apollo Justice, but
not actually played Apollo Justice, but I'm I'm told she's actually kind of a
I'm I'm told she's actually kind of a great character. Uh, she's a former I
great character. Uh, she's a former I think a former Yakuza boss or something
think a former Yakuza boss or something of that stripe. But she's kind of also
of that stripe. But she's kind of also this big, stoutly built, redoubtable
this big, stoutly built, redoubtable mom, right? And it seems like the mom is
mom, right? And it seems like the mom is when it's okay for for women to be fat
when it's okay for for women to be fat characters, right? Because they don't
characters, right? Because they don't need to be sexually attractive anymore.
need to be sexually attractive anymore. Please note the quotes. Right? So once
Please note the quotes. Right? So once the mom does not need to be attractive
the mom does not need to be attractive to men anymore, it's okay if she fills
to men anymore, it's okay if she fills out, right? That's another part of our
out, right? That's another part of our weird cultural association.
weird cultural association. Uh pandarin and World of Warcraft are
Uh pandarin and World of Warcraft are really interesting example. They're this
really interesting example. They're this weird pan-Asian fusion orientalist thing
weird pan-Asian fusion orientalist thing where they're like this mishmash of lots
where they're like this mishmash of lots of different Southeast Asian cultures
of different Southeast Asian cultures that are never named. Um they're kind of
that are never named. Um they're kind of the species stand in, right? And they're
the species stand in, right? And they're pandas. Come on. Uh they're pretty much
pandas. Come on. Uh they're pretty much all portrayed as gluttonous drunkards,
all portrayed as gluttonous drunkards, right? Like they love to eat and they
right? Like they love to eat and they love to drink, especially beer. Uh the
love to drink, especially beer. Uh the males in particular play into this jolly
males in particular play into this jolly fat guy stereotype where everyone
fat guy stereotype where everyone expects the the fat guy who likes to eat
expects the the fat guy who likes to eat and he's just whole like that Santa
and he's just whole like that Santa thing just oh god don't do that. Thank
thing just oh god don't do that. Thank you.
you. Uh and also there's some intersection
Uh and also there's some intersection with disability too. uh you know
with disability too. uh you know disabled characters are rare enough in
disabled characters are rare enough in the AAA space that these are also pretty
the AAA space that these are also pretty infrequent but there's a very persistent
infrequent but there's a very persistent stereotype right of um kind of big
stereotype right of um kind of big hulking characters that have some sort
hulking characters that have some sort of perceived mental disability right the
of perceived mental disability right the idea that they're just kind of both
idea that they're just kind of both large and slow and it's weird it's very
large and slow and it's weird it's very weird uh probably a good example of this
weird uh probably a good example of this would be um Michael Clark Duncan's
would be um Michael Clark Duncan's character in the green mile uh who als
character in the green mile uh who als also as a black body, right? A black
also as a black body, right? A black male body where you get all of this
male body where you get all of this stuff kind of lumped together, right?
stuff kind of lumped together, right? That's more common than you might think.
So, I want to talk about some ways that we can actually maybe improve. Uh,
we can actually maybe improve. Uh, I want to talk about Ellie from
I want to talk about Ellie from Borderlands 2. Uh, she's actually really
Borderlands 2. Uh, she's actually really great. She's a side character. She's an
great. She's a side character. She's an NPC character, but she has a lot of
NPC character, but she has a lot of great qualities, right? She's smart.
great qualities, right? She's smart. She's self-sufficient. She's able to
She's self-sufficient. She's able to live on her own in this really dangerous
live on her own in this really dangerous area of the Borderlands world. Um, she's
area of the Borderlands world. Um, she's freely sexual and flirty, right? She
freely sexual and flirty, right? She owns her body. She constantly refers to
owns her body. She constantly refers to herself as hot or attractive and nobody
herself as hot or attractive and nobody really questions her on that, right? So,
really questions her on that, right? So, she's just like, "Hey, how you doing?"
she's just like, "Hey, how you doing?" Right? Uh, also, if you've never heard
Right? Uh, also, if you've never heard her voice actor before,
her voice actor before, good times. Um, she has no issues with
good times. Um, she has no issues with her body type at all, right? She
her body type at all, right? She constantly just feels good about herself
constantly just feels good about herself and that's really great and affirming.
and that's really great and affirming. And she's defined by her body in the
And she's defined by her body in the sense that it's really visual, right?
sense that it's really visual, right? So, it's kind of impossible to deal with
So, it's kind of impossible to deal with her in a visual way and not have it be
her in a visual way and not have it be in your frame, but she's not limited by
in your frame, but she's not limited by her body, right? Everything she does,
her body, right? Everything she does, she can do no matter what her body type
she can do no matter what her body type would be. Uh, kind of the problem that
would be. Uh, kind of the problem that happens with Ellie is the context of the
happens with Ellie is the context of the game doesn't always support her in ways
game doesn't always support her in ways that it could. Um, she's the only
that it could. Um, she's the only character of her model type in the
character of her model type in the entire game, right? Um, there are no
entire game, right? Um, there are no other fat characters in Borderlands. Uh,
other fat characters in Borderlands. Uh, which is kind of a big deal because it
which is kind of a big deal because it turns her into the unicorn, right? It's
turns her into the unicorn, right? It's just like, well, she feels really good
just like, well, she feels really good about herself and there's literally only
about herself and there's literally only one of her anywhere. Uh,
one of her anywhere. Uh, also,
also, nobody in game really thinks of her as
nobody in game really thinks of her as attractive or says that she's attractive
attractive or says that she's attractive except her biological brother.
except her biological brother. So, that's a little weird. So, again, it
So, that's a little weird. So, again, it kind of codes her self-love and her
kind of codes her self-love and her self-esteem as slightly delusional,
self-esteem as slightly delusional, right? Like, she's into her, but nobody
right? Like, she's into her, but nobody else is, so why should we care? Um,
else is, so why should we care? Um, plus, Borderlands is a comedy game,
plus, Borderlands is a comedy game, right? And everything is a joke in a
right? And everything is a joke in a comedy game. So, it's kind of impossible
comedy game. So, it's kind of impossible to get away from the idea that she's a
to get away from the idea that she's a joke in some small way. Um, her mom is
joke in some small way. Um, her mom is Moxy, who, if you've never played a
Moxy, who, if you've never played a Borderlands game, is kind of the
Borderlands game, is kind of the stereotypical sex bomb, right? So they
stereotypical sex bomb, right? So they then have this link between
then have this link between stereotypical hot woman gives has this
stereotypical hot woman gives has this kind of, you know, really big fat lady
kind of, you know, really big fat lady who's, you know, good with herself, but
who's, you know, good with herself, but they they're juxtaposed in a really
they they're juxtaposed in a really weird way.
weird way. Uh, who here has played Pokemon X or Y?
Uh, who here has played Pokemon X or Y? Who here loves the hell out of Tiero?
Who here loves the hell out of Tiero? Well, you should have more hands up,
Well, you should have more hands up, damn it. Uh, this is Tiero. He's a side
damn it. Uh, this is Tiero. He's a side character in Pokemon X and Y. Um, he's
character in Pokemon X and Y. Um, he's great in a way I would not have expected
great in a way I would not have expected when I played that game. Uh, he's
when I played that game. Uh, he's clearly okay with his body. His friends
clearly okay with his body. His friends don't comment on it, right? Like he's
don't comment on it, right? Like he's one of your characters closest friends.
one of your characters closest friends. And so he pops up, you know, time and
And so he pops up, you know, time and time again in the game, but you know,
time again in the game, but you know, he's nobody's ever just like, "Oh, Tro,
he's nobody's ever just like, "Oh, Tro, you're such a good friend. I kind of
you're such a good friend. I kind of wish you would lose some pounds,
wish you would lose some pounds, though." Right? Like that never happens.
though." Right? Like that never happens. Um, he's into a physical thing that
Um, he's into a physical thing that might be kind of a challenge for a
might be kind of a challenge for a person of her size. He's a dancer,
person of her size. He's a dancer, right? and his whole Pokemon goal is
right? and his whole Pokemon goal is that he wants to make a Pokemon dance
that he wants to make a Pokemon dance team um of so his Pokemon are all the
team um of so his Pokemon are all the Pokemon that have dance in their move
Pokemon that have dance in their move set of some kind. It's actually kind of
set of some kind. It's actually kind of fantastic, right? But um uh but he's
fantastic, right? But um uh but he's clearly good at it and his friends
clearly good at it and his friends encourage him to do it, right? They
encourage him to do it, right? They don't treat his desire as weird or
don't treat his desire as weird or abnormal or tell him, "Well, you could
abnormal or tell him, "Well, you could be a dancer, but you're fat, so sorry."
be a dancer, but you're fat, so sorry." Right? Um so he is kind of he's a he's a
Right? Um so he is kind of he's a he's a bigger character. is a fat character,
bigger character. is a fat character, but it's not his defining
but it's not his defining characteristic, which is really
characteristic, which is really important.
important. And finally, I want to talk about the
And finally, I want to talk about the Lady Boss. Uh, if you've never played a
Lady Boss. Uh, if you've never played a Saints Row game, I'm a huge fan of the
Saints Row game, I'm a huge fan of the Saints Row series, and their character
Saints Row series, and their character creator actually gives you a lot of
creator actually gives you a lot of different options for body type, size,
different options for body type, size, kind of you can really customize your
kind of you can really customize your body uh pretty well in Saints, at least
body uh pretty well in Saints, at least Saints the third and Saints Row 4. Um,
Saints the third and Saints Row 4. Um, creative avatars kind of have their
creative avatars kind of have their downsides, too, right? The player isn't
downsides, too, right? The player isn't forced to inhabit a body that's
forced to inhabit a body that's different than theirs, but if you're a
different than theirs, but if you're a person who's not used to seeing your
person who's not used to seeing your body in games, it's kind of a huge boon
body in games, it's kind of a huge boon to be able to do that. And, uh, so you
to be able to do that. And, uh, so you kind of get to play around with this
kind of get to play around with this body that you inhabit while you're
body that you inhabit while you're playing the game.
playing the game. Uh, this is my lady boss. Uh, which is
Uh, this is my lady boss. Uh, which is also, if you follow me on Twitter, my
also, if you follow me on Twitter, my brand, hashtagbr. Uh, and I I love her.
brand, hashtagbr. Uh, and I I love her. like I kind of made kind of this big
like I kind of made kind of this big hefty red-headed woman who is is another
hefty red-headed woman who is is another me in kind of a tiny way. Uh she's my
me in kind of a tiny way. Uh she's my way of living the dream, which is to
way of living the dream, which is to wear anything I want whenever I want. If
wear anything I want whenever I want. If you've never shoed for clothes as a fat
you've never shoed for clothes as a fat person before, being fat means shopping
person before, being fat means shopping at specialty places. Um having kind of a
at specialty places. Um having kind of a limited range of styles and colors,
limited range of styles and colors, you're often paying a huge markup. Uh
you're often paying a huge markup. Uh you kind of have to make do. And in
you kind of have to make do. And in Steelport and Saints Row, I can wear
Steelport and Saints Row, I can wear whatever I want, whenever I want. It
whatever I want, whenever I want. It always looks fantastic, and that's
always looks fantastic, and that's amazing. So, kudos to you, Volition.
amazing. So, kudos to you, Volition. Uh, give you an example. Here's my lady
Uh, give you an example. Here's my lady boss wearing a few outfits. And here is
boss wearing a few outfits. And here is me as my lady boss wearing a few of
me as my lady boss wearing a few of those outfits.
those outfits. I own one of those, and I'm not going to
I own one of those, and I'm not going to tell you which one.
Uh, just to sum up, a lot of what we see of fat characters in games kind of
of fat characters in games kind of reinforces these existing stereotypes in
reinforces these existing stereotypes in other media like film and TV where fat
other media like film and TV where fat characters and fat people are lazy,
characters and fat people are lazy, greedy, food obsessed, glutton. Um, and
greedy, food obsessed, glutton. Um, and if they like themselves, then they're
if they like themselves, then they're delusional, right? Like they how could
delusional, right? Like they how could you possibly like yourself because being
you possibly like yourself because being gay is already always terrible. Um,
gay is already always terrible. Um, so what can game Wow, that's small text.
so what can game Wow, that's small text. So what can games do? Give us a space
So what can games do? Give us a space where our body type maybe just doesn't
where our body type maybe just doesn't matter for five seconds, right? Like I'm
matter for five seconds, right? Like I'm not going to lie. I leave the house and
not going to lie. I leave the house and somebody shouts some sort of fat joke at
somebody shouts some sort of fat joke at me from the street as a total stranger
me from the street as a total stranger pretty much every day of my life and
pretty much every day of my life and that's been since I was a teenager and I
that's been since I was a teenager and I am almost 40, right? So that sucks a
am almost 40, right? So that sucks a lot. Uh maybe don't do that in your
lot. Uh maybe don't do that in your game. Uh maybe instead tell a respectful
game. Uh maybe instead tell a respectful or supporting narrative. Have a fat
or supporting narrative. Have a fat character who's not like I really need
character who's not like I really need to diet. Have a fat character who's just
to diet. Have a fat character who's just like I really want to find a sequin
like I really want to find a sequin dress that looks awesome on me. Um,
dress that looks awesome on me. Um, don't reinforce all these negative
don't reinforce all these negative cultural ideas. Right? If you're
cultural ideas. Right? If you're thinking, uh, well, I need to make a
thinking, uh, well, I need to make a character who's really gluttonous, like
character who's really gluttonous, like really selfish. I should make him a big
really selfish. I should make him a big fat guy. No,
fat guy. No, stop that. Um, just think about what
stop that. Um, just think about what you're associating, right? Like,
you're associating, right? Like, question your associations for 5
question your associations for 5 seconds. Um, and just don't make us the
seconds. Um, and just don't make us the unicorn. Just don't have the one fat
unicorn. Just don't have the one fat person in the whole world. That sucks
person in the whole world. That sucks because a lot of fat people sometimes
because a lot of fat people sometimes feel that way, right? Like you have this
feel that way, right? Like you have this internal feeling of I'm the only person
internal feeling of I'm the only person in the world who just feels gross and
in the world who just feels gross and terrible about myself every time and
terrible about myself every time and everyone else is really pretty and life
everyone else is really pretty and life sucks, right? That's how people can
sucks, right? That's how people can often feel in real life, so maybe don't
often feel in real life, so maybe don't replicate that in the game. And if
replicate that in the game. And if you're thinking all of these suggestions
you're thinking all of these suggestions are also good ways to represent other
are also good ways to represent other aspects of diversity, that's not a
aspects of diversity, that's not a coincidence.
Also, just remember that our body image ideas about fatness hurt thin people,
ideas about fatness hurt thin people, too, right? Like being fat often feels
too, right? Like being fat often feels like the worst thing you could possibly
like the worst thing you could possibly be. And thin people's reactions to
be. And thin people's reactions to things like food and exercise are based
things like food and exercise are based on this fear of becoming fat that is
on this fear of becoming fat that is irrational and terrifying, right? Um,
irrational and terrifying, right? Um, for example, if you're
for example, if you're sorry, if you're a thin person, it's
sorry, if you're a thin person, it's perfectly reasonable to want the body
perfectly reasonable to want the body you want, right? If you feel fat and you
you want, right? If you feel fat and you want to lose weight, cool, because I
want to lose weight, cool, because I want you to have the body that feels
want you to have the body that feels good for you. But if you're really thin
good for you. But if you're really thin and you're standing next to me and you
and you're standing next to me and you go, "Oh my god, I look so fat." I swear
go, "Oh my god, I look so fat." I swear I will body check you into the street.
You don't mean any harm by it because you're just thinking about your body,
you're just thinking about your body, but then me, I'm just like, "Oh, okay.
but then me, I'm just like, "Oh, okay. So, your greatest fear is that you're
So, your greatest fear is that you're going to look like this, right? That
going to look like this, right? That makes me feel terrible. Um, please don't
makes me feel terrible. Um, please don't do that." And this focus on thin being
do that." And this focus on thin being beautiful is at the root of like lots of
beautiful is at the root of like lots of eating disorder problems and body
eating disorder problems and body dysmorphia issues and stuff with real
dysmorphia issues and stuff with real important real life consequences. Right?
important real life consequences. Right? So please don't think that caring about
So please don't think that caring about the representation of fat people only
the representation of fat people only helps fat people. It helps everybody. Uh
helps fat people. It helps everybody. Uh and just remember thin people and
and just remember thin people and thinness are not the enemy. Thin people
thinness are not the enemy. Thin people are fine. Some of my best friends are
are fine. Some of my best friends are thin people. Um,
[Applause] so it's okay. I can say whatever I want
so it's okay. I can say whatever I want about them, right? Uh,
about them, right? Uh, thin people are not the enemy, but body
thin people are not the enemy, but body norms that treat fatness as the enemy
norms that treat fatness as the enemy are the real problem. Uh, so with
are the real problem. Uh, so with further ado, thank you for coming.
further ado, thank you for coming. [Music]
[Music] [Applause]
[Applause] [Music]
[Music] [Applause]