So, uh, welcome to our talk recognizing the health risks of game development
the health risks of game development beyond carbal tunnel. I'm Wendy Despain.
beyond carbal tunnel. I'm Wendy Despain. Uh, we're not in order here, but this is
Uh, we're not in order here, but this is Patricia Piser and Lydia Breen and Adam
Patricia Piser and Lydia Breen and Adam Martin.
Martin. And hey, thank you for the one person
And hey, thank you for the one person applauding.
Um, this was kind of a hard talk to give. I
this was kind of a hard talk to give. I have wanted to give it for a while, but
have wanted to give it for a while, but um, it's
um, it's hard to get people to do it. So, um,
hard to get people to do it. So, um, genuinely I want you guys to know that
genuinely I want you guys to know that these people sitting up here today are
these people sitting up here today are the brave ones. Um, I had asked at least
the brave ones. Um, I had asked at least two other
two other uh fairly famous developers, not that
uh fairly famous developers, not that these guys aren't famous, but um,
these guys aren't famous, but um, well-known people in the industry who
well-known people in the industry who said, "Yes, I want to talk on this
said, "Yes, I want to talk on this topic. This would be great." And then
topic. This would be great." And then their PR department found out what they
their PR department found out what they would be talking about. And their PR
would be talking about. And their PR department said, "No way are you talking
department said, "No way are you talking on this topic." So uh
on this topic." So uh we I'm a contractor. I work with lots of
we I'm a contractor. I work with lots of different studios and companies and
different studios and companies and these guys have started their own
these guys have started their own companies. So uh their PR departments
companies. So uh their PR departments are not a little
are not a little queasy about talking about the fact that
queasy about talking about the fact that there are some uh health problems with
there are some uh health problems with working in the game industry. Um
oh we'll get there. So this is why I wanted to give the
So this is why I wanted to give the talk. I have started teaching students
talk. I have started teaching students about game design and um they're very
about game design and um they're very excited about game design and they're
excited about game design and they're very excited about getting into this
very excited about getting into this subject and um not worried at all about
subject and um not worried at all about what it will do to their life. Um, and
what it will do to their life. Um, and when I try to talk to them about it,
when I try to talk to them about it, they say, "Well, you know, it might give
they say, "Well, you know, it might give me carpal tunnel, but there's surgery
me carpal tunnel, but there's surgery for that now, so what's the big deal?"
for that now, so what's the big deal?" And uh,
And uh, when I
when I talk to all of my game industry dev
talk to all of my game industry dev friends, they say, "H, yes, so I'm on my
friends, they say, "H, yes, so I'm on my fifth spinal surgery."
fifth spinal surgery." Um,
Um, there's a big disconnect between what
there's a big disconnect between what students coming into the industry think
students coming into the industry think their life is going to be in the game
their life is going to be in the game industry and what it actually is for
industry and what it actually is for people who have been in the industry for
people who have been in the industry for a long time. Um, so I started to wonder,
a long time. Um, so I started to wonder, is this just me?
is this just me? Is it just my friends who are willing to
Is it just my friends who are willing to talk to me about hey, you know, dump on
talk to me about hey, you know, dump on me all of my health problems because I
me all of my health problems because I have my own health problems. And um I
have my own health problems. And um I wondered if I was getting a skewed view,
wondered if I was getting a skewed view, you know, maybe it's just that people
you know, maybe it's just that people like to complain to me about the health
like to complain to me about the health and maybe it's not the entire industry
and maybe it's not the entire industry that has these problems. Um could be. I
that has these problems. Um could be. I I like to check things out before I
uh go and tell everybody we've got to change order. But um no,
we've got to change order. But um no, this is a real thing. People are really
this is a real thing. People are really dying.
dying. Some of us in this room have friends who
Some of us in this room have friends who recently have been added to the list of
recently have been added to the list of game developers who have died. Um,
game developers who have died. Um, and so it's kind of a tough topic to
and so it's kind of a tough topic to talk about because when we're talking
talk about because when we're talking about it's dangerous,
about it's dangerous, it's not just well maybe you'll have to
it's not just well maybe you'll have to go through one little surgery at some
go through one little surgery at some point in time. Um, there are real
point in time. Um, there are real dangers in this industry that need to be
dangers in this industry that need to be talked about. So I went through to kind
talked about. So I went through to kind of analyze why it is that people are
of analyze why it is that people are dying in our industry and uh it came
dying in our industry and uh it came down to three things. Um
down to three things. Um first neglect. They're just ignoring
first neglect. They're just ignoring symptoms that they have. Um not going to
symptoms that they have. Um not going to doctors. Uh,
doctors. Uh, one of the people that I talked to as I
one of the people that I talked to as I was discussing this talk with them um
was discussing this talk with them um shared the story of their friend who was
shared the story of their friend who was a game developer who
a game developer who felt fine and then uh there was a little
felt fine and then uh there was a little mole on his shoulder and six months
mole on his shoulder and six months later he was dead because
later he was dead because he had cancer and cancer doesn't hurt.
he had cancer and cancer doesn't hurt. So he didn't go to the doctor. He felt
So he didn't go to the doctor. He felt fine. And so if it had been caught six
fine. And so if it had been caught six months sooner, he would have lived, but
months sooner, he would have lived, but he felt fine. So he didn't
he felt fine. So he didn't have his regular checkups and things
have his regular checkups and things like that. So, um, the other thing is
like that. So, um, the other thing is reckless behavior, which I include, um,
reckless behavior, which I include, um, driving while sleepd deprived, like when
driving while sleepd deprived, like when you've been crunching for 3 weeks
you've been crunching for 3 weeks straight and you haven't had enough
straight and you haven't had enough sleep and you wake up on the freeway
sleep and you wake up on the freeway going 70 or you don't wake up on the
going 70 or you don't wake up on the freeway going 70. And uh, there are
freeway going 70. And uh, there are substance abuse problems in the industry
substance abuse problems in the industry that sometimes we admit and sometimes we
that sometimes we admit and sometimes we don't. And then the third reason
don't. And then the third reason is the
is the hardest one I think for a lot of us but
hardest one I think for a lot of us but has hit home
has hit home fairly recently. So um
fairly recently. So um big question is what is going on?
Uh I like to do research and not just guess.
like to do research and not just guess. So I have an idea.
So I have an idea. I am going to put together a totally
I am going to put together a totally unscientific anecdotal interesting
unscientific anecdotal interesting survey to get um feedback and stories
survey to get um feedback and stories and find out if it's not just my small
and find out if it's not just my small circle of friends, but get it out to uh
circle of friends, but get it out to uh as many people as I possibly could. So,
as many people as I possibly could. So, I
I got
there it is. Um, lots of responses,
Um, lots of responses, 420 answers from 27 countries. Um,
420 answers from 27 countries. Um, and
and it was very enlightening. I came up with
it was very enlightening. I came up with the questions based on, you know, things
the questions based on, you know, things I know myself and
I know myself and research on other industries that spend
research on other industries that spend a lot of time working in offices and
a lot of time working in offices and creative industries like um television
creative industries like um television and movies and some things like that. Uh
and movies and some things like that. Uh the feedback that I got really surprised
the feedback that I got really surprised me. Um, everyone kind of knew that they
me. Um, everyone kind of knew that they were not taking good care of themselves
were not taking good care of themselves with their ergonomics and nutrition and
with their ergonomics and nutrition and taking breaks and getting enough
taking breaks and getting enough exercise. I have some really fun graphs
exercise. I have some really fun graphs I tried to shove into this short
I tried to shove into this short presentation and had to take out, but I
presentation and had to take out, but I will make available later because it's
will make available later because it's very interesting information. So, when I
very interesting information. So, when I talked to people though and in the
talked to people though and in the feedback that I got written in in the
feedback that I got written in in the hey, write anything you want. Um, they
hey, write anything you want. Um, they were like, we know this stuff. We know
were like, we know this stuff. We know we're not sitting up straight at our
we're not sitting up straight at our desks. Um,
are you going to talk about mental health?
health? Uh, and uh, please.
Uh, and uh, please. So,
So, I kind of went back to that. Oh, right.
I kind of went back to that. Oh, right. suicide and not taking care of
suicide and not taking care of ourselves, neglecting ourselves.
ourselves, neglecting ourselves. Yeah.
Yeah. So, the most depressing
uh answer I got on the survey was this one. Uh, how many hugs do you get in a
one. Uh, how many hugs do you get in a day? And at first, people were a little
day? And at first, people were a little confused that I meant at
confused that I meant at work, like in the workplace. So, I
work, like in the workplace. So, I clarified pretty quickly that no, I
clarified pretty quickly that no, I meant your entire day.
meant your entire day. Um, and if you if you look there, 192
Um, and if you if you look there, 192 people said they got
people said they got zero or one hug per day on average.
zero or one hug per day on average. Uh, and then the next biggest chunk is
Uh, and then the next biggest chunk is one to three. Like
one to three. Like this is yeah, not good. Um, there's been
this is yeah, not good. Um, there's been scientific research on this that uh
scientific research on this that uh hopefully I can make it show you.
hopefully I can make it show you. Yay.
Yay. Um,
Um, humans are social animals and we're hide
humans are social animals and we're hide hardwired to hug each other, have
hardwired to hug each other, have physical contact. Um, they've done some
physical contact. Um, they've done some really interesting research recently
really interesting research recently about how long to hug and how much good
about how long to hug and how much good it does and the fact that giving a
it does and the fact that giving a really good hug at the beginning of a
really good hug at the beginning of a day can last all day and have beneficial
day can last all day and have beneficial effects on, ironically enough, your
effects on, ironically enough, your heart health, um, like your blood
heart health, um, like your blood pressure and stuff. Uh, and holding
pressure and stuff. Uh, and holding hands helps. Petting your dogs does
hands helps. Petting your dogs does help. Um
the the kind of rule of thumb is that you need four hugs a day just to
you need four hugs a day just to survive.
survive. Uh eight hugs a day for emotional
Uh eight hugs a day for emotional stability and 12 hugs for healthy
stability and 12 hugs for healthy growth. And if you remember back
growth. And if you remember back we are not getting one hug a day many
we are not getting one hug a day many people in the game industry.
people in the game industry. Um, and this carries over into and you
Um, and this carries over into and you know is related to how many friends do
know is related to how many friends do you have?
you have? Um,
Um, and I'm not going to judge if you're one
and I'm not going to judge if you're one of these people that has 30 million best
of these people that has 30 million best friends or if you're one of these people
friends or if you're one of these people that has, you know, one best friend and
that has, you know, one best friend and that's enough and you feel fulfilled and
that's enough and you feel fulfilled and that's fine. But the scary statistics
that's fine. But the scary statistics are the ones that I highlighted that I
are the ones that I highlighted that I don't have best friends and I mostly
don't have best friends and I mostly hang out with people I work with. Now,
hang out with people I work with. Now, they're not huge numbers. Like most of
they're not huge numbers. Like most of the people there say
the people there say I have a few best friends and
I have a few best friends and acquaintances, but
acquaintances, but it's not fantastic. So, um,
it's not fantastic. So, um, one of the efforts that's going on right
one of the efforts that's going on right now is,
now is, um,
um, a support network that's being built up
a support network that's being built up for people who are, um,
feeling a lot of anxiety and loneliness. Um, it's called the Take This Project.
Um, it's called the Take This Project. It comes from the Zelda. Um, you know,
It comes from the Zelda. Um, you know, it's dangerous. take this.
it's dangerous. take this. It's dangerous to go alone. Um
It's dangerous to go alone. Um so there are some online support
so there are some online support networks that are springing up as people
networks that are springing up as people realize that um this is a real problem
realize that um this is a real problem in our industry. Um,
and to get
to get a little deeper into it,
a little deeper into it, um,
um, it has to do with like how much
it has to do with like how much stress you feel.
stress you feel. So, how much of your last year did you
So, how much of your last year did you spend feeling stressed out? And, um,
spend feeling stressed out? And, um, yeah.
yeah. 37% were stressed out for at least half
37% were stressed out for at least half their life in 2012.
their life in 2012. Um
I some of these statistics just start to get me really sad and upset and um
get me really sad and upset and um partly because I've had my own problems
partly because I've had my own problems with health that have been tracked back
with health that have been tracked back to stress.
to stress. And um
And um next slide. Yay. There some really
next slide. Yay. There some really depressing things out there about
depressing things out there about what kind of health problem stress can
what kind of health problem stress can cause and I've had doctors say this to
cause and I've had doctors say this to me and you know these kind of show it to
me and you know these kind of show it to that that pretty much any
that that pretty much any can any health problem can be tracked
can any health problem can be tracked back to stress. Uh, personally, I was
back to stress. Uh, personally, I was having hair loss. That's not something
having hair loss. That's not something that a woman my age generally thinks is
that a woman my age generally thinks is going to be a problem in her life. And,
going to be a problem in her life. And, um, my doctor said, "No, you're just
um, my doctor said, "No, you're just stressed out." And, uh, that's what's
stressed out." And, uh, that's what's causing your hair to fall out. And
causing your hair to fall out. And that's not fun.
that's not fun. So,
So, uh, yes, we have a creative industry
uh, yes, we have a creative industry who likes to do things at the last
who likes to do things at the last minute.
minute. Um,
Um, and kind of some people say they thrive
and kind of some people say they thrive on that, oh, the deadline's coming. But
on that, oh, the deadline's coming. But in reality, stress, like they've done
in reality, stress, like they've done studies, they can test this numerically.
studies, they can test this numerically. Uh, stress makes you less productive. It
Uh, stress makes you less productive. It makes you less creative. It makes you
makes you less creative. It makes you less coherent. It makes you less
less coherent. It makes you less rational. And it makes you less able to
rational. And it makes you less able to make great games. So if you're stressed
make great games. So if you're stressed out, it's actually impacting
out, it's actually impacting your ability to do a fantastic job at
your ability to do a fantastic job at what it is that you love.
what it is that you love. So um
So um let's talk about some of the ways people
let's talk about some of the ways people cope with this stress. Um
cope with this stress. Um caffeine was on my list. Um 19% said
caffeine was on my list. Um 19% said they need a daily fix, which is like,
they need a daily fix, which is like, "No, I need my daily fix." Um, and there
"No, I need my daily fix." Um, and there were some funny comments written in the
were some funny comments written in the other section like, "Oh no, there's
other section like, "Oh no, there's blood in my caffeine stream." And, uh,
blood in my caffeine stream." And, uh, there were some scary ones like, "I
there were some scary ones like, "I drink two to four lers of Diet Coke a
drink two to four lers of Diet Coke a day. Um, I use other stimulants that
day. Um, I use other stimulants that aren't just caffeine." I thought that
aren't just caffeine." I thought that was brave of someone to write in there
was brave of someone to write in there and admit that it's not just caffeine
and admit that it's not just caffeine that we use in our industry. And um
that we use in our industry. And um yeah, while working 16our days, six days
yeah, while working 16our days, six days per week, I was drinking coffee and Red
per week, I was drinking coffee and Red Bull and eating a leave cold and flu
Bull and eating a leave cold and flu medicine to get the boost from the
medicine to get the boost from the pseudo ephedrin till I put myself in the
pseudo ephedrin till I put myself in the hospital with atrial fibrillation. That
hospital with atrial fibrillation. That means his heart stopped working
means his heart stopped working correctly. So,
correctly. So, um,
uh, yay, my next slide has Grumpy Cat on it.
it. So, yeah, uh, it's the point I'm trying
So, yeah, uh, it's the point I'm trying to make is not necessarily about
to make is not necessarily about caffeine. It's about, um,
caffeine. It's about, um, using these things long term have
using these things long term have long-term effects on your health. Um,
long-term effects on your health. Um, and caffeine is not the most
and caffeine is not the most dangerous thing that our industry uses
dangerous thing that our industry uses to get by. Um,
to get by. Um, yeah. So,
yeah. So, the next question was, let's talk about
the next question was, let's talk about um alcohol and if this is to be
um alcohol and if this is to be believed, 32% of the game industry just
believed, 32% of the game industry just doesn't drink.
doesn't drink. Um,
Um, uh,
uh, no, but it's not like this is the only
no, but it's not like this is the only survey where that happens. Um,
survey where that happens. Um, pretty much every survey that asks
pretty much every survey that asks people about how their their drinking
people about how their their drinking habits, um, it's under reportported. Um,
habits, um, it's under reportported. Um, some people said that I get I drink to
some people said that I get I drink to get drunk more than once a week and that
get drunk more than once a week and that was 4% of the industry sample I had. And
was 4% of the industry sample I had. And that makes me worry like I worry. Oops.
that makes me worry like I worry. Oops. Um, and the rest of them all knew the
Um, and the rest of them all knew the right answer. Yes, I drink moderately
right answer. Yes, I drink moderately and not to excess and only with friends.
and not to excess and only with friends. Um,
Um, so this was the next slide statistic
so this was the next slide statistic that bothered me.
that bothered me. Do you have a hobby that does not
Do you have a hobby that does not involve games?
involve games? And I I couldn't make that up. 25% that
And I I couldn't make that up. 25% that is literally like if you do this 25%
is literally like if you do this 25% sorry it's it's another one 25% of the
sorry it's it's another one 25% of the game industry sample
game industry sample self- selecting that I had said no they
self- selecting that I had said no they had nothing outside of
had nothing outside of games that they did on a daily basis.
games that they did on a daily basis. So, um,
So, um, this goes back to what do you do to
this goes back to what do you do to cope? Um, with stress, with life,
cope? Um, with stress, with life, people, emotions.
Some people are not getting far enough away from their jobs that they
away from their jobs that they have even a hobby to escape from their
have even a hobby to escape from their job. Like if you're always playing a
job. Like if you're always playing a game,
game, that's part of your job as a game
that's part of your job as a game developer.
Um, yes. So, let's move on to the next one.
one. Um,
if you woke up one morning with really heavy, painful ache in your shoulder for
heavy, painful ache in your shoulder for no reason you can think of, um, what
no reason you can think of, um, what would you do?
would you do? Um,
Um, call in sick and play games. Is that 47
call in sick and play games. Is that 47 right up there? Uh, check in with a
right up there? Uh, check in with a doctor is 83. Um, ignore it. It'll go
doctor is 83. Um, ignore it. It'll go away. I have too much work to do. Is
away. I have too much work to do. Is that huge chunk?
that huge chunk? um answers in the other section mostly
um answers in the other section mostly had to do with people who um
have had this experience and they're like I'd call my masseuse right away and
like I'd call my masseuse right away and get an appointment or I'd call my
get an appointment or I'd call my chiropractor or like they they knew
chiropractor or like they they knew exactly what to do because they
exactly what to do because they have this problem. Um,
have this problem. Um, the one that kind of scared me was
the one that kind of scared me was Google it and then if it worried me what
Google it and then if it worried me what Google said, then I'd check in with a
Google said, then I'd check in with a doctor. Um, and go to work and obsess
doctor. Um, and go to work and obsess over it was scary, too. Um,
over it was scary, too. Um, so 68%
so 68% admit that they would ignore the
admit that they would ignore the symptoms of what could be a heart
symptoms of what could be a heart attack.
H this terrifies me for so many reasons. Um because pain in your shoulder is
Um because pain in your shoulder is classic symptom of a heart attack. Um
classic symptom of a heart attack. Um but even if it's not even if you just
but even if it's not even if you just slept funny, your body and your mind
slept funny, your body and your mind work together
work together and if we are ignoring things like hey I
and if we are ignoring things like hey I wonder if that's a heart attack. What
wonder if that's a heart attack. What else is it in our lives that we're
else is it in our lives that we're ignoring? Like we are
ignoring? Like we are a lot of those people said that they
a lot of those people said that they would call in sick but then play video
would call in sick but then play video games all day and not think about the
games all day and not think about the fact that they were in pain. And that's
fact that they were in pain. And that's just totally divorcing yourself from
just totally divorcing yourself from your mind and your body. And that's
your mind and your body. And that's not healthy. It's not going to help you
not healthy. It's not going to help you make great gains.
make great gains. Um,
Um, so
if I had to identify the game industry dangers, like danger, danger, danger.
dangers, like danger, danger, danger. So, the things that people talked about
So, the things that people talked about in their open-ended answers, um, toxic
in their open-ended answers, um, toxic bosses, toxic colleagues,
bosses, toxic colleagues, unrealistic deadlines,
unrealistic deadlines, uh, the shifting sands of expectations
uh, the shifting sands of expectations like, um, oh no, we've got to get this
like, um, oh no, we've got to get this over Friday or we're all going to die.
over Friday or we're all going to die. Oh, actually, it's Monday. What? Um,
Oh, actually, it's Monday. What? Um, unrealistic project plans. Yeah, we're
unrealistic project plans. Yeah, we're going to make an MMO in two months.
going to make an MMO in two months. Let's go.
Let's go. uh extreme pressure just this sense that
uh extreme pressure just this sense that the job or the game is everything and
the job or the game is everything and it's it's really not more important than
it's it's really not more important than your life. I promise. Um job insecurity
your life. I promise. Um job insecurity was a big danger uh because there are
was a big danger uh because there are layoffs for
layoffs for unexpected reasons all the time in our
unexpected reasons all the time in our industry. Um, so a lot of people are
industry. Um, so a lot of people are just worried that they're going to not
just worried that they're going to not have a job next week. Um, unc
have a job next week. Um, unc unconscious discrimination,
unconscious discrimination, um, women, minorities,
um, women, minorities, there's flatout bullying, um, creative
there's flatout bullying, um, creative dangers. This one is just the fact that
dangers. This one is just the fact that we're we're doing creative things and
we're we're doing creative things and it's scary to have this baby that you
it's scary to have this baby that you spend two years building in the safety
spend two years building in the safety and security of your own little studio
and security of your own little studio and then you send it out the door and
and then you send it out the door and people get on the forums and tell you
people get on the forums and tell you what they think. Um, it can be
what they think. Um, it can be hugely emotionally terrifying and hard.
hugely emotionally terrifying and hard. Um, and there are toxic miscommunication
Um, and there are toxic miscommunication loops. Um, that one I put in there
loops. Um, that one I put in there myself for a terrible project I was on
myself for a terrible project I was on that had
that had really every time we talked it got worse
really every time we talked it got worse and worse and worse. Um,
and worse and worse. Um, but
but just because these are dangers does not
just because these are dangers does not mean that nobody gets out alive.
mean that nobody gets out alive. It just means that you need to be aware
It just means that you need to be aware of what's going on. Like if you see a
of what's going on. Like if you see a sign that says beware of falling rocks,
sign that says beware of falling rocks, doesn't mean that a rock has fallen on
doesn't mean that a rock has fallen on your head. It means pay attention. If
your head. It means pay attention. If you know they're coming, you can avoid
you know they're coming, you can avoid them. You can watch out for them. Uh so
them. You can watch out for them. Uh so had to use a gaming analogy, of course.
had to use a gaming analogy, of course. So if you're in a good questing party,
So if you're in a good questing party, you need to be aware of what's ahead. Uh
you need to be aware of what's ahead. Uh and you need to prepare. You need to
and you need to prepare. You need to know you've got your healer and your
know you've got your healer and your tank and your ranged weapons user. And
tank and your ranged weapons user. And you need a plan.
you need a plan. And
And um I have written in my little speaker
um I have written in my little speaker notes Leroy Jenkins
notes Leroy Jenkins because a lot of times I feel like we
because a lot of times I feel like we are as game developers um and especially
are as game developers um and especially the young game developers are running
the young game developers are running into this
into this uh
uh business excited about it. totally
business excited about it. totally unprepared, not thinking about the
unprepared, not thinking about the dangers at all, not paying attention to
dangers at all, not paying attention to the plans and the warnings and
the plans and the warnings and everything that other people say. So,
everything that other people say. So, they're Leroy Jenkins.
they're Leroy Jenkins. If you don't know what I'm talking
If you don't know what I'm talking about, go Google it and have fun.
about, go Google it and have fun. Uh, okay. So,
we can't all be the tanks. Um,
Um, and even if we are, we have to switch
and even if we are, we have to switch out. If you've ever if you've ever
out. If you've ever if you've ever played an MMO multiplayer game, you know
played an MMO multiplayer game, you know you can't all do the same thing at the
you can't all do the same thing at the same time. So,
same time. So, uh,
uh, balance is balance is super important.
balance is balance is super important. And
how do you know when you go from, hey, this is weird. that I'm having a
hey, this is weird. that I'm having a hard time to actually I need help.
hard time to actually I need help. So, I'm kind of gonna pass this over to
So, I'm kind of gonna pass this over to Lydia. Not that she can actually see the
Lydia. Not that she can actually see the screen.
screen. Yep.
Lydia is um if you missed on the beginning uh based here in San
beginning uh based here in San Francisco, psychiatrist
Francisco, psychiatrist um and helped me out a lot with
um and helped me out a lot with like how do you figure out when you need
like how do you figure out when you need help
help for your mental health? Um,
for your mental health? Um, so, so, so anyway, I'm I'm Lydia Breen
so, so, so anyway, I'm I'm Lydia Breen and I've been practicing in the area for
and I've been practicing in the area for a little bit over a year, but I used to
a little bit over a year, but I used to practice in Chicago for 13. Um, this is
practice in Chicago for 13. Um, this is a little bit weird for me because I'm
a little bit weird for me because I'm used to one-on-one. I don't give a lot
used to one-on-one. I don't give a lot of presentations. So, as I've been
of presentations. So, as I've been listening to Wendy talk, I've been sort
listening to Wendy talk, I've been sort of wondering and contemplating what are
of wondering and contemplating what are you guys all feeling? And you're
you guys all feeling? And you're probably not going to tell us, but um
probably not going to tell us, but um you know, do you relate to these these
you know, do you relate to these these ideas? Do you have friends that you
ideas? Do you have friends that you worry about? Are you worried about
worry about? Are you worried about yourself? And and it may be possible
yourself? And and it may be possible that you're not going to actually think
that you're not going to actually think about that today, but maybe over the
about that today, but maybe over the next few weeks, these ideas will come
next few weeks, these ideas will come back to you as you're going throughout
back to you as you're going throughout your days. Um but yeah, so Wendy
your days. Um but yeah, so Wendy approached me and said, you know, I'm
approached me and said, you know, I'm giving this presentation. We kind of
giving this presentation. We kind of like to have an MD um to give some
like to have an MD um to give some credence to these ideas and also to add
credence to these ideas and also to add the part about psychiatry, about mental
the part about psychiatry, about mental health. Um how do you know if you have a
health. Um how do you know if you have a problem? Um well, people are different.
problem? Um well, people are different. Everybody's different. One person's
Everybody's different. One person's stress might be another person's joy.
stress might be another person's joy. So, it's not all that clear. And um
So, it's not all that clear. And um there's this concept of the baseline.
there's this concept of the baseline. I think I it's up there. Um we we talk
I think I it's up there. Um we we talk in mental health about our baselines. Um
in mental health about our baselines. Um some people never really get to a good
some people never really get to a good baseline, but those are the chronically
baseline, but those are the chronically mentally ill and probably not anybody in
mentally ill and probably not anybody in this room, but usually you can kind of
this room, but usually you can kind of look back and remember, okay, when was I
look back and remember, okay, when was I last really happy? When did I last feel
last really happy? When did I last feel really relaxed? I don't know how long
really relaxed? I don't know how long ago that is for you. Um it could have
ago that is for you. Um it could have been last weekend. It could have been
been last weekend. It could have been last month. It could have been a year.
last month. It could have been a year. Those those benchmarks are pretty
Those those benchmarks are pretty important. Um,
important. Um, and sure, we might have hard years and
and sure, we might have hard years and we might have hard months and we might
we might have hard months and we might not always need to see somebody. It's my
not always need to see somebody. It's my opinion though that it's always helpful
opinion though that it's always helpful to see a therapist. Mine too. Sorry.
to see a therapist. Mine too. Sorry. There's two. I do psychotherapy in my
There's two. I do psychotherapy in my practice. A lot of psychiatrists don't.
practice. A lot of psychiatrists don't. I believe in it. Um, there's different
I believe in it. Um, there's different kinds of psychotherapy. I can get into
kinds of psychotherapy. I can get into that later too, but medication can
that later too, but medication can sometimes be useful as well. Yeah. So,
sometimes be useful as well. Yeah. So, your next one is the danger.
your next one is the danger. Yeah. So, um rather than um putting
Yeah. So, um rather than um putting together an exhaustive list of the DSM
together an exhaustive list of the DSM diagnosis, um there's there's too many
diagnosis, um there's there's too many and I don't know for sure which ones are
and I don't know for sure which ones are the most common in your industry. They
the most common in your industry. They may not be any different than any other
may not be any different than any other industry where where work conditions are
industry where where work conditions are tough. Um there's a lot of them in this
tough. Um there's a lot of them in this area.
area. Um so but there are things that that are
Um so but there are things that that are obvious to me that probably depression
obvious to me that probably depression and anxiety are are pretty high up
and anxiety are are pretty high up there. Maybe ADHD and certainly as Wendy
there. Maybe ADHD and certainly as Wendy mentioned substance abuse that can make
mentioned substance abuse that can make all of them worse. Um
all of them worse. Um so if you're having trouble sleeping, if
so if you're having trouble sleeping, if you're having trouble getting yourself
you're having trouble getting yourself to eat because your appetite is low,
to eat because your appetite is low, those are kind those are kind of the the
those are kind those are kind of the the biggest ones that you want to be
biggest ones that you want to be thinking about. and and time is
thinking about. and and time is important. Um people can sometimes feel
important. Um people can sometimes feel unable to sleep or have appetite
unable to sleep or have appetite problems for a couple of days. That
problems for a couple of days. That might not be a big deal. When things
might not be a big deal. When things start lasting more like a couple of
start lasting more like a couple of weeks, it is actually a big deal. Major
weeks, it is actually a big deal. Major depression, major depression or a major
depression, major depression or a major depressive episode actually only
depressive episode actually only requires two weeks of symptoms to be
requires two weeks of symptoms to be clinical um of significance. So, we have
clinical um of significance. So, we have problems sleeping, um, appetite,
problems sleeping, um, appetite, problems tr trouble concentrating,
problems tr trouble concentrating, um, getting tired way too easily, just
um, getting tired way too easily, just not having enough energy to make it
not having enough energy to make it through the day most days. Um, lack of
through the day most days. Um, lack of interest in in things that used to cause
interest in in things that used to cause cause you to feel happy or give you
cause you to feel happy or give you pleasure. Um,
pleasure. Um, frequent feelings of guilt or
frequent feelings of guilt or worthlessness.
worthlessness. um
um the the sense of feeling sort of just
the the sense of feeling sort of just slowed down or an agitated feeling and
slowed down or an agitated feeling and actually people can see that in you
actually people can see that in you usually a slowed down or sped up look to
usually a slowed down or sped up look to you that can be part of depression.
you that can be part of depression. Um ready to go to the next one? Not
Um ready to go to the next one? Not quite. Okay. Um
quite. Okay. Um and generally of course depressed mood.
and generally of course depressed mood. Depressed mood most of the day every
Depressed mood most of the day every day. Um, constant worry, irritability.
day. Um, constant worry, irritability. These are kind of your anxiety symptoms.
These are kind of your anxiety symptoms. Having muscle tension all the time or
Having muscle tension all the time or most of the time. Next.
most of the time. Next. Um, yeah.
Um, yeah. Next.
Um, there are a lot of symptoms under panic attacks, but panic is actually
panic attacks, but panic is actually pretty common.
pretty common. And Wendy mentioned physical symptoms.
And Wendy mentioned physical symptoms. There are physical symptoms that can be
There are physical symptoms that can be caused by
caused by thoughts, by feelings, by mental
thoughts, by feelings, by mental symptoms. Um, if you're waking up every
symptoms. Um, if you're waking up every morning throwing up, that's probably a
morning throwing up, that's probably a bad sign. Um, if you have panic attacks,
bad sign. Um, if you have panic attacks, which um is like a very discreet and
which um is like a very discreet and quick event um of a sudden sense of fear
quick event um of a sudden sense of fear that usually lasts only 10 minutes in
that usually lasts only 10 minutes in its peak and decline. It has many
its peak and decline. It has many possible symptoms like shortness of
possible symptoms like shortness of breath, palpitations,
breath, palpitations, chest pain, even feelings of things
chest pain, even feelings of things don't feel real, fear of going crazy,
don't feel real, fear of going crazy, fear of dying, a whole bunch of things
fear of dying, a whole bunch of things that people have. Um,
some people might have a repeated thought or thoughts that they can't get
thought or thoughts that they can't get out of their head. That's obsessive
out of their head. That's obsessive thoughts or behaviors that they know
thoughts or behaviors that they know they can't control, they have to do in a
they can't control, they have to do in a certain way, like OCD.
certain way, like OCD. Um and then emotional lability like
Um and then emotional lability like crying way too easily. Um noticing your
crying way too easily. Um noticing your thoughts are racing, flying or not
thoughts are racing, flying or not actually needing sleep. Uh that can that
actually needing sleep. Uh that can that can be the opposite of depression. Only
can be the opposite of depression. Only needing 3 hours of sleep, you feel
needing 3 hours of sleep, you feel rested. Uh you feel driven to do more.
rested. Uh you feel driven to do more. Um
Um uh grandiose thinking and um increased
uh grandiose thinking and um increased involvement in pleasurable activities
involvement in pleasurable activities that have a high potential for painful
that have a high potential for painful consequences.
consequences. Um, and then substance abuse and we can
Um, and then substance abuse and we can talk about what the difference between
talk about what the difference between abuse and dependence is if you like. Um,
abuse and dependence is if you like. Um, obviously if you're hearing voices or
obviously if you're hearing voices or you're having visual hallucinations,
you're having visual hallucinations, that's definitely a sign of a
that's definitely a sign of a psychiatric illness. Um, having paranoid
psychiatric illness. Um, having paranoid feelings that people are out to get you.
feelings that people are out to get you. And um, suicidal thoughts, big one. Um,
And um, suicidal thoughts, big one. Um, if you're having suicidal thoughts
if you're having suicidal thoughts at all regularly, once a week, once
at all regularly, once a week, once every few weeks, that's that's not
every few weeks, that's that's not normal and it's something that you
normal and it's something that you should talk to somebody about.
Yeah, next slide. I think the next slide is um so how to
I think the next slide is um so how to get help. It's actually not that simple.
get help. It's actually not that simple. I wish it were easier. Um, most people
I wish it were easier. Um, most people will start with their health insurance
will start with their health insurance plan if they aren't independently
plan if they aren't independently wealthy. Um, you can do that. You can
wealthy. Um, you can do that. You can call your health insurance and say, "I
call your health insurance and say, "I need a psychotherapist. I need a
need a psychotherapist. I need a psychiatrist." Um, and they will give
psychiatrist." Um, and they will give you a list and then you can start
you a list and then you can start calling it. It is a process and it's
calling it. It is a process and it's unfortunate that while you're feeling
unfortunate that while you're feeling your worst, you have to now start
your worst, you have to now start calling and hope for calls back and
calling and hope for calls back and things like that.
things like that. There are many different um ways that
There are many different um ways that therapists are trained. So, I'm a
therapists are trained. So, I'm a psychiatrist. I went to medical school.
psychiatrist. I went to medical school. I did a psychiatry residency. Um but I'm
I did a psychiatry residency. Um but I'm also a therapist. I also prescribe
also a therapist. I also prescribe medications. So, those of us with the MD
medications. So, those of us with the MD can prescribe medications. Then there's
can prescribe medications. Then there's the PhD and then there's a social
the PhD and then there's a social worker. There's the whole range of
worker. There's the whole range of different trainings. They could all be
different trainings. They could all be good um at what they do in terms of
good um at what they do in terms of psychotherapy.
psychotherapy. Um there are different kinds of
Um there are different kinds of psychotherapy. You've probably heard of
psychotherapy. You've probably heard of cognitive behavioral therapy. There's
cognitive behavioral therapy. There's also psychonamic psychotherapy. Both can
also psychonamic psychotherapy. Both can be helpful for depression. Um anxiety.
be helpful for depression. Um anxiety. Sometimes things like OCD are really
Sometimes things like OCD are really better approached with cognitive
better approached with cognitive behavioral therapy.
behavioral therapy. And I think that's probably about Yeah.
And I think that's probably about Yeah. Okay. I want to um
Okay. I want to um step in with this last thought. really
step in with this last thought. really make sure I get it working on there.
make sure I get it working on there. Yes. Uh so know the laws in your country
Yes. Uh so know the laws in your country and state. Um
and state. Um one of the questions on the survey was
one of the questions on the survey was about hey your doctor says you need an
about hey your doctor says you need an ergonomic keyboard. Uh what happens if
ergonomic keyboard. Uh what happens if you go and tell your boss that you need
you go and tell your boss that you need an ergon ergonomic keyboard? Um, and one
an ergon ergonomic keyboard? Um, and one person out of the 240 said, uh, I get my
person out of the 240 said, uh, I get my keyboard because if I'm in a company
keyboard because if I'm in a company more than 14 people employed, uh, it's
more than 14 people employed, uh, it's law that I get if I have a doctor's
law that I get if I have a doctor's note, I get an ergonomic keyboard. So,
note, I get an ergonomic keyboard. So, um, there are actual laws on the books
um, there are actual laws on the books that help you to be safe at work. Um,
that help you to be safe at work. Um, I am not a lawyer. That's like the I I
I am not a lawyer. That's like the I I need to make sure that you all know I am
need to make sure that you all know I am not an attorney. I am not an expert in
not an attorney. I am not an expert in in labor law or safety at your
in labor law or safety at your workplace. But uh that doesn't mean that
workplace. But uh that doesn't mean that you can't go to the internet and uh
you can't go to the internet and uh educate yourself. Um,
educate yourself. Um, it's an important topic and different in
it's an important topic and different in different states and different
different states and different countries, but uh, OSHA is the place to
countries, but uh, OSHA is the place to start in the US. Hey,
start in the US. Hey, um,
um, so yeah, it's dangerous.
so yeah, it's dangerous. Be careful out there. Take care of
Be careful out there. Take care of yourself. Um,
you need to know that you are the one that's responsible for your own health.
that's responsible for your own health. Your employer isn't going to send you
Your employer isn't going to send you home when you need a vacation. Um,
home when you need a vacation. Um, unless you have an extremely nice boss,
unless you have an extremely nice boss, but your health is your responsibility.
but your health is your responsibility. You need to take care of yourself. Um,
You need to take care of yourself. Um, and
that's like my key takeaway message is learn about it, educate yourself, and
learn about it, educate yourself, and take care of yourselves because it's
take care of yourselves because it's dangerous out there, but we can do it.
dangerous out there, but we can do it. We can we can live, we can survive, we
We can we can live, we can survive, we can do this. So, that's the end of my
can do this. So, that's the end of my like official presentationy bit. I have
like official presentationy bit. I have other people here on the panel because
other people here on the panel because uh
uh yeah that's just hey this is who we are
yeah that's just hey this is who we are again. Um
real life war stories. Uh personally I've got a mystery disease
personally I've got a mystery disease that we have not yet figured out. I go
that we have not yet figured out. I go from doctor to doctor and um it's no
from doctor to doctor and um it's no fun.
fun. Uh we've discovered a few things.
Uh we've discovered a few things. Not all of it is, you know, jobreated,
Not all of it is, you know, jobreated, but things like, "Hey, my hair fall is
but things like, "Hey, my hair fall is falling out." They're like, "Hey,
falling out." They're like, "Hey, stress.
stress. Ease up on the stress." And hey, look,
Ease up on the stress." And hey, look, the hair stops falling out. It's
the hair stops falling out. It's remarkable. Um,
remarkable. Um, but I don't have quite the same like uh
but I don't have quite the same like uh direct
direct job related war stories that some of my
job related war stories that some of my panelists have if they're willing to
panelists have if they're willing to share.
share. Uh and we did get lots of war stories
Uh and we did get lots of war stories from the uh
from the uh survey survey people sharing um
survey survey people sharing um scary stuff like uh
scary stuff like uh my boss is so terrible that I can't
my boss is so terrible that I can't sleep at night.
sleep at night. Um,
I'm I'm drawing a blank, so you guys need to jump in and help me out here
need to jump in and help me out here because
because Are there any war stories of your own
Are there any war stories of your own you're willing to share?
Sure. Um, one of the things that really struck me
one of the things that really struck me from the survey was how many people
from the survey was how many people when given the opportunity to give
when given the opportunity to give advice to their younger selves
advice to their younger selves said don't crunch.
said don't crunch. Um, that crunch was not worth it and
Um, that crunch was not worth it and that no game was worth their health. Um,
that no game was worth their health. Um, I was the QA lead and manager on a
I was the QA lead and manager on a project.
project. um that had
um that had an extended crunch going up to ship.
an extended crunch going up to ship. Uh we shipped on Friday.
Uh we shipped on Friday. On Sunday, I came down with bronchitis
On Sunday, I came down with bronchitis because my body finally said, "Oh, okay.
because my body finally said, "Oh, okay. I can relax now." And I instantly got
I can relax now." And I instantly got sick. Um, I have heard stories of
sick. Um, I have heard stories of everything from eczema to hypertension
everything from eczema to hypertension to post-traumatic stress disorder.
to post-traumatic stress disorder. Um, resulting from
Um, resulting from bullying, office environment. Yeah.
bullying, office environment. Yeah. Office environments. Yeah. Um,
Office environments. Yeah. Um, those are really
those are really very real dangers.
very real dangers. Um my personal
Um my personal pet peeve
pet peeve um in this area is chairs.
um in this area is chairs. Um if you're working in a small company,
Um if you're working in a small company, you're likely sitting in a really crappy
you're likely sitting in a really crappy chair
chair and these ones like these ones.
Um I was working one day and realized that my
was working one day and realized that my arm was going numb.
And um as it turned out, it was because of my chair.
of my chair. Um and I ended up going out and spending
Um and I ended up going out and spending $1,500 on a real office chair
$1,500 on a real office chair because I decided that feeling in my
because I decided that feeling in my dominant hand was worth it.
dominant hand was worth it. Um
Um I one of the reasons I also started
I one of the reasons I also started giving this talk is that I had a friend
giving this talk is that I had a friend uh say you've got students you're
uh say you've got students you're talking to students tell them if there's
talking to students tell them if there's only one thing you can teach them it's
only one thing you can teach them it's to sit up straight at their desk have
to sit up straight at their desk have good posture because I've had five
good posture because I've had five spinal surgeries for
spinal surgeries for nothing. I was like were you in a car
nothing. I was like were you in a car accident? He said, "No, it was just from
accident? He said, "No, it was just from sitting slouching at a desk for 15
sitting slouching at a desk for 15 years, 16 hours a day." Um, and so he's
years, 16 hours a day." Um, and so he's got titanium rods in his spine.
got titanium rods in his spine. And uh,
And uh, and yeah, and it's um, I my my
and yeah, and it's um, I my my experience was um, I had what was
experience was um, I had what was suspected to be carpal tunnel syndrome.
suspected to be carpal tunnel syndrome. Um, and it got to the point where after
Um, and it got to the point where after about a year and a half of agonizing
about a year and a half of agonizing pain, uh, doctors were trying to get me
pain, uh, doctors were trying to get me to go for surgery. But, uh, it got worse
to go for surgery. But, uh, it got worse and worse. It got to the point of, um,
and worse. It got to the point of, um, burning pain from tips of the fingers
burning pain from tips of the fingers all the way up the arm to midarm. Uh,
all the way up the arm to midarm. Uh, sensations of freezing, sensations of
sensations of freezing, sensations of electric shock. Um, uh, drugs stopped
electric shock. Um, uh, drugs stopped working. Uh there was no painkillers
working. Uh there was no painkillers stopped having an effect. Um and it
stopped having an effect. Um and it eventually turned out in fact this is
eventually turned out in fact this is this is a positive story to come out of
this is a positive story to come out of this. Yay. Eventually turned out that it
this. Yay. Eventually turned out that it was all due to bad posture. Uh because I
was all due to bad posture. Uh because I used to do a lot of um a lot of rowing
used to do a lot of um a lot of rowing and I had big shoulder muscles. So bad
and I had big shoulder muscles. So bad posture. In fact, as I'm sitting now to
posture. In fact, as I'm sitting now to reach the microphone, I should be should
reach the microphone, I should be should be. But um leaning forwards like this,
be. But um leaning forwards like this, the pressure on nerves in the back of
the pressure on nerves in the back of the neck uh was called all those nerves
the neck uh was called all those nerves run down through your arms and
run down through your arms and everything uh was um purely all the
everything uh was um purely all the sensations none of them were biological.
sensations none of them were biological. It was just the effect of nerves being
It was just the effect of nerves being being pinched and squeezed. And I found
being pinched and squeezed. And I found this out um by accident uh climbing a
this out um by accident uh climbing a tree to get a Frisbee down for someone
tree to get a Frisbee down for someone and hanging from the tree stretching out
and hanging from the tree stretching out the arms. Suddenly all the pain went
the arms. Suddenly all the pain went away. Um so then uh for the next sort of
away. Um so then uh for the next sort of three or four months uh looked into this
three or four months uh looked into this in more detail and I'd been to lots of
in more detail and I'd been to lots of specialists already with no no results.
specialists already with no no results. Um and started doing uh yoga and taichi
Um and started doing uh yoga and taichi and uh gradually the symptoms went away
and uh gradually the symptoms went away and got much better and ended up with me
and got much better and ended up with me doing for the last uh seven years doing
doing for the last uh seven years doing uh Tai Chi uh quite seriously. So, I'm
uh Tai Chi uh quite seriously. So, I'm now fitter, stronger, and a lot
now fitter, stronger, and a lot healthier than I ever was before. Um,
healthier than I ever was before. Um, it's great for your health. It's great
it's great for your health. It's great for your mental health. It's very
for your mental health. It's very calming. Um, but I would never have
calming. Um, but I would never have bothered to get into that had it not
bothered to get into that had it not been for this this single experience.
been for this this single experience. Um, but I think the scariest bit was the
Um, but I think the scariest bit was the um the multiple doctors who were
um the multiple doctors who were suggesting surgery for something that
suggesting surgery for something that was literally not the cause of the
was literally not the cause of the problems. I actually have a picture of
problems. I actually have a picture of the surgery, but it's a little early in
the surgery, but it's a little early in the morning for showing it. Yeah, it's
the morning for showing it. Yeah, it's quite brutal stuff.
quite brutal stuff. I Yeah, I want I I use it for my
I Yeah, I want I I use it for my students who say, "Oh, well, you can fix
students who say, "Oh, well, you can fix carpal tunnel surgery." I'm like, "Hey,
carpal tunnel surgery." I'm like, "Hey, you want to see what that looks like?"
you want to see what that looks like?" Um, and then they say, "Oh, maybe I
Um, and then they say, "Oh, maybe I should work on my typing skills a little
should work on my typing skills a little better." Um,
better." Um, anything else or do we want to open it
anything else or do we want to open it up for questions?
All right, sounds like we've got question time. I can add more, but
question time. I can add more, but specific question. We've got a ton of
specific question. We've got a ton of So, as as people are walking up, we're
So, as as people are walking up, we're not having questions. Do we have any
not having questions. Do we have any questions? If you could go to the the
questions? If you could go to the the mic mic, that would be great. Then
mic mic, that would be great. Then everyone can hear
everyone can hear spot here. Um, I'm a student at Nor
spot here. Um, I'm a student at Nor Eastern University. I'm in game design
Eastern University. I'm in game design and uh I'm currently working in a lab so
and uh I'm currently working in a lab so I understand what you're like a lot of I
I understand what you're like a lot of I don't know I have had as experience as
don't know I have had as experience as you have in terms of like you know
you have in terms of like you know sitting in front of a computer but I
sitting in front of a computer but I definitely have dead weight you know
definitely have dead weight you know just hours upon hours just staying in
just hours upon hours just staying in front of a computer and my right hand I
front of a computer and my right hand I actually had to get a magnet um I think
actually had to get a magnet um I think magnetism helps a lot uh but I I still
magnetism helps a lot uh but I I still feel the pain and you know even testing
feel the pain and you know even testing beta testing as
beta testing as controllers, what have you. It's it's it
controllers, what have you. It's it's it is definitely when I have to do both the
is definitely when I have to do both the designing, scripting, and the beta
designing, scripting, and the beta testing, it can be could be a living
testing, it can be could be a living hell. So yeah, one of the funny stories
hell. So yeah, one of the funny stories that was put into the survey was that uh
that was put into the survey was that uh on the typing question, I had other and
on the typing question, I had other and they said, "Hey, uh for those of us who
they said, "Hey, uh for those of us who work on connect titles,
work on connect titles, we're all getting uh rotator cuff
we're all getting uh rotator cuff problems because we spend all day doing
problems because we spend all day doing this in our chairs and things like that.
this in our chairs and things like that. So, uh it can be anything. It's not just
So, uh it can be anything. It's not just typing, but any repetitive motion that
typing, but any repetitive motion that you do over and over and over over
you do over and over and over over again."
again." One of the key things that we ran across
One of the key things that we ran across is just how important it is to get up
is just how important it is to get up periodically.
periodically. And even just walking to the water
And even just walking to the water cooler and getting yourself a glass of
cooler and getting yourself a glass of water has a significant effect.
water has a significant effect. Should I show them that scary slide? I'm
Should I show them that scary slide? I'm going to show them the scary slide.
going to show them the scary slide. Yeah.
Yeah. Um has a significant effect on your um
Um has a significant effect on your um chances even of getting cancer.
chances even of getting cancer. Let's see if I can make it show up ever
Let's see if I can make it show up ever so beautifully as I do this from the
so beautifully as I do this from the left to the right. When I was uh
left to the right. When I was uh researching posture, I did a lot of
researching posture, I did a lot of reading about uh what's the best posture
reading about uh what's the best posture because a lot of us aren't strong enough
because a lot of us aren't strong enough to hold our posture correctly. Um and
to hold our posture correctly. Um and the best recurring uh piece of medical
the best recurring uh piece of medical advice I found was whatever posture you
advice I found was whatever posture you haven't been sitting in for the last 15
haven't been sitting in for the last 15 minutes. Um it is it's this thing of
minutes. Um it is it's this thing of movement. your body is really really bad
movement. your body is really really bad unless you have exceptionally good
unless you have exceptionally good posture. Um, and it took me uh probably
posture. Um, and it took me uh probably 3 four years into Tai Chi before I had
3 four years into Tai Chi before I had good enough posture to to literally sit
good enough posture to to literally sit still, completely still correctly. I
still, completely still correctly. I just didn't have the strength in all the
just didn't have the strength in all the muscles. But for everyone else, uh, for
muscles. But for everyone else, uh, for most of us, it's a case of just keep
most of us, it's a case of just keep moving. Um, I I have a friend who
moving. Um, I I have a friend who started yoga and one of the first poses
started yoga and one of the first poses that you learn in yoga is called the
that you learn in yoga is called the corpse pose. where you lay on the floor
corpse pose. where you lay on the floor literally and the instructor kept coming
literally and the instructor kept coming over and saying, "You're doing it wrong.
over and saying, "You're doing it wrong. You're doing it." She's like, "How do
You're doing it." She's like, "How do you do corpse pose wrong?" And he would
you do corpse pose wrong?" And he would push on her shoulders because she was so
push on her shoulders because she was so hunched this way that her shoulders were
hunched this way that her shoulders were not touching the floor when she laid
not touching the floor when she laid back on the floor. So, I mean,
back on the floor. So, I mean, yeah, get up and move around. This the
yeah, get up and move around. This the scary slide is that uh the yellow parts
scary slide is that uh the yellow parts of the day where you just get up and go
of the day where you just get up and go get a drink of water, that's considered
get a drink of water, that's considered moderate exercise.
moderate exercise. Getting up and walking around your
Getting up and walking around your office. Um and any moderate exercise
office. Um and any moderate exercise throughout the day greatly reduces your
throughout the day greatly reduces your chances of getting cancer of all things.
chances of getting cancer of all things. So you've got a question, so go ahead.
So you've got a question, so go ahead. It's actually not a question. Um, and
It's actually not a question. Um, and this is not my real voice, but um, I'm
this is not my real voice, but um, I'm with an 80 person company, so we're not
with an 80 person company, so we're not the super giant, but we're not small.
the super giant, but we're not small. Yeah. Um, the other thing I'm the
Yeah. Um, the other thing I'm the director of talent and culture, and I
director of talent and culture, and I came from other tech worlds, so I would
came from other tech worlds, so I would also say there may be some learnings out
also say there may be some learnings out there from the rest of the tech world
there from the rest of the tech world because they do it, too. Absolutely. But
because they do it, too. Absolutely. But we have an EAP. And so the other thing I
we have an EAP. And so the other thing I noticed when I came on a year ago is
noticed when I came on a year ago is most people didn't know it. So I feel
most people didn't know it. So I feel like the EAP fairy. I have little flyers
like the EAP fairy. I have little flyers and anytime somebody's looking stressed
and anytime somebody's looking stressed I'm like, "Okay, what's going on with
I'm like, "Okay, what's going on with you?" And if and then I'm like, "Oh, why
you?" And if and then I'm like, "Oh, why don't you consider this?" And so there I
don't you consider this?" And so there I mean there's there are tools that are
mean there's there are tools that are there people may not know about. Yes.
there people may not know about. Yes. Will you say the full EAP? I bet a bunch
Will you say the full EAP? I bet a bunch of people here don't even know what that
of people here don't even know what that is. It is a sort of a subset of your
is. It is a sort of a subset of your insurance policy that's called the
insurance policy that's called the employee assistance program. Uh usually
employee assistance program. Uh usually there's a 247 hotline. So, um, you know,
there's a 247 hotline. So, um, you know, definitely, you know, in a moment of
definitely, you know, in a moment of crisis, you don't have to wait until the
crisis, you don't have to wait until the next day to see if you still have
next day to see if you still have crisis. You can call the 24/7 hotline.
crisis. You can call the 24/7 hotline. Somebody will talk to you and they will
Somebody will talk to you and they will refer you. And typically, there is a set
refer you. And typically, there is a set number of free sessions for each EAP.
number of free sessions for each EAP. Um, and it doesn't have to be I'm
Um, and it doesn't have to be I'm depressed or suicidal. It can be I can't
depressed or suicidal. It can be I can't deal with the fact that my parents need
deal with the fact that my parents need care now or you know, my kids got
care now or you know, my kids got issues. And so it's also a way to get
issues. And so it's also a way to get other community resources that you don't
other community resources that you don't have time to go research on your own. It
have time to go research on your own. It can be a way to find that, you know, oh,
can be a way to find that, you know, oh, I do need a therapist. That's that's how
I do need a therapist. That's that's how I found one of my therapists once was
I found one of my therapists once was calling EAP. Right. So there's tools out
calling EAP. Right. So there's tools out there that even well-meaning employers
there that even well-meaning employers and employees may not know about. Yes.
and employees may not know about. Yes. Um so definitely go and ask. And the
Um so definitely go and ask. And the other thing is that um it's it's becomes
other thing is that um it's it's becomes part of your culture. If you're the one
part of your culture. If you're the one that wants to go walk or ride or
that wants to go walk or ride or whatever at lunchtime, we have a whole
whatever at lunchtime, we have a whole group of people that go every day at
group of people that go every day at lunchtime and they run and they exercise
lunchtime and they run and they exercise and they all do do it differently, but
and they all do do it differently, but what it is is that because there's
what it is is that because there's multiples of them, somebody's always in
multiples of them, somebody's always in the mood and that will encourage the
the mood and that will encourage the rest of the people to go. So, you can
rest of the people to go. So, you can you can start shifting your culture in
you can start shifting your culture in small ways um that are not uh going to
small ways um that are not uh going to freak anybody out. Yes. Um, there were a
freak anybody out. Yes. Um, there were a couple of things in the survey that were
couple of things in the survey that were like uh be careful about like
like uh be careful about like uh companies that have the gym and the
uh companies that have the gym and the food and the everything there because
food and the everything there because it's actually a trap. You're never going
it's actually a trap. You're never going to leave because you can just sleep at
to leave because you can just sleep at your desk and um
your desk and um yeah, so watch out for that. But but you
yeah, so watch out for that. But but you c you can be a force for change for your
c you can be a force for change for your colleagues as well like when you start
colleagues as well like when you start making a change in your own life.
Yeah. Yes. Uh this is for this question is for
Yes. Uh this is for this question is for Patricia and Adam but also for for Lydia
Patricia and Adam but also for for Lydia as well. Um I'm a faculty member
as well. Um I'm a faculty member teaching uh game development and
teaching uh game development and obviously that is a major issue with um
obviously that is a major issue with um trying to always fight that culture but
trying to always fight that culture but at the same time there's a certain
at the same time there's a certain amount that the students do need to do
amount that the students do need to do to be able to compete in the in the uh
to be able to compete in the in the uh to get into the career do you and I do
to get into the career do you and I do try and I have breaks every hour and I
try and I have breaks every hour and I have a big section about um cumulative
have a big section about um cumulative trauma disorder uh and health disorder
trauma disorder uh and health disorder in my um syllabus But beyond just taking
in my um syllabus But beyond just taking breaks, are there some other things the
breaks, are there some other things the three of you could suggest both for the
three of you could suggest both for the physical and the mental side? Just
physical and the mental side? Just little things within the classroom and
little things within the classroom and that I can start to kind of integrate
that I can start to kind of integrate help them integrate into their practice.
help them integrate into their practice. So, I'm going to do a shameless plug at
So, I'm going to do a shameless plug at this point. Um, uh, as a hobby, I run a
this point. Um, uh, as a hobby, I run a site called I Love Crunch, uh, whose
site called I Love Crunch, uh, whose purpose is to just document, uh, and
purpose is to just document, uh, and pull together, uh, what people are
pull together, uh, what people are saying about Crunch and what the
saying about Crunch and what the evidence is and the anecdotal stories.
evidence is and the anecdotal stories. Um and uh I get no benefit from this.
Um and uh I get no benefit from this. There's no ads or anything. It's just uh
There's no ads or anything. It's just uh it's there as a service for two reasons.
it's there as a service for two reasons. One is that a lot of uh a lot of teams
One is that a lot of uh a lot of teams and companies lie outrageously about
and companies lie outrageously about their crunch behaviors. Um and what I've
their crunch behaviors. Um and what I've seen working with students is a lot of
seen working with students is a lot of their impressions come from what they've
their impressions come from what they've read in the press. And frequently what
read in the press. And frequently what they're reading in the press is
they're reading in the press is bold-faced lies. Uh there's an awful lot
bold-faced lies. Uh there's an awful lot of it. It's been through multiple layers
of it. It's been through multiple layers of PR people. It's been through multiple
of PR people. It's been through multiple marketing people. Um and to combat that
marketing people. Um and to combat that was the main reason we started this site
was the main reason we started this site to document what's actually happening at
to document what's actually happening at these companies. So you can go there and
these companies. So you can go there and you can click on uh any company title
you can click on uh any company title and any any project title uh and see
and any any project title uh and see what's been publicly said not just by
what's been publicly said not just by the managers and the leads and so on but
the managers and the leads and so on but the engineers the artists the
the engineers the artists the programmers working on it. Um and I I
programmers working on it. Um and I I appreciate your your problem. you're
appreciate your your problem. you're fighting a a rear guard action against
fighting a a rear guard action against the overwhelming uh set of uh public
the overwhelming uh set of uh public statements by people uh who will go
statements by people uh who will go nameless cuz I don't want to be sued but
nameless cuz I don't want to be sued but making statements like if you do not
making statements like if you do not crunch you're unprofessional and you
crunch you're unprofessional and you will never work for my company. Um which
will never work for my company. Um which is completely outrageous and entirely
is completely outrageous and entirely wrong. Um but the uh the one of the
wrong. Um but the uh the one of the recurring things we see on the the
recurring things we see on the the studies is that um uh pretty much
studies is that um uh pretty much everything people think they know about
everything people think they know about their working habits is wrong. Uh you
their working habits is wrong. Uh you cannot self diagnose how effective you
cannot self diagnose how effective you are uh and how well you're working and
are uh and how well you're working and you have to get other people to verify
you have to get other people to verify it. Um uh there was a thing we did at at
it. Um uh there was a thing we did at at one team which we found worked really
one team which we found worked really well which was doing um uh Connect 4
well which was doing um uh Connect 4 playing it online anonymously with a
playing it online anonymously with a maximum of 3 seconds per turn. And uh
maximum of 3 seconds per turn. And uh it's such a simple game. We all know how
it's such a simple game. We all know how to play it. But it turns out 3 seconds
to play it. But it turns out 3 seconds per turn really checks how alert and
per turn really checks how alert and awake you are because you can lose in
awake you are because you can lose in three moves just because your brain
three moves just because your brain isn't functioning. And you can do this
isn't functioning. And you can do this after a cup of coffee first thing in the
after a cup of coffee first thing in the morning when you think you're wide
morning when you think you're wide awake. Um, and so we found doing really
awake. Um, and so we found doing really stupid tests like that, but really
stupid tests like that, but really simple ones was a massive eye openener
simple ones was a massive eye openener for all of us. Um, it would even show up
for all of us. Um, it would even show up uh did you go out and drink alcohol last
uh did you go out and drink alcohol last night? It made a noticeable effect on
night? It made a noticeable effect on how often you you won versus lost. Um,
how often you you won versus lost. Um, and my experience is beyond something
and my experience is beyond something like that that's very uh in-your-face
like that that's very uh in-your-face and evidence-based, no one is convinced.
and evidence-based, no one is convinced. Um, but I would I'd recommend doing
Um, but I would I'd recommend doing stuff like that because it's also quite
stuff like that because it's also quite fun. Um, uh, and I do that, too.
fun. Um, uh, and I do that, too. Actually, it's not the same game, but I
Actually, it's not the same game, but I I I play a game to see how alert I am
I I play a game to see how alert I am because I know if I'm alert, if I'm
because I know if I'm alert, if I'm really functional, I can win every time.
really functional, I can win every time. And when I lose, I'm like, "Okay, time
And when I lose, I'm like, "Okay, time time for me to stop because I'm going to
time for me to stop because I'm going to be making more mistakes that I have to
be making more mistakes that I have to fix tomorrow than I'm going to make
fix tomorrow than I'm going to make progress." So, yeah. And just one last
progress." So, yeah. And just one last piece of advice, get a hobby.
piece of advice, get a hobby. A hobby that is not playing games. Not
A hobby that is not playing games. Not games. Yeah, absolutely. That one that
games. Yeah, absolutely. That one that terrified me that 25% of the respondents
terrified me that 25% of the respondents had nothing beyond games in their life.
had nothing beyond games in their life. Uh the CAS are telling us we're done.
Uh the CAS are telling us we're done. Come on up and ask us the questions
Come on up and ask us the questions individually. Thank you. Thank you.