Um, so I think we should probably get started here because we've got a full 60
started here because we've got a full 60 minutes to get through. My name's uh
minutes to get through. My name's uh Richard Rouse. I'm a game designer,
Richard Rouse. I'm a game designer, writer, and director at my own company,
writer, and director at my own company, Paranoid Productions, where I'm working
Paranoid Productions, where I'm working on a experimental action stealth game
on a experimental action stealth game with some weird narrative stuff in it.
with some weird narrative stuff in it. Um, today we are here to talk about the
Um, today we are here to talk about the rules of the game. So, I am fascinated
rules of the game. So, I am fascinated by game design rules, uh, tricks,
by game design rules, uh, tricks, tradecraft, whatever you might call
tradecraft, whatever you might call them. you know, as game designers, uh,
them. you know, as game designers, uh, we spend our days making up rules about
we spend our days making up rules about the games that we're creating. Uh, so
the games that we're creating. Uh, so it's only natural that some of us start
it's only natural that some of us start thinking about the rules of, you know,
thinking about the rules of, you know, life itself and like how could I model
life itself and like how could I model this human interaction in this game
this human interaction in this game using rules? And then it's naturally
using rules? And then it's naturally that we extend that to the the art of
that we extend that to the the art of game design itself and think about what
game design itself and think about what are the rules if I could just follow
are the rules if I could just follow them, I could make my game fun. Um, and
them, I could make my game fun. Um, and so I've I've, you know, fascinated by
so I've I've, you know, fascinated by looking at these things and you've
looking at these things and you've you've heard of a lot of these. This is
you've heard of a lot of these. This is a a classic uh you know sometimes we get
a a classic uh you know sometimes we get these from other industries. This is
these from other industries. This is form follows function which was
form follows function which was originally said by Lewis Sullivan who
originally said by Lewis Sullivan who was a 19th century architect. Um you
was a 19th century architect. Um you know basically saying that you should
know basically saying that you should figure out what your building needs to
figure out what your building needs to do before you decide what form it should
do before you decide what form it should take which should also apply to games.
take which should also apply to games. Obviously you should figure out what
Obviously you should figure out what player is going to do in your game and
player is going to do in your game and then design the game around that not uh
then design the game around that not uh not the other way around. Um or you know
not the other way around. Um or you know we have this old chestnut which I did
we have this old chestnut which I did not actually know was from uh Nolan
not actually know was from uh Nolan Bushnell. Um you know it goes back a
Bushnell. Um you know it goes back a ways obviously. I had originally learned
ways obviously. I had originally learned it from the cube I got at the Ubisoft
it from the cube I got at the Ubisoft Design Academy. Um it contains a lot of
Design Academy. Um it contains a lot of wisdom actually. If you flip this cube
wisdom actually. If you flip this cube around it changes to say form followers
around it changes to say form followers function. So it's one of the smarter
function. So it's one of the smarter cubes I know. Um, so you should really
cubes I know. Um, so you should really think about the source of some of the
think about the source of some of the game design rules that you may hear I
game design rules that you may hear I find because uh if we look at the world
find because uh if we look at the world of say self-help books uh or or business
of say self-help books uh or or business help books or whatever you call these
help books or whatever you call these things often you'll find that the thing
things often you'll find that the thing that the people who are you know writing
that the people who are you know writing all these proclamations about rules to
all these proclamations about rules to live by or whatever the main thing
live by or whatever the main thing they're known for is giving advice right
they're known for is giving advice right that they don't actually have a craft of
that they don't actually have a craft of their own they've never made anything of
their own they've never made anything of their own they're just known for giving
their own they're just known for giving advice and that's fine I think it's fine
advice and that's fine I think it's fine to get you know useful advice from
to get you know useful advice from people who are more educated ation uh
people who are more educated ation uh you know educators than practitioners uh
you know educators than practitioners uh but the rules I find most interesting
but the rules I find most interesting are those from game designers whose
are those from game designers whose whose work I really respect. So for
whose work I really respect. So for example Sid Meyer is is famous for doing
example Sid Meyer is is famous for doing a lot of sort of things that you can
a lot of sort of things that you can capture in nice rule format for example
capture in nice rule format for example it's one of my favorite there are three
it's one of my favorite there are three types of games where the designer is
types of games where the designer is having all the fun games where the
having all the fun games where the computer's having all the fun and games
computer's having all the fun and games where the player is having all the fun.
where the player is having all the fun. you know, his point here being, you
you know, his point here being, you know, if you know, I've certainly heard
know, if you know, I've certainly heard a lot of game designers tell say this to
a lot of game designers tell say this to me of, you know, I really had a lot of
me of, you know, I really had a lot of fun making this game, but I don't really
fun making this game, but I don't really like playing it. Well, that's probably a
like playing it. Well, that's probably a bad sign. Um, and you should always
bad sign. Um, and you should always remember who the, you know, the end goal
remember who the, you know, the end goal is to make the player have fun, not just
is to make the player have fun, not just to have fun making the thing yourself.
to have fun making the thing yourself. Though, it's nice when you can do that,
Though, it's nice when you can do that, too. Or, you know, heavy computational
too. Or, you know, heavy computational games where the computer is doing this
games where the computer is doing this amazing simulation that is completely
amazing simulation that is completely opaque to the player. Uh, you know,
opaque to the player. Uh, you know, maybe that's not the best use of a game
maybe that's not the best use of a game either. Uh you know another quote I like
either. Uh you know another quote I like came comes from Brenda Romero who's
came comes from Brenda Romero who's sitting here in the second row um you
sitting here in the second row um you know she said uh the interface is the
know she said uh the interface is the gameplay saying that you know for you
gameplay saying that you know for you those of you who might be working on a
those of you who might be working on a game and you get all the systems working
game and you get all the systems working really well uh but the player has
really well uh but the player has trouble interfacing with it the player
trouble interfacing with it the player can't doesn't know how to control it
can't doesn't know how to control it they don't get good feedback and it's
they don't get good feedback and it's kind of not going to matter and you
kind of not going to matter and you shouldn't put off you know doing the
shouldn't put off you know doing the interface to your game until the end you
interface to your game until the end you sort of do that at your peril um or uh
sort of do that at your peril um or uh you know will write is famous for saying
you know will write is famous for saying a number of of uh quotable things about
a number of of uh quotable things about game design. Um, you know, I I feel sad
game design. Um, you know, I I feel sad having learned about the shutdown of
having learned about the shutdown of Max's Emeryville this morning and felt I
Max's Emeryville this morning and felt I had this slide in there for for ages and
had this slide in there for for ages and I loved a lot of games that came out of
I loved a lot of games that came out of that studio. So, it's sad to hear. Um,
that studio. So, it's sad to hear. Um, anyway, so Will Wright uh, you know,
anyway, so Will Wright uh, you know, said this about how you should really
said this about how you should really focus your game. Your game is not
focus your game. Your game is not complete until there's nothing else you
complete until there's nothing else you can remove. He attributed it to a
can remove. He attributed it to a expression about Japanese gardens, you
expression about Japanese gardens, you know, that, you know, they say they
know, that, you know, they say they should take out everything and then the
should take out everything and then the garden is complet. It's also attributed
garden is complet. It's also attributed to other industries. So, who knows what
to other industries. So, who knows what the actual origin of this maxim is.
the actual origin of this maxim is. Um, so when we look at rules like this
Um, so when we look at rules like this though, we should think about are these
though, we should think about are these rules really universal? Do they apply to
rules really universal? Do they apply to everything uh to all game types? And I
everything uh to all game types? And I don't think that they necessar
don't think that they necessar necessarily do. I mean, there's hundreds
necessarily do. I mean, there's hundreds of types and genres of games that we've
of types and genres of games that we've already made as an industry and as a
already made as an industry and as a medium. Um, and I think there's hundreds
medium. Um, and I think there's hundreds of types of games we haven't made yet.
of types of games we haven't made yet. to think that these rules necessarily
to think that these rules necessarily apply the same to everything or can be
apply the same to everything or can be can be so universal as to you know
can be so universal as to you know anything you might think you have to
anything you might think you have to follow these rules you know I don't
follow these rules you know I don't think that's necessarily true um I think
think that's necessarily true um I think that game design rules are personal not
that game design rules are personal not universal I think that the the rules
universal I think that the the rules people come up with define them as a
people come up with define them as a creator so if you're thinking to
creator so if you're thinking to yourself hey I want to make a game like
yourself hey I want to make a game like Sid Meer or Brenda or Will you know you
Sid Meer or Brenda or Will you know you might look at their rules and say hey
might look at their rules and say hey well I can learn from some of this and
well I can learn from some of this and then come up with my own rules that'll
then come up with my own rules that'll supplement that maybe some of their
supplement that maybe some of their rules I will move on from and not uh you
rules I will move on from and not uh you know and not have to follow that one.
know and not have to follow that one. It's a choice each of us have to make as
It's a choice each of us have to make as a game designer because I I just don't
a game designer because I I just don't think there are any completely universal
think there are any completely universal rules. So today that's what we're going
rules. So today that's what we're going to do is we're going to go through have
to do is we're going to go through have five speakers come up here for 10
five speakers come up here for 10 minutes each. They're each going to
minutes each. They're each going to speak about their own rules um that they
speak about their own rules um that they use in creating games. And these are
use in creating games. And these are personal rules, rules that you probably
personal rules, rules that you probably haven't heard other places um you know
haven't heard other places um you know that you may agree or disagree with. But
that you may agree or disagree with. But I hope that as you hear each of them
I hope that as you hear each of them you're thinking well how does this
you're thinking well how does this compare to my own philosophy? you know,
compare to my own philosophy? you know, how will this, you know, change how I
how will this, you know, change how I how I work on games in the future
how I work on games in the future potentially. So, with that, our first
potentially. So, with that, our first speaker is Laurelyn McWills. She is a uh
speaker is Laurelyn McWills. She is a uh uh a veteran of the industry, having
uh a veteran of the industry, having worked on everything from uh Full
worked on everything from uh Full Spectrum Warrior to the, you know, MMO
Spectrum Warrior to the, you know, MMO for all ages, free to uh Free Realms. Uh
for all ages, free to uh Free Realms. Uh she also worked on a a Snoop Dog game,
she also worked on a a Snoop Dog game, which I got to play while I was at
which I got to play while I was at Midway, but never made it out into the
Midway, but never made it out into the rest of the world, sadly. Um and in
rest of the world, sadly. Um and in 2014, she was honored as one of Gamma's
2014, she was honored as one of Gamma's top 10 game developers. So with that I
top 10 game developers. So with that I give you Marlin.
Hi. So my role that I'm going to be talking about is to stress emotional
talking about is to stress emotional connections at a systemic
connections at a systemic level. And when you look at the games
level. And when you look at the games that I've made, they're super eclectic.
that I've made, they're super eclectic. Uh you would think a lot of them there's
Uh you would think a lot of them there's nothing in common between them, but
nothing in common between them, but actually there is. There's a thread
actually there is. There's a thread between all of these games that they
between all of these games that they take not just character emotion, but
take not just character emotion, but player emotion and create a system out
player emotion and create a system out of it. So that's what I'm going to be
of it. So that's what I'm going to be talking about
talking about today. So as designers, we're all about
today. So as designers, we're all about making connections between player
making connections between player actions and how those actions are
actions and how those actions are rewarded in a game. And that can be
rewarded in a game. And that can be explicit UI, for example, like dialogue
explicit UI, for example, like dialogue trees, right? Which good ones tell you
trees, right? Which good ones tell you not just what uh is about, but what
not just what uh is about, but what might happen when you say it.
might happen when you say it. But also we think about it on the back
But also we think about it on the back end for feedback about the choices that
end for feedback about the choices that you've made like this from Darkest
you've made like this from Darkest Dungeon. We understand these tangible
Dungeon. We understand these tangible needs of a player to give us input and
needs of a player to give us input and for us to have the game do something in
for us to have the game do something in response. But really at the heart of a
response. But really at the heart of a player's interaction is not the
player's interaction is not the interaction itself. It's the motive
interaction itself. It's the motive behind that interaction. Basic human
behind that interaction. Basic human needs like for example the need for
needs like for example the need for wealth which is why players in MMOs
wealth which is why players in MMOs collect coins, right? To spend it to
collect coins, right? To spend it to feel rich. There's inherent value in
feel rich. There's inherent value in that. like the need for relationship.
that. like the need for relationship. You can see this behind a lot of the
You can see this behind a lot of the systems in boware games. Like a need for
systems in boware games. Like a need for mastery. This emotion is behind Dark
mastery. This emotion is behind Dark Souls. When you really think about it,
Souls. When you really think about it, it's behind the systems. And even the
it's behind the systems. And even the search for, you know, meaning in life,
search for, you know, meaning in life, these are all things that we know gamers
these are all things that we know gamers bring to the table when they come to
bring to the table when they come to play our game. But we think about
play our game. But we think about systems in a whole separate category
systems in a whole separate category from the emotional side of games and
from the emotional side of games and most design teams. In fact, when you
most design teams. In fact, when you think about it, they're even separate
think about it, they're even separate groups on larger teams. the systems team
groups on larger teams. the systems team is totally separate from the story team
is totally separate from the story team or whoever whatever designers are
or whoever whatever designers are traditionally charged with thinking
traditionally charged with thinking about emotion. We think it's a separate
about emotion. We think it's a separate part of the process. But ultimately the
part of the process. But ultimately the goal in every game is to elicit emotion
goal in every game is to elicit emotion even if that emotion is [ __ ] yeah I eat
even if that emotion is [ __ ] yeah I eat it zombie, right? That's an emotion that
it zombie, right? That's an emotion that we're trying to elicit from our players.
we're trying to elicit from our players. And I'll never forget an early GDC where
And I'll never forget an early GDC where I heard the System Shock developers talk
I heard the System Shock developers talk about creating a system where the last
about creating a system where the last bullet in a cartridge would always do
bullet in a cartridge would always do double damage because they wanted to
double damage because they wanted to push that emotional moment of it was my
push that emotional moment of it was my last bullet when I took him out. Right?
last bullet when I took him out. Right? That's thinking about your system from
That's thinking about your system from an emotional
an emotional perspective. So I'm going to talk about
perspective. So I'm going to talk about kind of a cheat sheet that I use and
kind of a cheat sheet that I use and show it to you and walk through a couple
show it to you and walk through a couple times that I've used it. So full
times that I've used it. So full spectrum warrior was a hardcore military
spectrum warrior was a hardcore military simulation. You control two squads of
simulation. You control two squads of four men each. uh US Army dismounted
four men each. uh US Army dismounted light infantry. So it started as an
light infantry. So it started as an official army game and what that meant
official army game and what that meant since we maintained that authenticity
since we maintained that authenticity was that there is zero tolerance for any
was that there is zero tolerance for any casualties on your team. Now in the
casualties on your team. Now in the training version that meant game over
training version that meant game over the minute a soldier died. But I was
the minute a soldier died. But I was looking at it as an emotional experience
looking at it as an emotional experience for the player. I wanted you to
for the player. I wanted you to understand what it's like to be a
understand what it's like to be a soldier on the field with a very
soldier on the field with a very documentary style feel to it. It was
documentary style feel to it. It was really important to me that you cared
really important to me that you cared about your soldiers dying, not because
about your soldiers dying, not because it was game over, but because they were
it was game over, but because they were your guys. So I started thinking about
your guys. So I started thinking about how can I design a system around the
how can I design a system around the human need to feel attached to another
human need to feel attached to another person. So this is the cheat sheet that
person. So this is the cheat sheet that I use. So you start off with needs,
I use. So you start off with needs, right? Human needs. These are not
right? Human needs. These are not necessarily game needs. So it's things
necessarily game needs. So it's things like a need to feel progress, a need to
like a need to feel progress, a need to feel individual, individualism, like I'm
feel individual, individualism, like I'm making my own way through this game.
making my own way through this game. Agency, right? Ownership.
Agency, right? Ownership. The second step in it is what
The second step in it is what interactions the players can actually
interactions the players can actually take in your game. So in for Spectre
take in your game. So in for Spectre Warrior that was interacting with cover
Warrior that was interacting with cover to take cover behind it or interacting
to take cover behind it or interacting with a trigger that might make an event
with a trigger that might make an event happen like a a car
happen like a a car bomb. And then the third part is to
bomb. And then the third part is to explicitly list player rewards. Now
explicitly list player rewards. Now notice this is a mix of systemic awards
notice this is a mix of systemic awards like mission
like mission advancement along with less tangible
advancement along with less tangible ones like emotional impact which is an
ones like emotional impact which is an award by
award by itself. So this forms a different kind
itself. So this forms a different kind of core loop than we're used to looking
of core loop than we're used to looking at. This is the experiential core
at. This is the experiential core loop. This is the core loop that goes
loop. This is the core loop that goes beyond just saying when the player
beyond just saying when the player interacts with A, B happens and he's
interacts with A, B happens and he's rewarded by C and that sends him back
rewarded by C and that sends him back in. This is a loop explicitly centered
in. This is a loop explicitly centered on the need the player is bringing to
on the need the player is bringing to the table and how you're going to
the table and how you're going to address that in your systems. So you see
address that in your systems. So you see some common translations for this like
some common translations for this like the combat loop. my need to feel a sense
the combat loop. my need to feel a sense of progress in full spectrum moria means
of progress in full spectrum moria means when I kill enough enemies or a certain
when I kill enough enemies or a certain type of enemy or certain specific boss
type of enemy or certain specific boss the mission advances right that's the
the mission advances right that's the combat loop but what it also led to was
combat loop but what it also led to was a system where the soldiers had
a system where the soldiers had personality because you needed to care
personality because you needed to care about them and if I can get this to
about them and if I can get this to play. Oops. One second.
That translated into the system behind the dialogue in full spectrum warrior
the dialogue in full spectrum warrior where the soldiers called each other by
where the soldiers called each other by name. They reacted to the environment
name. They reacted to the environment because you needed to care about them.
because you needed to care about them. And here's a really specific example of
And here's a really specific example of using this system. When we went into
using this system. When we went into usability testing, we saw this that
usability testing, we saw this that players actually did care about their
players actually did care about their soldiers.
soldiers. They cared about them so much that as
They cared about them so much that as soon as a soldier was a soldier was
soon as a soldier was a soldier was shot, they reloaded the game. Totally
shot, they reloaded the game. Totally took them out of the game, killed the
took them out of the game, killed the immersion. It's a system again. They see
immersion. It's a system again. They see past the, you know, past all the veils.
past the, you know, past all the veils. So, we needed a solution for that now.
So, we needed a solution for that now. So, go back to the chart. So, I'm now
So, go back to the chart. So, I'm now looking at this. I want your need to
looking at this. I want your need to feel a relationship, a close tie with
feel a relationship, a close tie with this soldier to result in what? I need a
this soldier to result in what? I need a reward. And actually, when I looked at
reward. And actually, when I looked at it, I realized I could make a mission
it, I realized I could make a mission reward. So what we ended up doing was
reward. So what we ended up doing was when a soldier in full spectrum warrior
when a soldier in full spectrum warrior was shot, it spawned an instant top
was shot, it spawned an instant top level priority mission to heal that
level priority mission to heal that soldier and then take him to the, you
soldier and then take him to the, you know, do field healing and then take him
know, do field healing and then take him to the unit for permanent healing. And
to the unit for permanent healing. And that mission objective meant players
that mission objective meant players stayed in the game for what I wanted to
stayed in the game for what I wanted to be the emotional moment instead of
be the emotional moment instead of seeing a system over, you know, a game
seeing a system over, you know, a game over screen. So I didn't let them see
over screen. So I didn't let them see the systems behind it. And the end
the systems behind it. And the end result was that players actually stopped
result was that players actually stopped reloading when we went into usability
reloading when we went into usability testing. And it ended up looking like
testing. And it ended up looking like this.
this. There's a cut in here because it's kind
There's a cut in here because it's kind of a long sequence.
Yes, sir. And you actually hear him call him by name, which is a very important
him by name, which is a very important element, I think, to your emotional
element, I think, to your emotional assessment.
at your service. So that's one example of how thinking
So that's one example of how thinking about emotions at the core can lead to a
about emotions at the core can lead to a system change. But here's a little more
system change. But here's a little more concrete example. Free roams. So free
concrete example. Free roams. So free was an MMO for kids and families. And
was an MMO for kids and families. And the core of Free Realms was that you
the core of Free Realms was that you could do anything you wanted at any
could do anything you wanted at any time. So you could be a ninja one minute
time. So you could be a ninja one minute and a chef the next and a postman uh for
and a chef the next and a postman uh for example. So that meant we had to think
example. So that meant we had to think about how do you level up as a postman?
about how do you level up as a postman? How do you level up as a pet trainer? um
How do you level up as a pet trainer? um does that have any parody with leveling
does that have any parody with leveling up as a race car driver? And really it
up as a race car driver? And really it comes down to this where once again I'm
comes down to this where once again I'm listing these are the free roams
listing these are the free roams specific elements and notice that
specific elements and notice that different things start to come up. So in
different things start to come up. So in free roams we had the explicit agenda
free roams we had the explicit agenda going in. We were going to reward
going in. We were going to reward laughter specifically right and listing
laughter specifically right and listing that out specifically sets our goals for
that out specifically sets our goals for the players in motion as a part of our
the players in motion as a part of our game. So again some of them are obvious.
game. So again some of them are obvious. You feel a need to progress. You kill
You feel a need to progress. You kill some enemies that give you XP. You level
some enemies that give you XP. You level up. Right? That's what all of us expect.
up. Right? That's what all of us expect. But what about these needs that are not
But what about these needs that are not usually recognized from a systemic
usually recognized from a systemic perspective? How often do you level up
perspective? How often do you level up by socializing? How often do you
by socializing? How often do you actually get an item for being
actually get an item for being individual? Right? These are player
individual? Right? These are player needs that we're just not recognizing in
needs that we're just not recognizing in our games from a system perspective at
our games from a system perspective at all. And so we took on some of these. We
all. And so we took on some of these. We said, "Okay, can interacting with an NPC
said, "Okay, can interacting with an NPC to get information produce laughter?"
to get information produce laughter?" And when you think about traditional MMO
And when you think about traditional MMO dialogue, it's actually pretty
dialogue, it's actually pretty dry. And we wanted to change that. We
dry. And we wanted to change that. We wanted to reward laughter. So we
wanted to reward laughter. So we actually spent a lot of time working on
actually spent a lot of time working on camera angles to get closer to the
camera angles to get closer to the characters, working on the exact way
characters, working on the exact way that the print looked at the the style
that the print looked at the the style of the writing. You can even see it in
of the writing. You can even see it in your response is thanks, right? A very
your response is thanks, right? A very positive response to give a very
positive response to give a very positive feeling. But even going beyond
positive feeling. But even going beyond that, we actually realized by using this
that, we actually realized by using this technique some specific problems we had
technique some specific problems we had in our game. For example, players were
in our game. For example, players were not leveling up and we were trying to
not leveling up and we were trying to figure out why. We saw in the metrics
figure out why. We saw in the metrics that they weren't leveling up the way we
that they weren't leveling up the way we expected. When we actually started
expected. When we actually started looking at it really closely, we
looking at it really closely, we realized the reason was because they
realized the reason was because they were socializing. They were hanging out
were socializing. They were hanging out with each other and having parties and
with each other and having parties and showing off clothes and all of these
showing off clothes and all of these things that none of our systems handled
things that none of our systems handled at all, right? Completely outside of our
at all, right? Completely outside of our systems. So, what this meant was we our
systems. So, what this meant was we our loop went like this. I have a social
loop went like this. I have a social need to interact with another player and
need to interact with another player and nothing, right? And what that really
nothing, right? And what that really means if you're working in freeto play
means if you're working in freeto play is you have something incredibly
is you have something incredibly unmonetized right there which was not
unmonetized right there which was not our motive but certainly it should be
our motive but certainly it should be yours because those emotional ties are
yours because those emotional ties are what make people spend money or stick
what make people spend money or stick with your game and what drive
with your game and what drive attention because ultimately that social
attention because ultimately that social experience is what's important. So we
experience is what's important. So we never got to the point where I I got to
never got to the point where I I got to take on leveling up through
take on leveling up through socialization which is something that
socialization which is something that still I'm still going at in another
still I'm still going at in another game. But what we did do was think about
game. But what we did do was think about another reward that we had available
another reward that we had available which was appearance items. So, my need
which was appearance items. So, my need for social status through another player
for social status through another player creates a social loop in giving me
creates a social loop in giving me appearance items. And we explicitly had
appearance items. And we explicitly had a ton of updates that featured player
a ton of updates that featured player appearance items specifically tied to
appearance items specifically tied to showing off birthday parties, those
showing off birthday parties, those sorts of events. Boom boxes that make
sorts of events. Boom boxes that make everybody dance. Our uh retention went
everybody dance. Our uh retention went way up. Players were very happy.
way up. Players were very happy. Actually, we made money off of those
Actually, we made money off of those items, which is a nice side effect. But
items, which is a nice side effect. But ultimately, what I like about doing this
ultimately, what I like about doing this kind of chart is that it leads to
kind of chart is that it leads to brainstorming. that leads you to make
brainstorming. that leads you to make connections that you might not make
connections that you might not make otherwise by explicitly treating player
otherwise by explicitly treating player emotions as a core part of your systems
emotions as a core part of your systems design and focusing on those needs
design and focusing on those needs really at the heart of it. What player
really at the heart of it. What player need, what human need are we trying to
need, what human need are we trying to satisfy because ultimately that's why we
satisfy because ultimately that's why we make games, right? We're trying to make
make games, right? We're trying to make em emotional meaning for players and
em emotional meaning for players and emotional meaning for ourselves as well.
emotional meaning for ourselves as well. Thank you.
Thank you, Laurelyn. I like how uh you know, not only will you, you know, I
know, not only will you, you know, I think enhance the the emotional
think enhance the the emotional experience by just having it part of the
experience by just having it part of the whole game and not just in the
whole game and not just in the narrative, but I think the emotional
narrative, but I think the emotional resonance you get out of systems is much
resonance you get out of systems is much stronger than like in a purely narrative
stronger than like in a purely narrative way. All right, our next speaker hardly
way. All right, our next speaker hardly needs much introduction. You know, only
needs much introduction. You know, only to say that if you've played an RPG in
to say that if you've played an RPG in the last 20 years, there's a good chance
the last 20 years, there's a good chance Chris worked on a an on entry in that
Chris worked on a an on entry in that franchise, particularly if it's
franchise, particularly if it's post-apocalyptic. Or you might know him
post-apocalyptic. Or you might know him as the lead designer and writer of one
as the lead designer and writer of one of the most beloved narrative games of
of the most beloved narrative games of all time, Plscape Tournament. I give you
all time, Plscape Tournament. I give you Chris Avalone.
Ah, so uh I thought I'd bring things down a little bit and talk to you a
down a little bit and talk to you a little bit today about embracing crap,
little bit today about embracing crap, which otherwise I've entitled Look for
which otherwise I've entitled Look for the Silver Lining. And what inspired
the Silver Lining. And what inspired this was uh every Wednesday at Obsidian,
this was uh every Wednesday at Obsidian, uh my two friends, my only two friends,
uh my two friends, my only two friends, uh Brian Mensy, who designed the uh the
uh Brian Mensy, who designed the uh the Vault Boy for Fallout, and uh Anthony
Vault Boy for Fallout, and uh Anthony Davis, who helped me on Nights of
Davis, who helped me on Nights of Republic 2. uh we go to the comic book
Republic 2. uh we go to the comic book store and we have very long
store and we have very long conversations about movies that we hate
conversations about movies that we hate and TV shows that we hate. And these
and TV shows that we hate. And these conversations go on for a very long
conversations go on for a very long time. And usually I discover that we all
time. And usually I discover that we all hate different things, usually about
hate different things, usually about movies and TV shows that I really like.
movies and TV shows that I really like. And I feel very victimized when they
And I feel very victimized when they tear into stuff that I really enjoy
tear into stuff that I really enjoy because I feel like they're not seeing
because I feel like they're not seeing the great qualities in these absolutely
the great qualities in these absolutely beautiful pieces of media. No matter
beautiful pieces of media. No matter what they are, they're
what they are, they're fantastic. Anyway, the particular movie
fantastic. Anyway, the particular movie that really set us off for one Wednesday
that really set us off for one Wednesday was I Frankenstein. And I don't know how
was I Frankenstein. And I don't know how many of you guys have seen this, but
many of you guys have seen this, but this is a great movie. It's as great as
this is a great movie. It's as great as Cube. It's as great as The Darkest Hour.
Cube. It's as great as The Darkest Hour. And it is great as yes Twilight and I
And it is great as yes Twilight and I will defend Twilight to my dying day and
will defend Twilight to my dying day and my undying day. Um in all these movies I
my undying day. Um in all these movies I think that there is something positive
think that there is something positive from a design perspective to embrace
from a design perspective to embrace that's worthwhile looking at. So for
that's worthwhile looking at. So for example, Cube Cube is not a great movie.
example, Cube Cube is not a great movie. A bunch of prisoners are thrown into
A bunch of prisoners are thrown into these incredibly similar series of rooms
these incredibly similar series of rooms that that have different colors, which
that that have different colors, which is great for your environment artists.
is great for your environment artists. And each one of them has a special skill
And each one of them has a special skill or ability that when they all get
or ability that when they all get together like an adventuring party, they
together like an adventuring party, they can solve the cube. Isn't that exciting?
can solve the cube. Isn't that exciting? So, we use that for example in Plscape
So, we use that for example in Plscape Tourman. We're like, you know what, we
Tourman. We're like, you know what, we don't really need to have a large number
don't really need to have a large number of party members to go through the
of party members to go through the Modron cube um because and also we don't
Modron cube um because and also we don't have to flex a lot of environment art
have to flex a lot of environment art resources because we can change the
resources because we can change the colors, randomly move the blocks around,
colors, randomly move the blocks around, and the artists really love that because
and the artists really love that because we were a very short staffed team. We
we were a very short staffed team. We also took that principle into the New
also took that principle into the New Vegas deal new Vegas DLC Dead Money.
Vegas deal new Vegas DLC Dead Money. We're like, "Hey, we're going to have a
We're like, "Hey, we're going to have a very very limited cast because we don't
very very limited cast because we don't have a lot of budget to play around
have a lot of budget to play around with." And each of their special
with." And each of their special abilities will help you solve the
abilities will help you solve the mystery of the Sierra Madre. Um, another
mystery of the Sierra Madre. Um, another piece of crap, or what I thought was
piece of crap, or what I thought was crap, was this series called the
crap, was this series called the Elementals, which had a superhero
Elementals, which had a superhero premise, which I consider incredibly
premise, which I consider incredibly boring, not just for super teams, but
boring, not just for super teams, but also for spell systems. So, if you're
also for spell systems. So, if you're doing spell systems like this, I'm not
doing spell systems like this, I'm not going to play your game. Each one of
going to play your game. Each one of them had a superpower that embodied one
them had a superpower that embodied one of the elements. And I'm like, "Oh my
of the elements. And I'm like, "Oh my god." Oh, it sounds like total total
god." Oh, it sounds like total total crap. It wasn't crap. They each gained
crap. It wasn't crap. They each gained their powers by dying. Okay, instantly
their powers by dying. Okay, instantly I'm interested. Okay, there. So, they're
I'm interested. Okay, there. So, they're all actually dead. But because they were
all actually dead. But because they were already dead, they got into the most
already dead, they got into the most horrible fight sequences where limbs got
horrible fight sequences where limbs got torn off, they got spears impaled in
torn off, they got spears impaled in them. And a few panels later, they got
them. And a few panels later, they got right back up, which from a narrative
right back up, which from a narrative design perspective explains why you can
design perspective explains why you can do catastrophic damage to a PC and have
do catastrophic damage to a PC and have them get right back up. And that's a
them get right back up. And that's a great hook for any computer game. also
great hook for any computer game. also at the elementals because I discovered
at the elementals because I discovered that I really love this comic. Um, in
that I really love this comic. Um, in this sequence, uh, this tiny girl here
this sequence, uh, this tiny girl here in subsequent panels beats the ever live
in subsequent panels beats the ever live ever living [ __ ] out of this butler in
ever living [ __ ] out of this butler in front of her. I'm like, what the It
front of her. I'm like, what the It turns out that little girl isn't a
turns out that little girl isn't a little girl at all. She's a projecting
little girl at all. She's a projecting telepath called Sanction who has the
telepath called Sanction who has the ability to reinvent his personality
ability to reinvent his personality every time he goes after a target. And I
every time he goes after a target. And I was like, "What the hell? That's the
was like, "What the hell? That's the most amazing thing I've ever heard of."
most amazing thing I've ever heard of." And I thought, "Well, you know what? If
And I thought, "Well, you know what? If you applied that to a protagonist in a
you applied that to a protagonist in a game, but instead of killing people,
game, but instead of killing people, every time he died, he changes
every time he died, he changes personality, that could explain why
personality, that could explain why thousands of players have a different
thousands of players have a different experience every time they play a role
experience every time they play a role playing
playing game." And also, uh, so me and Richard
game." And also, uh, so me and Richard argued about this one. How many of you
argued about this one. How many of you have read the comic Trans
have read the comic Trans Metropolitan? Okay, this is still gonna
Metropolitan? Okay, this is still gonna be valid, Richard. Still gonna be valid.
be valid, Richard. Still gonna be valid. I did not want to read this comic. You
I did not want to read this comic. You want to know why? Because the
want to know why? Because the protagonist is a journalist. You know
protagonist is a journalist. You know what? When I read comic books, I want to
what? When I read comic books, I want to read about superheroes beating each
read about superheroes beating each other up. Spider Jerusalem does not does
other up. Spider Jerusalem does not does not beat people up. But what he does
not beat people up. But what he does have is he has a series of kitchen
have is he has a series of kitchen appliances with personalities, which I
appliances with personalities, which I thought was fascinating. His coffee
thought was fascinating. His coffee maker is addicted to drugs and gets high
maker is addicted to drugs and gets high all the time. That is the most amazing
all the time. That is the most amazing thing I've ever heard of. And then I'm
thing I've ever heard of. And then I'm like, well, what if we took that into
like, well, what if we took that into Fallout New Vegas and we had a brand new
Fallout New Vegas and we had a brand new player stronghold where even though
player stronghold where even though Spider Jerusalem's appliances aren't
Spider Jerusalem's appliances aren't very helpful, the ones that you find are
very helpful, the ones that you find are very useful and they're just as
very useful and they're just as crazy. Um, so anyway, I Frankenstein,
crazy. Um, so anyway, I Frankenstein, which sort of set off this whole
which sort of set off this whole conversation. Very well reviewed. Very
conversation. Very well reviewed. Very well reviewed. But there's things to
well reviewed. But there's things to like about this movie. Okay, aside from
like about this movie. Okay, aside from the fact that Frankenstein's monster
the fact that Frankenstein's monster Adam looks like he just just stepped out
Adam looks like he just just stepped out of a J GQ catalog, I really like the
of a J GQ catalog, I really like the fact that his immediate environment
fact that his immediate environment emphasizes how debilitated his physical
emphasizes how debilitated his physical condition is. Like it actually looks
condition is. Like it actually looks stitched together just like he is. I'm
stitched together just like he is. I'm like, "Okay, well that's kind of cool."
like, "Okay, well that's kind of cool." Also, they had some pretty cool weapon
Also, they had some pretty cool weapon design I Frankenstein. Aside from the
design I Frankenstein. Aside from the fact the protagonist gets a hold of all
fact the protagonist gets a hold of all the cool weapons, which is what you want
the cool weapons, which is what you want every player in your game to do, they
every player in your game to do, they actually had it set up so this cool
actually had it set up so this cool segmented battle axe actually acted as a
segmented battle axe actually acted as a key that opened various vault doors in
key that opened various vault doors in the game. I'm like, "Okay, I'm sorry.
the game. I'm like, "Okay, I'm sorry. It's a movie. Oh, I'm getting confused."
It's a movie. Oh, I'm getting confused." Um, and I thought that was pretty neat,
Um, and I thought that was pretty neat, aside from just being a badass weapon.
aside from just being a badass weapon. Even better, they had these symbols in
Even better, they had these symbols in the environment where when they actually
the environment where when they actually threw the enemies against them, the
threw the enemies against them, the enemies would explode in these great
enemies would explode in these great bursts of fire. And those symbols were
bursts of fire. And those symbols were on weapons. that was the only way to
on weapons. that was the only way to kill these enemies. But from a game
kill these enemies. But from a game design perspective, that's really cool.
design perspective, that's really cool. That's a really a nice way of making
That's a really a nice way of making your environment matter. Like look for
your environment matter. Like look for where these symbols are. How do I punch
where these symbols are. How do I punch the enemy into it? How do I impale the
the enemy into it? How do I impale the enemy on these symbols to take them out
enemy on these symbols to take them out when I have no other weapons at my
when I have no other weapons at my disposal? I think that's [ __ ] cool.
disposal? I think that's [ __ ] cool. And darkest hour. Oh, this was a really
And darkest hour. Oh, this was a really great one. Oh, it's even but it's better
great one. Oh, it's even but it's better than I
than I Frankenstein. So anyway, energy draining
Frankenstein. So anyway, energy draining aliens come to Earth. They come to
aliens come to Earth. They come to Moscow. They come to all everywhere. A
Moscow. They come to all everywhere. A small party of adventurers must be
small party of adventurers must be united to stop this grave threat from
united to stop this grave threat from beyond. But what the way they do it is
beyond. But what the way they do it is one of them is actually the the inventor
one of them is actually the the inventor of this social app that tracks where the
of this social app that tracks where the other potential party members are and
other potential party members are and gets them into the party. And I'm like,
gets them into the party. And I'm like, hey, that's kind of a cool game design
hey, that's kind of a cool game design thing. And that explains why they can
thing. And that explains why they can all get together and speak the same
all get together and speak the same language. That's awesome. Also, the
language. That's awesome. Also, the aliens in Darkest Star are a little bit
aliens in Darkest Star are a little bit interesting because they are invisible
interesting because they are invisible until they get near a piece of machinery
until they get near a piece of machinery that can be turned on with electricity.
that can be turned on with electricity. So, you could actually pay attention to
So, you could actually pay attention to your environment and see these invisible
your environment and see these invisible creatures depending on just where you
creatures depending on just where you scan and where you look for where they
scan and where you look for where they might turn something on. And I thought
might turn something on. And I thought it was a really cool way for environment
it was a really cool way for environment design to pay attention to your
design to pay attention to your surroundings.
surroundings. or if you actually had light bulbs on
or if you actually had light bulbs on you, they would light up whenever the
you, they would light up whenever the invisible creatures came nearby or cell
invisible creatures came nearby or cell phones would go off. Or if you're an
phones would go off. Or if you're an advanced player, you can play a higher
advanced player, you can play a higher risk game of luring the aliens close to
risk game of luring the aliens close to things like elevators, buses, subway
things like elevators, buses, subway trains that you really need to advance
trains that you really need to advance to the next level. And I thought that
to the next level. And I thought that was pretty
was pretty cool. So, a micro design trick, which
cool. So, a micro design trick, which I'm going to slip in here, is the idea
I'm going to slip in here, is the idea of special features. You should always
of special features. You should always watch the special features for any movie
watch the special features for any movie that you watch. And here's my special
that you watch. And here's my special feature for you. Every single movie I
feature for you. Every single movie I watch, I try and do it on the iPad so I
watch, I try and do it on the iPad so I can take screen screen captures and give
can take screen screen captures and give it as reference art to every other
it as reference art to every other department at the studio when I need to
department at the studio when I need to explain what I'm talking about. But
explain what I'm talking about. But anyway, back to movies like Twilight. I
anyway, back to movies like Twilight. I probably should have used Fifty Shades
probably should have used Fifty Shades of Gray, but I'm sure there's more ways
of Gray, but I'm sure there's more ways to make that exciting that I just simply
to make that exciting that I just simply have not thought about. Um, I think
have not thought about. Um, I think every creative director and designer
every creative director and designer needs to embrace why people like a
needs to embrace why people like a certain form of media. no matter what it
certain form of media. no matter what it takes because sometimes all those bad
takes because sometimes all those bad ideas will give you a lot of
ideas will give you a lot of inspiration. And what I usually do
inspiration. And what I usually do instead of leaving notes in my books, I
instead of leaving notes in my books, I actually use my Kindle to make all the
actually use my Kindle to make all the notes and I do like numeric codes for
notes and I do like numeric codes for each entry and then I run a batch file
each entry and then I run a batch file and then I organize those into different
and then I organize those into different documents and that allows me to use them
documents and that allows me to use them as a source of inspiration which I for
as a source of inspiration which I for when I want to create art. I don't get
when I want to create art. I don't get bogged down with going through notes
bogged down with going through notes because it's already organized. Anyway,
because it's already organized. Anyway, Twilight. Uh, so Twilight a little bit
Twilight. Uh, so Twilight a little bit better than the other movies. Um, but
better than the other movies. Um, but what you know, as much as you may not be
what you know, as much as you may not be a romantic just like me, um, there are
a romantic just like me, um, there are good things about the romance in this
good things about the romance in this movie, aside from the creepy stalkery
movie, aside from the creepy stalkery elements, and note the the subtle use of
elements, and note the the subtle use of the owl wings behind Edward there. Isn't
the owl wings behind Edward there. Isn't that subtle? That is very
that subtle? That is very subtle. I like little touches like the
subtle. I like little touches like the fact when they go on a date and the
fact when they go on a date and the waitress is trying to flirt with Edward,
waitress is trying to flirt with Edward, he totally blows her off. You know, I
he totally blows her off. You know, I bet that's a very nice little touch.
bet that's a very nice little touch. It's a very human moment. It shows how
It's a very human moment. It shows how much he cares about Bella. I'm all for
much he cares about Bella. I'm all for that. I like the fact that her dad isn't
that. I like the fact that her dad isn't a dick. I'm like, "Wow, no more real
a dick. I'm like, "Wow, no more real parental rebellion here. At least one of
parental rebellion here. At least one of the family members in the situation is
the family members in the situation is actually a good person." I liked the
actually a good person." I liked the fact that each of the vampires had their
fact that each of the vampires had their own unique ability. I'm like, "That's
own unique ability. I'm like, "That's kind of nice." And also, this was the
kind of nice." And also, this was the touch that really did it for me. They in
touch that really did it for me. They in Edward's house, they have this display
Edward's house, they have this display of all the graduation caps they've
of all the graduation caps they've accumulated over the years because
accumulated over the years because they've graduated high school. so many
they've graduated high school. so many times and I'm like, you know what, the
times and I'm like, you know what, the ab she absolutely did not have to put
ab she absolutely did not have to put that touch in the book or the movie. And
that touch in the book or the movie. And guess what? It's there. It's a nice
guess what? It's there. It's a nice subtle way of reinforcing their
subtle way of reinforcing their immortality. So, I guess my point today
immortality. So, I guess my point today is take what you would consider to be
is take what you would consider to be crap or a negative experience. It might
crap or a negative experience. It might take itself too seriously. Find a way to
take itself too seriously. Find a way to transform that element into something
transform that element into something that people love, and chances are you'll
that people love, and chances are you'll make a really good game element out of
make a really good game element out of it. Thank you.
And the great the great thing about uh stealing from I Frankenstein instead of
stealing from I Frankenstein instead of say Alien and Star Wars and Blackhawk
say Alien and Star Wars and Blackhawk Down again is probably no one stolen
Down again is probably no one stolen that stuff from my Frankenstein yet. So
that stuff from my Frankenstein yet. So your game will seem original even though
your game will seem original even though you're not
creative. So our next speaker, speaking of not creative, uh is Dan Teasdale.
of not creative, uh is Dan Teasdale. Sorry, I'm just burning all the bridges.
Sorry, I'm just burning all the bridges. Uh, well, he's about to embarrass me, so
Uh, well, he's about to embarrass me, so I just had to go for it. Um, so our next
I just had to go for it. Um, so our next speaker, you may know from having worked
speaker, you may know from having worked on big franchises like Destroy All
on big franchises like Destroy All Humans or Rock Band. You may know him
Humans or Rock Band. You may know him from the puppeteering connect game, The
from the puppeteering connect game, The Gun Stringer. But what you should know
Gun Stringer. But what you should know him from is the absurdest indie game he
him from is the absurdest indie game he released last year called Roundabout,
released last year called Roundabout, which brought back FMV. And why you
which brought back FMV. And why you should listen to game design advice from
should listen to game design advice from someone who loves FMV so much. Well, I
someone who loves FMV so much. Well, I guess you're about to find out. Dan
guess you're about to find out. Dan Tale.
Thank you for that ringing endorsement there, Richard. So, hey everyone, thanks
there, Richard. So, hey everyone, thanks for coming out. This might come as a bit
for coming out. This might come as a bit of a surprise given that I'm talking on
of a surprise given that I'm talking on a design theory panel, but I'm actually
a design theory panel, but I'm actually not a big intense design theory kind of
not a big intense design theory kind of guy. Instead of spending my time writing
guy. Instead of spending my time writing books or blog posts, uh I instead spent
books or blog posts, uh I instead spent it creating things like the world's
it creating things like the world's number one allmale game development
number one allmale game development pinup calendar.
pinup calendar. Having said that, there was one design
Having said that, there was one design concept that's intrigued me for a while.
concept that's intrigued me for a while. It's a concept about a magic number. And
It's a concept about a magic number. And it's a magic number that I think every
it's a magic number that I think every designer in this room has used. And it's
designer in this room has used. And it's one that until a few years back, I had
one that until a few years back, I had no idea why. And it's about this guy
no idea why. And it's about this guy here, the number three. Three is kind of
here, the number three. Three is kind of a big deal when it comes to magic
a big deal when it comes to magic numbers. If you've played games for a
numbers. If you've played games for a while, you probably noticed that threes
while, you probably noticed that threes and to a lesser degree fives are popular
and to a lesser degree fives are popular numbers. number of starting lives, the
numbers. number of starting lives, the number of Angry Birds stars, even things
number of Angry Birds stars, even things like the number of Mario Kart turns to
like the number of Mario Kart turns to reach full boost. They're all balanced
reach full boost. They're all balanced to the number
to the number three. Obviously, three is a magic
three. Obviously, three is a magic number, but why? Just saying that it's a
number, but why? Just saying that it's a design habit doesn't really get into the
design habit doesn't really get into the root of why it became a habit. There's
root of why it became a habit. There's clearly something to this number beyond
clearly something to this number beyond random coincidence. So, I started diving
random coincidence. So, I started diving into why this was, and it turns out it
into why this was, and it turns out it stems from how the human brain deals
stems from how the human brain deals with information. My one weird trick is
with information. My one weird trick is actually based around two different
actually based around two different theories of the human
theories of the human brain. You may have heard of the magic
brain. You may have heard of the magic number seven plus or minus two. It was
number seven plus or minus two. It was discovered by this not at all creepy guy
discovered by this not at all creepy guy named George
named George Miller. The whole idea is that your
Miller. The whole idea is that your short-term memory can only hold five to
short-term memory can only hold five to only remember five to nine objects at
only remember five to nine objects at once. And this seems like a pretty
once. And this seems like a pretty useful piece of knowledge at first
useful piece of knowledge at first glance. And it gives us a pretty strong
glance. And it gives us a pretty strong hint as to why five is a magic number in
hint as to why five is a magic number in games. But there's a second part to this
games. But there's a second part to this which is equally
which is equally important. The second part is based on
important. The second part is based on research by this dude uh Herbert A.
research by this dude uh Herbert A. Simon. Uh while George Miller wanted to
Simon. Uh while George Miller wanted to find the largest amount that short-term
find the largest amount that short-term memory could hold, Herb here realized
memory could hold, Herb here realized that the total space is actually divided
that the total space is actually divided into what he called chunks. While those
into what he called chunks. While those can be different sizes, the best size is
can be different sizes, the best size is actually three units of
actually three units of things. So we can use these two theories
things. So we can use these two theories to get a nice rough rule set of how of
to get a nice rough rule set of how of the human brain's constraints.
the human brain's constraints. five to nine items of which the brain's
five to nine items of which the brain's ideal container size or chunk size is
ideal container size or chunk size is three means at most we're dealing with
three means at most we're dealing with three chunks that can carry three items
three chunks that can carry three items each nine items
each nine items total example of how this
total example of how this works
number splits it into chunks of two to three units you're most likely going to
three units you're most likely going to separate it into a three-digit chunk and
separate it into a three-digit chunk and two two-digit chunks that's because the
two two-digit chunks that's because the separator is providing a hint to your
separator is providing a hint to your brain on how to chunk this information.
brain on how to chunk this information. It's a really good example of why
It's a really good example of why separators and delimiters are really
separators and delimiters are really important. Having a comma and a
important. Having a comma and a four-digit number isn't just pretty. It
four-digit number isn't just pretty. It lets your brain chunk the importance
lets your brain chunk the importance single digit on one side while spending
single digit on one side while spending less time on the remaining three digits
less time on the remaining three digits on the other side. This isn't the only
on the other side. This isn't the only way to chunk this number, though. If you
way to chunk this number, though. If you heard the song before you saw the number
heard the song before you saw the number on paper, you probably chunked it to the
on paper, you probably chunked it to the beat. two chunks for the first bar, one
beat. two chunks for the first bar, one chunk for the remaining digits in the
chunk for the remaining digits in the second bar. And this is completely
second bar. And this is completely valid. Your perception of the number
valid. Your perception of the number doesn't have to be visual only. It can
doesn't have to be visual only. It can be audible, too. In both these cases,
be audible, too. In both these cases, your brain is trying to organize this
your brain is trying to organize this data into three neat chunks. So, let's
data into three neat chunks. So, let's try and break that. If we split the
try and break that. If we split the Jenny number into four chunks, your
Jenny number into four chunks, your brain has a harder time remembering it.
brain has a harder time remembering it. I mean, you can probably remember this
I mean, you can probably remember this if you actively try and internalize it,
if you actively try and internalize it, but it's an uncomfortable process
but it's an uncomfortable process because you're dealing with a set of
because you're dealing with a set of chunks that's larger than three. It's
chunks that's larger than three. It's also probably why you'd have a harder
also probably why you'd have a harder time remembering this 10digit number.
time remembering this 10digit number. Your brain is trying to fit this into
Your brain is trying to fit this into three groups, but it can't easily
three groups, but it can't easily without a number falling off. But wait,
without a number falling off. But wait, you might say, if you're smart, that's
you might say, if you're smart, that's just Jenny's number backwards with an LA
just Jenny's number backwards with an LA area code. I can totally remember that
area code. I can totally remember that now. And you'd be right. I bet you can
now. And you'd be right. I bet you can even remember this 15digit number if you
even remember this 15digit number if you know US area codes, 80s songs, and
know US area codes, 80s songs, and you've played Call of
you've played Call of Duty. And that's because in this
Duty. And that's because in this case, in this case, we're not dealing
case, in this case, we're not dealing with short-term memory alone. After 30
with short-term memory alone. After 30 seconds, if everything goes well, your
seconds, if everything goes well, your brain will try and move that information
brain will try and move that information into intermediate memory. And then two
into intermediate memory. And then two to three hours later, if everything goes
to three hours later, if everything goes well again, it goes into long-term
well again, it goes into long-term memory. In long-term memory, these
memory. In long-term memory, these chunks of objects become unique objects
chunks of objects become unique objects themselves. Your brain is essentially
themselves. Your brain is essentially compressing the starter for you. Anyway,
compressing the starter for you. Anyway, you're probably super bored of this
you're probably super bored of this 5minute intro to brain theory, and
5minute intro to brain theory, and you're asking the real question, which
you're asking the real question, which is, now that I know this one weird trick
is, now that I know this one weird trick about the number three, how can I use it
about the number three, how can I use it to make my games better? Well, since
to make my games better? Well, since we're dealing with perception of
we're dealing with perception of information, UI design is a no-brainer
information, UI design is a no-brainer to apply this to. Take roundabouts main
to apply this to. Take roundabouts main menu. Instead of your van standard
menu. Instead of your van standard vertical list of five menu options, we
vertical list of five menu options, we split it by rows into two chunks. One
split it by rows into two chunks. One row for gameplay stuff that matters and
row for gameplay stuff that matters and one row for housekeeping. That way, we
one row for housekeeping. That way, we can make sure that we're we're driving
can make sure that we're we're driving players towards gameplay with zero
players towards gameplay with zero thought on their end while at the same
thought on their end while at the same time not bearing settings and important
time not bearing settings and important options that people might need later on.
options that people might need later on. And as a bonus, it means all but one of
And as a bonus, it means all but one of our options on the main menu benefit
our options on the main menu benefit from Fitz's law, since every button is
from Fitz's law, since every button is on an edge instead of an onedimensional
on an edge instead of an onedimensional list. You can also use chunking for
list. You can also use chunking for evil. Take roundabouts challenges menu
evil. Take roundabouts challenges menu for example. The ideal chunk group for
for example. The ideal chunk group for this would be a 3x3 grid. However, that
this would be a 3x3 grid. However, that was easily chunkable by players and it
was easily chunkable by players and it gave the impression that we had a small
gave the impression that we had a small challenge list. So instead, we did two
challenge list. So instead, we did two rows of four and an extra item, which
rows of four and an extra item, which made it slightly harder for players to
made it slightly harder for players to internalize all the challenges at once,
internalize all the challenges at once, which made it seem like we had more
which made it seem like we had more challenges in the game, which is a total
challenges in the game, which is a total [ __ ] thing to do, but I am gaming's
[ __ ] thing to do, but I am gaming's biggest [ __ ] of 2013, so it's the
biggest [ __ ] of 2013, so it's the least I could do to hold up my
least I could do to hold up my reputation. The best case for perceptual
reputation. The best case for perceptual optimization, and actually the worst
optimization, and actually the worst case as well, is the Gunstringer. So, I
case as well, is the Gunstringer. So, I was the lead designer on the
was the lead designer on the Gunstringer, which was an on-rail uh on
Gunstringer, which was an on-rail uh on rails connect shooter with a skeleton
rails connect shooter with a skeleton marionette puppet. And it was really the
marionette puppet. And it was really the start of this skeleton phase of my
start of this skeleton phase of my career that I find myself in at the
career that I find myself in at the moment. Because everything was on Rails,
moment. Because everything was on Rails, it meant we had incredibly tight control
it meant we had incredibly tight control over everything the player saw, making
over everything the player saw, making it perfect for this kind of perception
it perfect for this kind of perception optimization. It's also a pretty good
optimization. It's also a pretty good example about what happens if you apply
example about what happens if you apply the rule of threes the wrong way. Here's
the rule of threes the wrong way. Here's why.
why. The Gunstrings gun was a six shooter. In
The Gunstrings gun was a six shooter. In the groove, you'd target six things and
the groove, you'd target six things and then you'd shoot six things. It's a
then you'd shoot six things. It's a really nice example of using the rule of
really nice example of using the rule of threes to help target acquisition. And
threes to help target acquisition. And the six shooter helped reinforce the 2x3
the six shooter helped reinforce the 2x3 pattern. But of course, I had to go and
pattern. But of course, I had to go and ruin a good thing. An enemy's AI would
ruin a good thing. An enemy's AI would spend a cycle spawning, a cycle aiming,
spend a cycle spawning, a cycle aiming, a cycle firing, and a cycle or a number
a cycle firing, and a cycle or a number number of cycles fleeing. Because we
number of cycles fleeing. Because we were on a rail, I made all of these
were on a rail, I made all of these states take the same amount of time. as
states take the same amount of time. as the uh player aim and fire cycle. It
the uh player aim and fire cycle. It didn't stop there, though. Since we used
didn't stop there, though. Since we used encounter design, we naturally extended
encounter design, we naturally extended that same timing pattern to our
that same timing pattern to our encounter pacing. Because we had
encounter pacing. Because we had regenerating health, it meant we also
regenerating health, it meant we also have to apply this timing to the health
have to apply this timing to the health meter. And because we were on a rail and
meter. And because we were on a rail and we had to time our multiplier system to
we had to time our multiplier system to all of these encounters as well. When I
all of these encounters as well. When I first balanced the game like this, I
first balanced the game like this, I thought it was genius. But it very
thought it was genius. But it very quickly dawned on me that this was
quickly dawned on me that this was actually more like the crazy ramblings
actually more like the crazy ramblings of a conspiracy
of a conspiracy theorist. I went way too far down the
theorist. I went way too far down the rabbit hole and it made the gun
rabbit hole and it made the gun stringers enemy balance a knife edge
stringers enemy balance a knife edge system. I forgot that the rule of threes
system. I forgot that the rule of threes is about how you perceive objects.
is about how you perceive objects. Grouping visible objects into twos and
Grouping visible objects into twos and threes is a really great way to optimize
threes is a really great way to optimize how your brain acquires objects. But
how your brain acquires objects. But adjusting the behavior of unperceivable
adjusting the behavior of unperceivable things isn't always going to pay off
things isn't always going to pay off because well, they're
because well, they're unperceivable. And I guess that works as
unperceivable. And I guess that works as a pretty good summary for all of this as
a pretty good summary for all of this as well. The rule of threes is a great way
well. The rule of threes is a great way to optimize your game for the human
to optimize your game for the human brain, but you have to treat it like
brain, but you have to treat it like optimization in any other part of game
optimization in any other part of game development. Don't apply it or it
development. Don't apply it or it doesn't have a benefit. Thanks a lot.
Thank you, Dan. So, moving right along here. We're running a little short on
here. We're running a little short on time. Uh, so next up, we have uh Kim
time. Uh, so next up, we have uh Kim McAuliffe. She is a veteran game
McAuliffe. She is a veteran game designer as well who just finished up
designer as well who just finished up working on Project Spark at Microsoft.
working on Project Spark at Microsoft. She's worked on everything from big and
She's worked on everything from big and small things from SOCM comp to the Sims
small things from SOCM comp to the Sims uh and is here to tell you whether size
uh and is here to tell you whether size matters in the end. I give you Kim
matters in the end. I give you Kim McAuliff.
[Applause]
That's not exactly how I remember phrasing it, but
okay. Okay. So, often as game developers, we're focused on the big
developers, we're focused on the big picture, but today I'm going to talk
picture, but today I'm going to talk about why it can be important to fight
about why it can be important to fight for the little
for the little things. Uh, one of my favorite little
things. Uh, one of my favorite little things in Portal 2 is a moment where you
things in Portal 2 is a moment where you can choose to rescue a different little
can choose to rescue a different little turret from
turret from incineration. Uh, it's an extremely
incineration. Uh, it's an extremely well-crafted moment. Uh, from the setup
well-crafted moment. Uh, from the setup that introduces you to this turret stuck
that introduces you to this turret stuck on a vent a few levels earlier to the
on a vent a few levels earlier to the intriguing hints about the plot that you
intriguing hints about the plot that you get from this turret as a reward for
get from this turret as a reward for rescuing it.
rescuing it. Um, another little thing that
Um, another little thing that contributed to my enjoyment of a game is
contributed to my enjoyment of a game is the context sensitive dialogue in Left 4
the context sensitive dialogue in Left 4 Dead 2. Uh, the way the characters
Dead 2. Uh, the way the characters respond when one of them gets hurt or
respond when one of them gets hurt or killed uh, made them feel human and
killed uh, made them feel human and deepen my desire to uh, make sure that
deepen my desire to uh, make sure that they stayed alive. Uh, the design trick
they stayed alive. Uh, the design trick that I want to talk about today is fight
that I want to talk about today is fight for the little things because they can
for the little things because they can have a surprisingly big impact on
have a surprisingly big impact on players and even the development team.
players and even the development team. And the things that impact your players
And the things that impact your players can then in turn have a positive impact
can then in turn have a positive impact on the success of your
on the success of your game. Uh in Contagious,
game. Uh in Contagious, uh Wharton marketing professor Jonah
uh Wharton marketing professor Jonah Burgerer shares his research exploring
Burgerer shares his research exploring why some products and ideas catch on and
why some products and ideas catch on and others don't. One of the principles that
others don't. One of the principles that he focuses on is social
he focuses on is social currency. People gain social currency by
currency. People gain social currency by talking about remarkable things.
talking about remarkable things. uh gaining positive impressions with
uh gaining positive impressions with their co-workers and family and
their co-workers and family and colleagues. Uh in other words, we talk
colleagues. Uh in other words, we talk about things that are cool because it
about things that are cool because it makes us look cool to
makes us look cool to others. Uh remarkable things are talked
others. Uh remarkable things are talked about more often and smart brands take
about more often and smart brands take advantage of this. Uh one example in the
advantage of this. Uh one example in the book is Snapple, whose quirky and weird
book is Snapple, whose quirky and weird real facts people couldn't help but talk
real facts people couldn't help but talk about until they were ingrained into
about until they were ingrained into popular culture. And the point to take
popular culture. And the point to take away here is that
away here is that the excuse me, the
the excuse me, the uh the little special things that people
uh the little special things that people find in your game, people are going to
find in your game, people are going to want to talk about because it makes them
want to talk about because it makes them feel
feel special. So, the first example of a
special. So, the first example of a little thing that I want to talk about
little thing that I want to talk about is from my very first game, Sims 2 for
is from my very first game, Sims 2 for the Nintendo DS. Uh the DS version of
the Nintendo DS. Uh the DS version of Sims 2 combined an open world sandbox
Sims 2 combined an open world sandbox with an adventure game questing. Uh, the
with an adventure game questing. Uh, the main story is that your Sim gets stuck
main story is that your Sim gets stuck in a town called Strange Town and ends
in a town called Strange Town and ends up taking over the local hotel, uh,
up taking over the local hotel, uh, befriending the citizens and then
befriending the citizens and then defending the town from various
defending the town from various attacks. So, uh, the little thing in
attacks. So, uh, the little thing in question had to do with the town's cows.
question had to do with the town's cows. Uh, you can interact with these cows to
Uh, you can interact with these cows to get milk, but that was it other than
get milk, but that was it other than some mooing. Uh, I strongly felt like
some mooing. Uh, I strongly felt like there was an opportunity here for more
there was an opportunity here for more interaction and some reward for
interaction and some reward for exploration. Uh, if we added cow
exploration. Uh, if we added cow tipping, for example, and then the
tipping, for example, and then the player interacted with the cow
player interacted with the cow afterward, then we could have a
afterward, then we could have a milkshake that you could get from the
milkshake that you could get from the cow
cow afterward. And then we also in the game
afterward. And then we also in the game had chocolate. And so why not be able to
had chocolate. And so why not be able to give the cow chocolate and then get a
give the cow chocolate and then get a chocolate cow and then have the cow
chocolate cow and then have the cow yield chocolate beverages? Like this is
yield chocolate beverages? Like this is genius.
genius. Um, unfortunately my producer at the
Um, unfortunately my producer at the time felt like, you know, cow tipping
time felt like, you know, cow tipping might be construed as, you know,
might be construed as, you know, potential animal cruelty and this could
potential animal cruelty and this could jeopardize our ESRB rating and we had to
jeopardize our ESRB rating and we had to be, you know, E10. Um, and this is my
be, you know, E10. Um, and this is my first game. Uh, I didn't understand the
first game. Uh, I didn't understand the uh the idea of feature creep. Uh, so I
uh the idea of feature creep. Uh, so I may have gone behind his back and
may have gone behind his back and convinced uh a junior programmer at the
time to uh to maybe just put it in anyway. And it was kind of a joke. It
anyway. And it was kind of a joke. It wasn't really supposed to stay in the
wasn't really supposed to stay in the build. Uh, and to keep it from seeming
build. Uh, and to keep it from seeming too mean, he even uh animated the cow to
too mean, he even uh animated the cow to immediately bounce back up, but it was
immediately bounce back up, but it was it was programmer arts. It was kind of
it was programmer arts. It was kind of like just a weeble wobble on it. It
like just a weeble wobble on it. It wasn't like it was a joke. It wasn't
wasn't like it was a joke. It wasn't supposed to stay.
supposed to stay. Um, but fortunately or unfortunately, EA
Um, but fortunately or unfortunately, EA saw it and loved it. And so then we had
saw it and loved it. And so then we had to add it to the schedule and have real
animations, real animations and real uh a real chocolate cow. And um the
a real chocolate cow. And um the producer was definitely not happy with
producer was definitely not happy with me. Uh but I can promise you that he got
me. Uh but I can promise you that he got over it. Uh this is a picture of us
over it. Uh this is a picture of us about five years later.
[Applause] So, so, uh, this kind of felt like just
So, so, uh, this kind of felt like just my small little victory. This is my
my small little victory. This is my first game ever. Um, and I wasn't
first game ever. Um, and I wasn't driving the creative vision or anything.
driving the creative vision or anything. I was a mission designer and a scriptor,
I was a mission designer and a scriptor, but this is my my creative contribution.
but this is my my creative contribution. Um, but the impact turned out to be much
Um, but the impact turned out to be much bigger than I could have seen at the
bigger than I could have seen at the time. Um, here it's called out in the
time. Um, here it's called out in the IGN walkthrough as uh clever and
IGN walkthrough as uh clever and amusing.
amusing. Um, another thing that happened, this is
Um, another thing that happened, this is a a friend request or a message from a
a a friend request or a message from a girl in the UK a few years later who
girl in the UK a few years later who wanted to be my friend because Sims 2 DS
wanted to be my friend because Sims 2 DS was her favorite game ever. And I was
was her favorite game ever. And I was like, "Wow, that's awesome." Um, I asked
like, "Wow, that's awesome." Um, I asked her if she ever ever found the Chocolate
her if she ever ever found the Chocolate Cow because uh I was afraid people would
Cow because uh I was afraid people would never find it. There were no hints in
never find it. There were no hints in the game about it. And she was like,
the game about it. And she was like, "Well, of course I did." And uh but even
"Well, of course I did." And uh but even that that was the impact was still
that that was the impact was still bigger than I I even thought at that
bigger than I I even thought at that point. Uh because it turned out that EA
point. Uh because it turned out that EA also uh thought that this feature was um
also uh thought that this feature was um popular and successful. And so they uh
popular and successful. And so they uh announced in Sims 3 that they were going
announced in Sims 3 that they were going to uh bring out a a cow like a farming
to uh bring out a a cow like a farming set and they were going to take the cows
set and they were going to take the cows from all the cow features from Sims 2DS
from all the cow features from Sims 2DS and put that into this pack and add a
and put that into this pack and add a bunch more features. They had a cow
bunch more features. They had a cow tipping miniame
tipping miniame um that you could fail if you slipped in
um that you could fail if you slipped in a cow pie. And then you could also play
a cow pie. And then you could also play tic-tac hoof with the cow to increase
tic-tac hoof with the cow to increase your logic score. um you could give the
your logic score. um you could give the cows soy beans to get soy milk and there
cows soy beans to get soy milk and there was this whole thing. Um and then I I
was this whole thing. Um and then I I went looking around on the forums and
went looking around on the forums and there was there were 22 pages of people
there was there were 22 pages of people excited about cow tipping and milkshakes
excited about cow tipping and milkshakes and there was even someone who called
and there was even someone who called out that cow tipping was fun. Her
out that cow tipping was fun. Her daughter had had it on the Sims 2 for
daughter had had it on the Sims 2 for DS. There was a hashtag that came out
DS. There was a hashtag that came out when um this was about to launch and
when um this was about to launch and then on the day that it launched people
then on the day that it launched people were posting pictures of their Sims
were posting pictures of their Sims playing with cows. So, looping back
playing with cows. So, looping back around to uh the book contagious and
around to uh the book contagious and social currency, here you have people
social currency, here you have people talking about a feature that they think
talking about a feature that they think is cool and interesting and in doing so
is cool and interesting and in doing so contributing to the success of a game.
contributing to the success of a game. Um, so moving on to my next example. Uh,
Um, so moving on to my next example. Uh, another example of fighting for a little
another example of fighting for a little thing arose when I was working on
thing arose when I was working on connect TV. Uh, this project used
connect TV. Uh, this project used connect to add gameplay to a family
connect to add gameplay to a family television watching experience. And
television watching experience. And there are multiple ways to interact with
there are multiple ways to interact with uh the TV, including an augmented
uh the TV, including an augmented reality game where you dressed up as the
reality game where you dressed up as the animal star of the show and uh the show
animal star of the show and uh the show went into your living room and you
went into your living room and you became the animals um and played games
became the animals um and played games based on the main narrative from that
based on the main narrative from that episode. Uh the the little thing
episode. Uh the the little thing uh the battle over the little things
uh the battle over the little things that I'm talking about today was
that I'm talking about today was involved the sidetracks. the sidetracks
involved the sidetracks. the sidetracks feature. These were special stories that
feature. These were special stories that we wrote together with Grizzly Creek
we wrote together with Grizzly Creek Films, who did the original show, and
Films, who did the original show, and then filmed on location. And these were
then filmed on location. And these were designed to be conversations that uh
designed to be conversations that uh were directly between Casey and the kids
were directly between Casey and the kids uh where the players got to be in
uh where the players got to be in control of how the adventure unfolded.
control of how the adventure unfolded. And how this worked was that Casey would
And how this worked was that Casey would stop during the adventure and ask the
stop during the adventure and ask the kids a question and then based on what
kids a question and then based on what they said there would be one of two
they said there would be one of two different um segments that would play
different um segments that would play next. And the problem that we
next. And the problem that we encountered is that connect could only
encountered is that connect could only track two skeletons at a time. And but
track two skeletons at a time. And but we wanted the whole family to play
we wanted the whole family to play together.
together. And
And uh so for our first iteration we were
uh so for our first iteration we were using uh we had to have a we decided to
using uh we had to have a we decided to have a a family spokesperson that would
have a a family spokesperson that would choose the answer for the whole family
choose the answer for the whole family using a hover cursor. Uh but this didn't
using a hover cursor. Uh but this didn't have the whole like everyone gets to
have the whole like everyone gets to participate feeling that we really
participate feeling that we really wanted. So we uh we were challenged by
wanted. So we uh we were challenged by the executive team to come up with a
the executive team to come up with a better solution. So we we all put our
better solution. So we we all put our heads together and a few people came up
heads together and a few people came up with some ideas and a really smart guy
with some ideas and a really smart guy from our development partner um put
from our development partner um put together a solution where we combined
together a solution where we combined blob tracking and skeletal tracking to
blob tracking and skeletal tracking to uh to pull the room every frame and uh
uh to pull the room every frame and uh to come up with a way to to uh
to come up with a way to to uh uh switch skeletons every frame and
uh switch skeletons every frame and count up to eight votes in the room. So
count up to eight votes in the room. So in the final version, the entire family
in the final version, the entire family can vote together on which way they
can vote together on which way they should go by raising either their right
should go by raising either their right hand or their left hand uh so that
hand or their left hand uh so that everyone can play at the same
everyone can play at the same time.
time. So Dad, I'm sorry, but I don't think I
So Dad, I'm sorry, but I don't think I want to work for a newspaper or review
want to work for a newspaper or review games when I grow up anymore. I want to
games when I grow up anymore. I want to be a
be a naturalist. So the speaker here is
naturalist. So the speaker here is Scarlet, the daughter of columnist
Scarlet, the daughter of columnist controller freak. in her review of
controller freak. in her review of connect
connect gov. Uh this particular quote is so
gov. Uh this particular quote is so great because it means that she was
great because it means that she was definitely definitely impacted by the
definitely definitely impacted by the sidetracks in particular. Uh this is the
sidetracks in particular. Uh this is the only place in the game that Casey speaks
only place in the game that Casey speaks directly to kids about learning how to
directly to kids about learning how to be
be naturalists. Um returning back to
naturalists. Um returning back to contagious again for a second. This is a
contagious again for a second. This is a kid talking directly about the impact
kid talking directly about the impact that a little thing that we fought for
that a little thing that we fought for had on her in a way that was shared with
had on her in a way that was shared with a lot of
people. Uh the last example that I want to mention is from another Nintendo DS
to mention is from another Nintendo DS title. This time I want to talk about
title. This time I want to talk about championing someone else's cause and how
championing someone else's cause and how fighting for a little thing uh can help
fighting for a little thing uh can help not just uh a title but also a team. I
not just uh a title but also a team. I came on to this project later in
came on to this project later in development and was tasked with
development and was tasked with designing the final level in the game.
designing the final level in the game. Uh the level artist working with me
Uh the level artist working with me expressed frustration that the other
expressed frustration that the other levels in the game had what he felt to
levels in the game had what he felt to be too much sameness in layout and not
be too much sameness in layout and not enough change and
enough change and elevation. So when I started working, I
elevation. So when I started working, I was looking at the concept art for the
was looking at the concept art for the level that I was going to be doing. And
level that I was going to be doing. And um the art for the setting makes it
um the art for the setting makes it clear that there should be lots of room
clear that there should be lots of room for changes in elevation because it's a
for changes in elevation because it's a it's a pile of wrecked
it's a pile of wrecked ships. So I started white boxing some
ships. So I started white boxing some ideas and uh working with him very
ideas and uh working with him very closely from the beginning and getting
closely from the beginning and getting his input. So I proposed a design that
his input. So I proposed a design that included a ton of vertical progression
included a ton of vertical progression um and then also frogger because why
um and then also frogger because why not? and uh he was immediately
not? and uh he was immediately re-engaged and excited to begin. Uh we
re-engaged and excited to begin. Uh we had to win some people over because uh
had to win some people over because uh it was so different from the rest of the
it was so different from the rest of the game. But in the end, because it was the
game. But in the end, because it was the final level, we were we were able to
final level, we were we were able to sell it. And fighting for this little
sell it. And fighting for this little thing made the game better, it
thing made the game better, it challenged me to be a better designer,
challenged me to be a better designer, and that it also boosted morale for a
and that it also boosted morale for a team member. Um, I didn't realize how
team member. Um, I didn't realize how much of an impact that being listened to
much of an impact that being listened to had on him until he told me about it
had on him until he told me about it years
later. So, in closing, fighting for the little things during the development of
little things during the development of your game pays off in big ways. If
your game pays off in big ways. If you're on a project where you're not the
you're on a project where you're not the creative lead, it's a way to carve out
creative lead, it's a way to carve out your own creative stamp on the game. It
your own creative stamp on the game. It may be a way to support a team member by
may be a way to support a team member by fighting for a cause that they believe
fighting for a cause that they believe in. Finally, if a feature means a lot to
in. Finally, if a feature means a lot to you, it might have a big impact on your
you, it might have a big impact on your players as well. And the little things
players as well. And the little things that impact your players will be the
that impact your players will be the things that they want to share with
things that they want to share with others, which is the best promotion that
others, which is the best promotion that you can ask for. Thank you.
you can ask for. Thank you. [Applause]
[Applause] Definitely in this age of ever more
Definitely in this age of ever more polished super big games, it's harder to
polished super big games, it's harder to sneak things by producers than ever, but
sneak things by producers than ever, but still super important. So, finally, our
still super important. So, finally, our our last speaker is uh is Nells
our last speaker is uh is Nells Anderson. Uh he describes himself as the
Anderson. Uh he describes himself as the best Wyoming born game designer
best Wyoming born game designer currently living in Canada. Uh you may
currently living in Canada. Uh you may know him as the lead designer of Mark
know him as the lead designer of Mark the Ninja or the stunning Firewatch,
the Ninja or the stunning Firewatch, which he will be demoing later this
which he will be demoing later this week. And I'm sure if you came up and
week. And I'm sure if you came up and asked him afterward, he would tell you
asked him afterward, he would tell you how to go see that yourself. And you
how to go see that yourself. And you should do that. I give you Nells
Anderson. Hello. Is this thing on? Okay, cool. Yeah. Um Oh, Richard, you didn't
cool. Yeah. Um Oh, Richard, you didn't change my X to an actual number. All
change my X to an actual number. All right. Well, whatever. Uh, my name is
right. Well, whatever. Uh, my name is Del Anderson, and my game cool game
Del Anderson, and my game cool game design, sure, it's a variable. It's
design, sure, it's a variable. It's whatever number it needs to be. All
whatever number it needs to be. All right. Uh, so my cool game design rule
right. Uh, so my cool game design rule today I'm going to be talking about is
today I'm going to be talking about is don't try to evaluate your own game. So,
don't try to evaluate your own game. So, as Richard mentions, I used to work at
as Richard mentions, I used to work at this place and I was a lead designer on
this place and I was a lead designer on this game and then I helped start up
this game and then I helped start up this place and now we're working on this
this place and now we're working on this cool game. Um, yes, and come ask me
cool game. Um, yes, and come ask me later if you want to come play it. Uh,
later if you want to come play it. Uh, but yes, this is my game design rule.
but yes, this is my game design rule. So, as noted, don't try and evaluate
So, as noted, don't try and evaluate your own game, but note the asterisk.
your own game, but note the asterisk. That's going to be important later. See,
That's going to be important later. See, so here's the problem. When you're
so here's the problem. When you're designing a game, you have all this
designing a game, you have all this knowledge in your head about how the
knowledge in your head about how the game works. I mean, of course you do,
game works. I mean, of course you do, right? It's in your head. It has to
right? It's in your head. It has to exist there before it can actually get
exist there before it can actually get out into the engine or the board or the
out into the engine or the board or the whatever it is. Uh, but there's a
whatever it is. Uh, but there's a problem with that. What that means is
problem with that. What that means is it's actually impossible for you to
it's actually impossible for you to strip that knowledge back out of your
strip that knowledge back out of your head. Our perspectives as designers are
head. Our perspectives as designers are wholly tainted with this dark knowledge
wholly tainted with this dark knowledge about how the game works. And this is a
about how the game works. And this is a problem because people who don't have
problem because people who don't have that knowledge still need to be able to
that knowledge still need to be able to play your game. And they need to be able
play your game. And they need to be able to do it without you explaining it to
to do it without you explaining it to them. Often some of the biggest failures
them. Often some of the biggest failures in a game's design are not necessarily
in a game's design are not necessarily its systems or its mechanics, but rather
its systems or its mechanics, but rather how those systems and mechanics are
how those systems and mechanics are communicated to the player. At the very
communicated to the player. At the very least, it's often nearly impossible to
least, it's often nearly impossible to determine whether a problem is having
determine whether a problem is having with the game is because of the design
with the game is because of the design itself or simply because they didn't
itself or simply because they didn't understand what was actually needed to
understand what was actually needed to be understood. Um, of course, so
be understood. Um, of course, so surprising absolutely no one. The answer
surprising absolutely no one. The answer to that is to do a crapload of play
to that is to do a crapload of play testing. Now, obviously there's been a
testing. Now, obviously there's been a million GDC talks about the who, what,
million GDC talks about the who, what, when, where, why of play testing about
when, where, why of play testing about people far more eloquent than me and for
people far more eloquent than me and for way longer than 10 minutes. Uh, so I'm
way longer than 10 minutes. Uh, so I'm not going to talk about that
not going to talk about that particularly, but you know, even folks
particularly, but you know, even folks like Richard who wrote this awesome game
like Richard who wrote this awesome game design book, there's an entire chapter
design book, there's an entire chapter about play testing. Uh but there is one
about play testing. Uh but there is one very important practice I do want to
very important practice I do want to call out about play testing. It's not
call out about play testing. It's not really about actual process but more
really about actual process but more about the mindset the design mindset
about the mindset the design mindset that one can adopt when observing and
that one can adopt when observing and reacting to play tests. So one thing
reacting to play tests. So one thing that I see people doing wrong in play
that I see people doing wrong in play testing and I I find myself still doing
testing and I I find myself still doing this sometimes is they is the the
this sometimes is they is the the designer ends up listening to the
designer ends up listening to the solutions that come out of the play test
solutions that come out of the play test rather than the problems themselves. See
rather than the problems themselves. See here's the thing about people who aren't
here's the thing about people who aren't game designers. surprise. They're not
game designers. surprise. They're not game designers. That's why what we do is
game designers. That's why what we do is kind of important. Remember all that
kind of important. Remember all that horrible tainted knowledge that you have
horrible tainted knowledge that you have in your mind, which is why you need
in your mind, which is why you need other people to play test the game in
other people to play test the game in the first place? Well, this is where
the first place? Well, this is where that knowledge is actually useful. You
that knowledge is actually useful. You know, during play testing, people will
know, during play testing, people will often talk about the problems they are
often talk about the problems they are having in terms of solution rather than
having in terms of solution rather than the problems themselves. They might say,
the problems themselves. They might say, "My character is too weak. They need to
"My character is too weak. They need to be tougher." Or, "These enemies have way
be tougher." Or, "These enemies have way too many hit points. They're impossible
too many hit points. They're impossible to kill." Um, now it is indeed possible
to kill." Um, now it is indeed possible that your enemies might just actually
that your enemies might just actually have too much health, but it might be
have too much health, but it might be that they actually have some weakness
that they actually have some weakness that the player just didn't understand.
that the player just didn't understand. Or maybe the play tester missed some
Or maybe the play tester missed some important item that's actually the
important item that's actually the counter to that kind of enemy. Or or or
counter to that kind of enemy. Or or or or there's like a million reasons why
or there's like a million reasons why the play tester could be feeling the way
the play tester could be feeling the way they are. That's why it's essential to
they are. That's why it's essential to personally observe play tests and focus
personally observe play tests and focus on the player's behavior. You know, if
on the player's behavior. You know, if it's unclear, ask them afterward why
it's unclear, ask them afterward why they were doing what they were doing.
they were doing what they were doing. This happened all the time during Mark
This happened all the time during Mark the Ninja's development. And I gave a
the Ninja's development. And I gave a talk here a couple years ago about that.
talk here a couple years ago about that. So it's on the vault. Also, you can just
So it's on the vault. Also, you can just grab the slides and the text on my
grab the slides and the text on my website. Um, but this is where it comes
website. Um, but this is where it comes back to the game design rule. So what I
back to the game design rule. So what I said at the beginning was don't try and
said at the beginning was don't try and evaluate your own game. But remember our
evaluate your own game. But remember our friend Mr. asterisk this important
friend Mr. asterisk this important caveat. Well, if we actually expand out
caveat. Well, if we actually expand out this entire rule, what it is is don't
this entire rule, what it is is don't try to evaluate your own game, but only
try to evaluate your own game, but only you know what it should be. See one. So
you know what it should be. See one. So obviously during all that play testing I
obviously during all that play testing I mentioned, another problem I find some
mentioned, another problem I find some designers have is they do not actually
designers have is they do not actually have a specific coherent vision for the
have a specific coherent vision for the particular moment they're trying to
particular moment they're trying to evaluate. Running a play test or hell
evaluate. Running a play test or hell even evaluating an entire design based
even evaluating an entire design based on whether or not it is fun is an
on whether or not it is fun is an absolutely ludicrous notion, right? Like
absolutely ludicrous notion, right? Like what is and isn't fun is not only
what is and isn't fun is not only utterly subjective between players, but
utterly subjective between players, but it's actually such a broad term it
it's actually such a broad term it generally describes just about nothing.
generally describes just about nothing. what makes Mario Kart 8 fun is
what makes Mario Kart 8 fun is completely different from what makes
completely different from what makes Dark Souls fun. And both of those things
Dark Souls fun. And both of those things are completely different from what makes
are completely different from what makes Silent Hill fun. And yet we some people
Silent Hill fun. And yet we some people seem to think that fun is just this
seem to think that fun is just this universal positive category that all
universal positive category that all games should have. Um as a as a brief
games should have. Um as a as a brief aside, maybe let's actually just stop
aside, maybe let's actually just stop saying games should be fun altogether.
saying games should be fun altogether. Uh one because as noted Oh, thank you.
Uh one because as noted Oh, thank you. It's it's basically a meaningless word,
It's it's basically a meaningless word, right? And two, calling something like
right? And two, calling something like Silent Hill or Dark Souls fun even
Silent Hill or Dark Souls fun even further highlights the absurdity of
further highlights the absurdity of using that term some kind of universal
using that term some kind of universal positive description to begin with. So,
positive description to begin with. So, I don't know, let's say compelling
I don't know, let's say compelling instead or something. Anyway, um so what
instead or something. Anyway, um so what makes a game experience compelling
makes a game experience compelling depends hugely on the game. So, you need
depends hugely on the game. So, you need to have a vision for what a particular
to have a vision for what a particular mechanic, moment, whatever it is
mechanic, moment, whatever it is actually supposed to feel like. It needs
actually supposed to feel like. It needs to be tangible and evaluable.
to be tangible and evaluable. Apparently, a term some folks use for
Apparently, a term some folks use for this is design intent, which I actually
this is design intent, which I actually I like that term a lot. It so for any
I like that term a lot. It so for any particular moment, it needs to have a
particular moment, it needs to have a design intent. That's something you can
design intent. That's something you can articulate. And at some level, the
articulate. And at some level, the players need to feel that as well, even
players need to feel that as well, even if obviously they can't articulate it
if obviously they can't articulate it quite as clearly, right? So, when you
quite as clearly, right? So, when you have that clear articulatable goal, then
have that clear articulatable goal, then as you're play testing, you can
as you're play testing, you can evaluate, well, is this moving us closer
evaluate, well, is this moving us closer toward this specific thing? And if not,
toward this specific thing? And if not, what can we do to get us closer in that
what can we do to get us closer in that direction? But if that goal is just to
direction? But if that goal is just to have your game be fun, then you are just
have your game be fun, then you are just going to spiral into a million
going to spiral into a million subjective arguments and quickly you
subjective arguments and quickly you will just want to wither up and die. Um,
will just want to wither up and die. Um, so to be briefly tangible, we were
so to be briefly tangible, we were recently play testing Firewatch a whole
recently play testing Firewatch a whole bunch and there's a bit right at the
bunch and there's a bit right at the beginning where the player discovers
beginning where the player discovers someone setting off fireworks in the
someone setting off fireworks in the middle of the woods, which obviously
middle of the woods, which obviously during the middle of fire season is a
during the middle of fire season is a really godamn bad idea. So the player
really godamn bad idea. So the player has to find their way toward where these
has to find their way toward where these fireworks are coming from. Now,
fireworks are coming from. Now, Firewatch is a game about narrative and
Firewatch is a game about narrative and exploration, but this bit right at the
exploration, but this bit right at the beginning, we didn't actually mean for
beginning, we didn't actually mean for the path to be unclear, but play testing
the path to be unclear, but play testing it, people kind of totally got lost. You
it, people kind of totally got lost. You know, not not necessarily in a bad way,
know, not not necessarily in a bad way, right? Some people even said, "Oh, they
right? Some people even said, "Oh, they enjoyed being lost and kind of confused
enjoyed being lost and kind of confused and enjoyed the exploration." The
and enjoyed the exploration." The problem was is that even though some
problem was is that even though some people's experience was relatively
people's experience was relatively positive, if we left that as is, then
positive, if we left that as is, then the bits later where we kind of do
the bits later where we kind of do intentionally want the players to be
intentionally want the players to be lost for a little bit, those moments
lost for a little bit, those moments wouldn't be unique. They'd just be kind
wouldn't be unique. They'd just be kind of interest. They'd just be kind of sy.
of interest. They'd just be kind of sy. It's like, oh, I guess the experience of
It's like, oh, I guess the experience of playing this game is being lost all the
playing this game is being lost all the time. Um, so instead, we improve the
time. Um, so instead, we improve the wayfinding in that initial area. And
wayfinding in that initial area. And obviously, we're going to keep looking
obviously, we're going to keep looking for that as we continue play testing.
for that as we continue play testing. So the notion of design intent does
So the notion of design intent does stand in contrast to something that some
stand in contrast to something that some folks talk about pretty frequently. The
folks talk about pretty frequently. The notion of building a minimum viable
notion of building a minimum viable product or MVP. Um and to be perfectly
product or MVP. Um and to be perfectly honest as far as at least games are
honest as far as at least games are concerned in my opinion. The notion of
concerned in my opinion. The notion of an MVP is kind of [ __ ] You know the
an MVP is kind of [ __ ] You know the idea at a high level is basically you
idea at a high level is basically you build the simplest cheapest version of
build the simplest cheapest version of of something then you put it in front of
of something then you put it in front of a bunch of people and then you change it
a bunch of people and then you change it and update it in response to what they
and update it in response to what they find attractive or appealing. Wait, hold
find attractive or appealing. Wait, hold on. That just sounds like exactly what
on. That just sounds like exactly what we were talking about, right? Except in
we were talking about, right? Except in almost all discussions of MVPs, there's
almost all discussions of MVPs, there's one very important thing missing. That
one very important thing missing. That vision. Minimum viable products fall out
vision. Minimum viable products fall out of the garbage heap of Silicon Valley
of the garbage heap of Silicon Valley startup culture where the only purpose
startup culture where the only purpose for creating anything is to sell it
for creating anything is to sell it either to customers or more likely to a
either to customers or more likely to a different Silicon Valley company. If
different Silicon Valley company. If you're making something interesting,
you're making something interesting, like say a really cool new piece of
like say a really cool new piece of communication software, but early
communication software, but early adopters are just using it to schedule
adopters are just using it to schedule doctor's appointments or something,
doctor's appointments or something, well, you actually just drop everything
well, you actually just drop everything you originally wanted to do and then you
you originally wanted to do and then you pivot and now I guess you're making
pivot and now I guess you're making calendaring software. Um, I mean, maybe
calendaring software. Um, I mean, maybe there's some value to all this if you if
there's some value to all this if you if all you care about is building products
all you care about is building products to be sold. Um, honestly, I'd even
to be sold. Um, honestly, I'd even question the value of that pretty
question the value of that pretty heavily. That's a whole other can of
heavily. That's a whole other can of worms. But this is especially poor for
worms. But this is especially poor for games. You know, as our as our good
games. You know, as our as our good friend Mark Cerny once said, if you ask
friend Mark Cerny once said, if you ask someone what they want in a game,
someone what they want in a game, they're just going to tell you about the
they're just going to tell you about the last rad game that they
last rad game that they played. This notion of minimum viable
played. This notion of minimum viable products is really good at finding local
products is really good at finding local maxima at optimizing under known
maxima at optimizing under known conditions. But what results from this
conditions. But what results from this creation is usually just a bunch of
creation is usually just a bunch of seamy games guilty of the worst sin,
seamy games guilty of the worst sin, being boring. You know, some of these
being boring. You know, some of these aren't necessarily bad games, per se.
aren't necessarily bad games, per se. They're just really really goddamn
They're just really really goddamn boring. They're they're uninteresting,
boring. They're they're uninteresting, right? There's a million of them and
right? There's a million of them and they're all basically the same in terms
they're all basically the same in terms of presentation that sort of vaguely
of presentation that sort of vaguely cartoony appeals to everyone aesthetic,
cartoony appeals to everyone aesthetic, in terms of the play experience, in
in terms of the play experience, in terms of kind of the vapid treadmill of
terms of kind of the vapid treadmill of gameplay. It's they're all just kind of
gameplay. It's they're all just kind of the same. And of course, like you can
the same. And of course, like you can label you can level the same criticism
label you can level the same criticism at a certain subset of AAA games or
at a certain subset of AAA games or independently made games or whatever
independently made games or whatever else because all of those games were
else because all of those games were basically built to be sellable or good
basically built to be sellable or good or fun or whatever else, but nothing
or fun or whatever else, but nothing more specific than that. So, you know,
more specific than that. So, you know, don't be content designing toward that
don't be content designing toward that local maxima, building something that's
local maxima, building something that's really just meant to be sold. I know all
really just meant to be sold. I know all of your games can be unique, compelling
of your games can be unique, compelling experiences. Stay focused on that. And
experiences. Stay focused on that. And while you're having people play what's
while you're having people play what's being built, listen for the problems
being built, listen for the problems they're having, not just the solutions.
they're having, not just the solutions. I'll leave this with uh something Mr.
I'll leave this with uh something Mr. Neil Gaiman said, because I certainly
Neil Gaiman said, because I certainly couldn't have said this any better.
couldn't have said this any better. Remember, when people tell you
Remember, when people tell you something's wrong or doesn't work for
something's wrong or doesn't work for them, they are almost always right. When
them, they are almost always right. When they tell you exactly what they think is
they tell you exactly what they think is wrong and how to fix it, they are almost
wrong and how to fix it, they are almost always
always wrong. That's it. Thank you very much.
Thanks everybody and that concludes our our rules for today. Remember these game
our rules for today. Remember these game design rules may or might may not apply
design rules may or might may not apply to your own rule. You need to think of
to your own rule. You need to think of game design rules as personal and be
game design rules as personal and be thinking of what your set of game design
thinking of what your set of game design rules uh that you may or may not want to
rules uh that you may or may not want to follow for your own projects will be.
follow for your own projects will be. The slides for this will be up on my
The slides for this will be up on my website. Thanks everybody for coming.