[Music] The next session is still grooving
The next session is still grooving gamedev life set to live music. Please
gamedev life set to live music. Please welcome Teddy, Daniel, and Ben.
[Music] [Applause]
The textures are [ __ ] What? The textures are [ __ ] These are
What? The textures are [ __ ] These are not words you want to hear an hour
not words you want to hear an hour before your game releases, but here we
before your game releases, but here we are at Glitch City, Los Angeles, an
are at Glitch City, Los Angeles, an Indie Co-op Studio, 11:00 p.m. March
Indie Co-op Studio, 11:00 p.m. March 30th, 2016.
30th, 2016. the night we release Hyperllight Drifter
the night we release Hyperllight Drifter to 24,000 Kickstarter backers and the
to 24,000 Kickstarter backers and the rest of the world. And the textures,
rest of the world. And the textures, they're [ __ ]
they're [ __ ] My fellow designer and coder Bo Ble has
My fellow designer and coder Bo Ble has been making a build, the final version
been making a build, the final version of the game for release, but Bo has been
of the game for release, but Bo has been trying to make a build all day. The
trying to make a build all day. The thing about developing a game for 3
thing about developing a game for 3 years is that your game gets big. Ours
years is that your game gets big. Ours did. So big in fact that it got too fat
did. So big in fact that it got too fat for Game Maker, the otherwise great 2D
for Game Maker, the otherwise great 2D game engine we used to make Hyperllight
game engine we used to make Hyperllight Drifter. For reasons we don't
Drifter. For reasons we don't understand, sometimes when we build the
understand, sometimes when we build the game, some sprites go missing. They're
game, some sprites go missing. They're gone. Shrug. So we just press the build
gone. Shrug. So we just press the build button again, wait 20 minutes, and we
button again, wait 20 minutes, and we pray.
pray. This is a talk about prayer in game
This is a talk about prayer in game development.
development. Hi, I'm Teddy Totty Dof,
Hi, I'm Teddy Totty Dof, professional gamesman from indie game
professional gamesman from indie game Hyperllight Drifter, now a creative
Hyperllight Drifter, now a creative director at Not Indie Square Enix
director at Not Indie Square Enix Montreal. And I'm [ __ ] with you. This
Montreal. And I'm [ __ ] with you. This is not a prayer talk. But it is about
is not a prayer talk. But it is about game development, the beginning and the
game development, the beginning and the end, the alpha and the omega of
end, the alpha and the omega of projects, how and why we make them. Next
projects, how and why we make them. Next to me is Daniel Rosenfeld, C418 musician
to me is Daniel Rosenfeld, C418 musician and composer of Minecraft.
and composer of Minecraft. On my other side, artist and developer
On my other side, artist and developer Ben Swindon.
Ben Swindon. Tonight, as we try to make a build,
Tonight, as we try to make a build, Hyperllight is at an end. Finishing
Hyperllight is at an end. Finishing games is the hardest part of making
games is the hardest part of making them. Taking our project to completion
them. Taking our project to completion sucks. Making menus, beating bugs,
sucks. Making menus, beating bugs, exploring the edges of your design, and
exploring the edges of your design, and then wrapping it all up in a play tested
then wrapping it all up in a play tested package. If you're worried about those
package. If you're worried about those textures of ours, don't be. While I was
textures of ours, don't be. While I was introducing myself, the next build that
introducing myself, the next build that Boil worked just before midnight, we
Boil worked just before midnight, we have our game 1.0. 0. But it's 3:00 a.m.
have our game 1.0. 0. But it's 3:00 a.m. now, and we still haven't clicked the
now, and we still haven't clicked the magic button to release.
magic button to release. We're waiting for an inexplicably slow
We're waiting for an inexplicably slow upload to finish to a partner's FTP, and
upload to finish to a partner's FTP, and we can't contractually launch on Steam
we can't contractually launch on Steam until it's done. So, we're waiting. 3
until it's done. So, we're waiting. 3 years of game development climaxing in
years of game development climaxing in an upload progress bar.
an upload progress bar. How did this happen? We're 3 hours late
How did this happen? We're 3 hours late and our backers are tweeting, "Fuck,
and our backers are tweeting, "Fuck, [ __ ] [ __ ] [ __ ] Why is it so tight?"
[ __ ] [ __ ] [ __ ] Why is it so tight?" Well, it's always tight, isn't it? When
Well, it's always tight, isn't it? When you make a schedule for your game, you
you make a schedule for your game, you fill that schedule with the things you
fill that schedule with the things you want to put into it because you will
want to put into it because you will always want more things than you can
always want more things than you can have. So, you just accept that, set a
have. So, you just accept that, set a release date, and work backwards. A lot
release date, and work backwards. A lot of things at the end are polish. Polish
of things at the end are polish. Polish is complicated. Yo, let's talk about it.
is complicated. Yo, let's talk about it. Polish is not always the right priority.
Polish is not always the right priority. We love polish in games because it makes
We love polish in games because it makes them shine. Play testing to refine
them shine. Play testing to refine clarity and maintain a flow state for
clarity and maintain a flow state for players. fixing game-breaking bugs to
players. fixing game-breaking bugs to avoid frustrating crashes, iterating on
avoid frustrating crashes, iterating on art so that it's at the peak of your
art so that it's at the peak of your craft that you're able to achieve. Those
craft that you're able to achieve. Those are all good things, right? And usually
are all good things, right? And usually the sign of a game that was planned
the sign of a game that was planned poorly is glaring lack of polish because
poorly is glaring lack of polish because they ran out of time.
they ran out of time. It looks cheap or glitchy or the online
It looks cheap or glitchy or the online servers crash or the difficulty curve
servers crash or the difficulty curve has frustrating spikes or you can get
has frustrating spikes or you can get stuck. Here are a list of games that
stuck. Here are a list of games that some of those apply to. Skyrim, Red Dead
some of those apply to. Skyrim, Red Dead Redemption, Hyperllight Drifter,
Redemption, Hyperllight Drifter, respectively. They were glitchy,
respectively. They were glitchy, glitchy, and you can get stuck. But
glitchy, and you can get stuck. But people kind of like those games. Maybe
people kind of like those games. Maybe not the last one as much.
not the last one as much. Here's the truth. You pick your battles.
Here's the truth. You pick your battles. Just like you can't add every feature,
Just like you can't add every feature, you can't perfect all the polish. And
you can't perfect all the polish. And I'm a proponent of less polish, more
I'm a proponent of less polish, more love. Not no polish. Sloppy craft is bad
love. Not no polish. Sloppy craft is bad craft. Play test, fix, refine. But keep
craft. Play test, fix, refine. But keep an eye on what you're giving up with
an eye on what you're giving up with every little piece you polish. Leave
every little piece you polish. Leave room for the love. The love, as I call
room for the love. The love, as I call it, is the little things. touches you
it, is the little things. touches you want to add for years of production, but
want to add for years of production, but you've never had time. And you won't
you've never had time. And you won't unless you take time. There came a
unless you take time. There came a moment in our final month when I had to
moment in our final month when I had to choose between fixing a rare bug and
choose between fixing a rare bug and finally building the Dash Challenge. A
finally building the Dash Challenge. A little miniame inspired by Super Mario
little miniame inspired by Super Mario RPG that I'd wanted to put in our game
RPG that I'd wanted to put in our game since the beginning. So, guess what? The
since the beginning. So, guess what? The bug stayed and I made the challenge. And
bug stayed and I made the challenge. And it's the single piece of our game I hear
it's the single piece of our game I hear the most about from fans. Some hate it,
the most about from fans. Some hate it, some love it, some love to hate it, but
some love it, some love to hate it, but they remember it. And no one has
they remember it. And no one has mentioned that bug.
mentioned that bug. Trade polish for love. That's what your
Trade polish for love. That's what your players will remember. And what they
players will remember. And what they remember is all that matters.
remember is all that matters. Shortly after this polish rant began,
Shortly after this polish rant began, our 3:00 a.m. upload finished. Our
our 3:00 a.m. upload finished. Our friends from Glitch City have stayed way
friends from Glitch City have stayed way past midnight in solidarity, silent
past midnight in solidarity, silent support of our panic production. We call
support of our panic production. We call Casey Hunt, our weward teammate, to get
Casey Hunt, our weward teammate, to get him on the phone for the big moment.
him on the phone for the big moment. Everyone in the studio gathers around as
Everyone in the studio gathers around as Alex Preston, our leader, prepares to
Alex Preston, our leader, prepares to push publish.
push publish. Button pushed. Everyone hugs and takes
Button pushed. Everyone hugs and takes selfies. Well, everyone hugs and I take
selfies. Well, everyone hugs and I take selfies.
selfies. Bottles of booze appear like magic. And
Bottles of booze appear like magic. And with an indescribable release of
with an indescribable release of tension, we pop champagne. Pop.
tension, we pop champagne. Pop. It comes bubbling out onto a poolside
It comes bubbling out onto a poolside deck. One month later, the location
deck. One month later, the location changed, but the people remain the same.
changed, but the people remain the same. I've told all my friends I'm leaving Los
I've told all my friends I'm leaving Los Angeles to go to Square Enix. To say
Angeles to go to Square Enix. To say goodbye, I've invited them to a Palm
goodbye, I've invited them to a Palm Springs Airbnb to drink, talk, swim, and
Springs Airbnb to drink, talk, swim, and drink. The sun shines through palm trees
drink. The sun shines through palm trees on pool chairs filled with game
on pool chairs filled with game developers, the brilliant and loving
developers, the brilliant and loving people I've called friends for 7 years.
people I've called friends for 7 years. I'm still usually I'm an explorer. I'm
I'm still usually I'm an explorer. I'm thirsty for the new new places, people,
thirsty for the new new places, people, projects, and perspectives. But as a
projects, and perspectives. But as a side effect, I have a hard time
side effect, I have a hard time appreciating the present. But in this
appreciating the present. But in this champagne moment, I'm glad I'm doing
champagne moment, I'm glad I'm doing just that. New is good, but new is
just that. New is good, but new is shallow. Along this poolside, I'm
shallow. Along this poolside, I'm surrounded by people I love, trust, and
surrounded by people I love, trust, and lean on. It takes time to wade into the
lean on. It takes time to wade into the deep end of person.
deep end of person. Wink.
Wink. That was a sex joke. Two years ago at
That was a sex joke. Two years ago at GDC, I rejected the term work life
GDC, I rejected the term work life balance. Still do. Work and non-work
balance. Still do. Work and non-work life can both be restful, but I think
life can both be restful, but I think that what we mean by this is that we
that what we mean by this is that we need variety.
need variety. making things and consuming action and
making things and consuming action and inaction. Like your life, your games
inaction. Like your life, your games need this balance of depth and variety.
need this balance of depth and variety. For Hyperllight, we spent the first half
For Hyperllight, we spent the first half of production on depth. The core combat,
of production on depth. The core combat, dashing, slashing, guns.
dashing, slashing, guns. We wanted to nail that before building
We wanted to nail that before building the Drifter's world. But while the depth
the Drifter's world. But while the depth of Hyperllight's core mechanics is
of Hyperllight's core mechanics is crucial, that's not the heart of the
crucial, that's not the heart of the game. And I've come to distrust the term
game. And I've come to distrust the term core mechanics. We're going to talk
core mechanics. We're going to talk about it.
about it. This term has its uses. In building a
This term has its uses. In building a game, it's important to understand your
game, it's important to understand your primary interactions. Your core
primary interactions. Your core mechanics are the ones around which your
mechanics are the ones around which your variety will be based. They're the
variety will be based. They're the source of depth. But in practice, I find
source of depth. But in practice, I find it misleading. Core mechanic implies
it misleading. Core mechanic implies that it's the core of your whole game.
that it's the core of your whole game. And often it's not.
And often it's not. We promised a preview of Hyperledge
We promised a preview of Hyperledge Drifter to our Kickstarter backers, and
Drifter to our Kickstarter backers, and one year after the campaign, we were
one year after the campaign, we were preparing to deliver that demo. But as
preparing to deliver that demo. But as we approached our release date for the
we approached our release date for the preview, we realized we had deep core
preview, we realized we had deep core mechanics, but a shallow core. We looked
mechanics, but a shallow core. We looked at our Kickstarter video and then the
at our Kickstarter video and then the demo we'd made, and we didn't see the
demo we'd made, and we didn't see the connection. Yes, our core mechanics are
connection. Yes, our core mechanics are combat, but looking at that video, you
combat, but looking at that video, you see the true core of our game is the
see the true core of our game is the world, the feeling of being that
world, the feeling of being that drifter, the empty spaces, haunting
drifter, the empty spaces, haunting tones, and ruined forgotten depths. So,
tones, and ruined forgotten depths. So, we delayed the preview a week, put our
we delayed the preview a week, put our heads stack back down, and developed the
heads stack back down, and developed the variety of moments that would enrich our
variety of moments that would enrich our world and form our real core.
world and form our real core. Alex spent time on environmental set
Alex spent time on environmental set pieces to enrich the world, to give it
pieces to enrich the world, to give it the history it begged for, to suggest a
the history it begged for, to suggest a purpose to all that killing and dashing.
purpose to all that killing and dashing. And don't get me wrong, we designed the
And don't get me wrong, we designed the Drifter's combat with the character and
Drifter's combat with the character and the message in mind, powerful, fragile,
the message in mind, powerful, fragile, medicated.
medicated. Core mechanics are important and should
Core mechanics are important and should serve your larger theme, but don't
serve your larger theme, but don't confuse them for the true core of your
confuse them for the true core of your experience. They are the bedrock, the
experience. They are the bedrock, the foundation on which you build the game.
foundation on which you build the game. But people stand on a foundation and
But people stand on a foundation and look up at the flying buttresses. Only
look up at the flying buttresses. Only you will know the work you put into
you will know the work you put into making that floor sturdy and level.
making that floor sturdy and level. They'll remember the buttresses.
They'll remember the buttresses. I'll remember this. Poolside champagne
I'll remember this. Poolside champagne friends hours from my desk on my laptop.
friends hours from my desk on my laptop. Friends gathered in sunshielding cabana.
Friends gathered in sunshielding cabana. We're doodling earthworm gym from memory
We're doodling earthworm gym from memory to test who best remembers the '90s.
to test who best remembers the '90s. FYI, Brendan Chung draws a brilliant
FYI, Brendan Chung draws a brilliant earthworm jam.
earthworm jam. The most important thing I've learned
The most important thing I've learned since releasing Hyperllight Drifter is
since releasing Hyperllight Drifter is not the value of rest, but the value of
not the value of rest, but the value of focus. I'm all over the place. I'm
focus. I'm all over the place. I'm always working on several projects. I
always working on several projects. I bet you are, too. You can do a lot of
bet you are, too. You can do a lot of things. You can explore. You can get
things. You can explore. You can get that variety, but you can only get one
that variety, but you can only get one thing at a time. So, when you work,
thing at a time. So, when you work, work. When you rest, rest. When you
work. When you rest, rest. When you party, party. I say it once a month and
party, party. I say it once a month and I forget it once a month. Put your phone
I forget it once a month. Put your phone on. Do not disturb. The people I respect
on. Do not disturb. The people I respect most for their productivity have their
most for their productivity have their phone mooned 24/7.
phone mooned 24/7. A few weeks after this Palm Springs
A few weeks after this Palm Springs doodling, I will move to Montreal and
doodling, I will move to Montreal and begin my next game. I did not rest
begin my next game. I did not rest between Hyperllight and Square Enix. Not
between Hyperllight and Square Enix. Not enough. I know that it was a choice I
enough. I know that it was a choice I consciously made and had to suffer the
consciously made and had to suffer the consequences of, but at least I did that
consequences of, but at least I did that with full knowledge of the sacrifice.
with full knowledge of the sacrifice. And when I did rest, I rested.
And when I did rest, I rested. As we get ready to sketch our various
As we get ready to sketch our various interpretations of Sonic the Hedgehog, I
interpretations of Sonic the Hedgehog, I feel a sudden pang of regret and
feel a sudden pang of regret and melancholy. I pull out my phone and send
melancholy. I pull out my phone and send a text to a friend whom I haven't seen
a text to a friend whom I haven't seen in months. There's been a rift between
in months. There's been a rift between us that needs unrifting. We exchange a
us that needs unrifting. We exchange a few emotional messages before I decide
few emotional messages before I decide to resume my focus. I'm here with these
to resume my focus. I'm here with these friends in this place. One thing at a
friends in this place. One thing at a time, Teddy.
time, Teddy. I tear myself away, put the phone down,
I tear myself away, put the phone down, and look up at an unfamiliar sky. half
and look up at an unfamiliar sky. half filled by a Canadian mountain.
filled by a Canadian mountain. Two months, countless goodbye tears,
Two months, countless goodbye tears, coffees, and drinks have gone by. I'm in
coffees, and drinks have gone by. I'm in Montreal at a table in the lounge at
Montreal at a table in the lounge at Square Enix, looking out the window as I
Square Enix, looking out the window as I hunch over a Muji B6 notebook. Gone are
hunch over a Muji B6 notebook. Gone are my nights of Hyperllight bug fixing and
my nights of Hyperllight bug fixing and release marketing. I'm back at the
release marketing. I'm back at the beginning, a blank page and the hunger
beginning, a blank page and the hunger to put a new game concept onto it. I've
to put a new game concept onto it. I've been sitting at this table a few hours a
been sitting at this table a few hours a day, just writing, working through
day, just writing, working through thoughts, ideas, purpose. Did I say
thoughts, ideas, purpose. Did I say finishing things was the hardest part of
finishing things was the hardest part of making them? [ __ ] finishing. Starting
making them? [ __ ] finishing. Starting things is the hardest. At the end,
things is the hardest. At the end, you're so good at making that game. It
you're so good at making that game. It comes naturally. I'm a professional
comes naturally. I'm a professional Hyperllight Drifter Maker.
Hyperllight Drifter Maker. But at a new beginning, it's all new.
But at a new beginning, it's all new. I'm a rookie again. No idea what I'm
I'm a rookie again. No idea what I'm doing. And it's even worse because I
doing. And it's even worse because I know what it feels like to know what I'm
know what it feels like to know what I'm doing. To fill a blank page with the
doing. To fill a blank page with the right project is to fill 100 pages with
right project is to fill 100 pages with the wrong projects. You splash your
the wrong projects. You splash your pallet of life experiences, cultural
pallet of life experiences, cultural references, and personal taste onto a
references, and personal taste onto a canvas in different combinations, hoping
canvas in different combinations, hoping they result in the image of a game idea
they result in the image of a game idea that's new, that means something to you,
that's new, that means something to you, that is worth putting out to the world,
that is worth putting out to the world, begging for the time and attention of
begging for the time and attention of thousands of people.
thousands of people. Speaking of thousands of people, I run
Speaking of thousands of people, I run into a lot of friends who say, "Hey,
into a lot of friends who say, "Hey, congratulations on Hyperllight Drifter.
congratulations on Hyperllight Drifter. I haven't gotten a chance to play it
I haven't gotten a chance to play it yet. I'm sorry." And like I always
yet. I'm sorry." And like I always respond, "Don't worry about it. There
respond, "Don't worry about it. There are so many games to play. like too many
are so many games to play. like too many really. We should all just stop making
really. We should all just stop making them.
them. Uh, and I'm joking, but there's a lot of
Uh, and I'm joking, but there's a lot of art out there. If you make a game, you
art out there. If you make a game, you release that game, and if the impossible
release that game, and if the impossible dream happens and you're a success,
dream happens and you're a success, you'll pre you'll be providing more
you'll pre you'll be providing more lifetime to the world than you took from
lifetime to the world than you took from it. Hey, let's do math.
it. Hey, let's do math. Nine of us made Hyperllight Drifter.
Nine of us made Hyperllight Drifter. Let's average our time commitment at 3
Let's average our time commitment at 3 years each and account for weekends off.
years each and account for weekends off. That's 19 years spent making Hyperllight
That's 19 years spent making Hyperllight Drifter.
Drifter. If you use public data from Steam Spy,
If you use public data from Steam Spy, you'll learn that people have spent 387
you'll learn that people have spent 387 years playing Hyperllight Drifter.
years playing Hyperllight Drifter. That's a 20 times multiplier. That's a
That's a 20 times multiplier. That's a sick combo, and that's eye opening to
sick combo, and that's eye opening to me.
me. When you dream of having a successful
When you dream of having a successful game, you're asking for so much
game, you're asking for so much responsibility.
responsibility. As game developers, it's easy to
As game developers, it's easy to disregard our own profession when we
disregard our own profession when we look at friends, siblings, heroes who
look at friends, siblings, heroes who spend their days fighting political
spend their days fighting political injustice, healing the sick, or teaching
injustice, healing the sick, or teaching children because we don't save lives.
children because we don't save lives. But I think we provide life. Not all of
But I think we provide life. Not all of life. Hey, don't spend your whole life
life. Hey, don't spend your whole life playing games and don't encourage others
playing games and don't encourage others to. We all know that. But still, we play
to. We all know that. But still, we play a part in filling the lives of the
a part in filling the lives of the world.
world. So, how do you want to fill them? I
So, how do you want to fill them? I can't tell you how to come up with
can't tell you how to come up with ideas. I can't even tell myself. But I
ideas. I can't even tell myself. But I can tell you how I filter ideas. As I
can tell you how I filter ideas. As I sit in Square Enix, headphones on,
sit in Square Enix, headphones on, caffeine in my blood, I evaluate ideas
caffeine in my blood, I evaluate ideas through two lenses. Lens one,
through two lenses. Lens one, what experience does this provide to the
what experience does this provide to the lives of others? And do I want to be
lives of others? And do I want to be responsible for a 20 times multiplier on
responsible for a 20 times multiplier on time spent in that pursuit? Your game
time spent in that pursuit? Your game doesn't have to be about love or faith
doesn't have to be about love or faith or politics. It can be joyful, simple,
or politics. It can be joyful, simple, fun. But you choose what type of fun.
fun. But you choose what type of fun. That's your impact on the world, your
That's your impact on the world, your responsibility to your players. Lens
responsibility to your players. Lens two. What will this express of my life,
two. What will this express of my life, my tastes, and those of my teammates?
my tastes, and those of my teammates? After all, each teammate puts a lot of
After all, each teammate puts a lot of life into a game. One of our teammates
life into a game. One of our teammates moved to Montreal from France to work on
moved to Montreal from France to work on the game, another from New York for a
the game, another from New York for a concept that I chose. There's more to
concept that I chose. There's more to their lives than our daily gamedev. But
their lives than our daily gamedev. But still, like that's a responsibility to
still, like that's a responsibility to yourself and to your team.
yourself and to your team. My first new teammate is Rena Badard,
My first new teammate is Rena Badard, joyful programmer from Fez and Below.
joyful programmer from Fez and Below. He visits my windowside table, waves in
He visits my windowside table, waves in the corner of my eye with a friendly
the corner of my eye with a friendly greeting to let me know the latest
greeting to let me know the latest iteration of our prototype is ready. I
iteration of our prototype is ready. I tell him I'll be right there and turn
tell him I'll be right there and turn back to my view of the mountain.
Sun has hit the horizon now and I stare into a blinding god ray. The light
into a blinding god ray. The light sweeps mercifully out of my eyes. Music
sweeps mercifully out of my eyes. Music pumps through high-mounted speakers.
pumps through high-mounted speakers. Artificial fog fills the room. The
Artificial fog fills the room. The fanfare of the Game Awards is in full
fanfare of the Game Awards is in full effect.
effect. Whoa,
Whoa, another Vonagget time jump. Cool. Great
another Vonagget time jump. Cool. Great GDC talk, Teddy. Thanks, man. Keep
GDC talk, Teddy. Thanks, man. Keep going, though. Okay. Um,
going, though. Okay. Um, more months fly by and I'm sitting in a
more months fly by and I'm sitting in a Los Angeles theater for the Game Awards.
Los Angeles theater for the Game Awards. It's surreal. And I and my Hyperllight
It's surreal. And I and my Hyperllight buds sit in a row, nominated for two
buds sit in a row, nominated for two awards next to incredible games like
awards next to incredible games like Firewatch, Inside, and Uncharted 4. As a
Firewatch, Inside, and Uncharted 4. As a trailer for another world premiere booms
trailer for another world premiere booms through the dark theater, I ponder
through the dark theater, I ponder awards.
awards. Awards, man, I've had a lot of time to
Awards, man, I've had a lot of time to think about award nominations because
think about award nominations because they didn't come at the end. They didn't
they didn't come at the end. They didn't come as a climax where years of
come as a climax where years of production that came months later when
production that came months later when I'm trying to move on and the rush is
I'm trying to move on and the rush is gone. I'm at that new beginning trying
gone. I'm at that new beginning trying to move forward and avoid the shadow of
to move forward and avoid the shadow of our recent success. People say, "Don't
our recent success. People say, "Don't do it for the awards. Don't do it for
do it for the awards. Don't do it for the money. Don't do it for the praise."
the money. Don't do it for the praise." Common wisdom says they're not
Common wisdom says they're not fulfilling at all.
fulfilling at all. [ __ ] Like they're [ __ ] great.
[ __ ] Like they're [ __ ] great. Uh, emotional, confusing, but great to a
Uh, emotional, confusing, but great to a point, right? I'll tell you what I tell
point, right? I'll tell you what I tell myself. That it's okay to dream about an
myself. That it's okay to dream about an award. We're up for GDC and IGF awards
award. We're up for GDC and IGF awards for Hyperlite. And if you are too, I
for Hyperlite. And if you are too, I hope we beat you.
hope we beat you. I mean, like, I hope we all win, but we
I mean, like, I hope we all win, but we won't. Uh, does that make me a bad
won't. Uh, does that make me a bad person for caring?
person for caring? It's okay to thirst after a high
It's okay to thirst after a high Metacritic and a glowing review in
Metacritic and a glowing review in Waypoint or Polygon because the
Waypoint or Polygon because the respective experts and your peers feels
respective experts and your peers feels really good. I won't overruule how you
really good. I won't overruule how you feel about your own game, it it won't.
feel about your own game, it it won't. the critiques you have about your own
the critiques you have about your own game and how you want to do things
game and how you want to do things differently next time, but the dream in
differently next time, but the dream in the back of your head behind the design
the back of your head behind the design and the love of the craft and the the
and the love of the craft and the the faith in the project, that feeling that,
faith in the project, that feeling that, hey, I kind of like want a trophy, maybe
hey, I kind of like want a trophy, maybe if you work your ass off and get lucky
if you work your ass off and get lucky because it takes both. It'll be
because it takes both. It'll be exciting. The reward will reward, but
exciting. The reward will reward, but that's all it'll do, right? It'll be
that's all it'll do, right? It'll be great and then it'll be over. But that's
great and then it'll be over. But that's true of a lot of things. So, don't make
true of a lot of things. So, don't make games for the awards, but it's okay to
games for the awards, but it's okay to hope for them.
hope for them. The night I find out about the
The night I find out about the nomination, I got congratulated by
nomination, I got congratulated by Square and then I texted my family and
Square and then I texted my family and they texted congratulations. And then I
they texted congratulations. And then I went home and I made dinner and I
went home and I made dinner and I panicked uh because I felt like I should
panicked uh because I felt like I should feel more than I was feeling. In my
feel more than I was feeling. In my spiral, I texted Alexander Bruce,
spiral, I texted Alexander Bruce, creator of Ant Chamber and a truly
creator of Ant Chamber and a truly caring human being. He told me, "Awards
caring human being. He told me, "Awards are like a birthday. People will
are like a birthday. People will celebrate it with you, but they can't
celebrate it with you, but they can't really care like you do. That doesn't
really care like you do. That doesn't invalidate your birthday. It just means
invalidate your birthday. It just means you can't expect the world to feel it
you can't expect the world to feel it with you. More lights in the theater.
with you. More lights in the theater. Another game award is presented and
Another game award is presented and accepted. As the show goes to
accepted. As the show goes to commercial, I wonder what Renault and
commercial, I wonder what Renault and the team are doing back at Square.
the team are doing back at Square. I'm reminded of the time I saw Renault.
I'm reminded of the time I saw Renault. Me sitting in a chair like this one
Me sitting in a chair like this one looking up at a stage like the one in
looking up at a stage like the one in front of me. In 2008, I attended my
front of me. In 2008, I attended my first GDC and consequently my first IGF
first GDC and consequently my first IGF awards. I've been making games here and
awards. I've been making games here and there for a couple years and the parade
there for a couple years and the parade of nominees on stage was inspiring. The
of nominees on stage was inspiring. The handsome Andy Shots announced a winner,
handsome Andy Shots announced a winner, Fez. And there was Renault on stage with
Fez. And there was Renault on stage with Phil to accept the award. I remember so
Phil to accept the award. I remember so clearly thinking to myself, I want that.
clearly thinking to myself, I want that. I want to make a game that's special
I want to make a game that's special like that and feel what it must feel
like that and feel what it must feel like. Next year, I said, GDC 2009, I'll
like. Next year, I said, GDC 2009, I'll be on that stage.
be on that stage. I spent the next eight IGF awards
I spent the next eight IGF awards suffering from that ambitious goal.
suffering from that ambitious goal. Ambition is good. Passion will push you
Ambition is good. Passion will push you forward and improve your work. But
forward and improve your work. But patience, I'm working on that one. It's
patience, I'm working on that one. It's not my strong suit. But finally, here I
not my strong suit. But finally, here I am at the Game Awards. A different
am at the Game Awards. A different theater, a different prize, but that
theater, a different prize, but that dream came true. Well, we lost. But for
dream came true. Well, we lost. But for the record, it actually does feel like
the record, it actually does feel like an honor to be nominated. But also, [ __ ]
an honor to be nominated. But also, [ __ ] Dishonored, too. [ __ ] that great, great,
Dishonored, too. [ __ ] that great, great, great game that beat us. But sitting
great game that beat us. But sitting among my friends in that theater, it
among my friends in that theater, it feels like a flying buttress. A moment
feels like a flying buttress. A moment I'll remember. I look up up at the stage
I'll remember. I look up up at the stage and there I am. Here I am. Hi. Here we
and there I am. Here I am. Hi. Here we are. GDC 2007. A week where the world of
are. GDC 2007. A week where the world of games comes together to talk, drink,
games comes together to talk, drink, dance, learn. To celebrate what we do
dance, learn. To celebrate what we do and strive to do it better. This talk
and strive to do it better. This talk teeters on the edge of emotion and
teeters on the edge of emotion and information. Tangible takeaways are
information. Tangible takeaways are important because this show can feel
important because this show can feel like a blur and it's hard to say what
like a blur and it's hard to say what will stick with you in a week or in a
will stick with you in a week or in a year. So, let's backload some hot tips.
year. So, let's backload some hot tips. Seven tips from Teddy. A rapid fire
Seven tips from Teddy. A rapid fire faster nano talk series. If I can fit
faster nano talk series. If I can fit enough in, maybe Megan, Simon, Kelly,
enough in, maybe Megan, Simon, Kelly, Akira, Jonathan, and Ryan will let me do
Akira, Jonathan, and Ryan will let me do it again.
it again. One, start game field from day one. It's
One, start game field from day one. It's immediate like music. It's emotional.
immediate like music. It's emotional. Everything that moves, feels,
Everything that moves, feels, characters, menus, dialogue boxes. If it
characters, menus, dialogue boxes. If it doesn't feel good, you might throw out a
doesn't feel good, you might throw out a good idea because of subconscious bias
good idea because of subconscious bias against bad game feel. Two, retweet
against bad game feel. Two, retweet yourself. Don't feel guilty. There are a
yourself. Don't feel guilty. There are a lot of tweets and most your followers
lot of tweets and most your followers miss it the first time, so get that
miss it the first time, so get that evening bump on the morning tweet. It's
evening bump on the morning tweet. It's cool. Three, invest in a good pair of
cool. Three, invest in a good pair of headphones or get your studio, too. If
headphones or get your studio, too. If you care about 1080p and 60 fps, why the
you care about 1080p and 60 fps, why the [ __ ] are you listening to the sound and
[ __ ] are you listening to the sound and music from laptop speakers or earbuds?
music from laptop speakers or earbuds? Four, Catherine is the best Persona game
Four, Catherine is the best Persona game ever made. Don't at me. Go play it.
ever made. Don't at me. Go play it. Five, this week at GDC, put your name
Five, this week at GDC, put your name tag on the right, not the left. The
tag on the right, not the left. The right is right. Anyone you meet is
right is right. Anyone you meet is looking at your right when they meet
looking at your right when they meet you, when they go to shake your right
you, when they go to shake your right hand. A name tag on the right is easier
hand. A name tag on the right is easier for your new friend to peek at, to
for your new friend to peek at, to memorize your name without looking like
memorize your name without looking like they're staring at your chest. Six,
they're staring at your chest. Six, assume every woman you meet this week is
assume every woman you meet this week is a developer. She's not with someone.
a developer. She's not with someone. She's with herself, and you can probably
She's with herself, and you can probably learn from her. Seven, yeah, right, duh.
learn from her. Seven, yeah, right, duh. Seven, ask for help. Now that I'm a
Seven, ask for help. Now that I'm a creative director with a fancy name, I
creative director with a fancy name, I struggle with remembering that yes, I'm
struggle with remembering that yes, I'm responsible for leading a team, but no,
responsible for leading a team, but no, I don't have to have all the answers.
I don't have to have all the answers. It's easy to get siloed when you're
It's easy to get siloed when you're under pressure in any role, but ask for
under pressure in any role, but ask for help. Ask for input. Make it cooler
help. Ask for input. Make it cooler together. Okay, takeaways.
together. Okay, takeaways. I'll tweet those next week. I'm Teddy D
I'll tweet those next week. I'm Teddy D on Twitter. Daniel C41A, Ben is Ben
on Twitter. Daniel C41A, Ben is Ben Swinden. They're on my pin tweet right
Swinden. They're on my pin tweet right now. It's great. So, here we are. We're
now. It's great. So, here we are. We're at the end. We're at the end. Uh, nearly
at the end. We're at the end. Uh, nearly a year from those textures being [ __ ]
a year from those textures being [ __ ] and that game being released. 2 years
and that game being released. 2 years since I last stood on this stage. 11
since I last stood on this stage. 11 years since I made my first video game.
years since I made my first video game. And here I am still making games. Here
And here I am still making games. Here we are gathered, still groovven.
we are gathered, still groovven. When talking about gamedev, life over
When talking about gamedev, life over drinks with friends. I've often said
drinks with friends. I've often said that this work is like life in the fast
that this work is like life in the fast lane. You spend years moving over into
lane. You spend years moving over into that lane and then you decide how long
that lane and then you decide how long you got to go fast. How long you can
you got to go fast. How long you can before you drift right and exit, slow
before you drift right and exit, slow down, pull off somewhere, buy a house or
down, pull off somewhere, buy a house or something. And hey, I was wrong about
something. And hey, I was wrong about that.
that. Yeah, I work more than I relax. I'm
Yeah, I work more than I relax. I'm intense about everything. That's just my
intense about everything. That's just my style right now. But that's no value
style right now. But that's no value judgment. Take any line you like. Drift
judgment. Take any line you like. Drift back and forth from left to right. It
back and forth from left to right. It doesn't matter how fast you move at any
doesn't matter how fast you move at any given time. It doesn't matter what lane
given time. It doesn't matter what lane you're in. It matters what road you're
you're in. It matters what road you're on and the turns you take. Because
on and the turns you take. Because busting your ass for a vapid game with
busting your ass for a vapid game with no point and no joy and no heart and no
no point and no joy and no heart and no personal investment is way less
personal investment is way less productive than a slow and gradual pace
productive than a slow and gradual pace on a game that you feel that you feel
on a game that you feel that you feel you need to make that you hope will add
you need to make that you hope will add to the world. And if you're being paid
to the world. And if you're being paid by someone else to work on a game and
by someone else to work on a game and you feel like it's not doing that, do
you feel like it's not doing that, do your best to make it better. And
your best to make it better. And remember that you can use this time to
remember that you can use this time to improve your craft. For the time you'll
improve your craft. For the time you'll find for you for a project you love, it
find for you for a project you love, it will come. So this wasn't about prayer,
will come. So this wasn't about prayer, but I have faith in games. a young,
but I have faith in games. a young, dumb, powerful medium. My window to the
dumb, powerful medium. My window to the world, my privilege and responsibility.
world, my privilege and responsibility. So, here's my goodbye. I promise to make
So, here's my goodbye. I promise to make games that strive for meaning to inspire
games that strive for meaning to inspire or heal. Let players escape or get
or heal. Let players escape or get players involved. I'll suffer imposter
players involved. I'll suffer imposter syndrome, but not get buried by it.
syndrome, but not get buried by it. Because when people give me a
Because when people give me a compliment, I'll f the urge to refute it
compliment, I'll f the urge to refute it in my head to destroy the good they're
in my head to destroy the good they're giving me. I promise to use my great
giving me. I promise to use my great privilege and luck to pull other people
privilege and luck to pull other people up. I won't squander it. I'll wield it
up. I won't squander it. I'll wield it to [ __ ] [ __ ] up, destroy it, and build
to [ __ ] [ __ ] up, destroy it, and build it back up to make this industry a
it back up to make this industry a better, safer, more diverse, more mature
better, safer, more diverse, more mature one. That's it. Thank you.
one. That's it. Thank you. [Applause]
[Applause] [Music]
[Music] [Applause]