Hello, everyone. Thank you for coming. Thank you for choosing this talk.
Uh I know there's so many amazing talks to choose from.
So it's an honor that you've chosen this one.
I guess if you are here,
maybe you are planning to be a manager or you are
taking your first steps or you are just plainly interested,
you know how this works.
So hopefully we can answer this today.
Um
Ideally,
we should be aware that this is a very young
industry and we are still learning how these things work.
We are figuring things out if you
pay attention the way we do things we have inherited so
much from cinema or from software development and other industries.
So we are taking some things and we're changing them to suit us,
but we're still evolving and learning also, we are so tied to technology
that
it really emphasizes for a
open mind and an open approach.
So hopefully we can learn an exchange today about those things
and
hopefully we can reach out,
you can reach out to me and we can talk about these things if this talk exists.
It's because I
want to share what I've learned in my first years in management,
what I learned from other people and what I've seen from other statistics.
Uh So putting all those three things together,
what we can learn and hopefully prevent some mistakes.
Uh I'll tell you a little bit about myself really quickly.
I'm Mark, I'm an elite animator. I love 42 games, which is part of the Sumo group.
You'll find lots of amazing Sumo group people in at
GC.
And
originally I didn't do animation. I studied uh business.
I went there and I quickly realized that wasn't for me, it was very great and dull,
at least the way they were doing those things.
And so I went to what I really like, which is cinema.
I went to cinema,
I studied cinema and then I found out about animation
and then I realized that I could make games,
which is what I truly like.
And that leaves me in this interesting spot where I really like the management side
of business. And I really like the animation and the art and video games.
So hopefully we can put those two things together
and find out some interesting things.
I want to begin this with a quote of a friend of mine.
Uh She is in human resources.
Let me show you this first.
I like using,
yeah, it would be quite useful for us. We'll be using some memes because they
uh
emphasize, they summarize a very complex thing. In an image very straightforward.
So as we can see our
cat friend here,
uh he used to be a great coder and he's been dragged
into that management promotion and now he's just stuck being doing meetings,
interviews, discussions, et cetera.
So he can't code anymore.
That's
once,
that's one thing that happens in the industry and that's why hopefully we
can talk later because maybe you've been through that or you know,
someone who's been through that.
So let me quote my friend, she is from human resources. Uh She doesn't do any
video game development and she used to be
in other industries and she joined the video game industry like a year ago.
So it was a very interesting perspective and we were talking about what we do,
think what we do, right?
And what we do wrong.
And she said one very interesting thing and she said
the most common mistake in this industry
is skilled individuals put into management roles.
So we have this
believe this thing that we just do in
the industry that's dragging like our poor friend
here dragged into a management position just because
you have it's a very skilled individual.
It can be code, it can be 3d animation, it can be two dr it can be anything.
But we have this tradition,
this thing of dragging those people and maybe they are not
in the right place and maybe they don't feel comfortable.
Um
So that was a very interesting take from an outsider of our industry.
Uh We need to understand that it's two different set of skills.
Uh being a coder or being a manager is two
different things and it requires two completely different things.
And you can see also you may know great managers
that probably they are not that great uh through
the artists or through the animators or designers.
Uh but they are great managers.
So they have that skill and we'll see, we'll talk about that.
We'll talk about the communication,
how important it is and those key skills that we need.
So
now is the Clickbait monument that I say,
and I say, if you are a manager or you're planning to be a manager,
you are probably going to regret it.
I guess I click here to find out why.
And
I'll tell you now,
there's this very interesting
uh survey that the workforce Institute did last year.
Maybe you read, maybe you heard about it through the talk.
Uh They let me quote,
they found out that 47% of middle managers are likely
to quit this 2023 because of stress related reasons.
Of course, this was last year
and we can observe two important things here in this survey.
So it says 47% 47% is huge is
half of it.
So that means that we're doing something clearly wrong.
And also it says
for stress related reasons
nowadays, we, we need to understand that
beliefs likes and the society as a whole changes and we need to adapt with that.
Um Probably 30 years ago,
uh mental well being or well being in general wasn't so important.
But now through this uh survey,
we found out that people appreciate that and they value that and they rather have
less pay in a, less
in a role with less responsibility,
but at least they preserve their mental well being and the mental health
and we are struggling to keep up with that new, luckily, new way of saying things.
OK.
Um
Before we dive into exactly
what is part of that, 47% how to prevent being part of that.
47% I want to talk about is a manager. What is
manager taking those first steps? What is a middle manager in this case?
And to do that because it's a very gray area. We don't really know.
Uh
you've been there probably, you know, someone, maybe you're doing
a little bit of uh you continue doing design, you are doing some documentation,
they're doing interviews.
You are leading
a team where is very great and we don't know how much you're supposed to do.
Maybe I'm not doing uh any, let's say 3D work at all.
So let's see what the dictionary says. So, so we are all on the same page
and I went to the Oxford Dictionary Dictionary and it says
a manager, a middle manager is a manager who is in charge of a small group of people
or a small department within the business organization.
And it goes on to say,
compared with top executives,
middle managers are likely to have more time to interact with their employees.
And that's the blessing we have in those uh three steps that we are
taking is that we have the opportunity to interact more with the employees.
And we have a closer approach than top executives to,
to the business organization, to the team, to the,
to the project we are working on.
And we are very lucky to be able to do that.
Now,
you will see that communication is crucial,
but let's dive into
that 47%. What happens? Why, where does that come from?
So from, as I said before, from surveys with uh exchange with friends
uh with colleagues with all the professionals
and probably I bother some of you here to see how was your experience?
We,
I I narrowed down to three main things and
you can also consult that with the Workforce Institute.
Three main things that
are the cause of that. 47%. There are many, there are as many as people in this room,
but
one of the main ones is this thing that we do in the industry. Now,
this is the wearing two hats that I call
is something that
is not
wrong in the, in
its essence.
It's the fact like we saw the cat in our previous slide in the first one,
which is when we do two things at the same time. For instance, I'm a 3d animator.
I conti continue doing animations
while I start taking care of some management responsibilities.
And
that has positives. That's, that's the way we've been doing.
And it has a clear strength, for instance, that we can stay closer to the team.
We know exactly what is going on. What pipeline are we using?
What software are you using? Any problems, any
blockers?
And we have that middle management position that we saw before in
the dictionary that we can actually interact and we have a,
closer knowledge of what's going on
and
that's great. That's a good thing.
We are wearing one hat, but then we are wearing the other hat.
So let's say we are a 3d character artist
and we are creating 100 characters a day like super prolific.
And
now we are starting taking some management responsibilities
and that's the great area that we were
talking about before when it comes to management.
We maybe are doing some interviews, as I said before.
Then we are hiring someone and we're doing some mentorship,
like telling them how to do things how our pipelines work.
And then we are doing some augmentation for these new people.
And then at the same time, we continue to do those 100 assets a day
and you can clearly see how this can end that wrong.
Um
The big problem with this is it's doable, you can do it. You can
continue to create those 100 assets a day while
uh continue with your new tasks. It's possible
and that's the main risk because you can do it.
But the question is for long,
for how long can you do it?
How long can you keep up? And that's when we see that 47%
of people who this is a very sneaky issue that we find
uh before you know it, you are overwhelmed
uh and torn between two words like
this poor friend.
That's a classic thing that happens.
And the other thing since we are talking
about this very gray area in the management side
you will be doing a few interviews. 34, how long is that going to take? Ok.
It may take 30 minutes, but
then you need some time to evaluate those candidates and
to exchange with other people that may be interested.
How long is that going to take? Is that going to be half an hour?
It's going to be an hour. It's going to be one meeting to meet these three meetings
so quickly it can balloon and it can
overwhelm you
and
it can take over.
And especially if you
continue to perform as you were performing before with those 100 assets a day a day.
They say in
this case, I usually find that the worst enemy is yourself,
that you struggle to realize that you are doing two things at
the same time and you should understand that it's too much.
So, the Barnet Barnet
is a key element.
Next.
This,
this is
stigma or a belief that we have in the industry. Uh
Something that has become
natural
is an assumption that we have
career progression
for skilled individuals as we saw before means
a management role or going to some management
responsibilities and leadership.
And
probably that shouldn't be the case. We're seeing some
probably big studios realizing that as uh not correct,
but we have this belief that because you are uh very good at what you do.
Code 3D animation design production
is a natural progression to become
uh take care of some of some management responsibilities.
And I've seen some great people
the way to prevent this is being very assertive
and very clear that they don't want to do that
they just want to continue doing what they are really good at.
So
we see the thing that we have this belief,
this natural progression and we are removing
the really skilled people
from what they do best and from what they want to do
you seen.
Uh and probably, you know, someone or you've been through that,
that you were very happy as a
cat at the very beginning of the presentation
that he was very happily coding he is the best coder
and they being dragged away just because that's the natural progression. So
at least some companies are waking up. We see
Sumo we have some other paths or some companies that just continue,
you can continue to be a senior.
You don't really need to progress into a lead or some other uh management positions.
But it's a very, very, very sad thing that we remove
people. Were they happy? Maybe they just don't want to do this.
They don't like it or they don't have the skills and they are not interested.
I I became uh
an animator to be an animator.
I became a designer to be a designer and
don't want to be dealing with these other things.
So that's something very important to keep in mind.
And now
the other side of this same coin, which is
this,
unfortunately, I've talked and I,
and I know very amazing people that they would be
absolutely great middle managers or they would have an absolute,
a very successful
management career.
They think they are not good enough.
Um
That is in itself a good thing
because you may,
they put value into
what it means to be a manager.
They realize they will have a lot of responsibility and we can make a big difference,
a big positive difference or negative difference in the team.
So the fact that they
value the fact that they understand the weight of the law
and they probably, they don't feel safe enough to,
or uh cap capable enough to fill those shoes.
It means that they really appreciate their role and they take it seriously.
So maybe if you are in that position, maybe it is actually for you.
And it's very sad because we are not empowering lots many,
uh lots of people like this that are, and we are missing out,
we're missing out on great uh managers.
Um
Let me see where we are.
Uh Yes,
I want to share a little example quickly of a friend of mine uh and he is from college.
He was in finance,
he is in finance and he had the worst managers that you can even imagine.
And
what I like
what he said,
we were discussing how they do things there and
how we do things in the gaming industry.
And he said
the, he had the worst managers. He said the fact that you care, the fact that
someone tries to improve, we may do it wrong, we may make mistakes.
But the fact that we say, ok, what have we done wrong? How can we improve it?
Just the fact that that already pulls you way
ahead of many other managers that they don't care,
they are not interested or they are just in that position
because career progression or because it just happened to be there.
So the fact of caring,
the fact of being interested that already makes a huge difference.
So last spot that I want to talk about, last point
that 47% is this
um
and it's a,
it's a tricky one
when probably you are taking those first steps, you will be
either promoted or maybe you change jobs and you are going to another
company
and you will jump into an already working machine.
Even if you're starting a studio from scratch,
probably you have investors or you have partners.
Uh But this applies mainly to those promotions, changing companies,
you may join there and then you may find very
unethical or toxic or
just plainly
bad negative practices.
And we have plenty of examples in the game industry. So we don't need
to talk about that. It can be from crunch or,
uh toxic behavior or harassment
and the danger of taking those first steps in a
place like that is that you may end up normalizing it
and become a new normal for you.
And the problem is that you will take the new normal
with you and you will take it to other places,
to other industries and to other jobs that you may have.
And
so it's a very risky one and it, it requires a lot of um,
a very strong moral compass and a very strong personality to not be sucked into that.
Because again,
all these three points are very sneaky that they just before you know it,
they are part of you
and it takes a
strength to realize that it's wrong and not to
be sucked into that and not normalizing it.
And just a quick note because I prepared this months ago.
But last week I watched for the first time, uh, The Devil Wears Prada.
I never watched that movie before.
And if you watch it,
you will understand perfectly what I mean here
and if you haven't and you watch it, you will see.
But pretty much, uh I was surprised I was like, oh, this is exactly, this is a,
uh the protagonist joins a company with a very
questionable, with very questionable ethics
and she despises it.
But by the halfway through the movie, she's fully into that and she is already,
she soaked the, the, the,
the ethics of the company and she became absolutely that.
So it's a good example.
Now with all these negative, all these pitfalls, all these,
this narrow path that we need to follow in those first steps, how to do it, right?
And how not to be part of that 47%.
I want to dedicate a little bit of how to, now that we are here,
we are already in the dance.
Let's dance, how to do this properly.
So how do we, how are we, our best managers?
The
easy first exercise would be thinking about your managers,
managers that you liked or disliked
and you have already a good example.
How would you do things how you would you change things that moment that you were
uh communicating something and you were ignored or many other examples,
I think I would do those things different.
So that's already a great start.
Also,
as we, as I said before, is a
industry that continues to grow is very, continues to morph into different things.
So this that we are doing right here, uh communicating,
exchanging and learning from each other is very important.
Um
It is
so
one of the things I said at the very beginning was about well being
and how well-being is very important nowadays and how we take it very seriously.
Um probably wasn't the case
40 years ago
or, or longer. Luckily now we care about those things. We saw
how some people prefer to have uh less pay but keep mental sanity.
And that is a change, a change that we are struggling to adapt.
Uh especially some people have been doing this for a long time.
We all heard the story.
So yeah, I used to crash 12 hours a day and that was the best thing and that was great.
Uh But that's not the thing anymore. Uh Luckily at least
we are trying to prevent that.
So
another statistic from UK G this time from the UK,
they consult the employees and they said, let me quote,
one in three employees say that managers fail to recognize
the impact they have on their team's mental health.
Hm.
And that's precisely what we're talking about.
We are struggling to realize that,
uh that's very important and that we have a big weight when it comes to that.
Whatever happens in that team, whatever happens in our project,
it will be carried over. We need to understand that the responsibility is very big.
Whatever happens there, it will be,
it will influence the private lives,
the family life, friends, hobbies, et cetera. It will,
we spend lots of time at work and it's a very part,
very important part of our lives and we can affect the
whole world of a person if we don't do things properly.
And if we do things properly, we may affect in a positive way
and you probably been through something like that so you can relate.
So how do we do this properly? How can we understand, evaluate and properly
care about their well being? And I put holistic because I'm not talking just about uh
mental well being and mental health.
I'm talking about everything from physical, social, spiritual.
It's really important. How do we do this
properly?
Um
The first step
is very important is that we need to be ok ourselves.
We need to be in a good place to be able to do that if we are struggling.
Uh if we are not in a good place, if we are,
uh we are not ok ourselves, it's really hard to be able to help someone else actually.
Probably we end up doing things, making things worse.
Uh So that's a key thing that we need to consider and be honest with ourselves.
As I said, with the two had example before you can push it and you can continue doing
regardless, but that won't have a good results.
So it's important to be honest with ourselves once we are OK,
uh We can proceed with the next step.
Also the fact of saying, being honest and saying, I can't,
I need some time.
It humanizes us and shows to the other people, to the team,
et cetera that we are human and we need some time off that we are having
went through something tough and we need that day off and say he did it,
I can do it as well.
So that's really important.
OK. So how do we do this?
It's of course, this is the new set of skills.
I was talking about the two different things about
the communication
and how to do that and how crucial
it is is the lifeline to your team, to the employees, to your teammates,
to your colleagues.
And it's
key to have it there. So it could be,
it's we know it. Um
but we do, we actually do it. I know many examples that it doesn't happen.
Maybe the documentation is there and how things should be,
but it doesn't actually happen and it has real repercussions in the end product.
genuine communication is very important. So I wrote that genuine communication,
genuine connections.
When you
exchange with other people, the managers, you may find some that prefer a more
professional relationship, a more strictly work connection.
But
I came here to tell you that maybe a more genuine,
closer
uh connection, we're creating
trust and creating
a truthful environment can make a really positive impact.
And by a genuine connection, a very close connection with team and your employees.
I don't mean uh being best friends forever and hanging out every Saturday.
What I mean is truly listening, great manners,
are great listeners and truly listening and
caring about that
person.
Maybe you're talking about your uh family, your pets, your hobbies,
or maybe you're talking,
you're telling me about problem with your hardware or your software,
every little thing I genuinely listen in and I genuinely then apply solutions to it.
Um
Let me see.
So I,
I'm telling you, yes, you need to
have that very close connection,
close relationship
that enable us to why, why it is important because it enabled us to
spot and see what is going good and what is going wrong. If we
don't do it, we may miss it.
And of course, it takes time. You may say, oh yeah, that's, that's great. Of course.
Uh Yeah, we'll talk to everyone every day for hours, but it takes time.
It takes effort
and internet takes money, it takes resources. Why, why would I do that?
Sometimes I just don't have the time
and,
and that takes us to this light where we see that it
is really important.
And,
and we see very ex very good examples in the last few
years in the industry where truly happy teams in a good place,
they can produce great work because we're here to make great games
and
the state of mind of the team is crucial.
So
that close and genuine
connection and relationship and understanding what's wrong
to the, let's say, microscopical level,
it enables to
apply solutions, genuine solutions, which it may be vacation, it may be
reduce the workload, it may be
uh some time off, whatever it is. But
we actually
remove obstacles for the people to get to making a great uh work. So
I remember back at uni and college studying about Henry Ford
Ford uh car maker
and
it was fun because he was starting,
we know that we need to thank him for the 40 hour work week.
And the way we are here right now is many things thanks to him.
And I remember the first things he did,
he was trying to play music in the production line where they were making the cars.
And just by that little change, you may know about it,
I already increased the productions of the cars.
So just one little change, making more comfortable, the employee,
it increased the production,
how for us that we are in a creative industry, creating art.
Literally, we're creating stories, characters, environments,
words out of nowhere,
how can a person
in
dark place? Not in a good spirit. How can we create anything like that?
How can we create art from a bad place?
So if it works for creating cars, for manufacturing cars,
it definitely should work for us um making games.
So if we go the other way around,
what we want is a great game and of course, this is a business.
So we want the conclusions when a great game that makes us lots of money.
Of course, how do we do that? We need that great team.
That is in a great place to make that great game.
Otherwise it won't happen. How do we do that?
Well, we have,
we can enable that team removing those problems
and how do we know about those problems?
Well,
we established that genuine and close connection where we can
find out about those details about the well being mental,
well being and
some subtle things that we can only discover through that
very close connection.
Now, as a quick summary of what we learned today
running of time here,
um
we learned that management done wrong
has a really high rate of, of failure
it's something that we shouldn't underestimate and jump into it.
Like I heard many testimonies just jump into it and then you regret it.
So it's something that you shouldn't
underestimate
and
we learn how important it is to avoid burnout
and how management is not the only path that's a
one big change we should understand in this industry.
Lastly,
we understood how important is the influence that we can have in the team as a whole,
in the whole mental and health of the team
and how communication can help us so much with that.
It's all about communication, genuine communication, at least for me.
So hopefully,
uh this stock will help to
make a better industry,
uh one that can make better games and in a healthier environment.
So with that,
I really thank you for being here and for listening to me. So, thank you very much.
Thank you.