Hi, everyone.
This is welcome to system Centric puzzle design in Patrick's Per Box.
Um, hi, I'm Patrick. I mainly do programming and design.
I've been making games since around 2011, mostly freeware games as a hobbyist.
And in March of 2022 I released my first commercial game,
which is called
Patrick's Parab Box.
This is a,
well,
thanks.
Um, this is a block pushing puzzle game with a recursive twist.
It had about a fouryear development time
and halfway through development, it won the IGF Excellence in design award.
Um, could I get a quick show of hands of who here has played, uh, the game?
A lot of people? That's very cool to see. Thanks.
Um,
so I'll still explain the core mechanics. So here's a gift of the gameplay.
You can see you push boxes around, but there's also this blue box,
which is a container for other boxes.
And if you squish it against the wall,
you can enter it and push other boxes into it and you can push them out.
This is a really cool system I discovered while I'm prototyping and
it ends up giving rise to lots of compelling mechanics and puzzles.
Here's another g
showing a situation where this blue box actually contains itself.
So if you exit from the blue box, you will end up back in the blue box.
Um This gives rise to even more puzzles with the recursion.
So these two gifts show the core of this system that I discovered,
but there's also more recursive mechanics that end up,
it gives rise to you as well. Such as what if a box contains multiple copies of itself
or what happens if you push a box outside of itself causing a paradox
or what happens if the player character is itself a box that can contain other boxes?
It's like wild stuff can happen.
Um So what I mean by system centric in this talk's title is that
this system that I have happened upon discovered is something I find legitimately
super interesting and compelling and I wanna tell all my friends about it.
Um So my goal of making this game is to showcase this recursive box system
on the flip side of the coin,
players motivation when playing the game is that
they want to see more of this system.
It's exciting to see what new mechanic
is around the next corner.
And this great system that I luckily discovered happens to
be very generous and that there's a lot of things
it has to show.
Um So I'll give us um selection of
sort of a sorry,
a design sort of post mortem a bunch of snippets that applied to this game,
but maybe you can apply it to your game whether or not it's a puzzle game.
Um
So one thing I did thinking about showcasing the system
was I try to keep an approachable level of difficulty.
Um
So relatively easy compared to other games in the hardcore puzzle genre.
Um because my goal was to showcase and communicate things about this cool system,
not necessarily to challenge players or to stump them
or, or other goals that I might have.
Um I did this because it's my personal preference.
But also
this really unexpectedly broadened the audience of the game.
More people could get into it who
weren't otherwise really good puu puzzle players, but they could get into it
and maybe even make it a lot of, a lot of the way through.
Um
Yeah.
Um So to show some examples of making an approachable difficulty,
here is a puzzle on the left where this is a puzzle about you
start in this little left pocket where you put your yourself and a blue box
into the green clone box
with the entering on the correct side.
Such that when you exit on the right side of the level out of the green clone box,
things are positioned correctly and you can solve the little maze
on the right. Here's a simpler, easier version of this puzzle.
Well, it's about the same basic idea, but now,
the constraint on the right is simplified and easier.
Once you get the, the, the cool recursive idea,
you can then move on without any unnecessary roadblocks.
And the, the right puzzle is the one I use in the game.
Here's the puzzle on the left where there's four blue boxes
and your goal is to separate them so that there's one space in between each
and there's a, you have to utilize the two green recursive boxes on the right
and do a cool recursive trick in order to separate them
on the right.
Here's a version of this puzzle with only three boxes and more empty space
which gives you more leeway.
So now all you have to do is recognize this recursive trick
and there's no
tight box finagling or finessing that the left puzzle has.
So there's less, less friction.
I ended up using this puzzle on the right,
but I did still like the cool complications that the left one has.
So I left it in as an optional puzzle
on the left. Here's a puzzle where your goal is to enter into this green box,
but you can't do so directly because there's walls on all four sides of it.
You have to utilize the other three boxes in the level to do so
on the right.
Here's a version of this puzzle with this green
box is constrained in this little cranny inside the wall
so you can't move it.
So this constrains the number of possibilities in this level.
So there's less things to do that aren't the solution or related to the solution
so you can get there quicker.
Um So to codify some of these things I did,
I tried to simplify puzzles as much as possible.
I tried to make puzzles as easy as possible while still showing their core idea,
while still communicating what they're about.
I removed some solution steps that were unnecessary or too hard.
I,
when appropriate, I trimmed the possibility space.
So less things to do that weren't the solution or weren't related or
I didn't want to be possible.
And in general try to keep the puzzles bite size because they're more like, hey,
did you know you can do this cool thing?
Isn't that cool?
And now here's another one, I'd rather keep people keep showing you things.
So there came a point.
There's a question though of like, well, how easy is too easy because
for some of these easy puzzles,
players would stumble into the solution without understanding
what happened
or they would not understand mechanics at a very deep level
which is not great.
But I decided, well,
I'm ok with this happening sometimes as long as I'm making this trade off in favor of
or in service of making the game more approachable and streamlined.
And this is sort of a maybe a controversial thing or it's, it's,
there's some subtlety involved here
about sometimes it is bad, but
just sharing my perspective that it worked well in this context.
OK. So puzzles don't exist in a vacuum.
They're surrounded by puzzles before them, after them. And on all sides of them,
here's a sequence of three puzzles where A introduces a new mechanic and
B and C expand on it in more complex and difficult scenarios.
A play tester was having trouble with C and I realized, oh yeah,
that's kind of an unfair leap from B to C.
So
I added this puzzle in which bridges the gap
and this was an improvement and it was a nice puzzle.
But another player was still having trouble on C
and I thought, well, I, I'd like C but it's,
I'd rather not have people get stuck on it rather than move on.
So I did just that and put, made C an optional puzzle.
So now after you solve N you can just proceed onwards.
This is the kind of thing I did a lot in the game
with puzzle ordering.
Here's another example. So here's seven puzzles.
The first of which introduces a brand new mechanic.
It's the infinite exit mechanic.
And then there's six other puzzles that give you
gradually give you more practice and more complex scenarios.
When I play tested this, it just didn't work that well.
The introduction was just confusing
and
the constraints were clear, there were just weird,
weird abstract puzzles that you couldn't quite grasp.
So I cut the end up cutting these five puzzles and the two, I didn't cut,
they were actually ok and I kept them with some changes.
And here's what I ended up with next.
I added a better introduction to this mechanic that's more clear.
And I added two better reinforcement puzzles to reinforce your knowledge.
Um,
and not doing what I knew didn't work in the first time
and added two optional puzzles which are the ones
in the lower right there that were also good.
So this was an improvement.
But then another play tester had trouble with
this mechanic at the very first puzzle,
which was they thought,
well, they thought this mechanic put them into a loose state
but it actually doesn't.
So I was, I thought, well, let's just add a level that shows you that.
And actually I was able to add four levels that clarify.
This doesn't put you in a loose state and this constrained environment
actually ends up being kind of having nice puzzles.
So now I have an even smoother introduction to this mechanic,
um which was great.
I tried to apply this kind of iteration
across every single puzzle sequence in the game.
Um So these, each of these boxes is an area in the game.
And if you squint or look closely each of those tiny
little boxes in there is like a sequence of puzzles,
um just showing this to show the scope of the work,
I try to be diligent and do this for every sequence.
Um So to codify some of these things,
um The general verbs I did was inserting a puzzle, modifying a puzzle,
deleting a puzzle,
reordering a puzzle or optional housing a puzzle.
And I did these in order to
patch up conceptual leaps,
improve to totalization or clarify, misunderstandings,
insert puzzles to reinforce knowledge or give
someone a second chance to learn something.
If for example, they stumbled into the solution
in the first instance
and also to manage to play time
because I want
people to be moving through the game and not get hung up on a puzzle, even if it's good.
I have so many other things to show.
I learned to treat this kind of puzzle
management or puzzle ordering as its own distinct skill
when making this game. And I found this skill to be just as important
as the skill of making puzzles in the first place.
Here's a gif showing a to the tools I used to, for example,
insert a new puzzle into the sequence of three.
So now it's sequence of four.
All I do is drag the puzzle into the ordering and then I can recompile the game
and all the connections work.
No additional configuration is required on my end.
Having this tool be quick and joyful was very nice
because I was making so many of these changes.
And I would rather encourage myself to do lots of these things
as opposed to if the tools were slow or miserable to use.
Related, I also did not have puzzles in the hub area even though that would be cool.
It's like a recursive game. So why not have puzzles and puzzles?
But I was iterating on this order so much that
I would have been breaking them all the time. So I made a trade off there
and it was, it was good. I iteration on the port, the puzzle order
a lot um helped
um related to this
unlocking leniency of in puzzle games.
So on the left,
here's an older version of the game where you can see this
player has gotten stuck in the third puzzle in this area.
And in
this version, if you get stuck on a puzzle in the main line,
there's no other option, you are stuck, you gotta solve it in order to move on.
Um which is bad.
Um On the right,
I made this change in the latent development where it looks more like on the
right where you can see this player has now made it through a lot of puzzles
because at any given point, I made it so that you have access to
multiple possible puzzles to make progress on.
This is very common advi like knowledge in
puzzle games to always have multiple paths available.
But I'm just mentioning it here to stress
that this is very important in making the game more approachable.
And I want to be generous in showing people cool stuff about the system,
not putting roadblocks
in front of people.
So I've talked about puzzles and puzzle ordering and I got information
on how I want to change those things based on play testing.
And I want to endorse a specific format of play testing, which is
video recordings with the play tester, narrating of dots out loud.
This is more work for the play tester because they have to set up
a recording software and also takes effort to narrate your thoughts all the time.
But I found it worth it
with a video. You can see all the little things and attempts players do in puzzles
with the
voice narration all the time.
You can hear their theories of what they're trying and thinking
about the system and what their emotions are at different times,
you can measure time taken on different parts.
So if a part of a puzzle takes 10 seconds versus 20 seconds versus 60 seconds,
uh videos are rewatchable at later dates.
So I can see what a play tester six months ago,
thought about this puzzle and what was the state of the puzzle at that time.
Um And to get
so those that's the video format and here's the to get more specific about opinions.
Here's past Patrick's
Patrick's parab box play testing preferences.
Um
So,
um I'll list off a bunch here. I try to get fresh place. I
try to get fresh play testers. I'm tripping over my
um I try to get fresh players
every time
because you can only experience a new mechanic
for the first time once.
And these mechanic introductions are exactly when I want to get smooth,
non expert.
Players were very helpful because players who had lesser
skill would stumble would encounter more stumbling blocks.
And a lot of those stumbling blocks are the kinds of
things I wanna fix to get people streamlined through the game.
I tried to pay very close attention to players' mental models.
So I knew where to, for example, clarify misunderstandings.
I tried to treat small bumps
that players occurred,
encountered as potentially very important because that could
be a big hurdle for another player.
Again, thinking of streamlining the game.
I like to do batches of one or two play testers at a time
in order to give each play test video
um due attention and respect that play tester's time
because I would watch this video in detail and take copious notes.
Um
I tried to get play testers who would play the entire game.
So as to not of course neglect the whole second half of the game.
Um
Personal learning was to for me was to watch the whole um
video
and take notes before making changes as opposed
to pausing the video every time I wanted to
make a change because that would give me more context by the end of the video.
And it would just help him work more efficiently.
And I did these play tests every so often
whenever I felt like the game was ready for another batch of feedback.
So it was nice to have a con sort more or less constant in the background
thinking about iterating on this puzzle ordering as
opposed to like backloading it or something.
Um Side note, it was difficult to find players who I knew
who were non experts
would, were willing to record themselves and narrate their thoughts
and were willing to play the full game.
But those players are also like by far the most helpful play testers,
I did about 15 of these full game video play tests throughout development.
Uh not counting other formats of play testing, but here's 15 videos
by the end of development, I thought,
oh
it's sort of, I'm reaching diminishing returns with doing these play tests.
But actually, after releasing the game and watching people play, I realized no,
actually, I didn't reach diminishing returns.
All those little changes in puzzles I was editing and inserting
at the very end were actually doing great work and I'm
glad I did them and I could have done more.
So that's a learning for me is I'm going to keep doing lots of play testing.
OK. Now, I want to switch gears a little bit and talk about
making puzzles.
Uh To me the purpose of this recursive box system,
I thought of it as it's not like the p that the purpose of the system
is that you can make, you can make cool puzzles.
I like to think of it as
the purpose of the puzzles is to showcase things about this cool system.
OK. Now here's a list of a bunch of techniques of
accumulated from other people. And along from my travels about
brainstorming techniques for making puzzles.
By far, the most common technique I used was finding an interaction in this system
and then making a puzzle that forces you to do this interaction as the key move
in the solution of that puzzle.
So for example, on the left,
here's a situation where you can enter a box by pressing it against
a stack of boxes against a wall which which is kind of cool.
And on the right here's a puzzle that forces you to do that to construct that
stack and then press against it in order to free the box from the wall.
So one thing is like, well, how do we,
how do we find these interactions that we can then force you to do in a puzzle?
Well, in general,
just playing around with the system and exploring the mechanics and
you know, normal stuff just playing around.
Um But to get to more specific,
some things that might be helpful are making a
big playground level with lots and lots of objects.
You can experiment
and making test levels that test edge cases or extreme cases.
And one technique which I found helpful to eke out a
few more puzzles which I've learned from Brett Taylor is to
enumerate um list out all the mechanics
in, in the game
and then list out all possible pairs of mechanics.
And then for each pair consider what might a
puzzle with that pair of mechanics be like.
So for example, the the clone mechanic plus the empty mechanic
or the clone mechanic plus the eat mechanic or about clone and transfer.
What about clone and possess
clone and infinite exit? And so on,
another technique was to try interesting or extreme geometry.
So all this these out from top left
a level with no
up, easily accessible upward spacing walls, interesting geometry
or what about a level with no walls at all.
And it turns out this is actually a cool puzzle.
Um What about a box with that's entirely filled with other boxes?
Um What about a three by three very small recursive area that's fun to navigate in
or what about a box that contains eight copies of
itself which creates a really trippy and interesting interaction.
Um These like these are what I like to call things almost happen moments.
Uh I really like these. So
when watching a play, play testers, sometimes they would try things that
wouldn't work out for whatever reason they weren't the solution.
But what if those things they tried actually were the solution?
Um So
and make a puzzle about that. So here on the left, here's an example of a player
who would want to free this blue box from the left wall
and they try to push this green clone box into it, but it doesn't end up working.
But on the right here and then I made this puzzle where you
actually do use these clone boxes to free boxes from the wall.
Um
So I like to think of this as sort of like crowdsourcing puzzle ideas to play testers,
um which is pretty cool, highly recommend this technique.
And it's also another reason why I like to pay very,
very close attention to each and every play tester in every minute of their
actions to really get into their mental models and make a lot of observations.
These are, these are what I like to call show levels.
So on the left,
here's a level very early in the game which just shows you you can enter and exit boxes
and there's actually no way to fail this level.
On the middle, here's a level where all you do is enter four levels deep into boxes
and then just go out four levels. It's just to show you you can go lots of levels deep.
And on the right here's a level where there's
a blue box that hasn't contains an orange box
and all you have to do is flip them so that the orange box contains the blue box,
all three of these are absolutely trivial levels to solve there.
You might not even call them puzzles,
but they still showcase cool things and players find these levels delightful.
So you don't always need a challenge.
Um When making puzzles, I tried to be diligent about investigating variations.
So for example, here I made this puzzle which I liked
and then I thought, oh, what, what would an easier version look like?
And oh, actually that that's ended up,
ended up being pretty good.
And what would a harder version look like?
Oh, actually that one's good enough to keep two.
And what kind of additional constraints could I put on? Oh, here's another
additional constraint, like a weird
line constraint.
And so now I, and now I have four good puzzles. Um
So I tried to investigate all these possible variations with every puzzle I made.
Um I got used to doing lots of digging when making puzzles.
So this game has 364 puzzles that it shipped with,
but also over 600 unused draft levels.
And these were levels that were ideas that didn't quite
materialize into a real puzzle or there were older versions
of puzzles that did ship or there were puzzles that just weren't that great.
Um
So at the beginning of development, I got kind of discouraged by this,
but by the end, I learned not to get discouraged by this
and that it's just part of the process and there's a lot of trial and error involved
related to this. I found that one
kind of simple heuristic of what makes a good puzzle system is simply
what's the number of, how many puzzles can you make in it?
Um When making para box, I early on it just ended up being that, oh,
I can make a lot of puzzles in it.
And that encouraged me to continue on with this prototype.
Um Nowadays, as I make more prototypes,
I find it helpful to keep this heuristic in mind when thinking about which
prototypes I want to pursue more.
It's sort of just an obvious heuristic of all the proof is in the pudding.
How many puzzles can you actually make in it?
Now, I want to switch gears again.
And lastly, I talk about a few mechanics a little bit
so early on in the game, I faced this,
one of many dilemmas I faced about the mechanics was what if you try to enter a box?
But there's like multiple openings on that side of the box.
Which opening do you enter?
I was concerned about this.
And you can see in this image right now the player enters no
opening because the player only checks the center spot on that side.
And here you can see it's filled by a wall so you can't enter it.
I then tried, tried this system where
you can actually enter any spot
and it just prioritizes ones that are closer to the center.
So now it's like a,
so you can see with these numbers for number one is in the
center and then it sort of spirals outward which ones it tries.
Um, I like this because it was more flexible. I can make more levels and it,
you know,
but
I end up then realizing, no,
actually I don't like this and I think this is
bad because it's sort of a complex system that I'm introducing
and
it felt kind of arbitrary
and like, how do you break ties and stuff?
And also we're gonna be, this is something that,
that the player has to keep in their mind
the entire time they're playing at every level.
In addition to all this recursive stuff, mechanics were,
are gonna be piling on top of it.
Um So I reverted to the center
only behavior on the left
and that ended up being a good call.
Here's another example I knew I wanted to try this mechanic of,
well,
I wanted to be able to transfer consciousness of your player into another
box so that you can control to like multiple boxes with different shapes.
My first attempt was to add this little arrow object where you
just push a box onto it and then you control that box,
very straightforward,
obvious thing to try.
And this worked, you know, I can make some puzzles with it,
but it kind of felt weird or wrong or arbitrary.
It's kind of a touchy feely thing, but
I didn't quite like it.
Um I next tried this, which was you,
can you transfer consciousness or possess a box when you squish
it against a wall and if you hit a solid wall,
then you transfer consciousness.
Otherwise, if it's a, if it's an opening on that side, you just enter it.
I like this a lot better because this synergize with
other mechanics because different sides can have different geometries.
So you can synergize with other mechanics.
It just felt it just felt better.
So I went with this version on the right.
And I'm glad I did not go with the first one.
I'm glad I did investigate another variation.
Here's a few mechanics I tried very early on in development.
Um So I had this like a weight object where you could like push a weight inside of a box.
And then now that box becomes weighted, which means you cannot push it.
It's like heavy.
Um
And then I had also had an object where you could push the shield inside of a box.
And now that box is shielded, which means you cannot enter or exit it.
There's like a shield you bump into around the box, which is, yeah, it's OK.
And then, um then I had sticky boxes which stick to each other when you push them
and you can unstick the boxes by putting them on a
block edge and like using the recursion to unstick them.
Um These are all these all felt kind of cool and I was like, oh yeah, I kind of like them
but
I wanna,
didn't
like them that as much.
And I wanna contrast these with other mechanics that did make it in the game,
which are, for example,
a box containing multiple copies of itself or a
box containing a horizontally flipped copy of itself,
or of course, the player itself being
a box that can contain other boxes.
These are sort of more natural extensions of the system
that sort of almost don't quite feel like mechanics.
I mean, I don't know what terms we're using here, but
these felt a lot better to me. They gave rise to lots of puzzles
and they were just organic.
Um
So I didn't use any of the ones on the left.
Um So my two learnings from this are
always investigate more mechanics.
Don't just go with the first things that come to my mind
and try to always think of what's natural. What natural extensions can I do
here are three mechanics that did feel natural but didn't make it into the main game.
So on the left here is what happens if you,
if entering a box takes priority over pushing a box.
Whereas in the main game, it's actually the other way around the priority
in the middle. What happens if you exit a box against a wall?
If you could, like, squish out and, like, free that box from the wall.
Like that kind of makes sense
on the right is what happens if you could push a box around from inside of it.
Kind of like piloting a submarine or something.
Um, these are all cool but they just didn't,
didn't work out for the main game.
They didn't play well with other mechanics or they didn't feel right or they,
like, didn't make a lot of
puzzles combined with other mechanics. They just didn't work out.
But I still,
these were still in my mind and I liked them and I thought
they were worse showcasing when I'm thinking
about showcasing things about the system.
So I came up with this idea of let's actually include
these three areas in the post game,
which do have these mechanics,
but they're confined to that post game.
So they don't contaminate the rest of the game and the other mechanics.
Um So I was happy with the solution. These are cool puzzles and mechanics.
I'm glad I found a way
to showcase more things about this system
that otherwise I wouldn't have been able to showcase without this format.
So
you might be interested in using some kind of
appendix format in your game or maybe you can
think of another creative format thing to showcase more
things you otherwise wouldn't have been able to.
All right. So to recap everything.
Um So my goal of making this game was to showcase this recursive box system
that I had luckily discovered and that I found really cool.
Um To that end, I made
the puzzles an approachable difficulty and style
because my goal was to showcase and also
this ended up really broadening the game's audience.
I put a lot of iteration into smoothing
the learning curve which I talked about inserting,
modifying leading puzzles.
Um I really endorse this play testing with video and narration format.
Um I talked about a few techniques for finding
puzzle ideas like finding cool things that are worth showcasing
and a few instances where I iterated on the the core mechanics of the game.
Um Here are five online puzzle design resources which I
highly recommend these have been very influential to me.
Um would recommend checking them out.
Um And here's my contact information.
Uh Thank you.