[Music]
Super happy to be here with uh the Tech Toolbox
Toolbox 2017. Who made that? It's awful.
2017. Who made that? It's awful. Uh as you can see, things are going well
Uh as you can see, things are going well for us here at the Tech Toolbox. Now,
for us here at the Tech Toolbox. Now, we're actually all ready to go. Um I
we're actually all ready to go. Um I don't have a lot of things to say, but
don't have a lot of things to say, but thanks for joining. If this is your
thanks for joining. If this is your first tech toolbox, let me give you a
first tech toolbox, let me give you a super quick introduction. Something has
super quick introduction. Something has been becoming more and more clear to me
been becoming more and more clear to me that uh to be a tool designer should
that uh to be a tool designer should actually be a hat that you wear if your
actually be a hat that you wear if your browser
browser crashes.
Um awful. It should be a hat that you wear, you know, even if you're if you're
wear, you know, even if you're if you're in a in a small studio or a single
in a in a small studio or a single developer, uh you wear many hats. you're
developer, uh you wear many hats. you're the engineer or the marketeer or
the engineer or the marketeer or whatever, but you should also consider,
whatever, but you should also consider, you know, being a tool designer and
you know, being a tool designer and dedicating some focus to it because uh
dedicating some focus to it because uh the tools, they often influence the
the tools, they often influence the final product game design, but they're
final product game design, but they're also at the same time invisible because
also at the same time invisible because they're made for the developers and not
they're made for the developers and not for the gamers or for the players. And I
for the gamers or for the players. And I think they're not talked about often
think they're not talked about often enough, especially the ones that only
enough, especially the ones that only live for one project, but had a huge
live for one project, but had a huge impact and are maybe were like tailored
impact and are maybe were like tailored specifically to solve problems within
specifically to solve problems within that project. And that's the sort of
that project. And that's the sort of stuff I uh I hope we'll be talking about
stuff I uh I hope we'll be talking about today. I'm going to give it off right
today. I'm going to give it off right away to the first speaker, which is uh
away to the first speaker, which is uh Michael Cook from the University of
Michael Cook from the University of Fallmouth. Let's give him a big hand.
There we go. Uh let's find out. Yeah.
Are we good? Yeah. Okay. All right. Hey everyone, my name is Michael Cook. I'm a
everyone, my name is Michael Cook. I'm a researcher in procedural generation,
researcher in procedural generation, creativity, and AI at Fmouth University
creativity, and AI at Fmouth University and the Metamakers Institute. I also
and the Metamakers Institute. I also organize the procedural generation jam
organize the procedural generation jam and in my spare time I make games. So,
and in my spare time I make games. So, I'm really into procedural generation
I'm really into procedural generation and I've meet loads of people who either
and I've meet loads of people who either want to be or already are. And uh over
want to be or already are. And uh over time, lots of those experiences have led
time, lots of those experiences have led to me building this tool called Dash. Uh
to me building this tool called Dash. Uh that's enough slides. Um so, I'm going
that's enough slides. Um so, I'm going to be demoing mostly today. Uh I I
to be demoing mostly today. Uh I I really love to walk you through this
really love to walk you through this tool. Um which may end up being ill
tool. Um which may end up being ill advised, but uh I'll I'll try and give
advised, but uh I'll I'll try and give you just a little flavor, but the idea
you just a little flavor, but the idea behind Daesh is that it lets people look
behind Daesh is that it lets people look at procedural generators from a
at procedural generators from a different angle and it pulls in some
different angle and it pulls in some ideas from research and and some of my
ideas from research and and some of my colleagues research as well. It's built
colleagues research as well. It's built in Unity, but it is completely open
in Unity, but it is completely open source. So if you don't use Unity, maybe
source. So if you don't use Unity, maybe you can pull some of these ideas out and
you can pull some of these ideas out and and they'll be relevant to you. I don't
and they'll be relevant to you. I don't want to talk too much about setup, but
want to talk too much about setup, but it's quite easy to connect a generator
it's quite easy to connect a generator to uh DHS. It just requires one or two
to uh DHS. It just requires one or two lines of code to tell Daesh where your
lines of code to tell Daesh where your generator is, uh, what parameters you're
generator is, uh, what parameters you're interested in modifying, uh, maybe how
interested in modifying, uh, maybe how to visualize it on the screen. And when
to visualize it on the screen. And when it loads in, you see something like
it loads in, you see something like this. So, we're actually using a
this. So, we're actually using a dungeon/cave generator that I pulled
dungeon/cave generator that I pulled down from a tutorial. And the reason I
down from a tutorial. And the reason I did that is because often lots of people
did that is because often lots of people tell me they uh they load procedural
tell me they uh they load procedural generators that they found in tutorials,
generators that they found in tutorials, and it's often really hard to solve
and it's often really hard to solve problems in them. Maybe you've been
problems in them. Maybe you've been handed this generator by a programmer
handed this generator by a programmer and you're an artist who doesn't really
and you're an artist who doesn't really want to dig around in code, but this
want to dig around in code, but this generator has problems. So maybe it
generator has problems. So maybe it generates dungeons that are okay most of
generates dungeons that are okay most of the time, but occasionally there's uh
the time, but occasionally there's uh there's like an island that isn't
there's like an island that isn't connected to the rest of the dungeon
connected to the rest of the dungeon like this one here. So we want to solve
like this one here. So we want to solve this problem and we could just sit here
this problem and we could just sit here all day and change parameters and Dash
all day and change parameters and Dash lets you do that. The parameters are
lets you do that. The parameters are loaded in on the right hand side and
loaded in on the right hand side and just like in Unity itself, you can
just like in Unity itself, you can fiddle with them and generate more
fiddle with them and generate more content, but that doesn't really tell
content, but that doesn't really tell you anything. So the next thing you can
you anything. So the next thing you can do is load metrics into dyn. So if you
do is load metrics into dyn. So if you have an idea that you want to capture
have an idea that you want to capture like uh how dense the level is maybe
like uh how dense the level is maybe like what percentage of the tiles are
like what percentage of the tiles are solid in your map, you can write a few
solid in your map, you can write a few lines of code. So usually these metrics
lines of code. So usually these metrics are quite short and DHS can load them in
are quite short and DHS can load them in and every time you generate content
and every time you generate content it'll give you some feedback. So we've
it'll give you some feedback. So we've got a couple of metrics here that we're
got a couple of metrics here that we're going to look at. One's density. So uh
going to look at. One's density. So uh on the left hand side you can see that
on the left hand side you can see that this map here is 52% dense. So 52% of
this map here is 52% dense. So 52% of the tiles are solid and it's 0.9
the tiles are solid and it's 0.9 connected which means that 90% of the
connected which means that 90% of the open tiles are accessible in the largest
open tiles are accessible in the largest uh chunk. So what we want to do is we
uh chunk. So what we want to do is we want to get to 100% connectedness. So
want to get to 100% connectedness. So again we could sit here all day and
again we could sit here all day and fiddle with parameters and things like
fiddle with parameters and things like that. But Dash has much cooler tools,
that. But Dash has much cooler tools, cooler ways of helping you look at these
cooler ways of helping you look at these things. And one of those is expressive
things. And one of those is expressive range analysis. Expressive range
range analysis. Expressive range analysis was first proposed by Jillian
analysis was first proposed by Jillian Smith and Jim Whitehead. Jillian's a
Smith and Jim Whitehead. Jillian's a professor at Northeastern now. Uh Jim
professor at Northeastern now. Uh Jim works at UCSC uh here in California. And
works at UCSC uh here in California. And expressive range analysis is a really
expressive range analysis is a really cool way of looking at a procedural
cool way of looking at a procedural generator's output. So you take two
generator's output. So you take two metrics that you have, two ways of
metrics that you have, two ways of thinking about your content, and DSH
thinking about your content, and DSH will go away and sample this generator
will go away and sample this generator hundreds of times. And each time it
hundreds of times. And each time it samples it, it'll write down those
samples it, it'll write down those metrics and it'll put a dot on a
metrics and it'll put a dot on a histogram. And the more dots appear on
histogram. And the more dots appear on one particular point, the whiter that
one particular point, the whiter that dot becomes. So on this histogram here,
dot becomes. So on this histogram here, on the x-axis, we can see density. And
on the x-axis, we can see density. And each dot represents a piece of content
each dot represents a piece of content or maybe 10 pieces of content generated
or maybe 10 pieces of content generated by this generator. And the y- axis is
by this generator. And the y- axis is connectedness. So points at the top of
connectedness. So points at the top of this and if we hover over dash actually
this and if we hover over dash actually shows us an example. Points at the top
shows us an example. Points at the top of this histogram represent content that
of this histogram represent content that was completely connected when it was
was completely connected when it was generated or very close to completely
generated or very close to completely connected. And if we hover over points
connected. And if we hover over points at the bottom, we can see that this one
at the bottom, we can see that this one is broken up into like loads of
is broken up into like loads of different islands. And so what this
different islands. And so what this histogram kind of shows us is the spread
histogram kind of shows us is the spread of expressivity and the range of
of expressivity and the range of possibilities. How often does your
possibilities. How often does your generator cause these outliers and and
generator cause these outliers and and what shape do they
what shape do they take? So now with this expressive range
take? So now with this expressive range analysis, what we could do is we could
analysis, what we could do is we could sit here and change parameters every day
sit here and change parameters every day and then we could look at the expressive
and then we could look at the expressive range analysis and see whether we've
range analysis and see whether we've managed to fix this problem because kind
managed to fix this problem because kind of what we want to do here is push all
of what we want to do here is push all of these points up so the average output
of these points up so the average output is more connected. But actually we can
is more connected. But actually we can do better than that. We can ask Dash to
do better than that. We can ask Dash to help us with it. Because the thing with
help us with it. Because the thing with procedural generators is and the thing
procedural generators is and the thing that people often have trouble with is
that people often have trouble with is that thinking about it in terms of
that thinking about it in terms of parameters are like inputs to a black
parameters are like inputs to a black box. So you can change a parameter but
box. So you can change a parameter but you might not really know what impact it
you might not really know what impact it has on the output. It would be much
has on the output. It would be much easier if we could talk about procedural
easier if we could talk about procedural generators in terms of the things that
generators in terms of the things that come out the other end. And that's what
come out the other end. And that's what metrics let us do. So DHS also has this
metrics let us do. So DHS also has this feature called autotuning where we can
feature called autotuning where we can say to DH what we really want is output
say to DH what we really want is output that is 100% connected. So we can say a
that is 100% connected. So we can say a connectedness of 1.0 zero and maybe 50%
connectedness of 1.0 zero and maybe 50% dense. We don't want it to just be a
dense. We don't want it to just be a completely empty room. And then we can
completely empty room. And then we can ask DHS to start autotuning and it'll go
ask DHS to start autotuning and it'll go away and do all of that work for us.
away and do all of that work for us. It'll uh maybe I'll risk it. I think I
It'll uh maybe I'll risk it. I think I have enough time. Uh it'll use a a
have enough time. Uh it'll use a a number of algorithms that it has to
number of algorithms that it has to search the parameter space and each time
search the parameter space and each time it searches it's looking at how the
it searches it's looking at how the expressive range is changing. Um that
expressive range is changing. Um that progress bar isn't in real time. Uh it
progress bar isn't in real time. Uh it occasionally terminates early if it if
occasionally terminates early if it if it finds a solution and it should do in
it finds a solution and it should do in this sense. So this isn't too difficult.
this sense. So this isn't too difficult. So what this allows you to do is ask
So what this allows you to do is ask Dash for a space of outputs rather than
Dash for a space of outputs rather than talking about your procedural generator
talking about your procedural generator in terms of its inputs. Um and it's not
in terms of its inputs. Um and it's not just that uh you just have to trust it
just that uh you just have to trust it when it comes out the other end. You can
when it comes out the other end. You can run expressive range analyses to confirm
run expressive range analyses to confirm the output which we'll do when this ends
the output which we'll do when this ends if it ends. Um I don't have time to look
if it ends. Um I don't have time to look into the other features that Dash has
into the other features that Dash has right now. But you can do things like
right now. But you can do things like look at the complete uh parameter space
look at the complete uh parameter space by doing a randomized expressive range
by doing a randomized expressive range analysis. Or you can ask it to search
analysis. Or you can ask it to search through your code for parameters that
through your code for parameters that you haven't considered as levers for
you haven't considered as levers for your uh generator, but they could be. So
your uh generator, but they could be. So fortunately, this did end. I have no
fortunately, this did end. I have no idea what parameterization it's going to
idea what parameterization it's going to return. So let's see what kind of things
return. So let's see what kind of things it's generating. Okay. Well, they're
it's generating. Okay. Well, they're definitely 100% connected. This may not
definitely 100% connected. This may not be exactly what you're imagining. So you
be exactly what you're imagining. So you can go back and ask Dash. You can
can go back and ask Dash. You can implement more constraints. You can turn
implement more constraints. You can turn off parameters to stop it fiddling with
off parameters to stop it fiddling with certain things. But we can confirm that
certain things. But we can confirm that this did what we asked to by running
this did what we asked to by running another expressive range analysis. And
another expressive range analysis. And if you remember what that last one
if you remember what that last one looked like with a long tail of results
looked like with a long tail of results coming all the way down the y-axis.
coming all the way down the y-axis. Hopefully, fingers crossed when this uh
Hopefully, fingers crossed when this uh expressive range analysis completes, we
expressive range analysis completes, we should see that all of those points have
should see that all of those points have been shoved up towards the top of the
been shoved up towards the top of the histogram. And you can see we've got a
histogram. And you can see we've got a couple of outliers. Uh let's hover over
couple of outliers. Uh let's hover over this one to see this one has sort of cut
this one to see this one has sort of cut off diagonally, but most of the data
off diagonally, but most of the data points are actually so connected that
points are actually so connected that they're right at the ceiling of this
they're right at the ceiling of this histogram.
histogram. uh to to give you another idea of uh the
uh to to give you another idea of uh the kind of weird outputs that it can find.
kind of weird outputs that it can find. Right now it's hard to tell Dan to to
Right now it's hard to tell Dan to to give you a number of options, but uh
give you a number of options, but uh we're still developing this. So there's
we're still developing this. So there's new features like ways of exploring
new features like ways of exploring these through visual examples and
these through visual examples and automatic optimization and things like
that. I'm just going to switch back to the slides. Just got one slide. So Dones
the slides. Just got one slide. So Dones is still in development and it's a
is still in development and it's a research tool, which means it looks
research tool, which means it looks ugly. It breaks things sometimes. It
ugly. It breaks things sometimes. It uses meta programming to dive deep
uses meta programming to dive deep inside your game, which means that it
inside your game, which means that it might jumble things up and break things.
might jumble things up and break things. So, there's lots of warnings everywhere
So, there's lots of warnings everywhere to back up before you use it. But what I
to back up before you use it. But what I really need is people who use procedural
really need is people who use procedural generation or people who want to use
generation or people who want to use procedural generation but have never
procedural generation but have never done it before to download da have a
done it before to download da have a play with it and let me know what they
play with it and let me know what they think. So, it's available online.
think. So, it's available online. There's papers and extra information at
There's papers and extra information at des.projam.com procjam.com or
des.projam.com procjam.com or alternatively you can talk to me on
alternatively you can talk to me on Twitter or maybe after this session or
Twitter or maybe after this session or you can find me usually hanging out near
you can find me usually hanging out near the Indie Mega booth uh for the rest of
the Indie Mega booth uh for the rest of GDC. Thanks very much and I'll pass.
Thank you, Michael. Has it been used in any games that are out?
any games that are out? Um, so I'm working on a game called
Um, so I'm working on a game called Rogue Process right now and it actually
Rogue Process right now and it actually came from hack together tools that I'd
came from hack together tools that I'd use for that game. Uh, and I'm hoping to
use for that game. Uh, and I'm hoping to pull the finished thing back into
pull the finished thing back into Darnesh now and sort of confirm the the
Darnesh now and sort of confirm the the ideas. Uh, so yeah,
where's the name come from? I I didn't I didn't know if I'd have time, but dash
didn't know if I'd have time, but dash is the fary word for knowledge. Um, and
is the fary word for knowledge. Um, and I'm learning a bit of Farsy, so uh,
I'm learning a bit of Farsy, so uh, yeah.
Next up, we have uh Holden Link from Turbo Button, who's going to talk to us
Turbo Button, who's going to talk to us about crossplatform VR tools. Whenever
about crossplatform VR tools. Whenever you're ready, let's give him a big
hand. Cool. Does that look all right up there? Sweet. Uh, hi everybody. I'm
there? Sweet. Uh, hi everybody. I'm Holden and I'm the VR guy in the
Holden and I'm the VR guy in the session.
session. Uh, so I'm from Torbutton. Uh, we're a
Uh, so I'm from Torbutton. Uh, we're a tiny studio in LA that, uh, just makes
tiny studio in LA that, uh, just makes VR games. Uh, we've released two so far.
VR games. Uh, we've released two so far. Adventure Time, Magic Man's Head games,
Adventure Time, Magic Man's Head games, and Floor Plan. Uh, we're currently
and Floor Plan. Uh, we're currently working on our third VR game called
working on our third VR game called Along
Along Together. So, uh, these games have uh,
Together. So, uh, these games have uh, released on four different VR platforms
released on four different VR platforms so far. Uh, Gear VR, Oculus Rift, Vive,
so far. Uh, Gear VR, Oculus Rift, Vive, and Daydream. Adventure Time was
and Daydream. Adventure Time was actually a launch title for all of the
actually a launch title for all of the platforms that it's been released on.
platforms that it's been released on. So, uh, we somehow ended up doing two
So, uh, we somehow ended up doing two games across four newly launched
games across four newly launched platforms with, uh, within a year with a
platforms with, uh, within a year with a team of three people. And also, none of
team of three people. And also, none of us had shipped games as programmers when
us had shipped games as programmers when we started. So, for a while, our logo
we started. So, for a while, our logo was a bit of a
was a bit of a lie. So, uh, how did we do it without
lie. So, uh, how did we do it without going crazy? Uh, I'd argue that we
going crazy? Uh, I'd argue that we didn't, but I'll show you how we made
didn't, but I'll show you how we made the games work, at
the games work, at least. So, uh, we use Unity. Unity is
least. So, uh, we use Unity. Unity is cool. Uh, and Unity didn't have native
cool. Uh, and Unity didn't have native support for, uh, most of these platforms
support for, uh, most of these platforms at launch. They have varying levels of
at launch. They have varying levels of support now, but each platform also has
support now, but each platform also has its own SDK and set of plugins. Uh, and
its own SDK and set of plugins. Uh, and to take full advantage of each platform,
to take full advantage of each platform, you have to use their SDK. And of
you have to use their SDK. And of course, some SDKs are only compatible
course, some SDKs are only compatible with certain Unity versions and so on.
with certain Unity versions and so on. So, uh, before we were working in VR, we
So, uh, before we were working in VR, we were using things like in control and
were using things like in control and rewired to handle gamepad input and some
rewired to handle gamepad input and some some of our game jam projects. And we
some of our game jam projects. And we wanted something kind of like that that
wanted something kind of like that that could wrap all the different VR headsets
could wrap all the different VR headsets and SDKs uh the same way that those
and SDKs uh the same way that those those things wrap gamepads. So we made a
those things wrap gamepads. So we made a thing that we call
thing that we call T-Butt. Uh we call it T-But because
T-Butt. Uh we call it T-But because that's the obvious namespace
that's the obvious namespace abbreviation for Turbo Button and
abbreviation for Turbo Button and there's no other reason. Um it's a
there's no other reason. Um it's a wrapper for VR SDKs that supports Oculus
wrapper for VR SDKs that supports Oculus Rift, Steam VR, PlayStation VR, Gear VR,
Rift, Steam VR, PlayStation VR, Gear VR, Daydream, and Cardboard out of a single
Daydream, and Cardboard out of a single Unity project. So, our games use uh
Unity project. So, our games use uh T-bot functions for accessing stuff like
T-bot functions for accessing stuff like the cameras and the controllers, and
the cameras and the controllers, and then T-But turns it into SDK calls for
then T-But turns it into SDK calls for whatever SDK that we're targeting. Uh, a
whatever SDK that we're targeting. Uh, a lot of the stuff that I'm going to show
lot of the stuff that I'm going to show today is up on GitHub now, and I'll
today is up on GitHub now, and I'll share the link at the
share the link at the end. So, uh, here's a little interface
end. So, uh, here's a little interface we made for uh, switching between SDKs.
we made for uh, switching between SDKs. Uh, we're using Unity's built-in
Uh, we're using Unity's built-in scripting defines to handle swapping
scripting defines to handle swapping between them, and they all get toggled
between them, and they all get toggled on and off one at a time so that they
on and off one at a time so that they don't cause any conflicts with each
don't cause any conflicts with each other. Um the other big reason for doing
other. Um the other big reason for doing this is that uh we're not actually
this is that uh we're not actually allowed to ship um other some
allowed to ship um other some competitors SDKs on certain platforms.
competitors SDKs on certain platforms. So this sections off the SDKs from
So this sections off the SDKs from getting compiled in builds as
getting compiled in builds as well. So uh we're making a game right
well. So uh we're making a game right now for Daydream uh where you play as a
now for Daydream uh where you play as a kid's imaginary friend and uh you follow
kid's imaginary friend and uh you follow them around uh on their adventures. A
them around uh on their adventures. A big part of the game is looking around
big part of the game is looking around and grabbing things in the environment,
and grabbing things in the environment, but there's actually minimal support
but there's actually minimal support right now for testing Daydream games in
right now for testing Daydream games in the Unity editor. It looks kind of like
the Unity editor. It looks kind of like that. So, you have to like hold the alt
that. So, you have to like hold the alt key on the keyboard and use the mouse to
key on the keyboard and use the mouse to rotate your view around. Uh, and you
rotate your view around. Uh, and you can't see anything in any any connected
can't see anything in any any connected headsets. So, there uh I'm using the I
headsets. So, there uh I'm using the I use the platform switching tool and uh
use the platform switching tool and uh that makes our Daydream game retarget
that makes our Daydream game retarget the Oculus SDK instead of the Daydream
the Oculus SDK instead of the Daydream SDK because if you're developing for
SDK because if you're developing for Rift Vive in Unity, uh you can see your
Rift Vive in Unity, uh you can see your game directly in the headset straight
game directly in the headset straight out of the Unity editor. So, it uh does
out of the Unity editor. So, it uh does take a few seconds to recompile, but I
take a few seconds to recompile, but I didn't have to make any scene changes.
didn't have to make any scene changes. And when I hit play, our camera is now
And when I hit play, our camera is now running through the Oculus SDK so we can
running through the Oculus SDK so we can test our Daydream game and headset. Um,
test our Daydream game and headset. Um, it's a much better workflow for us. Um,
it's a much better workflow for us. Um, and it's one that we initially started
and it's one that we initially started out of necessity because we didn't have
out of necessity because we didn't have access to enough phones. Uh, but we've
access to enough phones. Uh, but we've we've stuck with
we've stuck with it. Uh, here's what that camera wrapper
it. Uh, here's what that camera wrapper looks like in the inspector. So, most of
looks like in the inspector. So, most of the VR platforms have their own camera
the VR platforms have their own camera rig prefab that you just uh drag into
rig prefab that you just uh drag into the scene, and it's super easy to get
the scene, and it's super easy to get started with them. But when you're
started with them. But when you're trying to swap between different uh
trying to swap between different uh different headsets, swapping out those
different headsets, swapping out those camera prefabs can be a bit of a pain,
camera prefabs can be a bit of a pain, especially since they have to live in
especially since they have to live in your scene for the most part. So the uh
your scene for the most part. So the uh the camera rig we made uh is the only
the camera rig we made uh is the only one that lives in our scenes and it just
one that lives in our scenes and it just pulls in whatever camera rig it should
pulls in whatever camera rig it should be using for each platform and then
be using for each platform and then applies the same settings uh so you only
applies the same settings uh so you only have to put your settings in one place
have to put your settings in one place um onto uh all of those different camera
um onto uh all of those different camera prefabs. So that's everything from like
prefabs. So that's everything from like the standard Unity camera stuff to uh
the standard Unity camera stuff to uh stuff like tracking volumes and sorting
stuff like tracking volumes and sorting methods. Uh for example, it's like more
methods. Uh for example, it's like more optimized to have the camera do sorting
optimized to have the camera do sorting in a different way on Android compared
in a different way on Android compared to PC. So uh we can set all of that
to PC. So uh we can set all of that stuff up to to work for all the
stuff up to to work for all the different platforms
different platforms here. Uh we actually do the same thing
here. Uh we actually do the same thing with input as well. So in our game code,
with input as well. So in our game code, if we want to check a button presses on
if we want to check a button presses on a motion controller, for example, we
a motion controller, for example, we have a button was pressed function that
have a button was pressed function that accepts a button type and then a left or
accepts a button type and then a left or right controller. So for example, we can
right controller. So for example, we can say like main trigger on the right hand
say like main trigger on the right hand and it will return whatever that button
and it will return whatever that button means across PlayStation Move, Vive or
means across PlayStation Move, Vive or Oculus Touch. Uh new controllers are
Oculus Touch. Uh new controllers are getting announced for VR platforms all
getting announced for VR platforms all the time. Samsung uh actually announced
the time. Samsung uh actually announced a new one on Sunday. Um, so this
a new one on Sunday. Um, so this actually makes it way easier for us to
actually makes it way easier for us to support all of those uh new controllers
support all of those uh new controllers as they come in too because we can just
as they come in too because we can just add them to one place in this this
add them to one place in this this shared codebase between our games and
shared codebase between our games and then it works across all of
then it works across all of them. So uh we made a little interface
them. So uh we made a little interface for the editor that lets us toggle a
for the editor that lets us toggle a bunch of different controller settings
bunch of different controller settings for our games like how many motion
for our games like how many motion controllers they need or uh if they work
controllers they need or uh if they work with game pads or touchpads. We can also
with game pads or touchpads. We can also uh set up different hand prefabs and uh
uh set up different hand prefabs and uh controller models for each different
controller models for each different type of controller. Uh, and that's
type of controller. Uh, and that's really important to make sure that like
really important to make sure that like each controller feels right uh in in
each controller feels right uh in in your hands in VR so they all have
your hands in VR so they all have different different scales, different
different different scales, different offsets and
offsets and sizes. We also, uh, set up button
sizes. We also, uh, set up button mappings uh, for each controller. And we
mappings uh, for each controller. And we do this on a per game basis because uh,
do this on a per game basis because uh, what we found is that we couldn't really
what we found is that we couldn't really get a one-izefits-all solution. And when
get a one-izefits-all solution. And when it makes sense to have like two buttons
it makes sense to have like two buttons be the same thing on across Vive and
be the same thing on across Vive and Touch in one project, they might need to
Touch in one project, they might need to be different in another. So we uh we
be different in another. So we uh we serialize our button mappings out to
serialize our button mappings out to JSON and then bring them in at uh at
JSON and then bring them in at uh at runtime to create a lookup table for
runtime to create a lookup table for that script that I showed on the uh last
that script that I showed on the uh last slide. So setting stuff up this way has
slide. So setting stuff up this way has been uh really helpful in our current
been uh really helpful in our current projects uh even just for development
projects uh even just for development purposes. So this is the Daydream
purposes. So this is the Daydream controller. Uh it it essentially has
controller. Uh it it essentially has like a subset of the functions of the
like a subset of the functions of the Oculus Touch and Vive controllers. It uh
Oculus Touch and Vive controllers. It uh it has a a touchpad. It can track
it has a a touchpad. It can track rotation but it uh doesn't track
rotation but it uh doesn't track position. So, for testing on PC, there's
position. So, for testing on PC, there's a controller emulator that is provided
a controller emulator that is provided as part of the SDK. Um, and it lets you
as part of the SDK. Um, and it lets you turn any Android phone into a Daydream
turn any Android phone into a Daydream controller, but it's uh it's not exactly
controller, but it's uh it's not exactly the same thing as the real one. Like, it
the same thing as the real one. Like, it doesn't have a clicky button. Uh, you
doesn't have a clicky button. Uh, you have to like double tap on the touchpad
have to like double tap on the touchpad to simulate that. Um, and sometimes it's
to simulate that. Um, and sometimes it's kind of hard to tell where you're
kind of hard to tell where you're pressing on the phone
pressing on the phone screen. So, because we wrap all of our
screen. So, because we wrap all of our input, uh, we can just switch over to
input, uh, we can just switch over to the Oculus SDK and use touch controllers
the Oculus SDK and use touch controllers or the SteamVR SDK and use Vive
or the SteamVR SDK and use Vive controllers. and different people on our
controllers. and different people on our team are using all sorts of different
team are using all sorts of different controllers to uh to test the game in
controllers to uh to test the game in the editor. It's also really helpful to
the editor. It's also really helpful to have this uh control option for play
have this uh control option for play testing so that we get like a live
testing so that we get like a live mirror of uh what our players are
mirror of uh what our players are seeing. So uh the way this works is that
seeing. So uh the way this works is that when we're running on PC, we uh first
when we're running on PC, we uh first search for that controller emulator and
search for that controller emulator and then we fall back to Rift Revive
then we fall back to Rift Revive controls if we don't find it. Uh when
controls if we don't find it. Uh when running on Android, it's not compiling
running on Android, it's not compiling any references to Rift Revive stuff and
any references to Rift Revive stuff and it just goes straight to using the
it just goes straight to using the Daydream controller. So we added like a
Daydream controller. So we added like a a layer to uh to our input wrapper to
a layer to uh to our input wrapper to throw out the position data from the the
throw out the position data from the the viven touch controllers for that. Um and
viven touch controllers for that. Um and we also have offsets that we can specify
we also have offsets that we can specify to make uh the data that we get out of
to make uh the data that we get out of those controllers match what we would
those controllers match what we would get out of the daydream controller. So
get out of the daydream controller. So whenever we're developing for a mobile
whenever we're developing for a mobile VR platform, our workflow is actually
VR platform, our workflow is actually that we uh just have one person on the
that we uh just have one person on the team make builds for uh for the actual
team make builds for uh for the actual target device every uh every couple
target device every uh every couple weeks. Uh and then everybody else is
weeks. Uh and then everybody else is testing in the editor on Rift Revive. So
testing in the editor on Rift Revive. So we uh very rarely actually have to make
we uh very rarely actually have to make builds and and go straight onto the
builds and and go straight onto the device. It uh takes a week or two of
device. It uh takes a week or two of work each time we add a new platform to
work each time we add a new platform to T-But, but once we add those platforms
T-But, but once we add those platforms means that all of our games work across
means that all of our games work across them. Uh wrapping code is not a
them. Uh wrapping code is not a revolutionary concept by by any means.
revolutionary concept by by any means. Uh and a lot of VR developers are uh are
Uh and a lot of VR developers are uh are doing this uh themselves. We wanted to
doing this uh themselves. We wanted to go ahead and share how we're doing it uh
go ahead and share how we're doing it uh so we can get feedback about what we
so we can get feedback about what we should be doing better, of course, from
should be doing better, of course, from other developers, but uh also to help
other developers, but uh also to help other people who are getting started uh
other people who are getting started uh get a get a start with it. Um, so source
get a get a start with it. Um, so source for the platform switching tool, the
for the platform switching tool, the camera rig wrapper, and a standalone
camera rig wrapper, and a standalone version of the daydream wrapper are all
version of the daydream wrapper are all up on GitHub there. And there's also a
up on GitHub there. And there's also a wiki with documentation for setting them
wiki with documentation for setting them up. I hope you found this useful, but
up. I hope you found this useful, but more than anything, I hope you write
more than anything, I hope you write butt more often in your code. Thank
you. Thank you so much. Uh, what a great resource to uh share with everybody
resource to uh share with everybody else. And good name, too.
else. And good name, too. uh more butt name tools for just
uh more butt name tools for just abbreviation reasons. Uh next up we have
abbreviation reasons. Uh next up we have uh Ryan Williams from
uh Ryan Williams from Spryox. You may know Sprite Fox from
Spryox. You may know Sprite Fox from games like
games like Alphabar. Anyone?
Alphabar. Anyone? Yeah. Thought so. You ready to go? Let's
Yeah. Thought so. You ready to go? Let's give him a big hand.
Hi, I'm Ryan Williams and uh as was just announced I work at Spry Fox. I want to
announced I work at Spry Fox. I want to tell you about a little library we made
tell you about a little library we made uh called Dark Config. It is a tool for
uh called Dark Config. It is a tool for improving iteration time by hotloading
improving iteration time by hotloading text files directly into games. As you
text files directly into games. As you know, faster it iteration time is always
know, faster it iteration time is always better. Faster speaking time always
better. Faster speaking time always better, too. Um and hotloading assets
better, too. Um and hotloading assets and behavior is one of the key ways to
and behavior is one of the key ways to get a shorter iteration cycle. So
get a shorter iteration cycle. So there's there's lots of tools out there
there's there's lots of tools out there that do this. This is not unique. Um but
that do this. This is not unique. Um but there's they're just not really suited
there's they're just not really suited for our use case. And I think that you
for our use case. And I think that you might find that to be true as well. So
might find that to be true as well. So you might find dark config to be useful
you might find dark config to be useful as well. So dark config sits in kind of
as well. So dark config sits in kind of a sweet spot where it's very general
a sweet spot where it's very general purpose. It's it helps you iterate
purpose. It's it helps you iterate quickly with its hot loading. It's easy
quickly with its hot loading. It's easy to integrate new configuration files
to integrate new configuration files with the game. And you can express
with the game. And you can express virtually anything in those files. So
virtually anything in those files. So you can use it for all sorts of
you can use it for all sorts of things. And so by doing that, it takes
things. And so by doing that, it takes over some of the mental burden of
over some of the mental burden of developing, which is super important
developing, which is super important because when you're working on
because when you're working on something, you really need to be focused
something, you really need to be focused on your problem, your gameplay, and you
on your problem, your gameplay, and you don't want to be wrestling with like,
don't want to be wrestling with like, oh, these files aren't loading. So
oh, these files aren't loading. So that's great. Let me let me show you
that's great. Let me let me show you what I mean with the the classic live
what I mean with the the classic live demo um of fast iteration.
demo um of fast iteration. This this will there's no way this can
This this will there's no way this can possibly go
possibly go wrong. Uh so we use
wrong. Uh so we use uniting and that that throws a lot of
uniting and that that throws a lot of you. This is um the current title I'm
you. This is um the current title I'm working on. It's called Steamirds
working on. It's called Steamirds Alliance and it's a it's a big game.
Alliance and it's a it's a big game. It's an MMO. It's
It's an MMO. It's um it's got a tremendous amount of
um it's got a tremendous amount of content. We put almost everything in
content. We put almost everything in Dark Config in this game. We have close
Dark Config in this game. We have close to a thousand configuration files for
to a thousand configuration files for this uh which we have manually typed. Um
this uh which we have manually typed. Um so ignore that error message. That's
so ignore that error message. That's because I'm offline. The uh the
because I'm offline. The uh the configuration file I want to show you
configuration file I want to show you here is describing the backgrounds here
here is describing the backgrounds here behind this area. So I'm flying around
behind this area. So I'm flying around and I've got this beautiful procedurally
and I've got this beautiful procedurally generated world behind us. And on the
generated world behind us. And on the left here is the configuration file that
left here is the configuration file that describes the parameters for that
describes the parameters for that background.
background. So, one of the things that's useful
So, one of the things that's useful is being able to reuse and pastiche
is being able to reuse and pastiche existing assets. We're an indie and so
existing assets. We're an indie and so making new stuff is expensive and we're
making new stuff is expensive and we're often just trying experiments and we
often just trying experiments and we want to try something new. So, we have
want to try something new. So, we have this based on property here like this.
this based on property here like this. This is the section that describes this
This is the section that describes this dungeon that I'm currently in. And you
dungeon that I'm currently in. And you can see it's only using a subset of all
can see it's only using a subset of all the fields that I've got available for
the fields that I've got available for all these other things. So, we've got
all these other things. So, we've got this based on and that steals all the
this based on and that steals all the fields from a different area. So, I can
fields from a different area. So, I can change this and I'm going to try to get
change this and I'm going to try to get like a cryogenics lab type appearance
like a cryogenics lab type appearance here. So, I can change that and then
here. So, I can change that and then boom. Let me make this a little
boom. Let me make this a little bigger. Um, it just changes every single
bigger. Um, it just changes every single asset on the screen. And then I can
asset on the screen. And then I can refine that, right? Like I can change um
refine that, right? Like I can change um I remember that the Highlands has kind
I remember that the Highlands has kind of like a mechanistic background. So,
Highlands. So, cool. We got some stuff down there. Uh fog. Let's do the bring
down there. Uh fog. Let's do the bring the fog
up. Okay, that wasn't enough. Let's do more. That's the right amount of
more. That's the right amount of fog. Um, let's change the
walls.
Oops. Oh, I didn't know there was sound.
Cool. So, yeah. So, we're kind of getting there towards a cryogenic lab.
getting there towards a cryogenic lab. The last thing I want to do is just turn
The last thing I want to do is just turn off the uh the
snow. So, okay, cool. That's that's different than what we started from.
different than what we started from. And, you know, just to prove to you that
And, you know, just to prove to you that it's not exactly like the
it's not exactly like the Highlands. I can steal the rest of its
Highlands. I can steal the rest of its fields. And you can see, you know, the
fields. And you can see, you know, the lighting makes a big difference. So,
lighting makes a big difference. So, cool. So, we wouldn't just stop there.
cool. So, we wouldn't just stop there. we would probably, you know, make new
we would probably, you know, make new assets, but we wouldn't have to remake
assets, but we wouldn't have to remake everything for that area. And that's
everything for that area. And that's because dark config allows us to do this
because dark config allows us to do this quick reloading and see that we've made
quick reloading and see that we've made something um uh that's distinct enough.
something um uh that's distinct enough. So,
So, okay, express anything. Why is this
okay, express anything. Why is this important? Well, it's really valuable to
important? Well, it's really valuable to be able to use this general purpose tool
be able to use this general purpose tool for something that's an experiment. And
for something that's an experiment. And if you end up using that feature or
if you end up using that feature or functionality, then you can make a more
functionality, then you can make a more specific purpose tool. So, let me show
specific purpose tool. So, let me show you some of the expressiveness of dark
you some of the expressiveness of dark config um in some of these configuration
config um in some of these configuration files. This is the configuration file
files. This is the configuration file that defines how the procedural
that defines how the procedural generation layout of the dungeon works.
generation layout of the dungeon works. So, this defines where the enemies are
So, this defines where the enemies are spawned, where the walls are. Um, and we
spawned, where the walls are. Um, and we use, as you can see, YAML. YAML is a
use, as you can see, YAML. YAML is a very human file format. Um, it doesn't
very human file format. Um, it doesn't have a lot of boiler plate that XML and
have a lot of boiler plate that XML and JSON have. So, it's a lot more fluid to
JSON have. So, it's a lot more fluid to type. And the other nice thing about it
type. And the other nice thing about it is it supports uh sort of different
is it supports uh sort of different layouts for how you do things. So, for a
layouts for how you do things. So, for a list data structure, you can do a dash
list data structure, you can do a dash at the beginning of the line. And you
at the beginning of the line. And you can see here's an here's two list items
can see here's an here's two list items here. Um, but that doesn't always work.
here. Um, but that doesn't always work. That's kind of cumbersome if you're just
That's kind of cumbersome if you're just doing a point. So, this is another list.
doing a point. So, this is another list. And you can do that wherever you want
And you can do that wherever you want and it just looks the same in the in the
and it just looks the same in the in the code. The other thing that we do that's
code. The other thing that we do that's fairly interesting and this is specific
fairly interesting and this is specific to dark config is that you can override
to dark config is that you can override the parsing in certain cases and do
the parsing in certain cases and do heterogeneous lists. So this is a
heterogeneous lists. So this is a heterogeneous list here. This is an
heterogeneous list here. This is an enum. This is another enum and this is a
enum. This is another enum and this is a structure and there's just like a little
structure and there's just like a little hook in the code that looks at that list
hook in the code that looks at that list and parses this out. And it makes it so
and parses this out. And it makes it so that when I'm authoring this file I
that when I'm authoring this file I don't have to have like a separate field
don't have to have like a separate field for show in. And I can just say, okay,
for show in. And I can just say, okay, this this this room spawns at
this this this room spawns at uh this area and it's right there. Uh
uh this area and it's right there. Uh you can also see that we have ASKY maps
you can also see that we have ASKY maps in here. That's always nice. It's almost
in here. That's always nice. It's almost visual, you know, if you just just
visual, you know, if you just just imagine. So yeah, so it's it's not going
imagine. So yeah, so it's it's not going to be the greatest at any particular
to be the greatest at any particular thing, but it is, you know, pretty good
thing, but it is, you know, pretty good at a lot of things.
at a lot of things. Um, and the last thing that I think is
Um, and the last thing that I think is really important is that you actually
really important is that you actually make your game configurable. I don't
make your game configurable. I don't know if you're like me, uh, where I work
know if you're like me, uh, where I work with a bunch of other folks, but those
with a bunch of other folks, but those people really hate it when they can't
people really hate it when they can't change something about the game. So, I
change something about the game. So, I really think, um, I've really focused on
really think, um, I've really focused on making Dark Config easy to integrate
making Dark Config easy to integrate into your game. And often times, it's
into your game. And often times, it's just one line. And I I know that this is
just one line. And I I know that this is an important property because I've been
an important property because I've been that guy who hasn't made my game
that guy who hasn't made my game configurable. And these guys have been
configurable. And these guys have been all like I don't want to learn C to have
all like I don't want to learn C to have to edit this game. I want to like, you
to edit this game. I want to like, you know, be a designer or an artist. So,
know, be a designer or an artist. So, um, this is the line that integrates
um, this is the line that integrates that this dungeons. We were looking at
that this dungeons. We were looking at before. And this does two things at
before. And this does two things at once. It loads the the file the first
once. It loads the the file the first time and anytime that file changes it
time and anytime that file changes it hotloads that and propagates those
hotloads that and propagates those changes everywhere in the world uh the
changes everywhere in the world uh the game
game world. One of the nice properties of
world. One of the nice properties of dark config is that it updates the
dark config is that it updates the objects in place. So you see it blows
objects in place. So you see it blows this onto this
this onto this dictionary and then I take objects out
dictionary and then I take objects out of that dictionary and I'll just pass
of that dictionary and I'll just pass them around. You know I pass that to the
them around. You know I pass that to the constructor of some other thing. this
constructor of some other thing. this object just like goes all over the place
object just like goes all over the place and everywhere that uses it doesn't have
and everywhere that uses it doesn't have to care that it came from a
to care that it came from a configuration file. It just knows that
configuration file. It just knows that when the configuration file hotloads the
when the configuration file hotloads the properties in that object will change
properties in that object will change and um this is the object just so you
and um this is the object just so you can see it. It's just just some fields
can see it. It's just just some fields and they'll just be updated when the
and they'll just be updated when the file gets updated. So that means that
file gets updated. So that means that much more things are hotloaded, much
much more things are hotloaded, much more things are editable by other
more things are editable by other members of the team than if this had
members of the team than if this had been a lot harder to integrate. So
been a lot harder to integrate. So that's a very important value for us.
And I want you to do this. I want you to iterate
iterate fast. Express lots of things in your
fast. Express lots of things in your games. And I want you to actually do it.
games. And I want you to actually do it. We are proud to announce that uh this is
We are proud to announce that uh this is Spryfox's first open source project.
Spryfox's first open source project. It's up here on GitHub and you can check
It's up here on GitHub and you can check it out. Uh try not to inundate me with
it out. Uh try not to inundate me with pull requests while I'm at GDC. Thank
pull requests while I'm at GDC. Thank you.
you. Um and uh I want to drop in here that
Um and uh I want to drop in here that it's not just a Unity thing. thing. We
it's not just a Unity thing. thing. We use Unity, but we've made dark config so
use Unity, but we've made dark config so it supports any C# project. So you can
it supports any C# project. So you can um I expect to see you in all sorts of
um I expect to see you in all sorts of weird wonderful places. Thank you very
weird wonderful places. Thank you very much and happy
developing. Uh yeah, thank you so much. That's really interesting. I love also
That's really interesting. I love also how like text is such a good like lowest
how like text is such a good like lowest common denominator you can like build
common denominator you can like build more stuff onto. Like I think last year
more stuff onto. Like I think last year or two years ago we had Omar Cornet talk
or two years ago we had Omar Cornet talk about um dear Imui about like writing
about um dear Imui about like writing C++ visual tools. He's right there. I
C++ visual tools. He's right there. I see him. Uh talk about like C++ um more
see him. Uh talk about like C++ um more visual tools that that you can build on
visual tools that that you can build on top of anything. So you could go, you
top of anything. So you could go, you know, Unity to text file to like a
know, Unity to text file to like a custom level editor uh without having to
custom level editor uh without having to make that level editor into Unity or
make that level editor into Unity or compatible. That's really really cool.
compatible. That's really really cool. Uh next up we've got Shukia, also known
Uh next up we've got Shukia, also known as your boy Sugar.
as your boy Sugar. who's uh here to talk about procedural
who's uh here to talk about procedural mess deformation and how they use that
mess deformation and how they use that in their game design. Are you ready to
in their game design. Are you ready to go? Yeah, it's not working.
Hm. Are you on a different one? Yeah. There we go.
Okay. Yeah, that's me.
Are you going to introduce yourself or I will I will
um really happy to have sugar here and have some other South African developers
have some other South African developers as well. I got to lucky enough to go to
as well. I got to lucky enough to go to Amaze Johannesburg a few years ago and
Amaze Johannesburg a few years ago and met all these like great great people.
met all these like great great people. Uh and it's a it's a huge pleasure to be
Uh and it's a it's a huge pleasure to be able to have them here on stage with me.
able to have them here on stage with me. All right, you ready to go? Yeah, let's
All right, you ready to go? Yeah, let's do it. Let's give him a warm hand.
Thanks. Thanks for that introduction. What's up, guys? I'm Shukia Kimmani, but
What's up, guys? I'm Shukia Kimmani, but you guys can call me Sugar. And I'll try
you guys can call me Sugar. And I'll try my best to keep this short and sweet.
my best to keep this short and sweet. Um, I'm
Um, I'm the I'm the the lead programmer down at
the I'm the the lead programmer down at Yamok, small game development studio in
Yamok, small game development studio in Johannesburg, South Africa. And we've
Johannesburg, South Africa. And we've been working on our debut title,
been working on our debut title, Semblance. And while we started working
Semblance. And while we started working on this project, I started developing a
on this project, I started developing a tool that creates procedural animations
tool that creates procedural animations on dynamic 2D meshes. It's a lot of
on dynamic 2D meshes. It's a lot of words, okay? But basically, it's just to
words, okay? But basically, it's just to animate our character. and make him feel
animate our character. and make him feel as juicy as
as juicy as possible. But like any of us
possible. But like any of us programmers, it was a tool because I
programmers, it was a tool because I can't art, I can't animate, but I can
can't art, I can't animate, but I can write some pretty good code, right? And
write some pretty good code, right? And most of us have our prototypes look like
most of us have our prototypes look like little rectangles jumping around with on
little rectangles jumping around with on top of other rectangles. And I wanted to
top of other rectangles. And I wanted to do something a bit more interesting. And
do something a bit more interesting. And Mike Bethl has shown us that a rectangle
Mike Bethl has shown us that a rectangle can be pretty interesting. So I started
can be pretty interesting. So I started investigating what other people were
investigating what other people were doing with rectangles and games like
doing with rectangles and games like super sex soccer and tennis use a
super sex soccer and tennis use a rectangle and change the width and
rectangle and change the width and height of the rectangles and they start
height of the rectangles and they start to feel to it they start to come more
to feel to it they start to come more alive and then around the same time Zach
alive and then around the same time Zach Bell um released ink and he started
Bell um released ink and he started tweaking the corners of the rectangle
tweaking the corners of the rectangle and that's when I started thinking what
and that's when I started thinking what if I used bezier curves what if we
if I used bezier curves what if we define our rectangle based on bezier
define our rectangle based on bezier curves. And for you who don't know what
curves. And for you who don't know what a bezier curves is, it's pretty much the
a bezier curves is, it's pretty much the pen tool in Photoshop. So you got two
pen tool in Photoshop. So you got two points, the anchor points that are the
points, the anchor points that are the beginning and end of the Bezier curve,
beginning and end of the Bezier curve, and you have two other control points to
and you have two other control points to change how the curve works. And I did
change how the curve works. And I did that. So we got the rectangle based on
that. So we got the rectangle based on Bezier curves. And at this point, I
Bezier curves. And at this point, I wasn't too sure I was still working with
wasn't too sure I was still working with a rectangle anymore, cuz you could
a rectangle anymore, cuz you could change it into any shape that I really
change it into any shape that I really wanted. And this was fun, but creating
wanted. And this was fun, but creating the mesh was the first problem. And
the mesh was the first problem. And using the bezier curves, you can go all
using the bezier curves, you can go all all across the bezier curves in
all across the bezier curves in different steps. The more steps you use,
different steps. The more steps you use, the higher fidelity you get, the
the higher fidelity you get, the smoother curves you have. And then from
smoother curves you have. And then from there, the first thing you need to the
there, the first thing you need to the next thing you need to do is create the
next thing you need to do is create the triangles. And triangulating every frame
triangles. And triangulating every frame becomes very costly. And so we developed
becomes very costly. And so we developed a way of just putting one vertex in the
a way of just putting one vertex in the middle of the rectangle and having all
middle of the rectangle and having all the tries go right to the middle. And
the tries go right to the middle. And that way we didn't have to retriangulate
that way we didn't have to retriangulate every frame. And the middle middle
every frame. And the middle middle vertex was able we it's just an average
vertex was able we it's just an average of the four corners. So it was able to
of the four corners. So it was able to move around and you were still able to
move around and you were still able to change the mesh the way the way we
change the mesh the way the way we wanted. But now it's just a mesh. Why
wanted. But now it's just a mesh. Why not just slap on a sprite? I mean, then
not just slap on a sprite? I mean, then at this point, you can have more complex
at this point, you can have more complex shapes and still be able to not have to
shapes and still be able to not have to animate every frame and then you can
animate every frame and then you can just deform the mesh in the way you want
just deform the mesh in the way you want it. And this is how we started creating
it. And this is how we started creating the key frames that you would animate
the key frames that you would animate to. But procedural animation, we just
to. But procedural animation, we just use numeric springing. And that way you
use numeric springing. And that way you can jump from different key frames into
can jump from different key frames into other ones and it would still look nice
other ones and it would still look nice and springy and interesting.
and springy and interesting. And that's that's when we finally ended
And that's that's when we finally ended with this tool that helped uh either of
with this tool that helped uh either of us go in and change Squish's animations
us go in and change Squish's animations by just by the key frames a little tools
by just by the key frames a little tools to swap
to swap it the mirrors, flip it, and then
it the mirrors, flip it, and then eventually just save it into the bank of
eventually just save it into the bank of animations. And then inter internally in
animations. And then inter internally in code, we could just trigger off those
code, we could just trigger off those different animations. And what's great
different animations. And what's great about the key frames and the procedure
about the key frames and the procedure animations that you could blend in
animations that you could blend in between any of those key frames and that
between any of those key frames and that was fun. And we still needed the the
was fun. And we still needed the the square to look. And so we added eyes and
square to look. And so we added eyes and just make it a little springy and became
just make it a little springy and became a lot more interesting, a lot more fun
a lot more interesting, a lot more fun to play with. But at this point, the
to play with. But at this point, the tech was being built and it's just a
tech was being built and it's just a collection of algorithms, right? You
collection of algorithms, right? You have your bezier curves, you have a
have your bezier curves, you have a physics simulation on the springs. And
physics simulation on the springs. And we started asking ourselves, but but
we started asking ourselves, but but what if we just add it to the platforms
what if we just add it to the platforms as well. And then that way you have this
as well. And then that way you have this interesting mechanic where you can start
interesting mechanic where you can start changing the world and spring it as much
changing the world and spring it as much as possible. And that's basically what
as possible. And that's basically what the tool is. And if you need to ask me
the tool is. And if you need to ask me any more questions, just holler at your
any more questions, just holler at your boy. Or if you're more into Twitter,
boy. Or if you're more into Twitter, just throw it on Twitter as well, man.
just throw it on Twitter as well, man. Thanks
guys. That was excellent. Thanks, Sugar. Uh, I hope a
excellent. Thanks, Sugar. Uh, I hope a lot of people will hollow at your
boy and definitely check out Semblance. I'm really excited to hear more about
I'm really excited to hear more about it. Um, next up we have Chris Martins
it. Um, next up we have Chris Martins who's going to talk about a tool called
who's going to talk about a tool called Scepter. Are you ready to go? Yeah, I
Scepter. Are you ready to go? Yeah, I think so. Come up. Number one. Yeah.
think so. Come up. Number one. Yeah. Let's give another big hand. Chris
Martins. All right. Thank you. Uh, well, that was awesome. I'm like really
that was awesome. I'm like really excited and honored to be here among all
excited and honored to be here among all of these people making amazing things.
of these people making amazing things. Um, so I made a thing called Scepter,
Um, so I made a thing called Scepter, which I'm calling a a tinker tool, kind
which I'm calling a a tinker tool, kind of if you know what a tinker toy is. Um,
of if you know what a tinker toy is. Um, so it's a tool for tinkering with rule
so it's a tool for tinkering with rule sets. And what I was kind of inspired by
sets. And what I was kind of inspired by was the idea of rapid prototyping. Um, I
was the idea of rapid prototyping. Um, I guess I should say I'm an academic. Um,
guess I should say I'm an academic. Um, I'm an assistant professor at North
I'm an assistant professor at North Carolina University. Uh, so a lot of
Carolina University. Uh, so a lot of what I do is is sort of research
what I do is is sort of research motivated. And um I'm interested in
motivated. And um I'm interested in rapid prototyping games and particularly
rapid prototyping games and particularly like I really like using you know index
like I really like using you know index cards and paper prototyping sorts of
cards and paper prototyping sorts of things especially when making uh analog
things especially when making uh analog prototypes and I really wanted something
prototypes and I really wanted something that could be used similarly in the
that could be used similarly in the digital space to um basically drive get
digital space to um basically drive get right to the heart of rule sets without
right to the heart of rule sets without having to muck around with uh graphics
having to muck around with uh graphics and and input controls and things like
and and input controls and things like that. So um this slide has a little tiny
that. So um this slide has a little tiny bit of scepter code on it that you can
bit of scepter code on it that you can look at without understanding for now.
look at without understanding for now. Um but it's effectively a very tiny
Um but it's effectively a very tiny programming language for prototyping
programming language for prototyping system
system designs. And I'm going to show you three
designs. And I'm going to show you three examples to kind of demonstrate the
examples to kind of demonstrate the breadth of what I like to do in Scepter.
breadth of what I like to do in Scepter. Um it can be used for a number of things
Um it can be used for a number of things but I want to talk a little bit about uh
but I want to talk a little bit about uh using it for codifying resource
using it for codifying resource economies in games doing a little bit of
economies in games doing a little bit of procedural generation and prototyping
procedural generation and prototyping interactive
interactive fiction. So this next part is going to
fiction. So this next part is going to be the most syntax heavy that we'll get.
be the most syntax heavy that we'll get. Um but the uh so just just to give you a
Um but the uh so just just to give you a sense an overall sense for how this
sense an overall sense for how this works we use something called linear
works we use something called linear logic rules. And these are just rules
logic rules. And these are just rules where you have a left-hand side that
where you have a left-hand side that when the rule is selected um that
when the rule is selected um that left-hand side gets replaced by a right
left-hand side gets replaced by a right hand side. Um so the only syntax
hand side. Um so the only syntax specific toceptor in this rule is uh the
specific toceptor in this rule is uh the lolli and the tensor and lolli just
lolli and the tensor and lolli just separates the lefth hand side and the
separates the lefth hand side and the right hand side and tensor connects
right hand side and tensor connects together the pieces that go on either
together the pieces that go on either side of the rule. Uh so what are those
side of the rule. Uh so what are those pieces? Those are uh I'm being
pieces? Those are uh I'm being intentionally vague about what they are
intentionally vague about what they are because they can literally be anything
because they can literally be anything that describes some kind of segment of
that describes some kind of segment of or or slice of the world state uh that
or or slice of the world state uh that you're trying to describe. So without
you're trying to describe. So without further ado, let's look at our first
further ado, let's look at our first example. Uh so resource economies. So
example. Uh so resource economies. So what I mean by resource economies is the
what I mean by resource economies is the kind of thing that you often find as a
kind of thing that you often find as a central play element in games like
central play element in games like Minecraft or really any kind of crafting
Minecraft or really any kind of crafting game. uh where you have recipes that can
game. uh where you have recipes that can be uh put together from resources that
be uh put together from resources that you're collecting around the world. Um
you're collecting around the world. Um and you can also typically have some
and you can also typically have some kind of feedback loops in these systems
kind of feedback loops in these systems where the recipes allow you to create
where the recipes allow you to create new tools that allow you to uh uncover
new tools that allow you to uh uncover and obtain richer resources. So in
and obtain richer resources. So in scepter you can write a sort of system
scepter you can write a sort of system like that with rules that look kind of
like that with rules that look kind of like this. Uh so that the pieces of
like this. Uh so that the pieces of world state that you represent are
world state that you represent are things that the player has in their
things that the player has in their inventory which is like this have
inventory which is like this have predicate and they can have for example
predicate and they can have for example um a material m in some quantity which
um a material m in some quantity which is a quantity plus two. Uh so this is a
is a quantity plus two. Uh so this is a kind of pattern matching if you're used
kind of pattern matching if you're used to that from another programming
to that from another programming language. Um, so what this rule does is
language. Um, so what this rule does is it basically says if you have a material
it basically says if you have a material M in a quantity quantity plus two, you
M in a quantity quantity plus two, you can replace that piece of world state
can replace that piece of world state with having a shield made out of that
with having a shield made out of that material and having M in a quantity that
material and having M in a quantity that is two less than the quantity you
is two less than the quantity you started with. Um, the things in purple
started with. Um, the things in purple are variables and they can stand for
are variables and they can stand for arbitrary things in the world. So for
arbitrary things in the world. So for example, M here, if this were like sort
example, M here, if this were like sort of a Minecraft world, could stand for
of a Minecraft world, could stand for any material like wood or stone. Um, you
any material like wood or stone. Um, you can also have a rule like a mining rule
can also have a rule like a mining rule which says if you have a pickaxe made of
which says if you have a pickaxe made of some material and there's some ore in
some material and there's some ore in the world of some other material M prime
the world of some other material M prime and M can break M prime uh and you have
and M can break M prime uh and you have a quantity of M prime equal to Q, then
a quantity of M prime equal to Q, then you can replace all of those things with
you can replace all of those things with having a quantity of M prime that's one
having a quantity of M prime that's one more than that. Um, it should be noted
more than that. Um, it should be noted that we don't actually want to get rid
that we don't actually want to get rid of these two pieces of our world state.
of these two pieces of our world state. So we have a little bit of syntactic
So we have a little bit of syntactic sugar for uh keeping those things around
sugar for uh keeping those things around and you know basically checking a
and you know basically checking a condition without deleting
condition without deleting them. Um so what can you do with a rule
them. Um so what can you do with a rule set like this? Um so the author can uh
set like this? Um so the author can uh select subsets of these rules that
select subsets of these rules that either run autonomously so the system
either run autonomously so the system will pick randomly among all available
will pick randomly among all available rules that can fire or you can run run
rules that can fire or you can run run them interactively. the user
them interactively. the user picks. Um, so in the Minecraft example,
picks. Um, so in the Minecraft example, this could be used for example to
this could be used for example to basically run this rule set at random
basically run this rule set at random and see what kinds of things in the
and see what kinds of things in the world can be, you know, put together and
world can be, you know, put together and interacted with to create the kind of
interacted with to create the kind of feedback loop feedback loops I
feedback loop feedback loops I mentioned. Um, or you could interact
mentioned. Um, or you could interact with the system to try and debug it. Uh,
with the system to try and debug it. Uh, so the next example is procedural
so the next example is procedural generation which is basically the you
generation which is basically the you know this is the kind of mode where you
know this is the kind of mode where you would always want to be running the rule
would always want to be running the rule sets autonomously. So in a simple
sets autonomously. So in a simple procedural generation example um so I
procedural generation example um so I have like a screenshot of Spalunky here
have like a screenshot of Spalunky here to suggest um maybe we want to generate
to suggest um maybe we want to generate some kind of level uh with uh starting
some kind of level uh with uh starting with like an empty 2D array of tiles and
with like an empty 2D array of tiles and then populating them with some random
then populating them with some random tiles including walls and ladders and
tiles including walls and ladders and spikes and things like that. Um, so
spikes and things like that. Um, so because scepter randomly picks between
because scepter randomly picks between sets of rules that can fire, you can
sets of rules that can fire, you can start out by saying everything in the
start out by saying everything in the world is empty at coordinates x and y
world is empty at coordinates x and y and then you can at random replace those
and then you can at random replace those things with uh the fact that there's a
things with uh the fact that there's a wall there or the fact that there are
wall there or the fact that there are spikes there. Um, you can also introduce
spikes there. Um, you can also introduce some more interesting constraints uh
some more interesting constraints uh like for example, if you only want to
like for example, if you only want to put a ladder in a location where there's
put a ladder in a location where there's an empty space above, then you can also
an empty space above, then you can also add that condition. Um, again checking
add that condition. Um, again checking that condition without deleting it. And
that condition without deleting it. And you can, for example, if you only want,
you can, for example, if you only want, if you want to place the player in a
if you want to place the player in a random position, but you want to make
random position, but you want to make sure you can only do that once, you can
sure you can only do that once, you can add a token to the rule that basically
add a token to the rule that basically says, uh, is the player free? Like, has
says, uh, is the player free? Like, has the player not been placed yet? And then
the player not been placed yet? And then remove that token from the world so that
remove that token from the world so that that rule only fires once. And finally,
that rule only fires once. And finally, my third example is prototyping um,
my third example is prototyping um, interactive fiction. Uh so by
interactive fiction. Uh so by interactive fiction, I'm thinking in
interactive fiction, I'm thinking in kind of like the parser interactive
kind of like the parser interactive fiction sense where you're typing
fiction sense where you're typing commands like go north, take lamp. Uh
commands like go north, take lamp. Uh and you can describe these sorts of user
and you can describe these sorts of user actions and interactions with the world
actions and interactions with the world in a similar manner. Um starting with
in a similar manner. Um starting with you know character in a room if you um
you know character in a room if you um that should have a the indirection
that should have a the indirection should have a dollar sign next to it. Uh
should have a dollar sign next to it. Uh so if the room is in a particular
so if the room is in a particular direction towards room two then you can
direction towards room two then you can move in that direction and be in room
move in that direction and be in room two. Um the interesting thing about this
two. Um the interesting thing about this is that it's also fairly straightforward
is that it's also fairly straightforward to start scripting um more interesting
to start scripting um more interesting types of interactions like character
types of interactions like character conversation. Uh so if you're in uh a
conversation. Uh so if you're in uh a room and the a character is also in that
room and the a character is also in that room and you have some knowledge about a
room and you have some knowledge about a topic then you can start talking about a
topic then you can start talking about a topic and then maybe this rule interacts
topic and then maybe this rule interacts with another one that takes the um you
with another one that takes the um you know talk about uh predicate and then
know talk about uh predicate and then the character can respond to it.
the character can respond to it. So uh just the so these first two points
So uh just the so these first two points are kind of in summary. Uh you can you
are kind of in summary. Uh you can you can take rule sets and you can either
can take rule sets and you can either run them as generators, run them as
run them as generators, run them as interactive prototypes or kind of
interactive prototypes or kind of combine the two uh to switch between
combine the two uh to switch between automated generation and interaction. Um
automated generation and interaction. Um another thing that you can do is run
another thing that you can do is run them to analyze causality between
them to analyze causality between events. So, as one example, so in
events. So, as one example, so in interactive fiction, we often have like
interactive fiction, we often have like these quest or progression structures
these quest or progression structures that talk about kind of which pieces you
that talk about kind of which pieces you need to advance to certain puzzles. Uh,
need to advance to certain puzzles. Uh, and then what that permits at, um, as an
and then what that permits at, um, as an outcome that will allow you to advance
outcome that will allow you to advance to new puzzles. And you can there's a
to new puzzles. And you can there's a visualization component to scepter that
visualization component to scepter that allows you to see the causal structure
allows you to see the causal structure between events that happen in the world.
between events that happen in the world. Uh, so with that, I will throw up the
Uh, so with that, I will throw up the GitHub link. And this is, by the way,
GitHub link. And this is, by the way, like a crafty command line tool, so be
like a crafty command line tool, so be prepared um for academic software. Uh
prepared um for academic software. Uh but you are welcome to ping me on
but you are welcome to ping me on Twitter or talk to me in the wrap-up
Twitter or talk to me in the wrap-up room and I'd be happy to help you out.
Thanks. Thanks, Chris. We're already at the last tool
Chris. We're already at the last tool tech toolbox talk.
tech toolbox talk. Um, that's crazy.
Um, that's crazy. You good? Yeah.
[Music]
So, next up we have Inis Mckendendrick from Hello Games. If you guys ever heard
from Hello Games. If you guys ever heard of this game called
of this game called Nmanski, it's good to practice that.
Nmanski, it's good to practice that. Sorry. Um,
Sorry. Um, yeah. Yeah. is working. Cool. I'm just
yeah. Yeah. is working. Cool. I'm just gonna give it over to Inis
gonna give it over to Inis Mckendendrick. Let's give him a big
Mckendendrick. Let's give him a big hand.
Hi. So, I'm Inis Mckendendrick and I'm a programmer at Hello Games. Um, and yeah,
programmer at Hello Games. Um, and yeah, we worked on No Man's Sky, which is a
we worked on No Man's Sky, which is a sci-fi exploration game. Today, I'm
sci-fi exploration game. Today, I'm going to talk a bit about the tools that
going to talk a bit about the tools that we use for texturing, for procedural
we use for texturing, for procedural texturing, and making the most of our
texturing, and making the most of our artist textures. But a lot of the things
artist textures. But a lot of the things I'm saying are really relevant across
I'm saying are really relevant across the board when we generate content.
the board when we generate content. They're they're just principles. Um but
They're they're just principles. Um but there are some useful details I hope
there are some useful details I hope that you'll pick up as well. So when it
that you'll pick up as well. So when it comes to content in No Man's Sky, we
comes to content in No Man's Sky, we have a few aims that kind of guide our
have a few aims that kind of guide our approach to to creating that. The first
approach to to creating that. The first is that we have a really large space. So
is that we have a really large space. So we want to create a variety of
we want to create a variety of interesting content within that. But at
interesting content within that. But at the same time, we want to create enough
the same time, we want to create enough content that we couldn't possibly save
content that we couldn't possibly save it all to disk or have it all in memory
it all to disk or have it all in memory at runtime. So we we need to be
at runtime. So we we need to be generating it on the fly which means we
generating it on the fly which means we need uh generation approaches that are
need uh generation approaches that are performant and we can do at load time or
performant and we can do at load time or runtime. Um and the final guiding thing
runtime. Um and the final guiding thing for us is that we're a really small team
for us is that we're a really small team and I know that might not seem true to
and I know that might not seem true to some solo indies out there that's maybe
some solo indies out there that's maybe an unfair thing to say but compared to
an unfair thing to say but compared to AAA team with hundreds of artists we
AAA team with hundreds of artists we have five and there's no way we can
have five and there's no way we can output the amount of content that those
output the amount of content that those people can. So every piece of art that
people can. So every piece of art that our artists work on needs to really
our artists work on needs to really count. it needs to account for a load
count. it needs to account for a load more um content in the games than you
more um content in the games than you know a single te texture normally
know a single te texture normally would. So in terms of how we texture the
would. So in terms of how we texture the basic overview is that our artists make
basic overview is that our artists make parts of textures and we just recolor
parts of textures and we just recolor and recombine them in different ways to
and recombine them in different ways to get a much larger variety of textures.
get a much larger variety of textures. Um and how that looks is something like
Um and how that looks is something like this. So we start with a base layer
this. So we start with a base layer there um and then we add different
there um and then we add different layers over the top and really quickly I
layers over the top and really quickly I think you can imagine the kind of
think you can imagine the kind of variety that that can get. For example,
variety that that can get. For example, if I take that stripe texture and swap
if I take that stripe texture and swap it out for spots, then suddenly we have
it out for spots, then suddenly we have a different creature. If I take that
a different creature. If I take that sort of underbelly, that light color
sort of underbelly, that light color there, um, and swap it for some fur,
there, um, and swap it for some fur, then we're going to have another set of
then we're going to have another set of textures. And exponentially, we grow the
textures. And exponentially, we grow the space in which our our textures exist.
space in which our our textures exist. Um, and this is with a diffuse texture,
Um, and this is with a diffuse texture, but we do it matching up with our normal
but we do it matching up with our normal maps and our specular maps. So, we have
maps and our specular maps. So, we have a complete set of textures for any of
a complete set of textures for any of the props in our game just by the artist
the props in our game just by the artist creating a series of these texture
creating a series of these texture parts.
parts. And so in terms of how we author that,
And so in terms of how we author that, it's really important to us that our
it's really important to us that our artists use pieces of software that are
artists use pieces of software that are already out there. We don't want to make
already out there. We don't want to make a tool that replaces Photoshop because
a tool that replaces Photoshop because that would be really dumb. Um, we're
that would be really dumb. Um, we're not, you know, we're a really small team
not, you know, we're a really small team and our artists like Photoshop. Um, so
and our artists like Photoshop. Um, so our artists work like this. They work on
our artists work like this. They work on a texture as a whole. So this is a head
a texture as a whole. So this is a head for, I don't know, some rodenty thing, I
for, I don't know, some rodenty thing, I guess. Um, and they work on all the
guess. Um, and they work on all the layers all together there. So they they
layers all together there. So they they can see the texture as a whole. they can
can see the texture as a whole. they can combine the layers themselves and look
combine the layers themselves and look at um how that appears and check they're
at um how that appears and check they're in the correct order and things. And
in the correct order and things. And then you can see all the little hashtags
then you can see all the little hashtags next to the the layers there. And that's
next to the the layers there. And that's because we have a script that simply
because we have a script that simply takes all those textures and it exports
takes all those textures and it exports them to a series of separate files and
them to a series of separate files and names our normal maps appropriately for
names our normal maps appropriately for us to load them in the game. Uh and to
us to load them in the game. Uh and to supplement that we use metadata. And
supplement that we use metadata. And what you're seeing here is our metadata
what you're seeing here is our metadata editor, but the data itself is actually
editor, but the data itself is actually just XML. you can edit that in text
just XML. you can edit that in text format as well. And I think that's a
format as well. And I think that's a really good thing that we use all the
really good thing that we use all the time with our generated content. Both so
time with our generated content. Both so that our artists can provide more
that our artists can provide more information on what they've made, give
information on what they've made, give it context, give it probabilities for
it context, give it probabilities for showing up, but also so that we can
showing up, but also so that we can really easily debug and look through
really easily debug and look through existing data. You know, at any time we
existing data. You know, at any time we can see what's been generated and we can
can see what's been generated and we can check the input in a really clear and
check the input in a really clear and easy to store format and go back to it
easy to store format and go back to it later. So, it's really handy. Um, so
later. So, it's really handy. Um, so we've got our textures, we've combined
we've got our textures, we've combined them, and the other important step that
them, and the other important step that we do is recoloring them. So looking at
we do is recoloring them. So looking at this same texture from before, we're
this same texture from before, we're recoloring all the layers separately
recoloring all the layers separately there. And one of the pieces of
there. And one of the pieces of information that our artist gave on the
information that our artist gave on the previous slide was what each of those
previous slide was what each of those layers is made of. So if they say that
layers is made of. So if they say that uh a texture part is made of fur, that
uh a texture part is made of fur, that will determine the types of colors that
will determine the types of colors that that layer is allowed to
that layer is allowed to be. But when we say recoloring, that
be. But when we say recoloring, that could mean a lot of different things.
could mean a lot of different things. you know, we could be just hue shifting
you know, we could be just hue shifting those textures. Um, so if we have a
those textures. Um, so if we have a texture and a color input, we could
texture and a color input, we could combine those in a lot of different
combine those in a lot of different ways. So for us specifically, uh, the
ways. So for us specifically, uh, the most important thing that you can take
most important thing that you can take away from this today, and I think this
away from this today, and I think this has been said at Tech Toolbox before, if
has been said at Tech Toolbox before, if you're working with textures, don't work
you're working with textures, don't work in RGB. Find a nice, friendly texture
in RGB. Find a nice, friendly texture format that gives you some control over
format that gives you some control over what you're doing. We tend to work in
what you're doing. We tend to work in HSV, but it doesn't have to be. There
HSV, but it doesn't have to be. There are other nice color spaces, but just
are other nice color spaces, but just find something that gives you nicer
find something that gives you nicer control over your colors when you're
control over your colors when you're working with
working with them. So, then we have this transform.
them. So, then we have this transform. Um, and this is our our super secret
Um, and this is our our super secret code bit. You can kind of copy it
code bit. You can kind of copy it wholesale if you want, but the the
wholesale if you want, but the the important thing to think about here is
important thing to think about here is what we're inputting is our texture,
what we're inputting is our texture, which is, you know, our input texture
which is, you know, our input texture parts, a series of them, the average
parts, a series of them, the average colors of those, and the color that we
colors of those, and the color that we want them to become. So in terms of hue,
want them to become. So in terms of hue, um to give a brief overview, but
um to give a brief overview, but there'll be more detail on the notes for
there'll be more detail on the notes for this slide if you want to come back to
this slide if you want to come back to it and actually look at how it works. Um
it and actually look at how it works. Um our hue is just shifted so that the
our hue is just shifted so that the average color of our input texture
average color of our input texture becomes the hue that we want the texture
becomes the hue that we want the texture overall to be. And the importance from
overall to be. And the importance from this is that when our artists are
this is that when our artists are creating those textures, they're not
creating those textures, they're not creating them in a flat hue. They're not
creating them in a flat hue. They're not creating uh they're adding detail and we
creating uh they're adding detail and we need to do our best to preserve that.
need to do our best to preserve that. And that's why we hue shift in this way
And that's why we hue shift in this way and do separate transforms for
and do separate transforms for saturation and value. So for our
saturation and value. So for our saturation, that line's simply saying
saturation, that line's simply saying that we will let our textures become
that we will let our textures become less saturated to match the colors we
less saturated to match the colors we put in, but not more saturated. So we
put in, but not more saturated. So we will let them fade out to whites and
will let them fade out to whites and grays. Um, but we won't boost the
grays. Um, but we won't boost the saturation just because it's really
saturation just because it's really ugly. And then that final line, which is
ugly. And then that final line, which is a bit of a monster, is basically a curve
a bit of a monster, is basically a curve that came uh from fiddling with things
that came uh from fiddling with things in graph toy. And graphy is my favorite
in graph toy. And graphy is my favorite thing whenever you need to deal with
thing whenever you need to deal with curves. Um, and basically all it says is
curves. Um, and basically all it says is that we want to keep the the dark parts
that we want to keep the the dark parts of our input texture dark and the light
of our input texture dark and the light parts light, but in between we want to
parts light, but in between we want to try and match the the value of the color
try and match the the value of the color that we've chosen for it.
that we've chosen for it. Um, so then in terms of fitting all
Um, so then in terms of fitting all those things together, so that sorry
those things together, so that sorry this was a bit of shader code. Um, and
this was a bit of shader code. Um, and we do this all these next steps uh in a
we do this all these next steps uh in a shader in the game as we as we load into
shader in the game as we as we load into it. So the basic steps to bring this all
it. So the basic steps to bring this all together are that our artists create all
together are that our artists create all these bits of textures. They create
these bits of textures. They create these color palettes and in game we
these color palettes and in game we select the ones we want. They give us
select the ones we want. They give us probability data and that lets us choose
probability data and that lets us choose how rare um individual parts should be.
how rare um individual parts should be. So we we choose a complete set for an
So we we choose a complete set for an individual model. Uh we load all that
individual model. Uh we load all that data in game. We load all those input
data in game. We load all those input textures. Uh we then combine and recolor
textures. Uh we then combine and recolor them in in a shader. Um, and then the
them in in a shader. Um, and then the important part is that we then generate
important part is that we then generate mit maps and compress them and unload
mit maps and compress them and unload all that previous texture data. Um, a
all that previous texture data. Um, a big thing when you're working with
big thing when you're working with textures is that it's really easy to end
textures is that it's really easy to end up having a mass of RGB data in your
up having a mass of RGB data in your game. So, you need a plan for how you're
game. So, you need a plan for how you're going to get that into a workable
going to get that into a workable format. Um, and then the results
format. Um, and then the results themselves. So, we have a bunch of
themselves. So, we have a bunch of creatures, plants. Um, we use this
creatures, plants. Um, we use this texturing technique right across the
texturing technique right across the board. Um, and this shows a creature in
board. Um, and this shows a creature in context. But a really important thing
context. But a really important thing when you're evaluating your content is
when you're evaluating your content is that you're seeing things on mass. So we
that you're seeing things on mass. So we have tools that let artists really
have tools that let artists really quickly see vast amounts of content
quickly see vast amounts of content generated from the their input work. Um
generated from the their input work. Um and they can quickly call out bugs if
and they can quickly call out bugs if there's a problem. Um they can see if
there's a problem. Um they can see if all those creatures show up red without
all those creatures show up red without stripes or if something's showing up too
stripes or if something's showing up too much or if there's a texture that
much or if there's a texture that they're not able to get enough from if
they're not able to get enough from if it doesn't look different enough to
it doesn't look different enough to their other approaches. If there's a
their other approaches. If there's a space where they haven't made enough
space where they haven't made enough content. So being able to evaluate
content. So being able to evaluate content in a wide way is really
content in a wide way is really important from us. So I know there's not
important from us. So I know there's not a whole lot of of detail on a tool that
a whole lot of of detail on a tool that you can take away, but the important
you can take away, but the important thing um I want you to go away from with
thing um I want you to go away from with today is that anything your artists
today is that anything your artists make, you can get so much more from. You
make, you can get so much more from. You know, you can take that content, you can
know, you can take that content, you can boost it, you can manipulate it in ways,
boost it, you can manipulate it in ways, and that can be a really approachable
and that can be a really approachable and controllable way to look at
and controllable way to look at procedural generation. You know, this is
procedural generation. You know, this is great because our artists have made all
great because our artists have made all the things and they know what what the
the things and they know what what the output is going to be like. So, we have
output is going to be like. So, we have a fairly manageable space, but we're
a fairly manageable space, but we're still doing so much more with the
still doing so much more with the textures they've made than if we just
textures they've made than if we just used them directly. We have a way
used them directly. We have a way broader amount of content. Um, if you
broader amount of content. Um, if you have any questions about this stuff,
have any questions about this stuff, then just shout me on Twitter. I don't
then just shout me on Twitter. I don't have such a cool email address, but um,
have such a cool email address, but um, you can email me. Um, and we'll all be
you can email me. Um, and we'll all be in a wrap-up room later, I think. So,
in a wrap-up room later, I think. So, give me a shout.
Uh, thanks Inis and thanks all of the other speakers as well. Uh, look, I
other speakers as well. Uh, look, I fixed a year. I'm great. Uh, just to
fixed a year. I'm great. Uh, just to just to wrap this all up, uh, thanks for
just to wrap this all up, uh, thanks for listening to a bunch of super varied uh,
listening to a bunch of super varied uh, game developers talk about their games
game developers talk about their games and their tools.
and their tools. um take it yeah just take it seriously
um take it yeah just take it seriously and think about the tools you're you're
and think about the tools you're you're making and especially sharing them with
making and especially sharing them with each other because that's basically why
each other because that's basically why we start why we started doing the tech
we start why we started doing the tech toolbox. Um thanks for coming tell your
toolbox. Um thanks for coming tell your friends especially tell any anybody you
friends especially tell any anybody you know uh who is who may not uh of out of
know uh who is who may not uh of out of their own you know uh who who may not
their own you know uh who who may not normally submit to these type of things
normally submit to these type of things tell them to do it anyway especially
tell them to do it anyway especially your diverse friends. We really
your diverse friends. We really appreciate that and it's hard for us to
appreciate that and it's hard for us to to find them. um watch the previous
to find them. um watch the previous years in the vaults if you thought this
years in the vaults if you thought this was this was really interesting and
was this was really interesting and please fill out the evaluation and
please fill out the evaluation and definitely come up uh as soon as we clap
definitely come up uh as soon as we clap one more time to the front of the stage
one more time to the front of the stage and talk to anybody you have questions
and talk to anybody you have questions about their tool. Thank you so much and
about their tool. Thank you so much and I hope to see you again next year.