Hello. Hello. You
hear me? Ok,
good morning everyone.
Thank you so much for, for getting up and braving this early morning.
Uh I was worried it was gonna be an empty room
because of all the parties last night and get together.
So I appreciate so much seeing all of you here.
Got the most essential items here, got coffee, got a clicker.
Uh I got a little presentation so
we'll try and go that. Um So
in case you didn't read the label over there, we're gonna talk about
the 1st 30 years of Warcraft.
Uh And what I hope to,
I hope that you get out of this is we want to
share some of the experiences that we've had over 30 years.
Uh a little bit of the decisions that we made along the way,
some of the lessons we learned.
And I'm hopeful.
II, I hope that there will be information that will be helpful for all of you.
So why don't we kick it off with a movie?
Go buy World of Warcraft,
install it on your computer and join the online sensation before we all murder.
You.
Welcome to the World of Warcraft.
I'm with him
Shatner
and I'm a shaman.
I'm Mr T and this is my night. E
Mohawk.
There's
no
such
thing as a
night.
Shut
a fool.
This role playing game
where heroes like Leroy Jenkins do battles.
That would be the world of Warcraft.
If you're a player in the NFL,
then what you're most proud of is that you've rated third national league
in dungeon progression.
Timmy was perfect.
That was fire
chance.
Four hours are
ready to work.
So, uh just as Warcraft is celebrating 30 years,
it's been about 30 years for me as well.
I'll tell you a little bit of my background.
Uh I didn't start originally on, on Warcraft, although,
although I did start playing
back with Warcraft,
the RT S and then I played in the beta for World of Warcraft and I've,
I've been with Blizzard uh 12 years now.
Uh I started out first on uh Miss a
Panera as a lead producer and then
spent a little bit of time over on Diablo three.
I brought it over to console and then did Reaper of Souls uh killed the auction house.
Sorry about that for all of you that uh had investments in that.
Um But hopefully the rest of you were happy.
Um And then back to, to the wild team
um over the course of, of my history which, you know, kind of portray it there.
Um I worked on quite a few games as you can see either as executive producer,
production director and even game director.
Um,
it's really kind of special and cool for me to be
here at G DC because a couple of those games,
uh, really happened because of the meetings and people that I met here at G DC.
I was walking these halls when I first ran into a guy named Mike Booth,
uh, with a little game called Knox.
Uh, we made that together, Mike went on to do great things including left Fred Ed,
which I'm sure you've heard of.
Uh at least I hope you have.
Um
Also at the IGF,
I uh was looking at a lot of student
projects and became enamored with one called Cloud.
And that led me to meet Genova Chin and,
and Kelly Santiago and we started that game company, I incubated that when I was at,
at Sony.
for all of you that are out there with your, your hopes and dreams and,
and your game that you wanna do, I encourage you
uh to network, meet people. I think this is a great place to do it.
Um
In addition to the games that I worked on, I, I my educational background,
I have a degree in computer science from the University of New Mexico.
Probably not any lobos out there. But if you're out there, you know,
uh put, put your hands up, OK. I knew that.
Um
and then uh later, yeah, in my career.
I went back and got my uh MB A and, and that was at US C Marshall School of Business,
um, wrote a book on project management and ended up teaching out of that book
at the interactive media division of Cinematic School at US. C
uh some of the students I worked with have gone on to do some pretty cool games.
Uh So it was a, it was a, been a great experience for me there.
I've also uh was on the board for the A is so that's
uh dice. Um
I think that kind of, that kind of sums up me.
Um Why don't we get on to the stuff we really want to talk about, which is Warcraft.
So
Warcraft,
the universe, our mission
is to build a fantasy universe
that delights and connects everyone everywhere.
And so, you know, we chose our words carefully. I mean, for us,
you know, that fantasy universe means,
you know, I can't even, I can't even read my own notes here.
Uh
It means that we, you know, we essentially want to tell deep and cool stories.
We wanna be engaging and,
and in, in delighting,
it's important to us that the game not only be a little dangerous, you know,
there has to be challenges,
but there's an element of humor and that distinguishes
us from a lot of other games out there.
Connecting is important for us as we found.
And I'll talk about through the journey of building warcraft.
It's that building a community,
bringing people together, you know,
people that you might not have otherwise met in real life you'll meet
in, in our games
and we wanna make sure that the games themselves,
the content and the communities that we foster are inclusive
that you can be who you wanna be
and multicultural.
You know, we, and then the last part, you know, we wanna be everywhere
And if you'll notice there's, there's elements of, of, you know,
mythology from across the globe.
But we operate
in,
you know, 24 7 across the entire planet in many, many languages and cultures.
And we think it's a cool way to, you know, kind of get in touch
uh with other community,
these other cultures. And we pride ourselves in trying to make our games feel like
they were actually made for the regions or the countries that we publish in.
Like, even when we do localization, we'll take, you know,
the little jokes that we tell that, you know,
if you're playing here in North America,
you know, you'll probably understand them.
But if we did a literal translation of them to,
other countries, you know, Germany or, you know, Peru,
it wouldn't make as much sense.
So our localization teams actually try to
still have an element of humor, but a joke that makes sense in, in their culture.
So these are essentially the,
the games that we have released including
the wild expansions over our 30 year history
for uh for Warcraft.
Um
Warcraft itself is celebrating its 30 years coming. This November
World of Warcraft is celebrating 20 years in operation and again, this is in,
in November.
Um
Heartstone is celebrating its 10 year anniversary and rumble our, our newest baby.
Uh It is gonna be one year old uh in November.
So I'm gonna walk through some of the pivotal milestones
that we've had through the creation of these games.
And then later, you know, kind of connect that all together
uh and talk about how we feel that this led to some of our successes.
And then also I wanna share with you
a big mistake that we made.
So
Warcraft, the RT S
sorry, in 1994
we were playing a lot of, of real time strategy games.
The genre was just starting to happen
up until that point, you know, a lot of people were playing turn based games,
a lot of them were adaptations of, of board games.
And so this notion of having real time strategy games where you click on units,
they go do the thing and you're not, you know, pressing a turn button was,
was still relatively novel.
Um
We love the genre. We wanted to be able to make a game in that genre.
So we actually chose the fantasy setting for it because at that time, most of the,
the RT S games
were actually sci-fi or military in nature.
And that turned out to be a pretty important distinction for us down the road.
It's also important that in an RT S game, there's a very clear conflict.
And so we thought, ok, in a fantasy setting,
it's got to be Orcs versus Humans, there's a lot of literature
uh that has established that long standing, you know, rivalry and, and in our case,
competition for resources.
So we thought that would, that would be a very simple concept to, to start with.
And there it is in all of its glory. Uh
For those of you that played Warcraft like I did.
Um That's what it looked like when it first came out.
Um If you look at the, the play screen down below the little green blobs or the, the,
the orcs,
they're busily harvesting things chopping down wood,
what have you building their, their village?
But along comes the little blue blob.
Well,
that represents the humans and of course they're intruding
on their territory and thus the conflict begins.
Um, early Warcraft game.
You could play solo in campaigns, but you could also play with friends. I remember
it wasn't quite as convenient as, as it is today, but I remember hooking up, you know,
my computer over land with my neighbor and
introducing everybody in my neighborhood at Warcraft.
Um
The,
the storytelling was in the form of mission
briefings which you see in that upper corner
and his voice over, but it was, you know, this scrolling text.
So we, we had a lot of success with, with Warcraft,
uh did a sequel to it.
Um
And, you know, could have kind of just
stayed there but, you know, a lot of cool stuff was happening in the industry,
not the least of which was 3d cards.
When this came out, people didn't really have 3d cards on their, on their computers.
So in the, the late nineties, mid nineties,
that's when they really started to become more prevalent.
And we did Warcraft 31 of the first big evidence of it was going full 3d with it.
So now the camera could come down a little bit, you'd see a little bit of the, you know,
the shadows and volume of your units, a little more detail, higher resolution,
the action was, you know, cooler.
Uh We also
wanted to tell more story. So up until this point, it's missions, right?
Go do this, go harvest that, go take down, you know, this, you know,
uh this human settlement,
but we wanted to tell a deeper story to help you feel more connected
to what was going on in the game itself.
And that led to creating these.
What Blizzard would later become pretty famous for is our pre
rendered cinematics. We use those for the announcement of games.
Sorry, I'm gonna go over here because I can't see some of you there. Thank you.
For, for coming in and sitting up front. I appreciate it.
Um
But we use it for the announcement of our games.
We use that in between missions to kind of propel the story along
and to give it another connection. We added heroes to Warcraft three.
That was kind of an important decision because now
you have these key story characters that we could,
we could tie everything to.
It was a lot of what they were trying to accomplish.
And you as the general above were ordering
the troops around to help them essentially.
But one of the really
smart things we did
uh be because, oh, I forgot to mention we also had much deeper game play on this.
We now had 12, you know, different factions that could play in these maps.
Um which by the way, I got interesting story uh from uh Chris Met
who is one of the, at that time, one of the story writers,
um we had all these different colors,
12 different colors for all the units, right?
And you literally went on a menu and you picked pink or blue or yellow.
And he's like, man, this is boring as heck.
So he took each of those colors and he turned them into
the various factions which would later be, you know, the regions of Ezra. So uh
you can,
you can thank him for the fact that Twilight's Hammers called that instead of pink.
So,
but anyway, the the other thing that we did is is as multiplayer caught on.
And we could see this is pretty cool. There's a real multiplayer community
we thought, how do we extend this?
So
we created a very robust mod system for the game
and that allowed our players to not only build maps to extend the game,
but also games within the game. And
what you're looking at there is a game or MOD and
a very popular one for Warcraft three called Defense of the Ancients
or dota.
So this mod actually gave rise to the whole Moba genre
and also tower defense.
So it was really powerful. It allowed an extension of the game.
Um Warcraft three was by all accounts, one of the most popular RT Ss of the time.
So where do we go next to this? Do we continue to build this?
Do we continue to extend this?
We're really excited about,
you know,
3D and what could be done with it?
I mean, when
we're building RT L. So you have this God's eye view of, of, of the, you know, the
the map watching the soldiers below. But what if
you could be one of them?
What if instead of from above
the game is built in such a way that you're part of that universe
and we loved MM os at the time we were playing them. And we're like,
hey, you know,
we've seen by creating a platform in the game
that we can have multiple games inside essentially the same universe.
But mm OS would give us the opportunity to really immerse players.
You know, it's like cyberspace is here and it was, it was exciting for us to feel like,
hey, we could be part of this,
you know, this could be the future
and we could have a lot of different gameplay
inside of our game by taking Warcraft to an MO.
So how does Warcraft become
an mo
initially?
You know, I mean, mm OS based on role playing games, you know, you,
you typically level up to max level, you finished the story campaign and
you're kind of done.
But the interesting and cool thing about MM OS is that
you can extend that by having a lot of multiplayer interaction.
And so for us, it was coming up with, you know, cool things for people to do together
so that, you know, you level up to Max but you then you go on and do raids and dungeons
and you know, a lot of, of, of, of, of activity together
and essentially you forge connections with people
that you would otherwise have never met.
And that was something really powerful about World of Warcraft.
So how did that change us? How did that change
in some ways?
Uh the industry?
So when we released World of Warcraft,
the internet was really just kind of happening for a lot of people.
They were doing AOL chat rooms up until that point, text based text based muds.
So this was an opportunity for them to literally go into a world,
be completely immersed in it, have a 3d avatar
in a 360 degree world and interact with people.
You know,
they went out and, and harvested things.
They, they, they quested together, they, you know, conquered, you know,
demons and, and bosses together,
they tanked, they healed, they cried, they hugged each other,
they fell off of cliffs,
but they were connecting with each other. And we became,
or, or the wow became a lifestyle for many people.
Uh I mean,
some of you already and I appreciate you've come up to
me and you told me the stories about how wow,
brought you together, made you friends
and it was a really powerful thing
for us
uh as a company and it absolutely changed us. The very first Bliss Con that we had
was for burning crusade.
It was the first expansion that we had for World of Warcraft.
And
like I was talking to one of the, the original developers uh the other night
and I said, tell me about those experiences and he said, you know,
what was really interesting for us is that
when we went to Blues Con, we didn't know if it was gonna be,
you know, a success or not,
but thousands of people were descending on the Anaheim Convention Center
and it blew them away and the developers were like staring and looking at each other.
It's like,
oh my gosh,
all these people here for us,
what they quickly realized
is all those people were there for each other.
And we went from being a
game developer
to being the caretakers of a community.
I mean, it was a dawning realization to us that
we no longer owned this game exclusively.
All of you, some of you, they played it.
We're that community is your game. And now we had to take great care
and how we
were, we,
we, we were the stewards of your world, your lifestyle.
So this recounts some of the
uh the expansions that we've released over time for, for uh
World of Warcraft. We, you know, we have one coming up as well.
Um
Really excellent run for, for a while.
We hope to have it uh even longer, hopefully another 20 years at least.
But one thing that was happening was
about midway through the release of these expansions
is our players were talking about, you know, really wanna be able to recreate,
you know, that, that experience that they first had when they first joined.
Wow, that sense of discovery,
uh that sense of, of playing together again,
because
many of the, the things that we had done to make, wow, more,
you know,
convenient to play and many of these things were asked for by our player community
had actually in, in the minds of some especially some of the old timers like me
had, had,
had weakened some of those social bonds that
making the game a little bit more difficult,
a little more dangerous,
a little bit harder to actually whi which seems counterintuitive,
making a little harder to actually get to meet people,
uh made it easier to make it stick.
And so
largely at the urging of our fans
we released
or we release this, we took an evolutionary step
back to
someone once said that you can't go home again,
but they lacked vision
and a temporal discombobulated.
So
Warcraft Classic was certainly not something we we anticipated.
Um We've now had we re-released to the expansions for it.
It's a very vibrant community for us and really a second community for a while.
Um
We started out, it was really
pretty difficult because we didn't build well with
the intent of ever going back and,
and replaying, you know, that experience.
So we had literally lost some of the data
required to do that. We had to recreate it if you would.
Now, it's based on our modern, you know, client and server, but we want it to be a,
a truly authentic experience.
And maybe we were a little too overzealous in that
we wanted to reassure players that we weren't gonna
have any changes whatsoever. So we had, we developed this hashtag
you know, no changes.
And then over the course of time, players like, you know,
this community is a lot of fun,
but there's a few things that you did that we'd like for you to go ahead and put back in.
And so now we have hashtag some changes,
but they're, they're informed by our community community.
I think one of the funniest things is that, you know,
we went back and we took a lot of effort to fix bugs, you know,
things that were broken in, in the, you know, the old.
Wow. And
we had players tell us no, don't fix that bug.
That's a pretty cool exploit, you know. So we go back in and reintroduce the bug,
but it was, uh
it was a really cool uh experience for us.
It's really awesome for us to be able to have two communities in. Wow.
Uh one reliving the past, so to speak.
Uh And some of, and for some people, it's,
it's their first experience they chose to go into Wow, classic.
Uh as the first, wow, that they've ever played.
So
we talked a lot about, wow.
So what are some of the other expressions that we've had of warcraft?
Um
Like, you know, our love for RT Ss
and then our love for MM OS.
One of the things that we love playing
at, at, at Blizzard was TCGS or trading card games. Magic.
The gathering was super popular. We actually did our own magic. The gathering,
uh you know, type game trading card game
in, in the form of a world of Warcraft trading game.
And so that led to the creation of Hearthstone,
this was project Pegasus
uh internally.
And,
you know, the challenge for us is how do we make this physical game?
Because up until that point, there really wasn't a digital TCG.
Um How do we turn that into,
you know, a really cool digital game?
How can we take advantage of that technology and
do something that would be hard to do,
you know, in, in a, in a, in a
paper, you know, game.
Um,
we actually took inspiration from warcraft.
So the foundation for it was to look at the various classes of, wow
and create, you know, the card families for Hearthstone.
And it turned out to be, you know, it worked out really well.
Uh It also created a great connection if you'd never played. Wow.
Um, if you understood the card families in, in Hearthstone,
you could make that transition to. Wow.
And kind of get, oh, I know what a hunter is all about.
They're gonna summit a bunch of beasts or at least they're gonna have a beast,
you know, or, you know, warriors are, you know,
got a lot of armor on them and they can do a lot of damage.
Uh, but they also have to take a lot of damage
and that became sort of the foundation of, of how we design
Heartstone.
Um,
some of the ways in which we, you know things that we did inside of Hearthstone.
You could, you really couldn't do practically on a, on a,
on a regular card game is we actually have some cards that
allow you to make duplicates of whatever is in your opponent's deck.
You can imagine how messy that would be.
If you're trying to do that, you know, at, at, at, at a card tournament,
the Hearthstone brought millions of players in to play billions of matches
it initially released on, on PC.
Uh And then we moved it to tablet
and then on into mobile
here, you can see some of the,
the extensions we've made to Hearthstone over its 10 year history.
We've actually done 26 different expansions for it.
Uh Five different adventures on top of the, you know, original card set,
we've had over 100 and 50 million people play Hearthstone
in 100 and 58 billion games
and Heartstone just last week celebrated its 10th birthday. So
happy birthday, Heartstone.
So we were intrigued by mobile as a platform.
I mean, a lot of us were playing mobile games
and we thought now what if we, you know, and we were certainly, you know,
emboldened by the success of Heartstone on mobile.
It's like how, how would we envision
a game built from the ground up for mobile?
So we went back to our strategy roots
and we made Warcraft Rumble.
Um
Rumble is, is, was actually game directed and, and led by, you know, folks from the,
the W team.
So while it has strategy roots in it,
um you'll see a lot of elements of, of, wow, in rumble,
rumble is essential if you haven't played it, uh encourage you to do it. But um
you're essentially, you, you're picking leaders, you're building troop armies.
Um
You go on these, you know, maps
and essentially try to take down, you know, your opponent's home tower, so to speak
the families themselves,
the key story characters are based on the
characters that you see in World of Warcraft,
the maps. And it's interesting the transition we made in original Warcraft RT S,
the maps became the zones of, wow.
Well, now the zones of wow, become the Maps of Rumble.
Um
But rumble was, was, was, you know, it's, we just released it in November.
Um It was a really cool exploration for us to get into
mobiles and, and it's actually taught us some things that we brought back to
how we regard the support of our games, both. Wow and Heartstone
and like cars, Stone has that element of whimsy and humor in it.
So now I want to tell you a little bit about
the philosophies and decisions that we made that we think
that contributed to our success.
The three excuse me, the, the five areas I want to cover are set uh setting,
visual style story,
our evolving gameplay
and then our community.
So the setting turned out to be a really
important uh choice for us because that classic fantasy setting
is very familiar to people.
Um, it also gives you AAA technology
that is reasonably easy to understand.
You know, everybody knows, or hopefully everybody knows how to wield
sword and a shield or a bow.
And it, you know, as opposed to science fiction, which sometimes has to explain,
you know, what it's all about, you know, what,
how do you use the weaponry that's in it?
It's also, you know, medieval fantasy has been expressed over many,
many decades in literature
uh in, you know, in film.
And so people were understood that they could get into it super accessible
and it has global appeal, you know, I I mentioned earlier, but, you know,
while we base a lot of it on, on western mythology,
we put a lot of Eastern influences in, in our particular bla uh brand of fantasy
and the visual style,
we could have gone, you know, strictly photorealistic, uh
you know, 3d cards when warcraft first came out, you know, were, were, you know,
just becoming the rage,
but they were improving literally every, every six months,
you know, how many of you went out and, you know, spent a lot of money,
bought your first 3d card.
I got, you know, I got my NVD at Riva only to find it obsolete within a year.
It's like, oh man,
well,
the same thing was happening with the visuals
that people were creating for those games.
And when you approach photo reel, especially over the course of, you know, a, a long,
a lengthy lifespan, you know, Warcraft has had
um you quickly get kind of outmoded,
your graphics look dated and we wanted to make sure that
they didn't look dated that they would be timeless for us.
So that turned out to be a really good choice for us.
We also could have gotten cartoony, but we wanted to appeal to, you know,
a little bit older audience.
We didn't want it to be seen as a kids game,
you know, very much a social game.
It is a family game, you know, and certainly in the world of Warcraft,
but by and large, we want to make sure that,
that people still saw it as somewhat serious.
And so we went for this stylized look,
you know, bulky shoulders and,
you know, which looks great when you're putting armor on it, right?
Um A
lot of, uh in the animation of characters, squash and stretch.
So it had a lot of personality
and this actually kind of became the blizzard look.
And, and you can,
one of our goals is that when you see somebody playing one of our games
that people look over and say, hey, is that rumble? Is that, wow, is that Heartstone?
Because it's very distinctive look for our games?
And you can see how we, we each game kind of
interprets or reinterprets the style of a character.
In this case, this is Jaya Proud More.
That's how she appeared in the original Warcraft three.
And over the course of our games, how she's, you know,
expressed so she looks different, but you can still see the, you know,
key things that make her Jana
and then story,
you know, RT S games didn't necessarily have to have a story,
but it was a way to propel people through the missions.
And by creating a story, we laid the foundation for
an intellectual property, a franchise.
It was those things that helped, you know, connect people across games.
It was part of what connected them to the worlds themselves.
And when you think about it, you know, especially a game like World of Warcraft,
you know, people aren't ingesting the story in the same way as they would a movie,
it's not a linear experience where it's like,
ok, two hours I'm in, I know what's going on with every one of these characters
and, and you're following the plot to the end,
you may be interrupted by, you know, hours, weeks, months in your play experience.
So how do we keep that thread together and having those key story characters,
you know, sort of propel it. So
they always had some big conflict that they're dealing with sometimes, you know,
an existential threat to our planet
Azo.
Um or maybe just you know, they have a,
a real beef with each other and you're the heroes in there assisting these,
these leaders.
But
you understand both the conflict
and the world around you.
You see here, Arthur, if, if you, you know, he,
he was in the frozen throne in, in Warcraft, the RT S,
he certainly was the, the center of the Lich King,
uh Ratha
Lich King. And which is what our classic players are playing right now.
Um But that was, I think one of our more poignant stories um about how power corrupts
so evolving gameplay,
what we've done through the course of time is to,
you know, either take existing genres uh or, or even games that we've, we've,
you know, had ourselves and, and iterate on those,
but always find a way to reduce the complexity in playing those games,
make them more acce
accessible and experiment with new modes of play.
And we like to iterate on those on that proven gameplay.
Then finally,
uh and this has really been the most important thing for us is community.
We behave as the caretakers of, you know,
some people told me, you know, you own my childhood, but we, we,
we're the caretakers of their community of their lifestyle.
And we, you know, we take that seriously
and what has helped us is it through the course of, of,
of taking care of that community?
We've grown through a network effect.
People invite their friends to be part of the game. People incorporate that
in their lifestyle
that becomes something that they get together. They do on a Tuesday night
and, and there's a little bit of almost, you know, pressure from your friends, like,
oh, we're gonna go do this thing together.
But then you also know, you have a place to go and you have a way to connect with people.
Uh, you can make friends, you know, across borders across cultural, you know,
differences.
Uh And,
and that's a really important aspect of our game and especially, um wow,
and then we, you know,
we try to keep the games fresh through regular content updates.
So this just kind of sums up
the things that we attribute
to the success of our franchise.
So now I want to talk a little bit about
um
a more recent case study
on how things maybe didn't work out for us.
So if you look at this is the subscriber curve for World of Warcraft.
And we have a really predictable pattern where
every time an expansion would come out,
a lot of people would come in to play that expansion.
Uh They'd reunite with their friends, they level up, they, you know,
get through a lot of the content, they might down, uh you know, a raid boss, they, and,
and, and a substantial group of them would continue on, you know,
all the way through the expansion and on to the next one.
And it and it,
this isn't a steady state, right?
We have a constant inflow and outflow, you know, that
we literally have almost as many new players coming in as, as, you know,
other players going out, you know, they churn so to speak,
but they always would come back.
Every expansion we released pre pretty, pretty much,
it was very predictable, the same number of folks would come back.
And then when we released Classic,
you can see we actually in between expansion releases had another big peak.
So we brought back uh we created a, a new community of players.
And if you notice that, that actually led to
when we saw that tapering off after the release, we're now at a higher level.
So when Shadowlands came out,
we were very high and healthy, you know,
subscriber base for the game.
So as we're heading into, all right, we're gonna do the next two expansions for,
for Classic
and we're gonna release Dragon Flight.
So this is what we expected to see as a result of that.
Now, we recognize that, you know, OK,
Shadowlands came out during COVID and so that might have been a little bit higher,
but we expected Dragon Flight, especially with the, you know,
remember this is the overall subscriber base.
We, we expected that to still be a really strong, healthy showing.
That's what we got.
Uh
And I put uh Professor Putra side in there if you played, uh he's he,
he rarely means good news even though he talks about good news a lot.
Uh And this was not good news for us.
Instead of seeing that, that, that big healthy peak at, at dragon flight,
it was much lower
and a lot of that was attributed to
people losing their interest.
Uh And even in some cases, their trust in us
during Shadowlands.
So what went wrong?
I mean, it's, we did surveys of our players. We looked at forums.
Uh We said we had a community council, we consulted with them,
consulted ourselves, a lot of us are players
and we just got real about
it. Uh And we,
and ironic that some of the things that went wrong for us are some of the things that
we felt led to our success
that we might have, you know, strayed from, from the things that,
that we believe so strongly.
So
first off was the story and setting
in Shadowlands, you know,
you're essentially going to a place that was never expressed in the RT S,
but it's this afterlife
people players felt like they were a stranger in a strange land.
Uh We had similar concepts with burning crusade and legion,
but this felt pretty alien to our players.
And
Azoth,
which is the place that they leveled up and
they'd spent a lot of time in their characters
was, was their anchor was not a place that they were visiting anymore.
You know, they're literally playing in the, in the afterlife.
Also, the, the, the main, you know,
antagonist, you know, the Jailer
was not a character that we evolved very well. In the course of that expansion
wasn't understood to our players. We hadn't really introduced him before.
He also had this kind of annoying habit of,
of taking credit for all the things that had ever happened in, in, in.
Wow.
And it felt a little bit too contrived.
And then lastly,
we diminish some of the key story characters, characters that, you know,
our players had grown to love or hate,
but nonetheless expected to see have, you know, a powerful presence.
We, we kind of diminish them in, in Shadowlands.
And so from a story standpoint, players are disappointed and from a, you know,
franchise standpoint, it was tough to see some of those important characters
uh reduced.
Next was the gameplay itself.
You know, we had been clinging to the idea that, hey, you know,
the way we have done expansions in the past is the way we should do it for Shadowlands.
And one of the things we introduced all the
way back in legion was this notion of borrowed power
that is that you get items in the case of Legion,
it was an artifact weapon that you're leveling up and that you're, you know,
you're accumulating points, but the power is in the item and not in
your character. The thing that you've invested time in
and players didn't like it and they were telling
us that in subtle ways from Legion and then on
into battle for
Azoth, but it really came to a head with Shadowlands.
They had simply had enough with that.
Um
We also, I mean, things changed, players changed,
you know, during this time, you know, we're bringing a lot of new players,
but I think that
time is really important to people and, and,
you know, you can't,
we couldn't count on them spending as much time grinding
their way through something as they had in the past.
And so we were competing with a lot of other entertainment experiences.
So how do we change, you know, what we're doing?
The last part too is with our community.
We had, uh
you know, again, as I mentioned, you know, we released Shadowlands in COVID.
It was pretty tough for us. We had everyone had to go home and, and work from home.
We've never done that before
and we put all of our, all of our resources on getting Shadowlands out.
It was important for us to be able to do that for our players.
We, we made that paramount, but as a result,
we hadn't really adequately, you know, resourced
the first update for Shadowlands.
So there was kind of a lengthy gap between the release of Shadowlands
and the first update and players are like, hey, I'm kind of bored.
I, I want something to do what's going on? Blizzard was, you know,
did you, you run out of steam
and we weren't consistent in those updates
and we also weren't communicating with our players.
We'd always kind of prided ourselves and like,
we're gonna do something amazing and then,
you know, surprise you with it and hopefully you're gonna love it.
But our players needed to know.
Well, no, I, you know, I wanna know, I mean, I'm invested time here.
I wanted to still hang out with my friends who want cool things to do.
What are you up to, you know,
and are you even listening to us anymore?
And here's some of the comments that you can see a couple of comments
complaining about borrowed power,
um
complaining about the respect for players time and that quote
was so important to us that's become a mantra for us, respect your players' time.
So what do we do
now? We were already, you know,
as we were, you know, after we finished off the initial release of Shadowlands,
we're talking about, where do we go next?
We realized that,
you know,
maybe this was gonna be a little bit too far out for
our players and that we wanted to return to high fantasy.
So that was already in the works.
We wanted to go uh to the Dragon Isles, we wanted to tell that story.
It's an important aspect of, you know, the history of
Azoth.
Um And so that was already in the works to do Dragonfly.
But Dragonfly turned out to be exactly what
players wanted in terms of setting high fantasy.
Get to be on dragons
deeper storytelling, you know, for,
um for our players, we worked in, you know, those key story characters and we tell,
told you a lot of the threads
uh that we had either kept a little mysterious or we hadn't connected before
and we reintroduced dangerous
but humor, it was more lighthearted.
It wasn't as somber as you know, the afterlife, you know, that we saw in,
in Shadowlands
and the, the, the zones themselves were vibrant, you know, bright light and,
you know, really majestic and beautiful things. This is actually a shot from
a quest in the game where all you do is stay a while and listen. Uh
you sit down on this ledge and you look at
the dragons flying around and you have a little,
you know, dialogue with the character
and then gameplay, we got rid of borough power. Yay.
Our players were pretty happy about that.
Um
And our design decisions became player centric as opposed to
being more about the game that we wanted to build.
I mean, originally, it was like we build games that we love,
which is a great way to start.
And all of you should be considering that if you don't like it,
then you certainly shouldn't be making it.
But think beyond that, you know, think about what your players want and,
and the longer you run, the more you sh you know, you know what they want.
I mean, we have all kinds of data
in our players in terms of where they're playing, how they're spending their time
and, and looking at that, reviewing it, talking to them
and using that to inform your design decisions.
And I, and I
specifically say data informed, you know, we, we didn't go so far as to,
we're gonna look at all the data and that's the game that we're gonna do,
we're gonna check all the boxes, but rather, hey, here's some stuff we wanna do.
Here's a whole list of things that we wanna do.
What are the things that we think our players are gonna like the most
based on what they're telling us and we prioritize those things
and that made a, a pretty big difference for us.
Uh We also for those of you who play, wow, at
the very beginning it was two factions. It was horrid versus alliance, right?
And that was, that's an important part of the story.
But people, when they first came into the game, they would often choose, you know,
one faction over the other on the basis of how they looked,
you know, I wanna be an orc, I mean, this is cool, you know, they ride motorcycles and,
they're, you know, they're spiky, you know, or
you want to be part of the alliance because actually,
they look very pretty and they wear, they look awesome in shining armor
and their buildings are so cool. They're like those, you know,
you know, uh, fairy book castles, fairy tale castles.
But that decision up front could actually
trap you because
you meet somebody in real life. You're hanging out at G DC. It's like, oh, you play?
Wow, that's awesome. What do you play? I play Alliance. Oh, I play hard. Yeah.
Well, I guess we can't be friends
and it's like, well, why should we create that division?
So we broke the cardinal rule and we allow cross faction play.
Let's see. Oh, and I can't forget
portrayed here. Dragon riding.
So flying is something that our players have loved to do
and, and we release an expansion
and within minutes it's like when are we gonna get flying?
You know, we're like,
you don't get flying because we want you to walk around on the
ground and really get immersed in the story and it's a good reason,
right?
Experience it more.
But it's like, yeah, but I really want flying. When are you gonna have flying?
Um, so with dragon around like, you know what?
It's, it's an expansion about dragons.
It'd be kind of weird if we don't let people fly. So we built a whole new flying system.
Dragon riding
that allows you from the very beginning to, you know,
you get your dragon and you get to,
you know, fly around the entire dragon aisles and we designed all the zones so that
they could be taken in from the air and, and that, you know, and we made a joy of flying.
I don't know if, if you've tried it, you know, hopefully you agree
that the aerobatics and the control that you have over your flying mounts is,
is like nothing we've done before.
It's literally like a flight simulator
in a good way. Not a bad way. No, no controls for your dragon.
So the other thing we did
is we committed.
We've never done this before.
But
excuse me,
we laid out the full year of what we were gonna do.
We told our players, hey, this is what you can count on from us
and we delivered on it.
And the way we did that is we,
we put aside
dedicated resources people
to just
make content
for these patch updates.
Now, some of these things were part of what we call the expansion team,
especially the blue banners there,
but a lot of the white banner stuff was that live service team.
And it's funny because, you know, we've been operating, you know,
live service since the beginning.
But it's actually kind of the experience that we had with mobile.
We're like, oh, these people are looking at data all the time.
They're constantly worried about what their players are doing.
They're using this to plan their updates.
Maybe there's some good learnings for us there and it turned out to be the case,
some of the same disciplines that, you know, your mobile mobile
colleagues are going through, your product managers are going through.
We've, we've kind of had to relearn for the, the wow team
and we continue that
for Classic as well.
And we actually got creative with Classic.
You know,
we have a lot of people on the team
that they're part of the Classic community themselves.
They love it. We ask them, you know, like,
OK, so we want to be careful, you know, classic is about no changes.
But what are some clever things that we could do
to engage this classic community? And so we did hardcore mode,
which was crazy, you know, for us, it was, it,
it turned out to be a lot of fun for content creators, you know,
because they could show people trying to level up
as far as they could before getting killed off.
Uh But it wasn't hardcore for was us, wasn't always just competitive either.
We'd see groups band together and try and,
you know, survive as, as long as they could. But it was, it was a lot of fun
and then season of discovery was a new way to let players re experience classic.
But with a twist, you know, they could actually, we made some modifications
that our players could make modifications to their class and,
and discover if you would those powers.
And then finally on, on Warcraft itself, uh
uh Modern, wow itself.
You know, we've extended this commitment to our players.
You know, we are releasing content every eight weeks in the game.
Um And if you'll notice there, if those of you,
you may have been traveling yesterday, but
there's a little pirate flag. Well, yesterday
we announced Plunders Storm,
which is actually a, a mode for Warcraft World of Warcraft.
It isn't inside of wow, modern and it isn't inside of Wow, classic.
What it is is, it's a Battle Royale
version of the game that you can just jump into with a, you know,
you don't take your existing character from either of those games.
You, you roll a new character,
you, if you play Battle Royale games, you kind of know how that, that functions. But,
you know, when you are killing off your opponents,
you know, they as, as they die, they put out a pinata of, of, of,
of the loot in the form of the spells that they were using.
So you pick and choose which of their spells you want
and then you carry on
and it's,
you know, we, we did it
kind of for fun. We just thought this would be a cool mode to put in.
We wanted to see if players would like it. The response has been really good for us.
Uh I think people are having a lot of fun. They were totally unexpected.
Uh I think what was really interesting for me.
I was reading some of the comments yesterday is that,
um,
you know, they were, you know, it might surprise you,
but there are actually people that, you know,
will get on the internet and complain about your game,
you know.
And, uh, yeah, I know. Weird. Right. At least it was back in the nineties.
Certainly not today. It's pretty commonplace.
But there,
there are some people like, you know, man, I wish they, you know,
why did they make this, you know, battle Royale thing, blah, blah, blah and our own,
we knew we'd done the right thing when
our own players were coming forward and saying,
why are you complaining?
They give you something essentially that you, you, that,
that you didn't know was coming.
It's a pleasant surprise. It seems to be a hell of a lot of fun.
Um
I don't understand why you're complaining.
You people just complain and it was,
I was watching the comments from the players towards the players and I'm like, OK,
we did, we did something right?
And we want to continue to do, you know, kind of creative stuff.
Keep it stirred up just
really, you know, don't,
don't get stuck in the rut, you know,
that we had been in where we were kind of repeating the same pattern.
And then finally we announced
the next three expansions at Blues Con. We've never done that. We committed to
where, what's, what's the story gonna be set in,
you know,
what are the major plot points or at least the major plot point for each one of these
and we're committed to delivering on that.
So summing up
the things that we feel
we did write, you know, to, to, to turn around, uh
you know, what was happening on World of Warcraft in story and setting
gameplay
and community.
And these are some of the comments as a result of it,
you know, they're ecstatic that we got rid of Barra power.
They're happy with Dragonfly, they like the story,
they love the pace of content updates
and that's the stuff you like to see, right?
So
what was the result?
We actually for the first time in the history
of, of World of Warcraft,
we have more subscribers before the next expansion comes out
uh than in any other time in, in the life of an expansion, right?
So normally we would see a,
a drop off that would continue and then it pops up when the next expansion comes out,
you see that, that nice big,
you know, uh
increase, which is really,
so that trajectory happened just as our live services
was kicking in as we were making commitments.
Um
And so we're, you know, we're feeling pretty good about, you know, where,
where we are now and, and crises averted,
but we have to stay vigilant, right?
We have to stay on top of our community.
We have to continue to deliver things that excite them.
I think I've covered some of this. I wanna make sure. So,
um
biggest lessons for us that I wanted to impart to you is that players want evolution.
You know, they, these communities are deeply invested in the games and they,
they don't want to leave your game, don't give them a reason to leave, you know,
give them a reason to stay.
And community sentiment
during Shadowlands was a real wake up call for us.
What our players wanted had fundamentally changed and we hadn't recognized that.
So we had to throw out our old playbook
that had worked for us for,
you know,
18 years at that point.
And now we're crafting a new playbook,
but our players are co authoring it with us.
Uh I think I, I think I pretty much covered it.
So uh our
motto uh on top of, of, of our mission statement, which is was original and is true
today
is to honor the past
and forge the future.
So with that,
I want to thank you
and I think we have dr we have just a couple of minutes.
Ok? If anybody wants to ask a question,
head up to the mic if you want.
Uh it's right behind you there. If you, if you don't mind,
do my best
on this side. He,
hi. Hi, how you doing, John?
Um
Ben Fox. Uh I was at Blizzard for a little while.
Uh running uh some, some data uh applications.
And I'm curious where I saw some of the, the data information that you provided on,
you know, how well the the game has, has done over the years.
Where do you see that kind of taking you in the future?
And how big of AAA part will data play and
how you evolve the game and continue to move forward?
Because data has a significant part of the game right now. We, we have a
uh a very close relationship between our product management team and our DEV team.
As I said, we have a dedicated life services team.
We actually have an associate game director, Jeremy
Fel, that is his life.
And uh if you, if any of you knew the history of Feasel
um
in
Mian area, you know, we were,
we need a little more time and we're like, hey
Feasel,
go create something for us to keep the players busy
and he went crazy and created the Timeless aisle.
Uh So it's, and it's, it's in his DNA. I think he's the right person to lead it, but
they work closely with our, our, our PM group.
And, and we literally do weekly review of
what are the things we'd like to do,
what are the things our players would like us to do?
And we use a kind of a methodology to, to stack rank, you know,
but the how, how big an effort is it to do that and you know,
how much excitement do we think our, our engagement is like,
how we want to measure things we'll get from our players.
We also have put a lot of effort into variety of activities
and not over index on, hey, it's just for the Raiders or the, you know, the,
the battle grounds folks.
But,
you know, even for the folks, folks that are there to just kind of role play and,
and go out and be in the world together,
we wanna make sure we're giving them new content.
Yep.
Yeah. Uh
Hi. Uh I just have a question. I thank you for the talk was great.
But how do you engage new players that are coming to offer first time?
They, they can feel left out with so many expansions, so many stuff to do,
they can feel left out because they're just coming to the game after 20 years.
-- How do you cater to those -- gamers? Yeah. Good question. And
you know, this is an area that we, we have to continue to evolve.
But what we introduced is
when you, when you first come in, if you start from the very beginning,
you know, you go to a special place called Exiles reach,
don't be thwarted by that terrible name.
Um But you actually are there with other new players and you level to,
to 10 essentially
and you get to know the ropes of how to play the game.
And we kind of walk you through all the mechanics of it.
And from that point, you, you will, once the next expansion is out,
you'll go into dragon flight and you'll level up to maximum there.
And hopefully, you know, we try to keep that group of people together.
So we'll even suggest a realm that you can go to that, that group will be in.
Um But a lot of people don't enter that way and most people are, you know,
they're or not most people, but a lot of people, their friends will say, hey,
come and play well with me.
And so we offer a boost to them.
Uh And in that case,
they go right into max level and they can play right along with their friends.
But, you know, as you pointed out, well, has got a lot of,
of complexity and depth to it.
And so we encourage friends to play together and kind of, you know,
show them the cool stuff to do and, you know, here's the D OS and don't of, of, you know,
how to down this boss.
Uh But I think that's an, that's an a, a area for us to, to grow as well.
I mean, I think watching how new players are coming in, what's exciting for them,
what isn't,
you know, how much time commitment, you know, do they feel comfortable with?
And I think that's an area you'll see us, you know,
fine tune quite a bit over the next few years.
Thank you.
Thanks.
Hi. So uh when we will have a universities, 30 years old,
there is a difficulty when it comes to keeping consistent and
delivering on the continuity of story,
especially when you have other mediums like books, comics, et cetera.
Are there any
lessons or any interesting challenges that you've had to overcome
to get to the point that you are today?
Yeah, I mean, most of the uh so the question was really to
creating cohesion and consistency across
our stories in various forms of media.
So, uh one of the things we do is that we review all of it, you know, so
re re read the books, read the comic books, look at the board games,
um
you know, review the movie, you know.
Uh and, you know,
that's uh honestly a big part of Chris Matson's
job now he's returned uh to work with us
uh because it's so important, right? You want characters to be true to their,
you know, their nature, you know, and their motivations.
Um And we'll continue to explore, you know, other forms of media because, you know,
that's a great way for people to, to get to know the universe.
We're excited about it.
We think, you know, there's a lot of great parable parables and,
and lessons in, in, in, wow, and the way the denizens of
azoth,
you know, behave and treat each other.
Uh
But we do, we do monitor all that.
We don't just throw it out there and, and,
and let you know anybody do what they want with the universe.
But you know, that being said as, as you point out it's 30 years there, time to time,
we even have our own inconsistencies.
Um We've established databases to be able to go back and track. Ok.
What exactly did Kag Gar say? And
you know what was Madi's thing? So,
yeah, thank you so much.
Thanks.
Yeah,
yeah, I'll probably,
I'll probably have to end it because I think Drew wants to drag map.
Let me take your question and then uh
-- OK, go ahead. First -- of all. Thank you for the presentation and this amazing game.
So I'm a big fan.
I just want to ask,
um maybe what was the role of intellectual property in building your franchise?
Maybe you can share some priorities or challenges in these terms.
You know,
it's funny and we didn't set out to build a universe that would last 30 years.
But that's why I wanted to show some of the decisions we made along the way that,
that worked out really well towards it.
Uh A couple of years ago, we, we reorganized and, you know,
that's how I became general manager and that's a big part of my job is to,
you know, safeguard Warcraft, uh you know, as an intellectual property.
Uh But I'm a developer, you know, and so I think of that through the games that we make.
And so
we will always be central in games.
You know, uh if you look at something like marble,
they're always central in comic books, new characters were created there.
Um Story was created there in the movies and all in the games were an offshoot of that.
And I think for us it's the games, you know,
we'll express the story first through the games
and then, you know, we'll look for cool and new things to do and find, you know,
different ways for you to experience warcraft in other media.
But games will be the center for that.
Thank you.
Thank you all. Thank you so much.