My name is Martin Thorson True and I'm a senior technical artist and I've been in
senior technical artist and I've been in the industry for about 13
the industry for about 13 years. Um, the last game I helped out
years. Um, the last game I helped out was Witcher 3. A small disclaimer
was Witcher 3. A small disclaimer though, I am no longer employed by CD
though, I am no longer employed by CD Project Red. I moved on, but I was
Project Red. I moved on, but I was allowed to do this anyway.
allowed to do this anyway. So, welcome to content optimization
So, welcome to content optimization pipeline for an openw world game.
I will start with a statement that artist they can do amazing
artist they can do amazing things beautiful things is how we
show this is in-game by the way. Uh but they can also do things like
way. Uh but they can also do things like this and this is not to bash on any
this and this is not to bash on any artist. It's just stuff that seeps
artist. It's just stuff that seeps through the cracks. Uh, I call this Mesh
through the cracks. Uh, I call this Mesh Monster. I have no idea what it is, but
Monster. I have no idea what it is, but it's in there.
it's in there. Um, they also like to do stuff like
this. This one about 5% of the actual mesh is above
one about 5% of the actual mesh is above ground. The rest is
ground. The rest is below. So, Titanic.
below. So, Titanic. Yeah. Also, artistic creativity as I
Yeah. Also, artistic creativity as I call it.
call it. It's the same here. 30% is above ground,
It's the same here. 30% is above ground, 70% is below
70% is below ground. Uh, one famous asset we had at
ground. Uh, one famous asset we had at city project was the chicken
city project was the chicken bucket. And that one has 1 and a half
bucket. And that one has 1 and a half million
triangles. And you can imagine it was a big on the screen. Um, it was very
big on the screen. Um, it was very expensive chickens.
So uh this presentation will be in four parts. Why we well you saw how we did
parts. Why we well you saw how we did the optimization, the outcome and what
the optimization, the outcome and what we learned.
we learned. So
why there there was a need to find something that was robust and scalable
something that was robust and scalable to the everchanging demands of an open
to the everchanging demands of an open world game
world game production. We needed to find the assets
production. We needed to find the assets um that needed the extra love and
um that needed the extra love and attention.
attention. Um, we did not have that many post or
Um, we did not have that many post or pre-export
pre-export checks and we had approximately 500,000
checks and we had approximately 500,000 entities placed. That doesn't mean they
entities placed. That doesn't mean they are unique. It just placed entities.
are unique. It just placed entities. We could also change the entities inside
We could also change the entities inside in the inside our editor like give them
in the inside our editor like give them more collision shapes, merge meshes, add
more collision shapes, merge meshes, add extra loads,
extra loads, uh add
uh add materials. We could also author assets
materials. We could also author assets like materials, um particle effects,
like materials, um particle effects, shaders. And inside the editor, we also
shaders. And inside the editor, we also have certain components like light
have certain components like light components, sound components, and
components, sound components, and vegetation. All of these costs, all of
vegetation. All of these costs, all of these need to be
optimized. So, how did we do it? We created this. I call it the
it? We created this. I call it the database
database viewer. Um, I will go more into detail
viewer. Um, I will go more into detail on this later, but it's a database back
on this later, but it's a database back end and a small viewer on top of it.
end and a small viewer on top of it. with the
world. The the general layout of uh the Redkit engine is that we have a world,
Redkit engine is that we have a world, we have layers and world has properties
we have layers and world has properties as well. And layers have
as well. And layers have properties. Inside layers, we have
properties. Inside layers, we have entities and they have also properties.
entities and they have also properties. And inside entities, we have components
And inside entities, we have components and they all have properties.
and they all have properties. Um, we needed something to iterate
Um, we needed something to iterate through the worlds and the layers to
through the worlds and the layers to find certain properties that we were
find certain properties that we were interested in like size, vert count,
interested in like size, vert count, materials, uh, radius of a light and
materials, uh, radius of a light and whatever you actually wanted. So, we
whatever you actually wanted. So, we needed something to iterate
needed something to iterate through. We did. We queried all those
through. We did. We queried all those properties we needed and then every time
properties we needed and then every time we found something, we spit that out as
we found something, we spit that out as a one string inside a text file. Like I
a one string inside a text file. Like I said, we needed something
said, we needed something fast to implement because we're in full
fast to implement because we're in full production. Um, so this was the
production. Um, so this was the solution. I'm not saying it's the
solution. I'm not saying it's the optimal solution. This was our solution.
optimal solution. This was our solution. Uh so we everything was found was put
Uh so we everything was found was put into uh a text file that is looking like
into uh a text file that is looking like this. So it's an SQL statement basically
this. So it's an SQL statement basically just
just saying insert into
saying insert into blah. So with this text file, it's not a
blah. So with this text file, it's not a database yet, but with this text file,
database yet, but with this text file, we can iterate through this text file
we can iterate through this text file and
and uh create the
uh create the database. This ended up being several
database. This ended up being several files depending on where in the world
files depending on where in the world you
you were. The files, some of them became
were. The files, some of them became huge, 2 GB of text.
huge, 2 GB of text. Um, but with those files, like I said,
Um, but with those files, like I said, we used Python. We iterated over each
we used Python. We iterated over each line and created the database. And this
line and created the database. And this is where all the fun and magic
is where all the fun and magic comes. Anyone could come to me or they
comes. Anyone could come to me or they could do it themselves, come up with
could do it themselves, come up with what they wanted to know. And for
what they wanted to know. And for example, give me all the meshes that has
example, give me all the meshes that has no loads and the triangle count is
no loads and the triangle count is larger than 2,000 and the outer height
larger than 2,000 and the outer height distance is greater than 50
distance is greater than 50 m and we can find all the assets. It
m and we can find all the assets. It will kick out a list of where in the
will kick out a list of where in the world it was, the name, the layer, the
world it was, the name, the layer, the position,
position, everything. Another example would be
everything. Another example would be give me the position and the radius of
give me the position and the radius of the light to cast shadows. It's a
the light to cast shadows. It's a feasible
question. Uh last example, give me the vertex count and bounding box bounding
vertex count and bounding box bounding box area of mesh
components. So this tool did all that. Um just to see if I can
Um just to see if I can there quick
there quick overview artist or anyone using this
overview artist or anyone using this this was on the server so everybody had
this was on the server so everybody had access to it. uh they could write a
access to it. uh they could write a statement if they knew how to do SQL
statement if they knew how to do SQL statements, write it over here. They
statements, write it over here. They could execute, get the output on the
could execute, get the output on the right hand side. If they liked what they
right hand side. If they liked what they did, they could save the command and
did, they could save the command and since it was on the server, everyone had
since it was on the server, everyone had access to their commands as well. And
access to their commands as well. And the commands went over here and you can
the commands went over here and you can double click it to use it. So you don't
double click it to use it. So you don't have to write it again, of course.
have to write it again, of course. Um, if you wanted to find it, you can
Um, if you wanted to find it, you can see on the map exactly where it was. So,
see on the map exactly where it was. So, you can see
you can see this light with radius of 200 m or
this light with radius of 200 m or whatever it was there, you can find it.
whatever it was there, you can find it. You see it on the map, you can click on
You see it on the map, you can click on this map and that will actually teleport
this map and that will actually teleport you. If you had the editor open, it will
you. If you had the editor open, it will move you over there directly. So, the
move you over there directly. So, the artist could do an SQL statement, wear
artist could do an SQL statement, wear the light and directly drop you in at
the light and directly drop you in at that position.
that position. Um, you could save the image so it's an
Um, you could save the image so it's an artist can actually see all the broken
artist can actually see all the broken meshes or loads or whatnot. They can get
meshes or loads or whatnot. They can get the image and see all the dots on the
the image and see all the dots on the screen. The image was saved in 4K for
screen. The image was saved in 4K for the people who wanted to zoom to see,
the people who wanted to zoom to see, oh, I'm in this corner of this house.
oh, I'm in this corner of this house. So uh city project red also had uh
So uh city project red also had uh Google solutions.
Google solutions. So all the data went up to Google to
So all the data went up to Google to Google docs and this is how we presented
Google docs and this is how we presented it for the people that actually needed
it for the people that actually needed to help out fixing it. We presented
to help out fixing it. We presented lists of names and asset and what was
lists of names and asset and what was wrong and they went to Google
Sheets. We um as you yeah just said that uh as you see we could also have
uh as you see we could also have different
different pre-defined images. I will show you two
pre-defined images. I will show you two next slide where we call it the vertex
next slide where we call it the vertex density map, high foliage map, uh light
density map, high foliage map, uh light radius map. We we could just add more of
radius map. We we could just add more of these images.
these images. Um and this slide is already done.
Um and this slide is already done. So this is the uh vertex density map and
So this is the uh vertex density map and the high foliage count map. Just to show
the high foliage count map. Just to show you a little bit what what we did by
you a little bit what what we did by default on the left hand side we have
default on the left hand side we have vertex density map and basically what
vertex density map and basically what that was we took the vertex count
that was we took the vertex count uh and looked at the bounding box of
uh and looked at the bounding box of that entity to just get a idea of how
that entity to just get a idea of how many vertices were in a certain area.
many vertices were in a certain area. With this, of course, you can see
With this, of course, you can see directly that there's certain areas that
directly that there's certain areas that are a little bit more dense. Most likely
are a little bit more dense. Most likely that is the area we need to optimize,
that is the area we need to optimize, but it can also be used for the level
but it can also be used for the level designers to see, oh, this area hasn't
designers to see, oh, this area hasn't been populated. Maybe we want to add
been populated. Maybe we want to add more stuff over here.
more stuff over here. The um high foliage count map was just
The um high foliage count map was just for to see that okay in these areas we
for to see that okay in these areas we need to start trimming off the trees or
grass since everything was uh uh statements that we can kick off every
statements that we can kick off every week. This is basically how it looked
week. This is basically how it looked like. every week, every Monday, I kicked
like. every week, every Monday, I kicked off the same SQL statements
off the same SQL statements um so that we could do a burndown chart.
um so that we could do a burndown chart. So connected to Google, grabbed all the
So connected to Google, grabbed all the data that was uh there
data that was uh there and as you can see we can have a nice
and as you can see we can have a nice burndown shot week to week. So they can
burndown shot week to week. So they can work during the week. we can put in
work during the week. we can put in strike teams to one week we needed to
strike teams to one week we needed to fix all the LODs and the next week we
fix all the LODs and the next week we can see if it was fixed or not and this
can see if it was fixed or not and this just helped us to focus what we needed
just helped us to focus what we needed to fix during that
week. So the outcome here are some amazing
outcome here are some amazing findings. We found a shadow casting
findings. We found a shadow casting light that was 4,000 m in diameter.
light that was 4,000 m in diameter. And I'm in America. I have no idea what
And I'm in America. I have no idea what that is in
that is in miles or in feet. Sorry. But it's huge.
miles or in feet. Sorry. But it's huge. And the funny part is as well when I
And the funny part is as well when I looked at the layer, I think the layer
looked at the layer, I think the layer was cave. So it's
underground. Another amazing find was we found, again, not bashing on any artist,
found, again, not bashing on any artist, stuff sips through the crack. It's
stuff sips through the crack. It's everywhere. We found animated bows.
everywhere. We found animated bows. These were about 200. They were all
These were about 200. They were all underground. The outer height distance
underground. The outer height distance was almost a
was almost a kilometer. And because they were
kilometer. And because they were animated, they had skinning data and
animated, they had skinning data and bones. Uh I also found test
bones. Uh I also found test assets. And this is a couple of week
assets. And this is a couple of week before final, the first
final. Um, we found a quarter of a million
Um, we found a quarter of a million vertices on one
vertices on one ship. We found over 200 meshes that had
ship. We found over 200 meshes that had 2,000 triangles and no loads. This is an
2,000 triangles and no loads. This is an open world game. You need loads. A lot
open world game. You need loads. A lot of
of them. And we found that in one place
them. And we found that in one place there was 105,000 grass
there was 105,000 grass entities in an area that was smaller
entities in an area that was smaller than 32 square meters.
than 32 square meters. And the funny part in this one is that
And the funny part in this one is that this had nothing to do with the artist.
this had nothing to do with the artist. This was actually an implementation
This was actually an implementation error of our folio system. So the
error of our folio system. So the programmer loved this. He could find
programmer loved this. He could find this area. He could quickly go there
this area. He could quickly go there look at a code and yes he said awesome
look at a code and yes he said awesome now he can fix it because he had a repro
now he can fix it because he had a repro case. He saw where it was and the
case. He saw where it was and the programmer could fix this problem
programmer could fix this problem because it was programming issue and not
because it was programming issue and not an art issue. So it's not just artists
an art issue. So it's not just artists that use this tool and could use it even
programmers. So the results because of all this data or we could focus on
all this data or we could focus on certain areas and certain
certain areas and certain assets and we could put in strike teams.
assets and we could put in strike teams. So this week you can look at only the
So this week you can look at only the LODs and they have all the list to do
LODs and they have all the list to do that.
that. Uh it was very efficient in that way to
Uh it was very efficient in that way to know exactly what you're looking for
know exactly what you're looking for with all the lists. It was accurate
with all the lists. It was accurate because this is taken from the build. So
because this is taken from the build. So in theory, if we ship that day, this is
in theory, if we ship that day, this is the data that would go on
the data that would go on disk. So it's accurate. You had all the
disk. So it's accurate. You had all the paths to the assets like layers and
paths to the assets like layers and entities, components, it was all there.
entities, components, it was all there. So
So it's and so what after that we had what
it's and so what after that we had what did we learn from
did we learn from this? First of what went
this? First of what went wrong the huge text
wrong the huge text files. So have anyone tried to open a 2
files. So have anyone tried to open a 2 GB of text in Notepad or
GB of text in Notepad or Notepad++? Basically it coughs and says
Notepad++? Basically it coughs and says no not at all. Um, so don't do that.
no not at all. Um, so don't do that. That's horrible. And on top of that,
That's horrible. And on top of that, because it's SQL statements line by
because it's SQL statements line by line, if one line is
line, if one line is wrong, the database will not be
wrong, the database will not be generated. So you have to rebuild it
generated. So you have to rebuild it again and circumvent
again and circumvent that. The next statement is trying to
that. The next statement is trying to add everything into the database. And I
add everything into the database. And I will try to explain this much better. If
will try to explain this much better. If we have house A over here and we have
we have house A over here and we have the same house A over here, different
the same house A over here, different layers or maybe the same layer, but they
layers or maybe the same layer, but they are the same house, just different
are the same house, just different positions. So this is a design flow from
positions. So this is a design flow from my part, but we were in a hurry. Sorry.
my part, but we were in a hurry. Sorry. Yeah. Um, what the script, the code did
Yeah. Um, what the script, the code did was it found this house, put that as one
was it found this house, put that as one line of SQL statement saying, "Hey, I
line of SQL statement saying, "Hey, I found house a position blah." it
found house a position blah." it continued. It found house A again and
continued. It found house A again and wrote a complete new line with the same
wrote a complete new line with the same data but just a new
data but just a new position. So that's the reason the text
position. So that's the reason the text files are two gigs. If I would do it
files are two gigs. If I would do it again, I would probably try to just say
again, I would probably try to just say here's house
here's house A as a table and then I would have
A as a table and then I would have positions of houses A as a table. houses
positions of houses A as a table. houses and positions
and positions um would also
um would also significantly lower the actual size of
significantly lower the actual size of the text
the text file. Um there was no real-time update
file. Um there was no real-time update to the database. So if an artist fixed
to the database. So if an artist fixed stuff, they had to wait for the next
stuff, they had to wait for the next build to execute the SQL statements and
build to execute the SQL statements and from the tool. Um if I would do
from the tool. Um if I would do everything again, I wouldn't do textile
everything again, I wouldn't do textile either. I would just trying to put the
either. I would just trying to put the database directly into the
database directly into the editor. Um, the last point
editor. Um, the last point is my findings because we work with
is my findings because we work with Google Docs. I could not find it could
Google Docs. I could not find it could be me. So, no hot feelings Google. I'm
be me. So, no hot feelings Google. I'm just saying I could not get the Google
just saying I could not get the Google API to create pie charts from the Google
API to create pie charts from the Google Excel sheets. So I had to use a separate
Excel sheets. So I had to use a separate lib to do that for example and that's
lib to do that for example and that's just thing we had Google we did all
just thing we had Google we did all things but I need to use other libs just
things but I need to use other libs just to kick out the burndown charts I would
to kick out the burndown charts I would love it to be one
love it to be one lib so what went
lib so what went right like I said it was useful for more
right like I said it was useful for more than just the artist level designer can
than just the artist level designer can find areas they wanted to populate uh
find areas they wanted to populate uh programmers can find errors
programmers can find errors um we found things that we didn't know
um we found things that we didn't know exist. Uh the data was accurate because
exist. Uh the data was accurate because it like I said it came from the build.
it like I said it came from the build. It was fast to search through because
It was fast to search through because SQL that's the reason I chose
SQL that's the reason I chose SQL. Um and by having this image, this
SQL. Um and by having this image, this is something very amazing. Um during my
is something very amazing. Um during my time uh I've learned that if you give an
time uh I've learned that if you give an artist an image of a map and saying
artist an image of a map and saying these 200 red dots are errors, they are
these 200 red dots are errors, they are more much more happier than having an
more much more happier than having an Excel sheet with 200 of lines. They're
Excel sheet with 200 of lines. They're saying these are the
saying these are the errors. Somehow having an image makes it
errors. Somehow having an image makes it real. So it's super useful.
So uh I want to thank um a couple of people and I will butcher their names I
people and I will butcher their names I say sorry already. Um Kristoff
say sorry already. Um Kristoff Trishin, Patrick
Trishin, Patrick Drosvski, Emil
Drosvski, Emil Givvenski,
Givvenski, Wukosski, Jose Tesera, Costas
Wukosski, Jose Tesera, Costas Mikolopoulos and CD Project Red.
Mikolopoulos and CD Project Red. Thank
Thank [Applause]
you. If you have questions, there are mics
everywhere. Otherwise, you can uh grab me outside out there. Yes. Hello. So,
me outside out there. Yes. Hello. So, first of all, thank you for the talk.
first of all, thank you for the talk. It's really informative. Um I just
It's really informative. Um I just wonder um so you said that uh you guys
wonder um so you said that uh you guys have the database and then you guys were
have the database and then you guys were able to use the uh queries SQR
able to use the uh queries SQR statements uh to to to find something
statements uh to to to find something that you want were was really impossible
that you want were was really impossible to find during development. How much did
to find during development. How much did you guys involve testers into this
you guys involve testers into this process running this uh you know just
process running this uh you know just running this uh queries and then to find
running this uh queries and then to find errors? These queries were actually
errors? These queries were actually basically me sitting on Mondays and
basically me sitting on Mondays and Tuesdays and to create these sheets. But
Tuesdays and to create these sheets. But the artist when they saw the tool, they
the artist when they saw the tool, they started using it themselves. So the
started using it themselves. So the artist just open up the tool and they
artist just open up the tool and they started to find their own issues and
started to find their own issues and they started to write some crazy SQL
they started to write some crazy SQL statements that was huge. Yeah. So that
statements that was huge. Yeah. So that was super awesome. So we did not have
was super awesome. So we did not have testers. The artist directly went on.
testers. The artist directly went on. Okay. Thank you. Yeah.
I was wondering if you could talk a little bit about uh time series data
little bit about uh time series data about did you design the database so
about did you design the database so that you could look at historical trends
that you could look at historical trends that way or did you do all of that by
that way or did you do all of that by analyzing your Google Sheets X plus
analyzing your Google Sheets X plus facto there was just Google sheets
facto there was just Google sheets analyzing so during this time I also had
analyzing so during this time I also had to learn
to learn SQL so it's it's it was it was awesome
SQL so it's it's it was it was awesome plus C++ and all that. Yeah.
plus C++ and all that. Yeah. Thank you. Okay. Thank you.
Thank you. Okay. Thank you. [Applause]
[Applause] [Music]