[Music] So about this talk,
So about this talk, not to flatter myself or anything, but
not to flatter myself or anything, but if this is not the most important talk
if this is not the most important talk you will hear, here we go. If this is
you will hear, here we go. If this is not the most important talk you're going
not the most important talk you're going to hear at this conference, this is
to hear at this conference, this is certainly the most relevant. There is
certainly the most relevant. There is not a single aspect of game development
not a single aspect of game development that does not touch on IP. So to that
that does not touch on IP. So to that extent uh here we go. So as far as who I
extent uh here we go. So as far as who I am
am uh I work with Interactive Entertainment
uh I work with Interactive Entertainment Law Group. We are based out of Elsa
Law Group. We are based out of Elsa Gundo, California which is quite nearby.
Gundo, California which is quite nearby. Um and we represent game developers
Um and we represent game developers almost exclusively. Almost all of our
almost exclusively. Almost all of our clients are interactive entertainment
clients are interactive entertainment clients. I mean we have
clients. I mean we have independent developers, we have
independent developers, we have publishers, we have uh you know just
publishers, we have uh you know just designers in and of themselves but we
designers in and of themselves but we represent all aspects of of the game
represent all aspects of of the game development community whether it be
development community whether it be mobile console uh digital sales uh
mobile console uh digital sales uh straight to PC.
straight to PC. So this is what we do. This is our stock
So this is what we do. This is our stock and trade and almost everything that we
and trade and almost everything that we do involves IP transactions. So that
do involves IP transactions. So that includes licensing which is something
includes licensing which is something that we're going to go in quite a bit
that we're going to go in quite a bit here.
here. So this is just to give you an idea of
So this is just to give you an idea of what we are going to cover. First I'm
what we are going to cover. First I'm going to give you kind of a summary of
going to give you kind of a summary of what intellectual property is. I'm going
what intellectual property is. I'm going to try to let the slides speak for
to try to let the slides speak for themselves and just harp on the points
themselves and just harp on the points that you need to take away from this.
that you need to take away from this. Otherwise this talk could go on for
Otherwise this talk could go on for about five or six hours and nobody wants
about five or six hours and nobody wants to deal with that. So uh after that
to deal with that. So uh after that we're going to talk about how to protect
we're going to talk about how to protect your IP and uh what your IP portfolio
your IP and uh what your IP portfolio actually is so you have an idea of what
actually is so you have an idea of what it is you're trying to protect.
So the first one uh the first thing that we have to take into consideration is
we have to take into consideration is going to be what are intellectual
going to be what are intellectual property rights? What are these rights
property rights? What are these rights that we're talking about? And uh the one
that we're talking about? And uh the one thing that you really need to to take
thing that you really need to to take away from this is that there is no
away from this is that there is no straightforward answer when it comes to
straightforward answer when it comes to intellectual property. It's something
intellectual property. It's something that you can't really touch. You can't
that you can't really touch. You can't really get your hands on and quite
really get your hands on and quite frankly neither can the law. So there
frankly neither can the law. So there are a lot of um different considerations
are a lot of um different considerations that that come into play whenever we're
that that come into play whenever we're talking about intellectual property. And
talking about intellectual property. And the most common answer you will ever
the most common answer you will ever hear to any question you ask of any
hear to any question you ask of any lawyer is going to be it depends. I'm
lawyer is going to be it depends. I'm sorry. It depends.
sorry. It depends. There is no yes or no when it comes to
There is no yes or no when it comes to intellectual property law. So everything
intellectual property law. So everything is going to be on a case- by case basis.
And uh there are certain types of IP. Obviously I think most people are
Obviously I think most people are probably pretty familiar with the big
probably pretty familiar with the big three which is copyright, trademark,
three which is copyright, trademark, patent. These are the ones that we
patent. These are the ones that we always hear about. It's part of the
always hear about. It's part of the trips agreements. It's something that
trips agreements. It's something that you see talked about every day when we
you see talked about every day when we hear about, you know, trademark issues
hear about, you know, trademark issues in the King case. Um, patent trolls,
in the King case. Um, patent trolls, things like that. Uh, but there are also
things like that. Uh, but there are also a lot of nonfederal IP issues that come
a lot of nonfederal IP issues that come into play and, you know, so the ones
into play and, you know, so the ones that don't really get talked about as
that don't really get talked about as much, although there has been some
much, although there has been some issues recently with the whole Oculus
issues recently with the whole Oculus Rift trade secret issue.
Rift trade secret issue. By and large, they don't really get as
By and large, they don't really get as much attention as they should. And
much attention as they should. And that's kind of a problem because when it
that's kind of a problem because when it comes down to cases, literally a common
comes down to cases, literally a common law case for a name and likeness or
law case for a name and likeness or defamation issue is going to be just as
defamation issue is going to be just as costly and troublesome as a copyright
costly and troublesome as a copyright claim. So it's important to bear in mind
claim. So it's important to bear in mind that the entire body of intellectual
that the entire body of intellectual property law is something that you need
property law is something that you need to be mindful of.
to be mindful of. So first question is what is copyright?
So first question is what is copyright? And you have the textbook explanation
And you have the textbook explanation here. I just kind of want to briefly
here. I just kind of want to briefly look it over. Uh the one thing that you
look it over. Uh the one thing that you really need to pay attention to here is
really need to pay attention to here is that original does not necessarily mean
that original does not necessarily mean unique. Just because it's something that
unique. Just because it's something that you've created originally, there is
you've created originally, there is something called independent origin,
something called independent origin, which means that two people can create
which means that two people can create identical works so long as neither one
identical works so long as neither one has access to one another. There is no
has access to one another. There is no copyright infringement. So that's
copyright infringement. So that's something to bear in mind. Original does
something to bear in mind. Original does not mean unique.
And the other thing that you absolutely have to pay attention to with this is it
have to pay attention to with this is it has to be fixed. It actually has to be
has to be fixed. It actually has to be in in some sort of physical medium. You
in in some sort of physical medium. You have to be able to physically touch it
have to be able to physically touch it or see it or have some record of of your
or see it or have some record of of your work.
work. So what
So what are copyrights? Like what this is kind
are copyrights? Like what this is kind of the plain English version of of of
of the plain English version of of of what copyrights are. Uh it goes beyond
what copyrights are. Uh it goes beyond Eureka. Uh, one of the most dangerous
Eureka. Uh, one of the most dangerous things, one thing I hear all too often,
things, one thing I hear all too often, uh, one of the most dangerous things a
uh, one of the most dangerous things a developer can say is, "Let me tell you
developer can say is, "Let me tell you my game idea whenever they haven't done
my game idea whenever they haven't done anything with it." And the reason that
anything with it." And the reason that is is because there is no protection for
is is because there is no protection for your idea, especially if you're
your idea, especially if you're broadcasting it. Uh, there is no
broadcasting it. Uh, there is no copyright protection. There is no
copyright protection. There is no trademark protection, but uh, you don't
trademark protection, but uh, you don't have any real protections for your
have any real protections for your ideas. So let me tell you about your my
ideas. So let me tell you about your my game idea is not something that you ever
game idea is not something that you ever want to say as a developer.
want to say as a developer. As far as the methods of fixation um as
As far as the methods of fixation um as I as you can see you have books saved
I as you can see you have books saved documents um as so long as you have some
documents um as so long as you have some record of your copyrighted work
record of your copyrighted work something that you can submit to the
something that you can submit to the copyright office if you decide to
copyright office if you decide to register uh you will be protected so
register uh you will be protected so long as it's obviously not infringing.
long as it's obviously not infringing. it has to be for a legal purpose. So,
it has to be for a legal purpose. So, that's another thing to keep in mind. If
that's another thing to keep in mind. If your work isn't in and of itself
your work isn't in and of itself infringing, um you're you're probably
infringing, um you're you're probably not going to obtain the types of
not going to obtain the types of protections that you want.
protections that you want. So, what copyright is not, as I said,
So, what copyright is not, as I said, it's not your idea. It's a this is an
it's not your idea. It's a this is an issue that I have to harp on a lot
issue that I have to harp on a lot because um this is the most common area
because um this is the most common area where people get confused. It's like,
where people get confused. It's like, this is my idea. They stole my idea.
this is my idea. They stole my idea. Isn't it protected by copyright? Well,
Isn't it protected by copyright? Well, no, it's not unless you've actually done
no, it's not unless you've actually done something with it. Um, and even a
something with it. Um, and even a treatment, things like that, like, and
treatment, things like that, like, and what I mean by treatment, if you're not
what I mean by treatment, if you're not quite familiar, it's basically like a
quite familiar, it's basically like a summary, um, or, you know, like a design
summary, um, or, you know, like a design document. A good example, something like
document. A good example, something like that can give you the requisite
that can give you the requisite copyright protection that you need, but
copyright protection that you need, but until you've taken your your work or
until you've taken your your work or your idea to that stage, you're not
your idea to that stage, you're not going to be entitled to the type of
going to be entitled to the type of protection that you probably want.
protection that you probably want. uh as far as what else it is, it can't
uh as far as what else it is, it can't be something that you can use and it's
be something that you can use and it's it can't be useful. It can't be um
it can't be useful. It can't be um it can't be a product or service, for
it can't be a product or service, for example. It has to be something that
example. It has to be something that is purely creative and useless
is purely creative and useless in in in the simplest way to
in in in the simplest way to to put it. And
to put it. And I I don't want people to get confused by
I I don't want people to get confused by this. What I mean by that is that you
this. What I mean by that is that you can have creative components in a useful
can have creative components in a useful product. Um for example, the Coke bottle
product. Um for example, the Coke bottle is a good a good example. The Coke
is a good a good example. The Coke bottle is a good example of a lot of
bottle is a good example of a lot of things. Uh and and one of the ways is
things. Uh and and one of the ways is you know the actual design of the Coke
you know the actual design of the Coke bottle itself is separable from the um
bottle itself is separable from the um the function of the Coke bottle. So to a
the function of the Coke bottle. So to a certain extent, maybe not copyright, but
certain extent, maybe not copyright, but there going to be certain protections to
there going to be certain protections to that design itself that uh that you're
that design itself that uh that you're going to want to that that you need to
going to want to that that you need to take into consideration whenever um
so another thing, it's not perpetual. Um you do have a limited term. So 90
Um you do have a limited term. So 90 years from the life of the author, 120
years from the life of the author, 120 years from publication.
years from publication. Um,
Um, oh, what I was going to say about the
oh, what I was going to say about the usefulness, uh, a good example, probably
usefulness, uh, a good example, probably the best example that we can talk about
the best example that we can talk about here is game mechanics versus the
here is game mechanics versus the creative content of a game. So, the
creative content of a game. So, the mechanics themselves are going to be
mechanics themselves are going to be considered
considered there's always I'll talk about software
there's always I'll talk about software patents later, but there's always going
patents later, but there's always going to be an issue. Mechanics are never
to be an issue. Mechanics are never going to be copyrightable because they
going to be copyrightable because they they are a method. They are a process.
they are a method. They are a process. They are something that is useful.
They are something that is useful. Uh but the creative elements, the
Uh but the creative elements, the characters, your story, uh the world you
characters, your story, uh the world you create, uh the music that you use, these
create, uh the music that you use, these are things that are going to be
are things that are going to be copyrightable and they kind of make your
copyrightable and they kind of make your work distinct, distinctive
work distinct, distinctive and they give you the copyright
and they give you the copyright protection that you want. So what is
protection that you want. So what is copyright infringement?
copyright infringement? Uh there are a few forms of infringement
Uh there are a few forms of infringement and the requirements that I have here
and the requirements that I have here for direct infringement but you also
for direct infringement but you also have contributo and vicarious
have contributo and vicarious infringement. A vicarious infringement
infringement. A vicarious infringement typically revolves around having a
typically revolves around having a financial stake in that infringement and
financial stake in that infringement and contributo infringement uh involves
contributo infringement uh involves actively facilitating that infringement.
actively facilitating that infringement. So it's a slightly different standard
So it's a slightly different standard from direct. The direct infringer is the
from direct. The direct infringer is the one who's actually doing the copying.
one who's actually doing the copying. the vicarious and contributo infringers.
the vicarious and contributo infringers. I'm sure you guys have probably heard of
I'm sure you guys have probably heard of Napster and Groster. That's where we
Napster and Groster. That's where we hear about these things. Uh that's where
hear about these things. Uh that's where you're going to have your your vicarious
you're going to have your your vicarious and and contributo infringement.
So, what are the rights you get whenever you get a copyright? Because it's not
you get a copyright? Because it's not something it's not a property right.
something it's not a property right. Well, it is, but it's not a physical
Well, it is, but it's not a physical property right. It's not like you get a
property right. It's not like you get a deed or a title. uh it's not something
deed or a title. uh it's not something that you can physically take a hold of
that you can physically take a hold of and carry with you. It's
and carry with you. It's intangible which is a problem in a lot
intangible which is a problem in a lot of cases because unless you have some
of cases because unless you have some record of that intellectual property uh
record of that intellectual property uh it's difficult to prove.
it's difficult to prove. So as far as the rights that you get
So as far as the rights that you get though obviously the right to reproduce
though obviously the right to reproduce uh the one thing that I really want you
uh the one thing that I really want you to take away here apart from derivative
to take away here apart from derivative works just be mindful of what a
works just be mindful of what a derivative work is uh is moral rights
derivative work is uh is moral rights and author's rights and I say that
and author's rights and I say that because um they are not commercial and
because um they are not commercial and they tie directly to the author. So even
they tie directly to the author. So even if you have a work for hire agreement
if you have a work for hire agreement for uh for instance if you're
for uh for instance if you're outsourcing to uh another company to do
outsourcing to uh another company to do some some work product for you or if you
some some work product for you or if you are you know contracting with an
are you know contracting with an independent contractor based out of
independent contractor based out of Europe uh they're going to be a body of
Europe uh they're going to be a body of rights that those individuals have that
rights that those individuals have that even if they have a work for hire
even if they have a work for hire agreement with you which is something
agreement with you which is something that we go into in licensing um
that we go into in licensing um you can't get rid of those rights.
you can't get rid of those rights. They're difficult to to wave away.
They're difficult to to wave away. They're difficult to to push away in any
They're difficult to to push away in any way. So, you need to have some sort of
way. So, you need to have some sort of workound in your agreements uh that
workound in your agreements uh that deals with those rights and and how to
deals with those rights and and how to address them so that they can't come
address them so that they can't come back later on and tell you, okay, well,
back later on and tell you, okay, well, we want you to pull this because we feel
we want you to pull this because we feel that it's uh it does not adequately
that it's uh it does not adequately represent what we we wanted to create.
So, a couple of notes. Um, defenses. I I don't harp a lot on this because at
I I don't harp a lot on this because at the end of the day, you have to bear in
the end of the day, you have to bear in mind that it's a defense, which means
mind that it's a defense, which means that somebody has to sue you first. And
that somebody has to sue you first. And ideally, if you're a developer, you
ideally, if you're a developer, you don't want it to ever get to that point.
don't want it to ever get to that point. Uh, you never want to be the target of a
Uh, you never want to be the target of a of a lawsuit. But, as far as what
of a lawsuit. But, as far as what defenses can be raised, as I said
defenses can be raised, as I said before, independent origin is a big one.
before, independent origin is a big one. Senapair uh is is is kind of another
Senapair uh is is is kind of another thing that you need to uh take into
thing that you need to uh take into consideration and that's something
consideration and that's something that's really really common. It's it's
that's really really common. It's it's kind of common to a genre. So the
kind of common to a genre. So the example that you might want to say is
example that you might want to say is like a zombie horror flick and you know
like a zombie horror flick and you know the zombies like the way that zombies
the zombies like the way that zombies move and things like that can be
move and things like that can be considered Santa affair.
considered Santa affair. Um
Um and and that will take it outside of the
and and that will take it outside of the scope of copyright protection.
scope of copyright protection. nominally uses this whenever a use is so
nominally uses this whenever a use is so minuscule that it's not really an issue.
minuscule that it's not really an issue. And there are also exceptions and every
And there are also exceptions and every few years the copyright office
few years the copyright office re-evaluates these exceptions and adds
re-evaluates these exceptions and adds new ones and the most recent ones this
new ones and the most recent ones this year happen to be parody and private
year happen to be parody and private copies. Note that these were not in the
copies. Note that these were not in the actual DMCA until this year. So while
actual DMCA until this year. So while these usually fell under the purview of
these usually fell under the purview of fair use and could be raised as a
fair use and could be raised as a defense, now they fall squarely within
defense, now they fall squarely within the copyright exceptions, which means
the copyright exceptions, which means that you can't really bring a claim even
that you can't really bring a claim even if uh if it qualifies as a parody or it
if uh if it qualifies as a parody or it qualifi qualifies as a private copy. Now
qualifi qualifies as a private copy. Now the problem with that is that what is a
the problem with that is that what is a parody and this is something that is
highly disputed and it varies from from country to country from
from country to country from jurisdiction to jurisdiction circuit to
jurisdiction to jurisdiction circuit to circuit. Uh
circuit. Uh the EU standard of parodies is going to
the EU standard of parodies is going to be very different from the United States
be very different from the United States standard of parodies because we have
standard of parodies because we have very different senses of humor. Uh but
very different senses of humor. Uh but yeah, so again, this is where I have to
yeah, so again, this is where I have to say it depends. You don't know until it
say it depends. You don't know until it gets litigated.
gets litigated. So,
So, but it it is a clearly stated exception
but it it is a clearly stated exception now. So, it's something that you can you
now. So, it's something that you can you can you know take to the bank with you
can you know take to the bank with you if you if you do plan on implementing
if you if you do plan on implementing parodies in the way that you market your
parodies in the way that you market your product or in the way that you execute
product or in the way that you execute your product. Moving
your product. Moving on, we've got trademarks.
on, we've got trademarks. Um, this is again the legal definition.
Um, this is again the legal definition. I'm not going to recite it. Uh, the
I'm not going to recite it. Uh, the easiest way to understand trademarks
easiest way to understand trademarks that it is your brand. It is how you
that it is your brand. It is how you market yourself. It is how people
market yourself. It is how people identify you in the marketplace. It is
identify you in the marketplace. It is your logo. It is the
your logo. It is the way that your goodwill is reflected on
way that your goodwill is reflected on the world.
the world. Uh and you have some examples here. Some
Uh and you have some examples here. Some really interesting examples are going to
really interesting examples are going to be things like sound marks and those are
be things like sound marks and those are really fun. I did a talk on that uh
really fun. I did a talk on that uh pretty recently actually and uh it's
pretty recently actually and uh it's interesting how much audio plays a role
interesting how much audio plays a role in how we recognize things like I had
in how we recognize things like I had some examples like the Lord of the Rings
some examples like the Lord of the Rings music like
music like things like that can um can qualify you
things like that can um can qualify you for trademark pro protection. Some other
for trademark pro protection. Some other things that are uh pretty useful are
things that are uh pretty useful are like trade dress. And the cool thing
like trade dress. And the cool thing about trade dress is as far as your IP
about trade dress is as far as your IP portfolio goes, is that it can cover a
portfolio goes, is that it can cover a lot of things. It can cover like the
lot of things. It can cover like the look and feel of your product. Uh the
look and feel of your product. Uh the types of colors that you use, like your
types of colors that you use, like your color scheme, which may not be original
color scheme, which may not be original enough to qualify for copyright
enough to qualify for copyright protection. It can qualify you for trade
protection. It can qualify you for trade dress. So I have like I I represent a
dress. So I have like I I represent a lot of app developers. I I spent a lot
lot of app developers. I I spent a lot of time representing app developers when
of time representing app developers when I started out
I started out and um a lot of apps are really really
and um a lot of apps are really really simple like stupidly simple but they're
simple like stupidly simple but they're a lot of fun and people like them and uh
a lot of fun and people like them and uh they are very easy to infringe upon and
they are very easy to infringe upon and you can't always claim copyright
you can't always claim copyright protection to some of this stuff because
protection to some of this stuff because sometimes the only thing they seem to
sometimes the only thing they seem to claim are going to be the mechanics and
claim are going to be the mechanics and maybe some of the uh look and feel
maybe some of the uh look and feel elements like the UI trade dress is a
elements like the UI trade dress is a very good idea and and you know
very good idea and and you know trademark and unfair competition law is
trademark and unfair competition law is a very good way to protect those
a very good way to protect those particular elements that fall outside of
particular elements that fall outside of copyright protection but you still want
copyright protection but you still want to be able to you know send a send a cis
to be able to you know send a send a cis letter out for
so what is the trademark infringement standard and I also want to I I kind of
standard and I also want to I I kind of want to point out that trademarks don't
want to point out that trademarks don't really have a term uh they exist for as
really have a term uh they exist for as long as you use them now they can be
long as you use them now they can be abandoned and the the typical term for
abandoned and the the typical term for abandonment is 3 to 5 years and I'm not
abandonment is 3 to 5 years and I'm not saying this just for the US that is
saying this just for the US that is internationally
internationally um Egypt I think is 5 years but most
um Egypt I think is 5 years but most other countries are about three 3 to
other countries are about three 3 to five
five so abandonment just means that you're
so abandonment just means that you're not using it in commerce and token uses
not using it in commerce and token uses don't qualify so you actually have to be
don't qualify so you actually have to be actively using your brand in commerce
actively using your brand in commerce for it to qualify for trademark
for it to qualify for trademark protection it's actually is something
protection it's actually is something that is like going back
that is like going back as far as uh what it is. The the really
as far as uh what it is. The the really important thing to note about trademarks
important thing to note about trademarks is that you actually have to be using it
is that you actually have to be using it in commerce and whether that means
in commerce and whether that means you're using it to market your product.
you're using it to market your product. Uh you have to be selling something
Uh you have to be selling something under it essentially. And that doesn't
under it essentially. And that doesn't necessarily mean that
necessarily mean that you have to earn a profit.
you have to earn a profit. a lot of people don't. It also doesn't
a lot of people don't. It also doesn't mean that it doesn't apply to like
mean that it doesn't apply to like nonprofits and things like that. Um, it
nonprofits and things like that. Um, it when I say selling, it means that it has
when I say selling, it means that it has to be generating some kind of goodwill.
to be generating some kind of goodwill. That's how I like to think about it in
That's how I like to think about it in terms of, you know, actually procuring
terms of, you know, actually procuring uh trademark protection. Even if you're
uh trademark protection. Even if you're not receiving income from it right now,
not receiving income from it right now, so long as you are marketing a product
so long as you are marketing a product or service that is generating goodwill
or service that is generating goodwill and that is generating um
and that is generating um a a connection with your product or the
a a connection with your product or the thing that you're doing uh that can
thing that you're doing uh that can qualify you for trademark protection.
qualify you for trademark protection. So just registering your logo without
So just registering your logo without actually using it or without actually
actually using it or without actually creating that brand and marketing and
creating that brand and marketing and creating that affiliation between your
creating that affiliation between your product and the logo isn't going to be
product and the logo isn't going to be sufficient. And I'll talk about
sufficient. And I'll talk about registration here in a bit.
registration here in a bit. So what is trademark infringement? Uh
So what is trademark infringement? Uh like copyright infringement, it is it
like copyright infringement, it is it does kind of have a strict liability
does kind of have a strict liability element to it and uh that is the
element to it and uh that is the likelihood of confusion standard. So,
likelihood of confusion standard. So, even if you even if you're not intending
even if you even if you're not intending to infringe on somebody's mark, um you
to infringe on somebody's mark, um you can still be prohibited from using your
can still be prohibited from using your own mark in commerce because it creates
own mark in commerce because it creates that likelihood of confusion. And what
that likelihood of confusion. And what that typically means is would the
that typically means is would the ordinary consumer look at those two
ordinary consumer look at those two brands like look at look at two
brands like look at look at two competing brands or two brands that are
competing brands or two brands that are in the in a related marketplace or or or
in the in a related marketplace or or or competitors. would they be confused? And
competitors. would they be confused? And this kind of it is not related. It is
this kind of it is not related. It is not limited to strictly competing marks,
not limited to strictly competing marks, right? Anything that um qualifies as
right? Anything that um qualifies as like a related class can create that
like a related class can create that problem. And now when we're talking
problem. And now when we're talking about famous marks, when we're talking
about famous marks, when we're talking about Sony, when we're talking about
about Sony, when we're talking about Coca-Cola, when we're talking about, you
Coca-Cola, when we're talking about, you know, Pepsi, um you have this other
know, Pepsi, um you have this other element of dilution and tarnishment. And
element of dilution and tarnishment. And dilution comes into play whenever even
dilution comes into play whenever even if it's not in a related market, if you
if it's not in a related market, if you use the brand name, it can be
use the brand name, it can be prohibited.
prohibited. uh and tarnishment is obviously you know
uh and tarnishment is obviously you know certain kinds of disparagement or
certain kinds of disparagement or associating a product associating a
associating a product associating a brand uh with a product that
brand uh with a product that might create some kind of disparagement
might create some kind of disparagement to that product to that brand.
to that product to that brand. Uh trademark law is not limited to just
Uh trademark law is not limited to just trademarks. It's part of the LAN act and
trademarks. It's part of the LAN act and so it it uh also uh implies certain
so it it uh also uh implies certain levels of unfair competition. Unfair
levels of unfair competition. Unfair competition is exactly what it sounds
competition is exactly what it sounds like. It is
some kind of fraud, some kind of implicitly wrong act. Whether and and
implicitly wrong act. Whether and and while there are legal standards to this,
while there are legal standards to this, it is it is kind of vague. It is kind of
it is it is kind of vague. It is kind of somewhat open-ended as far as what
somewhat open-ended as far as what constitutes as unfair. There are
constitutes as unfair. There are obviously some standards. It can't just
obviously some standards. It can't just be ordinarily like the things that
be ordinarily like the things that happen during the ordinary course of
happen during the ordinary course of business, an ordinary course of
business, an ordinary course of competition. Has to be kind of a step up
competition. Has to be kind of a step up above that. Um whether it be, you know,
above that. Um whether it be, you know, openly disparaging your competitor in a
openly disparaging your competitor in a way that
way that is untruthful. For example, like any
is untruthful. For example, like any kind of fraud is obviously going to
kind of fraud is obviously going to implicate unfair competition. And then
implicate unfair competition. And then obviously, you know, counterfeiting
obviously, you know, counterfeiting goods, counterfeiting marks. And I raise
goods, counterfeiting marks. And I raise unfair competition because the trademark
unfair competition because the trademark act only applies to registered marks. So
act only applies to registered marks. So you don't get full trademark protection
you don't get full trademark protection unless you've registered.
Now moving on to patents. Uh there are three different types of patents. The
three different types of patents. The only ones that we really pay attention
only ones that we really pay attention to are utility and design because plant
to are utility and design because plant patents literally mean like physical
patents literally mean like physical plants. And I don't know well plants
plants. And I don't know well plants versus zombies would not apply.
versus zombies would not apply. But utility and design patents are very
But utility and design patents are very very relevant to the games industry. Um
very relevant to the games industry. Um we see a lot of litigation coming out
we see a lot of litigation coming out from
from various big names concerning utility
various big names concerning utility patents, controllers, any kind of
patents, controllers, any kind of hardware that people develop.
hardware that people develop. Design patents less. So a lot of people
Design patents less. So a lot of people don't go in for design patents because
don't go in for design patents because there is considerable overlap between
there is considerable overlap between design patents and copyright and
design patents and copyright and trademark. kind of protects some of the
trademark. kind of protects some of the same elements and some of the same um
same elements and some of the same um infringement standards are used
infringement standards are used determining infringement standards are
determining infringement standards are used. So trademark protection and design
used. So trademark protection and design patents do tend to overlap a lot. Uh not
patents do tend to overlap a lot. Uh not many patent attorneys that I know
many patent attorneys that I know generally go into recommending design
generally go into recommending design patents unless there is a a pressing
patents unless there is a a pressing reason to do so.
reason to do so. Utility patents on the other hand are
Utility patents on the other hand are very important not just in
very important not just in if you decide to go into the business or
if you decide to go into the business or if you are in the business of developing
if you are in the business of developing hardware but also if you are licensing
hardware but also if you are licensing hardware or if you are uh in the
hardware or if you are uh in the business of manufacturing such things
uh it has to be useful. Um business methods actually are are patentable. uh
methods actually are are patentable. uh so are to some extent software patents
so are to some extent software patents and I'm going to go into that here in a
and I'm going to go into that here in a bit. Uh but the the key elements is that
bit. Uh but the the key elements is that it has to be new. It it can't be
it has to be new. It it can't be something that's that's been created
something that's that's been created before. It has to be non-obvious to a
before. It has to be non-obvious to a person in that in that field and it has
person in that in that field and it has to be useful. So that's what so anything
to be useful. So that's what so anything that is patentable is not copyrightable
that is patentable is not copyrightable and vice versa. Those two are mutually
and vice versa. Those two are mutually exclusive.
exclusive. And the uh
And the uh I don't think the term for utility
I don't think the term for utility patents has changed. The term for uh
patents has changed. The term for uh design patents has however it used to be
design patents has however it used to be 14 years. It was 14 years for quite some
14 years. It was 14 years for quite some time and just recently they added a year
time and just recently they added a year and I could not begin to tell you why.
and I could not begin to tell you why. Just a heads up we don't do a lot of
Just a heads up we don't do a lot of patent work. Uh, I have a sociology,
patent work. Uh, I have a sociology, social psychology double major, so I
social psychology double major, so I never will, uh, unless I go back to
never will, uh, unless I go back to school, but, um, you have to have a
school, but, um, you have to have a scientific background in order to do
scientific background in order to do that.
that. Uh,
Uh, but I do have enough understanding to
but I do have enough understanding to kind of tell you when you might need a
kind of tell you when you might need a patent and and when patent infringement
patent and and when patent infringement might be an issue.
So there are some differences and at least as far as copyright goes for a
least as far as copyright goes for a design uh for design patent a lot like
design uh for design patent a lot like trademark it is kind of strict liability
trademark it is kind of strict liability but also it doesn't require access which
but also it doesn't require access which is another element of the trademark
is another element of the trademark thing. Uh way more overlap with
thing. Uh way more overlap with trademark than with copyright.
Give you some time to read these because it's kind of dense.
So this is probably the most contentious issue for patent law in our
contentious issue for patent law in our industry
industry and uh software problems are kind of
and uh software problems are kind of problematic
problematic and um
and um it it's not always easy to tell when a
it it's not always easy to tell when a software patent applies. I don't really
software patent applies. I don't really want to spend a lot of time talking
want to spend a lot of time talking about this because this this in and of
about this because this this in and of itself is is worth a talk um and I just
itself is is worth a talk um and I just don't have time to start going down this
don't have time to start going down this road. But if you do have questions about
road. But if you do have questions about the software patent issue uh obviously
the software patent issue uh obviously after you know after the talk uh
after you know after the talk uh whenever we have some questions you can
whenever we have some questions you can raise those.
So what is patent infringement? Again you know you kind of have the strict
you know you kind of have the strict liability thing. What I mean by strict
liability thing. What I mean by strict liability is that it it's not
liability is that it it's not intentional. A lot of
intentional. A lot of federal a lot of criminal claims, a lot
federal a lot of criminal claims, a lot of you know torches claims, all of those
of you know torches claims, all of those require
require intent. You have to have you have to
intent. You have to have you have to have a certain mindfulness to do that.
have a certain mindfulness to do that. Now mindfulness does come into play or
Now mindfulness does come into play or or you know being aware of the
or you know being aware of the infringement does come into play
infringement does come into play whenever
whenever you know what you're doing is wrong and
you know what you're doing is wrong and you're doing it you know you're doing it
you're doing it you know you're doing it um
um in bad faith because it plays into
in bad faith because it plays into damages. Uh a lot of courts are
damages. Uh a lot of courts are obviously going to award punitive
obviously going to award punitive damages in the event that you are acting
damages in the event that you are acting in bad faith. uh you can limit you
in bad faith. uh you can limit you while it is a strict liability tor and
while it is a strict liability tor and you know you can get injunctions imposed
you know you can get injunctions imposed against you from doing it. You can limit
against you from doing it. You can limit the the harm to yourself by showing that
the the harm to yourself by showing that you know was an accident. Officer I
you know was an accident. Officer I didn't mean to to speed that.
Okay. So moving on personality rights.
personality rights. This is kind of a fun area of the law
This is kind of a fun area of the law because again it is it is kind of a it
because again it is it is kind of a it depends thing. It it literally changes
depends thing. It it literally changes from state to state and not just
from state to state and not just I mean just the names of of whether or
I mean just the names of of whether or not like name and likeness and
not like name and likeness and appropriation totally interchangeable
appropriation totally interchangeable depends on the state you're in. Uh
depends on the state you're in. Uh right of privacy less so intrusion is is
right of privacy less so intrusion is is kind of self-explanatory.
kind of self-explanatory. Um there are a few overlaps but actually
Um there are a few overlaps but actually very careful distinctions between things
very careful distinctions between things like public dis public disclosure of
like public dis public disclosure of private facts and false light
private facts and false light defamation. Uh a lot of it comes down to
defamation. Uh a lot of it comes down to whether there is economic harm. Uh a lot
whether there is economic harm. Uh a lot of it comes down to whether it is more
of it comes down to whether it is more injury to the individual from a
injury to the individual from a psychological standpoint.
psychological standpoint. And that's that's kind of the difference
And that's that's kind of the difference between publicity rights and privacy
between publicity rights and privacy rights in general. Publicity rights are
rights in general. Publicity rights are almost exclusively economic and
almost exclusively economic and commercial. Privacy rights are almost
commercial. Privacy rights are almost exclusively you really hurt my feelings
exclusively you really hurt my feelings and you know you you caused me
and you know you you caused me you know a lot of personal harm caused
you know a lot of personal harm caused me a lot of psychological damage.
me a lot of psychological damage. As far as publicity rights go when I say
As far as publicity rights go when I say it's commercial I mean that the person
it's commercial I mean that the person their stock and trade is their name. Uh
their stock and trade is their name. Uh you have like celebrities are a great
you have like celebrities are a great example where name name and likeness
example where name name and likeness issue comes up. Uh I actually was
issue comes up. Uh I actually was speaking with somebody yesterday about
speaking with somebody yesterday about the Lindsay Loan um GTA
the Lindsay Loan um GTA case where she's claiming that um her
case where she's claiming that um her name and likeness is being used in that
name and likeness is being used in that game
game there. And you know as far as raising
there. And you know as far as raising the defamation issue, there's always
the defamation issue, there's always defamation proof characters and we have
defamation proof characters and we have an example of one right there. Uh
but what is defamation?
Uh the biggest thing I want you to take away from
thing I want you to take away from defamation is one, it has to actually be
defamation is one, it has to actually be published. It's not something that you
published. It's not something that you say to that person. It has to be
say to that person. It has to be something that you share with third
something that you share with third parties. It has to be something that you
parties. It has to be something that you publish. Uh and another thing is it has
publish. Uh and another thing is it has to be stated as a fact. So, it can't
to be stated as a fact. So, it can't just be your opinion. You can have a
just be your opinion. You can have a really negative opinion about somebody.
really negative opinion about somebody. You can say some horrendous things about
You can say some horrendous things about another human being. Um,
provided you don't move into the threat category.
category. Uh, you can say some terrible things
Uh, you can say some terrible things about another person and so long as it's
about another person and so long as it's couched in the uh in the form of of an
couched in the uh in the form of of an opinion, there's very little anybody can
opinion, there's very little anybody can do about it. Now, if you imply anything
do about it. Now, if you imply anything that even touches on a possible fact or
that even touches on a possible fact or assumes that something is true, then you
assumes that something is true, then you trigger defamation. So, that's something
trigger defamation. So, that's something that you need to be careful of. And this
that you need to be careful of. And this isn't limited to just how you say it
isn't limited to just how you say it because this isn't just limited to
because this isn't just limited to words. It's how you portray people. So
words. It's how you portray people. So if you're using uh a particular likeness
if you're using uh a particular likeness of somebody in your game and you are
of somebody in your game and you are portraying that likeness or that uh that
portraying that likeness or that uh that that parody of a person in a way that
implies that that person is actually like that to an extent that it it is
like that to an extent that it it is disparaging. It is it can create you
disparaging. It is it can create you know some kind of commercial or
know some kind of commercial or psychological harm. um you run the risk
psychological harm. um you run the risk of of being the target of a defamation
of of being the target of a defamation suit.
suit. Honestly, the threshold issue is if they
Honestly, the threshold issue is if they are pissed off enough to bring a legal
are pissed off enough to bring a legal claim against you, it's it's already
claim against you, it's it's already kind of a problem. As I said, you while
kind of a problem. As I said, you while you can't always be risk averse, um to
you can't always be risk averse, um to the extent that you can limit
the extent that you can limit creating these issues for yourself,
creating these issues for yourself, you should.
you should. There are defenses obviously truth uh to
There are defenses obviously truth uh to that extent the whole defamation proof
that extent the whole defamation proof thing comes up you know if if somebody
thing comes up you know if if somebody really is a horrible person and they
really is a horrible person and they have done horrible things and and you
have done horrible things and and you can show that well not much you can do
can show that well not much you can do about it. Uh,
about it. Uh, also consent. Consent is kind of a
also consent. Consent is kind of a tricky issue because what constitutes
tricky issue because what constitutes incent consent? If somebody gives you um
incent consent? If somebody gives you um a license to use their name and
a license to use their name and likeness, how far can you go with that
likeness, how far can you go with that as far as a defamation claim is
as far as a defamation claim is concerned? So, that's something that you
concerned? So, that's something that you need to take into consideration as well.
need to take into consideration as well. Um, accident
Um, accident kind of a trickier issue in and of
kind of a trickier issue in and of itself just because how do you prove
itself just because how do you prove that it's an accident? I mean, you're
that it's an accident? I mean, you're you're saying how do you show that you
you're saying how do you show that you did not
did not know that it was false, right? How do
know that it was false, right? How do you show goodwill?
you show goodwill? And then privilege. people like me can
And then privilege. people like me can pretty much get away with it whenever
pretty much get away with it whenever we're dealing with a court proceeding
we're dealing with a court proceeding but otherwise privilege is pretty
but otherwise privilege is pretty limited.
So trade secrets whenever I was talking
trade secrets whenever I was talking about the worst thing a developer can do
about the worst thing a developer can do is let me tell you my idea this is where
is let me tell you my idea this is where this kind of comes in. You can do that
this kind of comes in. You can do that if you have something that is creating a
if you have something that is creating a trust between people as far as
trust between people as far as confidentiality. So, if you say, "Let me
confidentiality. So, if you say, "Let me tell you my idea, but first sign this
tell you my idea, but first sign this NDA." All good.
NDA." All good. What is a trade secret? The uh key
What is a trade secret? The uh key takeaway here is it has to have economic
takeaway here is it has to have economic value and it has to be something that
value and it has to be something that you're actually keeping secret, which
you're actually keeping secret, which means that you're actually taking
means that you're actually taking reasonable steps to keep it from being
reasonable steps to keep it from being disclosed to the public.
The another thing to take away is that it doesn't have to be fixed. It doesn't
it doesn't have to be fixed. It doesn't have the same standards of um the same
have the same standards of um the same the same requirements that you have for
the same requirements that you have for copyright and things like that. And
copyright and things like that. And that's kind of why trade secrets are
that's kind of why trade secrets are attractive. That's kind of why they're
attractive. That's kind of why they're sexy because it's a lot cheaper than a
sexy because it's a lot cheaper than a patent because patents can run you, you
patent because patents can run you, you know, anything from 25 to 40 grand just
know, anything from 25 to 40 grand just to apply.
to apply. That and that has nothing to do with
That and that has nothing to do with enforcement. Um,
enforcement. Um, but trade secrets, all you have to do is
but trade secrets, all you have to do is just keep it secret and and try to keep
just keep it secret and and try to keep other people from talking about it.
So, what is trade secret infringement?
uh in every
contract I've ever drafted and almost every single one has to contain a
every single one has to contain a confidentiality provision or NDA. You
confidentiality provision or NDA. You have a you have a a thing that that
have a you have a a thing that that triggers and and you have this with a
triggers and and you have this with a lot of different provisions. You have
lot of different provisions. You have this for like if you have a work for
this for like if you have a work for hire issue, you also if you have a work
hire issue, you also if you have a work for hire provision, you also want to
for hire provision, you also want to have an assignment. Whenever you have a
have an assignment. Whenever you have a confidentiality provision, you also have
confidentiality provision, you also have to have the exceptions. And the
to have the exceptions. And the exceptions are
exceptions are basically, you know, what will not
basically, you know, what will not constitute infringement. And that's
constitute infringement. And that's things that um have to be disclosed for
things that um have to be disclosed for like court reasons, like if if there's a
like court reasons, like if if there's a judicial reason for it. Uh things that
judicial reason for it. Uh things that are disclosed by third parties or things
are disclosed by third parties or things that you already knew about prior to
that you already knew about prior to engaging or developing this trust.
engaging or developing this trust. um
um things that are known by third parties
things that are known by third parties and disclosed to you through that
and disclosed to you through that channel so long as they are not also
channel so long as they are not also bound by confidentiality. There are
bound by confidentiality. There are certain exemp exceptions that uh that
certain exemp exceptions that uh that are going to apply whenever we're
are going to apply whenever we're talking about um trademark infringement.
talking about um trademark infringement. One of the big things to bear in mind it
One of the big things to bear in mind it has to be wrongful. It has to actually
has to be wrongful. It has to actually be you know doxing is a good example.
be you know doxing is a good example. any kind of hacking, things like that is
any kind of hacking, things like that is going to is going to create that
going to is going to create that that improper behavior thing. We've been
that improper behavior thing. We've been hearing a lot about that lately. So,
hearing a lot about that lately. So, it's something to keep in mind. Uh, and
it's something to keep in mind. Uh, and there's also, you know, that obligation
there's also, you know, that obligation of trust. There's that if you are
of trust. There's that if you are subject to an NDA, if you and you need
subject to an NDA, if you and you need to check your employment agreements, you
to check your employment agreements, you need to check your independent
need to check your independent contractor agreements, master services
contractor agreements, master services agreements. All of these things are
agreements. All of these things are going to possibly create that level of
going to possibly create that level of trust that is going to expose you to
trust that is going to expose you to risk if you decide to disclose this
risk if you decide to disclose this information improperly.
So, moving on uh to the part that that we have fun with because this is pretty
we have fun with because this is pretty much what we do. uh everything
much what we do. uh everything concerning my practice touches on your
concerning my practice touches on your IP portfolio to some extent.
So what is your IP portfolio? It is not just the IP that you have. It is not
just the IP that you have. It is not just the IP that you may be infringing
just the IP that you may be infringing on. It's all of your licenses. It's all
on. It's all of your licenses. It's all of your uh documents relating to your to
of your uh documents relating to your to your licenses. All of your documents
your licenses. All of your documents relating to your registration. It's your
relating to your registration. It's your paper trail to a certain extent. It's
paper trail to a certain extent. It's also the intangible aspects of it. It's
also the intangible aspects of it. It's those rights that attach to those little
those rights that attach to those little pieces of paper that tell you you own
pieces of paper that tell you you own this. Um, it is your bread and butter.
this. Um, it is your bread and butter. And this is why it's important because
And this is why it's important because at the end of the day, your IP is all
at the end of the day, your IP is all you really have as a game developer.
you really have as a game developer. It is the
It is the it's your stock and trade. You may put
it's your stock and trade. You may put out physical products, but at the end of
out physical products, but at the end of the day, what you're really making money
the day, what you're really making money off of is your IP. And that's why I said
off of is your IP. And that's why I said it's not the most important. I would
it's not the most important. I would still say that this talk is probably the
still say that this talk is probably the most important.
Yeah. Another thing that this this last point about work for hire agreements,
point about work for hire agreements, bear in mind that it's not like whenever
bear in mind that it's not like whenever we hear about work for hire, you know,
we hear about work for hire, you know, you hear about all the the the ownership
you hear about all the the the ownership transfers to the employer or the person
transfers to the employer or the person who's commissioning the work, but that's
who's commissioning the work, but that's not 100% true because there's there
not 100% true because there's there going there even as somebody who only
going there even as somebody who only does work for higher work, it doesn't
does work for higher work, it doesn't mean that you don't have IP. I mean,
mean that you don't have IP. I mean, you're still going to have IP. How else
you're still going to have IP. How else do you do business if you don't have a
do you do business if you don't have a trademark? If you don't have uh goodwill
trademark? If you don't have uh goodwill generated by the work that you're
generated by the work that you're producing. So that's an intangible asset
producing. So that's an intangible asset that makes it proprietary that makes it
that makes it proprietary that makes it IP.
So So this is again like what is your what is your IP portfolio? Uh you
what is your IP portfolio? Uh you obviously have the IP that you own, the
obviously have the IP that you own, the things that you create, your trademarks,
things that you create, your trademarks, um trade desk, all of those all of those
um trade desk, all of those all of those things that all those intangible uh
things that all those intangible uh components that that become a part of
components that that become a part of your business. Uh and also your licenses
your business. Uh and also your licenses and not just the licenses that you have
and not just the licenses that you have from third parties, but the licenses you
from third parties, but the licenses you put out are going to be a big issue. And
put out are going to be a big issue. And why I say that is because it limits the
why I say that is because it limits the value of your assets.
value of your assets. So, we're talking about IP portfolios.
So, we're talking about IP portfolios. You want to think of it as
You want to think of it as kind of like a registry of what you're
kind of like a registry of what you're worth. And a lot of that is going to be
worth. And a lot of that is going to be determined by what rights do you still
determined by what rights do you still have a hold of? Because all of these
have a hold of? Because all of these rights are severable. Like whenever you
rights are severable. Like whenever you assign a copyright or whenever you give
assign a copyright or whenever you give a license for a copyright, that doesn't
a license for a copyright, that doesn't necessarily mean that it's to all of
necessarily mean that it's to all of your copyrights. I mean, they were
your copyrights. I mean, they were enumer enumerated before. it. You can
enumer enumerated before. it. You can just assign the right to publicly
just assign the right to publicly display it. You can just license
display it. You can just license non-exclusively
non-exclusively um
um the right to reproduce it and distribute
the right to reproduce it and distribute it, but not the right to make derivative
it, but not the right to make derivative works. So,
works. So, where your value lies is what you still
where your value lies is what you still hold on to, how much what you're
hold on to, how much what you're licensing out is worth, and how much
licensing out is worth, and how much you're getting back from it.
you're getting back from it. and also your third party licenses.
and also your third party licenses. Whenever you have an exclusive license
Whenever you have an exclusive license to something, it means you have the
to something, it means you have the right to exclude others from doing it.
right to exclude others from doing it. So, if you get a license to make a
So, if you get a license to make a Frozen game for the iPhone and it's
Frozen game for the iPhone and it's exclusive, you are the only one who has
exclusive, you are the only one who has the right to do that, which means that
the right to do that, which means that you
you won't have you should not have
won't have you should not have competitors for that same IP.
competitors for that same IP. And if you do that's that's the area of
And if you do that's that's the area of where we talk that's when we talk about
where we talk that's when we talk about protection.
So let's look at let's look at some of the licensing models that we have here.
the licensing models that we have here. Work for hire versus a license. These
Work for hire versus a license. These are not the same. Actually they're kind
are not the same. Actually they're kind of mutually exclusive. Work for hire is
of mutually exclusive. Work for hire is not an assignment. A work for hire
not an assignment. A work for hire implies that ownership originally lies
implies that ownership originally lies with the person commissioning or
with the person commissioning or commissioning the work or employing you
commissioning the work or employing you to create this work. So it is a default
to create this work. So it is a default in employment relationships. Um and it
in employment relationships. Um and it is
is a common provision in a lot of
a common provision in a lot of independent contractor agreements you
independent contractor agreements you may be required to sign.
may be required to sign. As I said before, you know, the moral
As I said before, you know, the moral rights issue does come into play
rights issue does come into play whenever we're talking about work for
whenever we're talking about work for hire because those moral rights are
hire because those moral rights are separable from the commercial rights
separable from the commercial rights that are owned by the company.
that are owned by the company. Um, so at least in some cases that's not
Um, so at least in some cases that's not always true. There's some workarounds to
always true. There's some workarounds to that, but by and large it's good to
that, but by and large it's good to assume that the moral rights will always
assume that the moral rights will always lie with the individual who's created
lie with the individual who's created the work.
Anytime you see a work for hire deal or a work for hire provision, as I said,
a work for hire provision, as I said, whenever I was talking about
whenever I was talking about confidentiality, have those triggers,
confidentiality, have those triggers, right? The trigger that you're going to
right? The trigger that you're going to find with a work for hire is going to be
find with a work for hire is going to be an assignment because there are going to
an assignment because there are going to be cases where work for hire will not
be cases where work for hire will not apply. Uh there's
apply. Uh there's a pretty
a pretty actually work for hire is very very
actually work for hire is very very limited according to the the scope of
limited according to the the scope of copyright
copyright and while um collective works are
and while um collective works are included in that which kind of covers in
included in that which kind of covers in a lot of cases video games and things
a lot of cases video games and things like that it's not conclusive. So for
like that it's not conclusive. So for work for hire provisions, if you are the
work for hire provisions, if you are the one, you know, for example, procuring
one, you know, for example, procuring this,
this, you want to have an assignment in there
you want to have an assignment in there saying that even if it doesn't qualify
saying that even if it doesn't qualify as worth for hire, you still have those
as worth for hire, you still have those rights assigned to you and you're still
rights assigned to you and you're still the person who owns the rights, you own
the person who owns the rights, you own the property. If you are the one who is
the property. If you are the one who is being hired, if they don't have it in
being hired, if they don't have it in there, you just kind of want to be quiet
there, you just kind of want to be quiet so you can come back for it later on if
so you can come back for it later on if they decide not to pay you.
they decide not to pay you. Just happened several times. Uh
Just happened several times. Uh there are a lot more benefits to a
there are a lot more benefits to a license. However, at least from the
license. However, at least from the standpoint of the contractor or uh the
standpoint of the contractor or uh the the the IP owner, the person who's
the the IP owner, the person who's creating the work, a license gives you a
creating the work, a license gives you a lot more flexibility. Um it enables you
lot more flexibility. Um it enables you to you know sever rights as I said or or
to you know sever rights as I said or or you know parcel out certain properties
you know parcel out certain properties work for hire like from a statutory
work for hire like from a statutory perspective seems really only applies to
perspective seems really only applies to copyright. There are some trademark and
copyright. There are some trademark and and patent uh considerations for that as
and patent uh considerations for that as well. The actual term of art work for
well. The actual term of art work for hire it originally comes from copyright.
hire it originally comes from copyright. I think it's been co-opted by some other
I think it's been co-opted by some other areas of intellectual property, but it
areas of intellectual property, but it originates with copyright.
originates with copyright. You have a lot of different license
You have a lot of different license types. Um, obviously exclusive,
types. Um, obviously exclusive, non-inclusive, whether or not somebody
non-inclusive, whether or not somebody else can use the work
else can use the work in addition to, you know, other people.
in addition to, you know, other people. The thing about licenses is that you can
The thing about licenses is that you can handicap people. You can totally
handicap people. You can totally handcuff them from from
handcuff them from from their
their ownership rights. So to the extent that
ownership rights. So to the extent that a license is exclusive that means that
a license is exclusive that means that even you don't have the right to use it
even you don't have the right to use it once you exclusively license something.
So why is portfolio management important?
important? First and foremost you need a paper
First and foremost you need a paper trail. You need to document everything.
trail. You need to document everything. And this is going to be important from a
And this is going to be important from a business audit standpoint. Um uh anytime
business audit standpoint. Um uh anytime you mean just like doing your taxes,
you mean just like doing your taxes, this is something that you need
this is something that you need information on uh because it it directly
information on uh because it it directly relates to your company's value, right?
relates to your company's value, right? It directs to your profit margins. It
It directs to your profit margins. It directs to your budget.
directs to your budget. Having these assets and having a record
Having these assets and having a record of these assets is mandatory.
of these assets is mandatory. Um as I said, it's your primary asset
Um as I said, it's your primary asset asset. this is what you are
asset. this is what you are building your trade on. This is what
building your trade on. This is what you're building your game around.
you're building your game around. Uh and there are times whenever you
Uh and there are times whenever you absolutely need to show ownership. Uh
absolutely need to show ownership. Uh you are going to find this a lot in
you are going to find this a lot in whenever you're getting venture capital
whenever you're getting venture capital or trying to get funding for your game.
or trying to get funding for your game. Uh you're going to find this whenever
Uh you're going to find this whenever you hopefully or maybe not hopefully a
you hopefully or maybe not hopefully a lot of people are against this concept,
lot of people are against this concept, but if you are
but if you are in the luxurious position of getting
in the luxurious position of getting bought out, we've had quite a few deals
bought out, we've had quite a few deals where a a good part of our due diligence
where a a good part of our due diligence relates specifically to um your IP
relates specifically to um your IP assets and what licenses are where, what
assets and what licenses are where, what you've licensed out, what you have
you've licensed out, what you have licenses to. um you know all of your
licenses to. um you know all of your registrations have to be in place. Chain
registrations have to be in place. Chain of title becomes important. Uh typically
of title becomes important. Uh typically you hear the the the term of art chain
you hear the the the term of art chain of title whenever we're talking about
of title whenever we're talking about real property. It also applies to
real property. It also applies to intellectual property and that is the
intellectual property and that is the chain of ownership um and any kind of
chain of ownership um and any kind of third party IP that you uh have a right
third party IP that you uh have a right to as well as any IP that you've
to as well as any IP that you've developed and who you've licensed it out
developed and who you've licensed it out to. So chain of title becomes very
to. So chain of title becomes very important.
important. Also, if you get errors and omissions
Also, if you get errors and omissions insurance, which I actually highly
insurance, which I actually highly recommend if you are putting out a game
recommend if you are putting out a game and it's it's seeing some kind of
and it's it's seeing some kind of economic success,
economic success, it will cover you for most IP claims,
it will cover you for most IP claims, which may not always be covered under
which may not always be covered under your typical commercial insurance
your typical commercial insurance standard.
standard. Uh, so it's something to to keep in
Uh, so it's something to to keep in mind. And if you are going to get that
mind. And if you are going to get that insurance, you need to have records of
insurance, you need to have records of ownership for your um for your IP for
ownership for your um for your IP for your portfolio because that's that's
your portfolio because that's that's what's going to be protected. Anything
what's going to be protected. Anything that you don't have a record of,
that you don't have a record of, anything that you don't have in writing
anything that you don't have in writing falls outside of the insurance scope,
falls outside of the insurance scope, which is a problem.
which is a problem. So, how do you protect it? It's fairly
So, how do you protect it? It's fairly simple with copyright because it costs
simple with copyright because it costs like 35 bucks, right? And then if you if
like 35 bucks, right? And then if you if you have an attorney do it because it it
you have an attorney do it because it it can be kind of confusing at times. Um
can be kind of confusing at times. Um you know it's it takes like an hour a
you know it's it takes like an hour a couple hours work if that. So and we
couple hours work if that. So and we ship it off to a parillegal. It it's not
ship it off to a parillegal. It it's not it's not a difficult process to get your
it's not a difficult process to get your copyright registered. So you have no
copyright registered. So you have no excuse for failing to register your
excuse for failing to register your copyright. And it's what's more it does
copyright. And it's what's more it does it gives you that paper trail that you
it gives you that paper trail that you need.
need. it. You also I would also recommend when
it. You also I would also recommend when if you do license out works or if you do
if you do license out works or if you do procure a license an exclusive license
procure a license an exclusive license you register that with the copyright
you register that with the copyright office as well because that also shows
office as well because that also shows your chain of title. It also shows a
your chain of title. It also shows a record for that and you can you don't
record for that and you can you don't just register the copyright in and of
just register the copyright in and of itself. You can register those add
itself. You can register those add additional documents and you can do that
additional documents and you can do that with trademark patent uh copyright all
with trademark patent uh copyright all of them.
Uh so some of the benefits of copyright protection, it doesn't entitle you to
protection, it doesn't entitle you to money damages that you wouldn't get if
money damages that you wouldn't get if there is no actual financial harm or if
there is no actual financial harm or if they didn't see a profit from the
they didn't see a profit from the infringement. Um
infringement. Um and you also cannot sue anybody until
and you also cannot sue anybody until you're registered. But by and large, I
you're registered. But by and large, I still say having a paper trail in
still say having a paper trail in general and having having that in
general and having having that in writing is really important.
writing is really important. So
So protecting your trademark uh you don't
protecting your trademark uh you don't have as I said before you don't have
have as I said before you don't have trademark protection until it's
trademark protection until it's registered. You have unfair competition
registered. You have unfair competition protection to a certain extent but that
protection to a certain extent but that is vastly less secure than what you're
is vastly less secure than what you're going to find under the trademark act.
going to find under the trademark act. So the only way to get trademark
So the only way to get trademark protection is by registering. Certain
protection is by registering. Certain states also have uh trademark protection
states also have uh trademark protection to a limited extent. So you can register
to a limited extent. So you can register with the state as well. But uh for for
with the state as well. But uh for for the real, you know, meaty trademark
the real, you know, meaty trademark issues, you want you want to register
issues, you want you want to register with the US PTO. Some of the benefits is
with the US PTO. Some of the benefits is three times statutory damages if
three times statutory damages if somebody counterfeits your work and if
somebody counterfeits your work and if you can show that it's in bad faith. Uh
you can show that it's in bad faith. Uh this is something that I like to
this is something that I like to threaten with whenever I send out cease
threaten with whenever I send out cease and desist based on those apps that I
and desist based on those apps that I was mentioning before. uh if it was like
was mentioning before. uh if it was like a really really popular app and it's
a really really popular app and it's pretty obvious that somebody just
pretty obvious that somebody just directly ripped it off and changed the
directly ripped it off and changed the color scheme, just say it's a
color scheme, just say it's a counterfeit and therefore entitled to
counterfeit and therefore entitled to three times monetary damages for any
three times monetary damages for any potential loss profits or any profits
potential loss profits or any profits that they've made from it.
that they've made from it. Um,
also if you have a registered mark, it becomes incontestable. And what this
it becomes incontestable. And what this means is that I think it's like after 5
means is that I think it's like after 5 years
years of being registered, it becomes very
of being registered, it becomes very difficult for somebody to come after you
difficult for somebody to come after you for infringement based on based on your
for infringement based on based on your trademark or for likelihood of
trademark or for likelihood of confusion. At that point, you have
confusion. At that point, you have obtained enough of a position in
obtained enough of a position in commerce, provided you've used it
commerce, provided you've used it continuously and provided you can show
continuously and provided you can show that use, you have achieved that
that use, you have achieved that level of protection where if somebody
level of protection where if somebody comes after you based on your
comes after you based on your registration, uh the it's it's going to
registration, uh the it's it's going to be pretty much ignored. It's going to be
be pretty much ignored. It's going to be very difficult to push the the burden
very difficult to push the the burden shifts entirely on the plan.
shifts entirely on the plan. Also, uh, anybody who's going to be
Also, uh, anybody who's going to be registering a mark or or typically
registering a mark or or typically anybody who's going to be coming after
anybody who's going to be coming after you for trademark infringement, um,
you for trademark infringement, um, they're going to have access to the
they're going to have access to the pto.gov website. So, uh,
they this kind of puts them on notice if they do if they do if doing a USPTO.gov
they do if they do if doing a USPTO.gov search is extraordinarily simple. You
search is extraordinarily simple. You just type in the mark. Not that hard. So
just type in the mark. Not that hard. So it'll pull up identical marks. There
it'll pull up identical marks. There there are other search parameters that
there are other search parameters that obviously come into play whenever you're
obviously come into play whenever you're actually trying to register a mark. Um
actually trying to register a mark. Um Google is also a good resource for this.
Google is also a good resource for this. But for
But for the registration itself for for
the registration itself for for protection purposes, it does put people
protection purposes, it does put people on notice that you that you are the
on notice that you that you are the rifle owner.
rifle owner. Protecting your patents like trademarks,
Protecting your patents like trademarks, the only way to have protection. There
the only way to have protection. There is no such thing as an unregistered
is no such thing as an unregistered patent.
patent. Uh you can have an applied patent. You I
Uh you can have an applied patent. You I mean you can have an apply for patent
mean you can have an apply for patent which can give you some limited
which can give you some limited protection as far as patent pending but
protection as far as patent pending but uh as far as
uh as far as a a patent that has not even been
a a patent that has not even been applied for doesn't exist. You have
applied for doesn't exist. You have trade secrets for that.
trade secrets for that. Uh
Uh and speaking of which, how do you
and speaking of which, how do you protect your trade secrets? Um
protect your trade secrets? Um confidentiality provisions as I
confidentiality provisions as I mentioned before. Uh non-disclosure
mentioned before. Uh non-disclosure agreements are or part for the course.
agreements are or part for the course. The biggest thing though is because all
The biggest thing though is because all of these things are kind of worth the
of these things are kind of worth the paper they're written on, right? The the
paper they're written on, right? The the big issue is going to be
big issue is going to be what are you doing to protect that
what are you doing to protect that information? What are you doing to
information? What are you doing to protect your information? Obviously
protect your information? Obviously creating these relationships, we're m
creating these relationships, we're m we're creating we're creating that
we're creating we're creating that confidential relationship is very very
confidential relationship is very very important.
important. Um but you need to also make sure that
Um but you need to also make sure that people cannot improperly get that
people cannot improperly get that information. You have to do what you can
information. You have to do what you can to prevent people from being able to dox
to prevent people from being able to dox that information. You have to keep it uh
that information. You have to keep it uh from being published.
from being published. And doing that, you know, it typically
And doing that, you know, it typically involves taking proper security
involves taking proper security measures,
measures, password protecting things, uh making
password protecting things, uh making sure certain things are under lock and
sure certain things are under lock and key, not telling your employees about it
key, not telling your employees about it unless they absolutely need to know
unless they absolutely need to know about it. And these are things that
about it. And these are things that you're also going to want to include in
you're also going to want to include in your confidentiality provisions. You
your confidentiality provisions. You need to be very specific about what is
need to be very specific about what is protected under your trade secrets,
protected under your trade secrets, which is kind of it seems
which is kind of it seems counterproductive because you actually
counterproductive because you actually need to provide a list of what is
need to provide a list of what is covered under trade secret like what you
covered under trade secret like what you are treating as a trade secret. Um
are treating as a trade secret. Um because that makes it that much clear
because that makes it that much clear that that relationship exists. This is
that that relationship exists. This is what it applies to. Uh
so as far as you know the trade secret issue and the documents that you need
issue and the documents that you need um
um your licenses must always be in writing.
your licenses must always be in writing. Uh there are lots of like clip licenses
Uh there are lots of like clip licenses and and things like that where people
and and things like that where people say oh yeah sure go ahead. A really good
say oh yeah sure go ahead. A really good example of this is like the King's Quest
example of this is like the King's Quest um Activision issue with uh Silver
um Activision issue with uh Silver Lining. If you guys are familiar with
Lining. If you guys are familiar with that title, it was an independent title
that title, it was an independent title for the King's Quest series. If you guys
for the King's Quest series. If you guys don't know what King's Quest is, I'm
don't know what King's Quest is, I'm very, very sad and I'm going to feel
very, very sad and I'm going to feel very very old, but it is one of the best
very very old, but it is one of the best games ever. Best series ever as far as
games ever. Best series ever as far as I'm concerned.
I'm concerned. But uh so originally, you know,
But uh so originally, you know, basically what it comes down to is that
basically what it comes down to is that Activision just kept waffling on whether
Activision just kept waffling on whether or not these guys had the right to do
or not these guys had the right to do it. And the problem is that they never
it. And the problem is that they never really like the the company never really
really like the the company never really got anything in writing.
got anything in writing. Uh so
Uh so this is why stuff like this is
this is why stuff like this is important. If you if you do get if you
important. If you if you do get if you do get permission, you need to make sure
do get permission, you need to make sure that you can prove that you have
that you can prove that you have permission to do it. That includes
permission to do it. That includes non-exclusive licenses.
non-exclusive licenses. Uh obviously, you know, if you guys are
Uh obviously, you know, if you guys are not sure what a master services
not sure what a master services agreement is, it's kind of like an
agreement is, it's kind of like an independent contractor agreement except
independent contractor agreement except it
it covers all of your work and not just,
covers all of your work and not just, you know, one one statement of work. It
you know, one one statement of work. It covers you all future work orders,
covers you all future work orders, things like that. It's kind of like a a
things like that. It's kind of like a a parent contract to all of the future
parent contract to all of the future work that you do for that client.
work that you do for that client. Um, you obviously want to have make sure
Um, you obviously want to have make sure that you have a a pretty straightforward
that you have a a pretty straightforward employee policy like employee handbook
employee policy like employee handbook that stipulates what is confidential,
that stipulates what is confidential, how confidential information is treated.
how confidential information is treated. Also, intellectual property in general,
Also, intellectual property in general, what they can take home with them or
what they can take home with them or what what they can consider their own IP
what what they can consider their own IP and what's protected there, what kind of
and what's protected there, what kind of work they can do outside of the
work they can do outside of the workplace that does not belong to you.
workplace that does not belong to you. And vice versa, if you're an employee,
And vice versa, if you're an employee, if you're if you're contracting with
if you're if you're contracting with this other company, you need to kind of
this other company, you need to kind of know if you are working for multiple
know if you are working for multiple clients, is there going to be any bleed
clients, is there going to be any bleed through between those agreements, right?
through between those agreements, right? Like is the work that you're doing for
Like is the work that you're doing for one client going to uh fall under the
one client going to uh fall under the ownership claims of another. Um
ownership claims of another. Um so these are things that you kind of
so these are things that you kind of need to pay attention to and why having
need to pay attention to and why having something in writing and why
something in writing and why understanding what's in writing is
understanding what's in writing is really really important.
And with that, so I have four minutes, five minutes for questions. So if you
five minutes for questions. So if you guys have any questions,
guys have any questions, do you have to patent a game? You said
do you have to patent a game? You said game
game take two years to get approved. Okay.
take two years to get approved. Okay. He's asking if you have to patent a
He's asking if you have to patent a game. No, very rarely. Now there are, as
game. No, very rarely. Now there are, as I said, like there are software patents
I said, like there are software patents and things like that. Absolutely not
and things like that. Absolutely not mandatory. There's a lot of question as
mandatory. There's a lot of question as to whether software patent should even
to whether software patent should even exist. Um, a lot of people are really
exist. Um, a lot of people are really against it. Patenting your game is very
against it. Patenting your game is very rarely even an option unless we're
rarely even an option unless we're talking about mechanics and rule sets
talking about mechanics and rule sets because so much of a game is going to be
because so much of a game is going to be creative, right? It's going to be
creative, right? It's going to be entertainment. Uh, your story cannot be
entertainment. Uh, your story cannot be patented. Your characters cannot be
patented. Your characters cannot be patented. The music that you have cannot
patented. The music that you have cannot be patented. your color scheme. Well,
be patented. your color scheme. Well, unless we have a design patent cannot be
unless we have a design patent cannot be patented.
patented. So, uh so no, a copyright will will
So, uh so no, a copyright will will generally protect you with with regard
generally protect you with with regard to the actual game itself. You would
to the actual game itself. You would register typically either you can
register typically either you can register the literary work uh which
register the literary work uh which would be a portion of your code. It's
would be a portion of your code. It's like 25 the first the first and last 25
like 25 the first the first and last 25 pages of your code or uh audiovisisual
pages of your code or uh audiovisisual work which is a copy of the of the
work which is a copy of the of the physical game itself.
physical game itself. Yes. developers, development studios
Yes. developers, development studios that close down, not necessarily
that close down, not necessarily acquired or bought by anybody, but just
acquired or bought by anybody, but just decide we're out. We're going to shut
decide we're out. We're going to shut the company down, but we still own IP or
the company down, but we still own IP or have licenses that we own. How do you
have licenses that we own. How do you transfer that?
transfer that? Okay, he So, he's asking what happens
Okay, he So, he's asking what happens whenever a studio shuts down and
whenever a studio shuts down and actually this is typically handled in
actually this is typically handled in the winding up provision of your uh if
the winding up provision of your uh if you have an operating group. It depends
you have an operating group. It depends on if you if you're an LLC, you would
on if you if you're an LLC, you would have an operating agreement. If you are
have an operating agreement. If you are a a CC corp or an S corp, you'd have
a a CC corp or an S corp, you'd have bylaws.
bylaws. That's something that would be handled
That's something that would be handled in in the winding up provision of your
in in the winding up provision of your agreement. If it's not, it should be.
agreement. If it's not, it should be. And essentially
And essentially you can either
you can either cut your losses, try to sell off that IP
cut your losses, try to sell off that IP and um
and um you know sell it to third parties or you
you know sell it to third parties or you can have it transfer to the individual
can have it transfer to the individual owners. That IP is always going to
owners. That IP is always going to exist. Someone is always going to own
exist. Someone is always going to own it. And you know when when it comes down
it. And you know when when it comes down to winding up, you know, if whatever
to winding up, you know, if whatever your operating agreement says about
your operating agreement says about assets will apply to your IP if it's not
assets will apply to your IP if it's not if it's not expressly handled in the
if it's not expressly handled in the agreement itself.
Does that answer your question or or I'll get your part. Okay,
I'll get your part. Okay, sounds good. Yeah. Again, that kind of
sounds good. Yeah. Again, that kind of again it depends, right? Like it's very
again it depends, right? Like it's very much an it depends situation. Okay.
much an it depends situation. Okay. There's no there's no real solid answer
There's no there's no real solid answer I can give you with that except for like
I can give you with that except for like the default depends on your agreement.
the default depends on your agreement. Other questions?
Well, if you have any specific questions because that seems to be what typically
because that seems to be what typically happens when I give a talk.
happens when I give a talk. Uh by all means do approach me after the
Uh by all means do approach me after the conference. I'll be in the winding up
conference. I'll be in the winding up room. So I that's it for me. Thank you.
room. So I that's it for me. Thank you. [Applause]