[Music]
Hello. Hello. Hi.
All right. Good. Good. Good. Okay. Hi, guys. Uh, I am speaking first. I'm
guys. Uh, I am speaking first. I'm Christine Forbus. I'm the Oh, all right.
Christine Forbus. I'm the Oh, all right. Early claps. Go ahead. Bring it on.
Early claps. Go ahead. Bring it on. Yeah.
Yeah. Mhm. I deserve it. Keep it going. That's
Mhm. I deserve it. Keep it going. That's all right. Uh, I am the CEO and co-owner
all right. Uh, I am the CEO and co-owner of the Super Duper Game Company. Uh, my
of the Super Duper Game Company. Uh, my husband, uh, Garrett and I work on a
husband, uh, Garrett and I work on a game called Black Ice. And I wasn't too
game called Black Ice. And I wasn't too comfortable using postmortem because
comfortable using postmortem because we're still in early access. So, I made
we're still in early access. So, I made up midmortem and it it's not a real word
up midmortem and it it's not a real word and sorry, but it it'll have to do. So,
and sorry, but it it'll have to do. So, I want to talk a little bit about our
I want to talk a little bit about our game, how development's gone so far,
game, how development's gone so far, what I can pass on to you from what I've
what I can pass on to you from what I've learned. So before I get into any of all
learned. So before I get into any of all that, I want to get into what Black Ice
that, I want to get into what Black Ice is. So this is Black Ice. It's a
is. So this is Black Ice. It's a cyberpunk hacking game. You're a hacker
cyberpunk hacking game. You're a hacker in cyerspace taking down servers of
in cyerspace taking down servers of large corporations.
large corporations. So pretty cool. It's we kind of say it's
So pretty cool. It's we kind of say it's like Borderlands meets Tron as far as
like Borderlands meets Tron as far as visuals and game style goes. So we
visuals and game style goes. So we started development in uh 2013,
started development in uh 2013, got green lit in 2014
got green lit in 2014 and uh moved back from the Bay Area to
and uh moved back from the Bay Area to Austin, Texas, where we are now in 2015
Austin, Texas, where we are now in 2015 and now it's 2016 and I'm speaking at
and now it's 2016 and I'm speaking at GDC. So
GDC. So what can I teach you? Before I was in
what can I teach you? Before I was in the game industry, I was a high school
the game industry, I was a high school teacher. So I kind of instinctively
teacher. So I kind of instinctively frame everything I do as a teacher and I
frame everything I do as a teacher and I didn't want to come up here and say this
didn't want to come up here and say this is what I did and it sucked. This is
is what I did and it sucked. This is what I did and it was great and then not
what I did and it was great and then not put that in anything constructive for
put that in anything constructive for you if you want to get into the indie
you if you want to get into the indie industry. So what can I teach you? First
industry. So what can I teach you? First thing go to conventions.
thing go to conventions. You have to go to conventions because
You have to go to conventions because people need to see your game. Twitter's
people need to see your game. Twitter's not enough. Telling your friends isn't
not enough. Telling your friends isn't enough. Your mom telling her friends
enough. Your mom telling her friends isn't enough. You have to get out there.
isn't enough. You have to get out there. You have to say, "Hey, this is my game."
You have to say, "Hey, this is my game." So, you need to get eyes on your game.
So, you need to get eyes on your game. And don't get stuck into thinking that
And don't get stuck into thinking that that means packs only or GDC only. Don't
that means packs only or GDC only. Don't shy away from local conventions,
shy away from local conventions, conventions that are geared towards
conventions that are geared towards things that are outside of video games.
things that are outside of video games. Uh we our game's really like kind of
Uh we our game's really like kind of cyberpunky kind of retro that you saw.
cyberpunky kind of retro that you saw. So we looked at classic game conventions
So we looked at classic game conventions and looked at showing our game there.
and looked at showing our game there. It's about cyberpunk stuff. So we looked
It's about cyberpunk stuff. So we looked at hacking conventions or places that
at hacking conventions or places that communicate with hackers. You know, look
communicate with hackers. You know, look at the style of your game, the the
at the style of your game, the the video, like the visual styles, the play
video, like the visual styles, the play styles. Find those really niche
styles. Find those really niche conventions and reach out to them. Even
conventions and reach out to them. Even board game conventions, I've heard you
board game conventions, I've heard you can do really cool things with. So,
can do really cool things with. So, hello.
Find the people who are looking for a game like yours. I don't care how weird
game like yours. I don't care how weird your game is. I don't care how niche you
your game is. I don't care how niche you think it is. There is a human being out
think it is. There is a human being out there who wants it and wants to play it.
there who wants it and wants to play it. But you cannot trust your audience to
But you cannot trust your audience to find you. You have to find them. So, get
find you. You have to find them. So, get out there and say, "Oh, you like video
out there and say, "Oh, you like video games about rabbits picking up carrots.
games about rabbits picking up carrots. Guess what? I make that. And you're
Guess what? I make that. And you're going to make somebody's day. And that
going to make somebody's day. And that person's going to go and say, "I have
person's going to go and say, "I have been looking for a game with rabbits and
been looking for a game with rabbits and carrots for months. Somebody made it.
carrots for months. Somebody made it. Hooray." Be that person. Be that game
Hooray." Be that person. Be that game developer that can give somebody what
developer that can give somebody what they want. But find them cuz they're not
they want. But find them cuz they're not they don't know. They don't know to look
they don't know. They don't know to look for you. So do that. But with that comes
for you. So do that. But with that comes this exception. Limit your storefront
this exception. Limit your storefront presence. This is something that we did
presence. This is something that we did wrong when we first started. And it
wrong when we first started. And it sounds counterintuitive. You think,
sounds counterintuitive. You think, well, the more places I sell my game,
well, the more places I sell my game, the more money I'm going to make and
the more money I'm going to make and then I'm going to be a millionaire. And
then I'm going to be a millionaire. And no, you're not. You're really, really
no, you're not. You're really, really not. It's It doesn't work that way. And
not. It's It doesn't work that way. And so, when I say we had too many
so, when I say we had too many storefronts,
storefronts, I mean we had too many storefrs. These
I mean we had too many storefrs. These are all the places that you could get
are all the places that you could get Black Ice when we first started, not
Black Ice when we first started, not including our own website. And just to
including our own website. And just to kind of break that down before we got on
kind of break that down before we got on Steam, this is how our sales looked. And
Steam, this is how our sales looked. And you notice that's only four out of the
you notice that's only four out of the many that I showed you. There's a reason
many that I showed you. There's a reason people didn't buy them on that
people didn't buy them on that storefront. They're not going to go to
storefront. They're not going to go to all these different storefronts to buy
all these different storefronts to buy your game. And what's more is once you
your game. And what's more is once you make it onto Steam, that's what it looks
make it onto Steam, that's what it looks like now when we sell Black Eyes. We
like now when we sell Black Eyes. We replaced the Humble Widget with the
replaced the Humble Widget with the Humble Store. The only reason that 8% is
Humble Store. The only reason that 8% is a big number like 8 is because we were
a big number like 8 is because we were on their uh front page for a while. So
on their uh front page for a while. So once you're on Steam, step back a little
once you're on Steam, step back a little bit.
bit. Reasons to limit your storefront
Reasons to limit your storefront presence is it's less work for you. When
presence is it's less work for you. When we first started out, we thought that
we first started out, we thought that the coolest thing we could do was push
the coolest thing we could do was push out a patch a week.
out a patch a week. So, it wasn't just one patch a week. It
So, it wasn't just one patch a week. It was one patch a week to eight different
was one patch a week to eight different storefronts.
storefronts. And oh my god, did they make sure that
And oh my god, did they make sure that was the hardest thing to do cuz every
was the hardest thing to do cuz every storefront works differently. Everyone
storefront works differently. Everyone gets patch notes differently. And so,
gets patch notes differently. And so, you're pushing a patch to one place,
you're pushing a patch to one place, pushing a patch to another place. Don't
pushing a patch to another place. Don't do that. Don't do it. It's not worth the
do that. Don't do it. It's not worth the trouble. Have one really good build on a
trouble. Have one really good build on a couple sites instead of one kind of okay
couple sites instead of one kind of okay build on like 10 sites. And also, it's
build on like 10 sites. And also, it's important to build and focus your brand.
important to build and focus your brand. Think about what you want your game to
Think about what you want your game to be and who you want to play it. And that
be and who you want to play it. And that goes back to conventions. If your game
goes back to conventions. If your game is educational, then don't worry about
is educational, then don't worry about all these other sites that focus on
all these other sites that focus on FPS's and war games. Find some cool
FPS's and war games. Find some cool education sites that focus on maybe
education sites that focus on maybe selling to teachers or selling to
selling to teachers or selling to classrooms. If your game is if you don't
classrooms. If your game is if you don't even want to sell it, if you just want
even want to sell it, if you just want to give it away, try looking at
to give it away, try looking at charities, nonprofits, things like that.
charities, nonprofits, things like that. So, make your game
So, make your game tailored to the people you want to give
tailored to the people you want to give it to. And doing your homework with
it to. And doing your homework with storefronts is the best way to do that.
storefronts is the best way to do that. cuz there are a lot out out there and
cuz there are a lot out out there and they're all going to come out of the
they're all going to come out of the woodwork once they see you're selling to
woodwork once they see you're selling to one place. We got emails on emails, hey,
one place. We got emails on emails, hey, I have this storefront. Would you like
I have this storefront. Would you like to give me 50% of your earnings and I'll
to give me 50% of your earnings and I'll put it on my store? No. No, I wouldn't.
put it on my store? No. No, I wouldn't. And it's tempting. It's tempting when
And it's tempting. It's tempting when you're not making any money from your
you're not making any money from your game. 50% of the cut's going to sound
game. 50% of the cut's going to sound really good, but don't do it. And I'm
really good, but don't do it. And I'm going to get to like value later cuz
going to get to like value later cuz value is like super important. And that
value is like super important. And that goes in with price perception control.
goes in with price perception control. Out of all the storefronts we had, one
Out of all the storefronts we had, one of them they decided when and for how
of them they decided when and for how much our game would go on sale. And that
much our game would go on sale. And that was really tricky. And we got lucky that
was really tricky. And we got lucky that we could opt out, but we had to tell
we could opt out, but we had to tell them, "Excuse, excuse me. Uh, I don't
them, "Excuse, excuse me. Uh, I don't think I want my $5 game 75% off today."
think I want my $5 game 75% off today." And then they would, "Okay, fine." And
And then they would, "Okay, fine." And so you want to make sure that your game
so you want to make sure that your game is selling for what it's worth. And
is selling for what it's worth. And again, going back to you're going to get
again, going back to you're going to get stuck in this mindset of screw it. I
stuck in this mindset of screw it. I want I need $10 now. I'll fine. It's a
want I need $10 now. I'll fine. It's a $30 game. Whatever. I'll take it. Don't
$30 game. Whatever. I'll take it. Don't take it. And controlling that price
take it. And controlling that price perception. There's a really nifty
perception. There's a really nifty plugin that I'm sure all of you know
plugin that I'm sure all of you know that will tell you where a game is being
that will tell you where a game is being sold the cheapest. So, it doesn't matter
sold the cheapest. So, it doesn't matter if your game is being sold for $10 on a
if your game is being sold for $10 on a 100 websites. If one site is selling it
100 websites. If one site is selling it for $5, everybody's going to go there
for $5, everybody's going to go there and buy it for $5. So, you need to be in
and buy it for $5. So, you need to be in control of how much your game costs. And
control of how much your game costs. And that goes into something else you should
that goes into something else you should do, which is take yourself seriously
do, which is take yourself seriously with the indie scene. Nobody wants to be
with the indie scene. Nobody wants to be the boss guy. Nobody wants to be the
the boss guy. Nobody wants to be the suit or the you need to do this and you
suit or the you need to do this and you need to do that and I'm a professional.
need to do that and I'm a professional. It's like, nah, man. I'm like, I'm just
It's like, nah, man. I'm like, I'm just indie dev. I'm chill. Like, I'm cool.
indie dev. I'm chill. Like, I'm cool. But people don't want to take you
But people don't want to take you seriously if you're chill and cool. And
seriously if you're chill and cool. And then nobody's going to buy your game.
then nobody's going to buy your game. Nobody's going to want to feature your
Nobody's going to want to feature your game because then you look like somebody
game because then you look like somebody who doesn't know what you're doing. And
who doesn't know what you're doing. And so you need to set professional
so you need to set professional standards. One of the worst things we
standards. One of the worst things we did when we were starting out is because
did when we were starting out is because we were new, we weren't comfortable
we were new, we weren't comfortable telling contractors that they had a due
telling contractors that they had a due date. So we ended up with assets. We've
date. So we ended up with assets. We've been developing this game for 3 years.
been developing this game for 3 years. Their assets I still haven't received
Their assets I still haven't received from artists. I'm just never going to
from artists. I'm just never going to get them. There's a cool poster. Not
get them. There's a cool poster. Not going to have that. An animation. Nope.
going to have that. An animation. Nope. All kinds of things. You need to do that
All kinds of things. You need to do that even if it feels uncomfortable. You need
even if it feels uncomfortable. You need to do that. You need to say, "No, I'm
to do that. You need to say, "No, I'm sorry. I need this by this time." And
sorry. I need this by this time." And then once you get that, you'll get
then once you get that, you'll get comfortable with it. And then it'll make
comfortable with it. And then it'll make everything so much easier for you. Cuz
everything so much easier for you. Cuz you need to treat your game like it has
you need to treat your game like it has value because it does. I don't care how
value because it does. I don't care how terrible your game is. is it could have
terrible your game is. is it could have the worst graphics and it could lag
the worst graphics and it could lag every half second, but you're putting
every half second, but you're putting your time into this game. You're putting
your time into this game. You're putting your everything into this game. And if
your everything into this game. And if you don't treat it like it's worth
you don't treat it like it's worth something, nobody else is going to treat
something, nobody else is going to treat it like it's worth something either. So,
it like it's worth something either. So, you need to step back, look at what
you need to step back, look at what you're working on, and say, "Hell yeah,
you're working on, and say, "Hell yeah, like this is worth it, and I'm going to
like this is worth it, and I'm going to let other people know that they need to
let other people know that they need to treat it that way, too." So, get
treat it that way, too." So, get feedback.
feedback. Don't shy away from that. Don't baby
Don't shy away from that. Don't baby your game and coddle it and say, "No,
your game and coddle it and say, "No, it's not ready and go away and you can't
it's not ready and go away and you can't look at it." Like, don't do that. Get it
look at it." Like, don't do that. Get it out there. Put it out there early,
out there. Put it out there early, often, and everywhere. And when I say
often, and everywhere. And when I say everywhere, these are some amazing
everywhere, these are some amazing places to get feedback for your game.
places to get feedback for your game. Reddit was one of the best places that
Reddit was one of the best places that we got awesome feedback from our game.
we got awesome feedback from our game. Uh, not just like indie dev or gamedev
Uh, not just like indie dev or gamedev subreddits. We were on the cyberpunk
subreddits. We were on the cyberpunk subreddit just posting early screenshots
subreddit just posting early screenshots of like our demo of like our earliest
of like our demo of like our earliest build and saying like, "Hey guys, we
build and saying like, "Hey guys, we make a cyberpunk game. Is this cool?"
make a cyberpunk game. Is this cool?" And they were like, "Yeah, this is
And they were like, "Yeah, this is cool." Find, again, I know I keep going
cool." Find, again, I know I keep going back to it, like those really niche
back to it, like those really niche communities. Find a small community that
communities. Find a small community that fits with the themes of your game and
fits with the themes of your game and ask them what they think.
ask them what they think. Also, listen to what people have to say.
Also, listen to what people have to say. It's really easy to give people an
It's really easy to give people an opportunity to talk, but it's impossible
opportunity to talk, but it's impossible sometimes to listen to what they have to
sometimes to listen to what they have to say. I had maybe 50 people tell me in a
say. I had maybe 50 people tell me in a row at a convention that the crosshair
row at a convention that the crosshair in our game is hard to see. And I was
in our game is hard to see. And I was like, "No, it's not. It's right there."
like, "No, it's not. It's right there." And I know, but I just And they're And
And I know, but I just And they're And I'm watching these people who I'm wrong.
I'm watching these people who I'm wrong. They're taking time out of their day to
They're taking time out of their day to play my game and they're trying to tell
play my game and they're trying to tell me this part of your game doesn't really
me this part of your game doesn't really work. And I'm like, "No, I can see the
work. And I'm like, "No, I can see the crosshair." So 50 people the whole day
crosshair." So 50 people the whole day and then the second day of the
and then the second day of the convention. Uh just has anyone ever told
convention. Uh just has anyone ever told you like your crosshair is kind of hard
you like your crosshair is kind of hard to to see? And they're squinting at my
to to see? And they're squinting at my computer and I'm back there like no,
computer and I'm back there like no, nobody's ever said that to me.
nobody's ever said that to me. And I went home and we fixed the
And I went home and we fixed the crosshair.
crosshair. And people loved it. Not a single
And people loved it. Not a single complaint since. So, it's going to
complaint since. So, it's going to bruise your ego. It is. You're going to
bruise your ego. It is. You're going to want to think that you're the best game
want to think that you're the best game developer in the world. You're going to
developer in the world. You're going to want to think that you know exactly what
want to think that you know exactly what you're doing because it's your baby. But
you're doing because it's your baby. But you got to listen. People are they're
you got to listen. People are they're going to sit down and the first thing
going to sit down and the first thing out of their mouth, you need to remember
out of their mouth, you need to remember what it is. The first thing they say,
what it is. The first thing they say, good or bad, that's their instant
good or bad, that's their instant immediate impression. You need to write
immediate impression. You need to write it down if you're not going to remember.
it down if you're not going to remember. If it's I can't see your crosshair. The
If it's I can't see your crosshair. The colors don't make sense. I don't get it.
colors don't make sense. I don't get it. Take the time to talk to them. What
Take the time to talk to them. What don't you get? Ask that question. It's
don't you get? Ask that question. It's simple. People love to talk. People love
simple. People love to talk. People love to tell you what they don't like about
to tell you what they don't like about stuff. So, take that opportunity. Be
stuff. So, take that opportunity. Be like, "Good. Tell me what you don't like
like, "Good. Tell me what you don't like about it and make it better."
about it and make it better." All of this goes into the most important
All of this goes into the most important thing.
thing. Keep your day job. And I am not going to
Keep your day job. And I am not going to be the first indie developer to tell you
be the first indie developer to tell you that. And I pray to God I'm not the last
that. And I pray to God I'm not the last indie developer to tell you that. But
indie developer to tell you that. But you need to keep your day job. No matter
you need to keep your day job. No matter how much fun it is to work on your game,
how much fun it is to work on your game, no matter how much time you think you
no matter how much time you think you can spend on it and kind of h like maybe
can spend on it and kind of h like maybe I don't really need that game job. And
I don't really need that game job. And I'm going to give you some real
I'm going to give you some real logistical adult reasons why, which is
logistical adult reasons why, which is the first one is you subsidize your game
the first one is you subsidize your game costs. Your game's not going to make
costs. Your game's not going to make money right away, if it makes money at
money right away, if it makes money at all. Let's be real. So, you need to pay
all. Let's be real. So, you need to pay for things out of your own pocket. our
for things out of your own pocket. our first couple conventions that was all
first couple conventions that was all us. Uh paying our contractors, paying
us. Uh paying our contractors, paying our artists, that came from us. You have
our artists, that came from us. You have to have that available. And if you
to have that available. And if you don't, if you think I'm just going to
don't, if you think I'm just going to quit my job and I'm going to become an
quit my job and I'm going to become an indie game developer, it's not free
indie game developer, it's not free making a game. It's work and it's money.
making a game. It's work and it's money. And quitting your g your day job
And quitting your g your day job eliminates any chance you have of
eliminates any chance you have of subsidizing game costs. Also, you need a
subsidizing game costs. Also, you need a safety net.
safety net. Your game might fail, and it hurts to
Your game might fail, and it hurts to think about that, and it hurts to admit
think about that, and it hurts to admit it to yourself and to keep that in your
it to yourself and to keep that in your back pocket while you're developing a
back pocket while you're developing a game. It could fail. And if it does, you
game. It could fail. And if it does, you need to have something that's going to
need to have something that's going to prop you up. It cannot be your game. I
prop you up. It cannot be your game. I hate to tell you that, and it sounds so
hate to tell you that, and it sounds so negative, I guess, but you need to have
negative, I guess, but you need to have something there because that's that's
something there because that's that's your livelihood. Like you can't play
your livelihood. Like you can't play with that just cuz you want to make a
with that just cuz you want to make a cool platformer. Like that's not worth
cool platformer. Like that's not worth it. But you get to define success and
it. But you get to define success and failure when you keep your day job. If
failure when you keep your day job. If your game fails and you don't get to eat
your game fails and you don't get to eat dinner that week, you have failed.
dinner that week, you have failed. You don't get to deny that. You don't
You don't get to deny that. You don't get to say that that's not a failure
get to say that that's not a failure because it is a failure. If you have
because it is a failure. If you have income already, if you have something to
income already, if you have something to carry you, you get to define what
carry you, you get to define what success and failure is. For us, success
success and failure is. For us, success was having the game pay for itself.
was having the game pay for itself. That's all we wanted. All we wanted was
That's all we wanted. All we wanted was a game that could eventually sustain
a game that could eventually sustain itself. And we got there. And we got
itself. And we got there. And we got there because we kept our day jobs. And
there because we kept our day jobs. And we got there because we were
we got there because we were fortunate enough to have that foresight
fortunate enough to have that foresight and put ourselves in the position where
and put ourselves in the position where we could define what success is to us.
we could define what success is to us. And I want that for you. I want you to
And I want that for you. I want you to be able to pay your rent. I want you to
be able to pay your rent. I want you to be able to get your kids a new backpack
be able to get your kids a new backpack for school. Don't tie those things to
for school. Don't tie those things to the success and failure of your game cuz
the success and failure of your game cuz it's not worth it. But it will be worth
it's not worth it. But it will be worth it when it succeeds if you don't have
it when it succeeds if you don't have all that stress. So I've I just I wanted
all that stress. So I've I just I wanted to end with that because I've heard so
to end with that because I've heard so many horror stories from other devs
many horror stories from other devs losing houses, not struggling to get by.
losing houses, not struggling to get by. And that does not need to be you. I'm
And that does not need to be you. I'm here telling you the industry does not
here telling you the industry does not need to be that difficult. If you have a
need to be that difficult. If you have a day job, keep it. If you don't have a
day job, keep it. If you don't have a day job, find one, keep it, and then
day job, find one, keep it, and then work on your game. So, that's all I have
work on your game. So, that's all I have to say. That's our game. That's me.
to say. That's our game. That's me. That's Garrett. I would absolutely love
That's Garrett. I would absolutely love for you guys to come and find me after
for you guys to come and find me after this. Ask me questions, talk. You can
this. Ask me questions, talk. You can talk to Garrett. He's lead developer, so
talk to Garrett. He's lead developer, so he'll be able to answer more technical
he'll be able to answer more technical questions. But you guys can do this. You
questions. But you guys can do this. You can do this. If I can freaking do this
can do this. If I can freaking do this and I was a high school teacher, you can
and I was a high school teacher, you can do this. Like, come on. It's just just
do this. Like, come on. It's just just do everything I said and you'll be
do everything I said and you'll be totally fine. So, yeah. Awesome. Thanks,
totally fine. So, yeah. Awesome. Thanks, guys.
guys. [Applause]
Hello. This is my the longest talk in English
This is my the longest talk in English ever.
ever. [Applause]
[Applause] [Music]
Yeah. My name is Sun Park and I'm a creative director at Total Cream. Turkim
creative director at Total Cream. Turkim is an independent game studio based in
is an independent game studio based in South Korea
South Korea and in 2009 I founded our studio as a
and in 2009 I founded our studio as a school assignment project and since 2011
school assignment project and since 2011 we've turned out 30 our studio into
we've turned out 30 our studio into professional game studio. We made three
professional game studio. We made three games and two commercial games so far.
games and two commercial games so far. Today we will talk about our latest
Today we will talk about our latest project 6180 the moment.
Hm. Yeah.
Yeah. So in our team, we are just twoman team.
So in our team, we are just twoman team. So our programmer young men do code and
So our programmer young men do code and I do everything but code
I do everything but code except music. Yeah.
except music. Yeah. Including us, a total of five people
Including us, a total of five people worked on our game 6180 the moon. A
worked on our game 6180 the moon. A different programmer made the original
different programmer made the original version of game make with game maker and
version of game make with game maker and two different music composer created the
two different music composer created the music. The game is available on Steam,
music. The game is available on Steam, Xbox One and Wii U so far and we will
Xbox One and Wii U so far and we will launch on iOS soon. Android, we don't
launch on iOS soon. Android, we don't have Android phone. Sorry,
have Android phone. Sorry, I actually didn't work on um Yeah,
I actually didn't work on um Yeah, that's skip. Yeah, so
that's skip. Yeah, so maybe you don't know well about our
maybe you don't know well about our game. So this is trailer. As you see,
game. So this is trailer. As you see, this is a really minimalistic game.
this is a really minimalistic game. We've connected the top and bottom of
We've connected the top and bottom of the screen so player can jump extremely
the screen so player can jump extremely high through the screen. Yeah,
high through the screen. Yeah, I like that sound.
Okay, skip it. The first prototype was made in a game
The first prototype was made in a game jam. One day my previous freelance
jam. One day my previous freelance programmer Jerome and I visited my
programmer Jerome and I visited my friend's game studio and then they were
friend's game studio and then they were doing their internal game jam at that
doing their internal game jam at that time. When we arrived there there was
time. When we arrived there there was only 1 hour and 43 minutes left until
only 1 hour and 43 minutes left until the end of the jam. Jerome and I decided
the end of the jam. Jerome and I decided to join in the jam. We had less than 2
to join in the jam. We had less than 2 hours.
hours. Jerome said hey I prepared thing to make
Jerome said hey I prepared thing to make a platformer game. So you should make an
a platformer game. So you should make an awesome idea for it
awesome idea for it within 3 minutes.
within 3 minutes. Okay, I agreed and started to work on my
Okay, I agreed and started to work on my our game's main concept.
our game's main concept. So I'm always interested in make a weird
So I'm always interested in make a weird fun games. So this time I wanted to make
fun games. So this time I wanted to make a weird platformer game. So how can we
a weird platformer game. So how can we make a weird platformer game? I have
make a weird platformer game? I have only three minutes.
only three minutes. At first, I thought that the most
At first, I thought that the most essential thing in a platformer game is
essential thing in a platformer game is jump.
jump. So, I tried to make an idea for kind of
So, I tried to make an idea for kind of weird jumping.
weird jumping. Suddenly, I realized that all platformer
Suddenly, I realized that all platformer games have a limit on the the jump hate.
games have a limit on the the jump hate. It's screen size as you see.
It's screen size as you see. So I wanted to make a jumping mechanic
So I wanted to make a jumping mechanic that exceeds that jump limit. Finally,
that exceeds that jump limit. Finally, we did it by connecting top and bottom
we did it by connecting top and bottom of the screen. This is it.
of the screen. This is it. The first version is this video. And
The first version is this video. And yeah, it have just four tiny levels. We
yeah, it have just four tiny levels. We really love this prototype. So we
really love this prototype. So we decided to make a full version. In this
decided to make a full version. In this version, this white circle, yeah, it was
version, this white circle, yeah, it was just circle in the first version have a
just circle in the first version have a skill which make it stop in the midair.
skill which make it stop in the midair. Yeah, maybe you will see that soon.
Yeah, maybe you will see that soon. Yeah,
Yeah, as you see, it could stop infinitely,
as you see, it could stop infinitely, but in in the full version, we change it
but in in the full version, we change it it as one one time for one jump if the
it as one one time for one jump if the player have the item. Yeah.
player have the item. Yeah. So, we had a play test with our close
So, we had a play test with our close friends. They also like our games.
friends. They also like our games. Of course, there were both of good and
Of course, there were both of good and bad feedback,
bad feedback, but we decided to concentrate only on
but we decided to concentrate only on good feedback.
Why? Why good feedback only? First, we are not veteran developer.
First, we are not veteran developer. Though we've made games for several
Though we've made games for several years, I think we we are still newbie
years, I think we we are still newbie developers. If we couldn't make a
developers. If we couldn't make a perfect game, then we wanted to make a
perfect game, then we wanted to make a game which have its own color.
game which have its own color. So I also think maximizing good points
So I also think maximizing good points goes toward minimizing bad points as
goes toward minimizing bad points as well. So to keep improving our game's
well. So to keep improving our game's unique color, I made a game design
unique color, I made a game design checklist based in only good feedback.
The important the most important purpose of this list is making every build fun.
of this list is making every build fun. This is a part of the list. They are
This is a part of the list. They are mostly for supporting our main mechanics
mostly for supporting our main mechanics extremely long jump through the screen.
extremely long jump through the screen. Let's take a look each guidelines.
Let's take a look each guidelines. We thought our jump mechanic is super
We thought our jump mechanic is super unique. But whenever I added new
unique. But whenever I added new elements in our game, it I felt like the
elements in our game, it I felt like the game is was becoming too normal.
game is was becoming too normal. So I boldly quit expanding content. It
So I boldly quit expanding content. It was uh just try to make a tiny sexy
was uh just try to make a tiny sexy game. I wanted to end the game before
game. I wanted to end the game before people felt like our game mechanics
people felt like our game mechanics wasn't fresh anymore. Actually, the
wasn't fresh anymore. Actually, the average clear time is just around 6180
average clear time is just around 6180 seconds like our game title. We didn't
seconds like our game title. We didn't intend it to make it though. Yeah, lots
intend it to make it though. Yeah, lots of people said our game is too short,
of people said our game is too short, but I think this is totally enough
but I think this is totally enough gameplay length. If we make our game
gameplay length. If we make our game longer with same puzzle elements, yeah,
longer with same puzzle elements, yeah, it must be a lose a bit. Yeah,
it must be a lose a bit. Yeah, I think our main mechanics super long
I think our main mechanics super long jump in connected space would be a
jump in connected space would be a little complicated to some players.
little complicated to some players. Actually in the game the player should
Actually in the game the player should think before almost every jump. So the
think before almost every jump. So the core mechanic is already complicated in
core mechanic is already complicated in our case. To reduce the difficulty and
our case. To reduce the difficulty and make a game more simple, we used only
make a game more simple, we used only common puzzle object like breaking
common puzzle object like breaking thing, blinking thing and keep falling
thing, blinking thing and keep falling thing. Yet they are really common things
thing. Yet they are really common things in platformer genre. So they could
in platformer genre. So they could support our jump mechanic without
support our jump mechanic without elevating the difficulty of our game.
elevating the difficulty of our game. The most important thing while game
The most important thing while game designing is checking whether game
designing is checking whether game objects block both of the top and bottom
objects block both of the top and bottom of the screen.
of the screen. As I've said again and again, long jump
As I've said again and again, long jump in open space is main feature of our
in open space is main feature of our game. But if we block the space,
game. But if we block the space, it would be become a normal platformer.
it would be become a normal platformer. So I always try to keep both of top and
So I always try to keep both of top and bottom of the screen open. And there is
bottom of the screen open. And there is only one exception to this. It was
only one exception to this. It was breaking blocks because the space would
breaking blocks because the space would be open after breaking.
be open after breaking. I really like these breaking ones. Um in
I really like these breaking ones. Um in the early stage of development we set
the early stage of development we set its sound effect like glass crashing but
its sound effect like glass crashing but I wanted to make it a kind of music
I wanted to make it a kind of music thing after we made background music. So
thing after we made background music. So we made five musical sounds which fit
we made five musical sounds which fit with each PGM and play them randomly
with each PGM and play them randomly when they are broken.
when they are broken. Um yeah like making music through the
Um yeah like making music through the game play. That's surely
game play. That's surely so
so yeah
yeah pretty.
pretty. [Music]
[Music] We also tried to make all sound effects
We also tried to make all sound effects in game as a music thing but as a result
in game as a music thing but as a result we just made only this breaking sound as
we just made only this breaking sound as musical sound. It was my opinion. I
musical sound. It was my opinion. I thought that would be uh I thought that
thought that would be uh I thought that would be more charming if we make only
would be more charming if we make only several musical experience in whole
several musical experience in whole game.
We didn't want to make a hard game. Basically, I hope more people could see
Basically, I hope more people could see our games ending that allows us to show
our games ending that allows us to show the whole thing we made to players. So,
the whole thing we made to players. So, I designed all levels as fun experience,
I designed all levels as fun experience, not as a kind of challenging thing. For
not as a kind of challenging thing. For this, placing save point in each levels
this, placing save point in each levels is really important. Basically, I placed
is really important. Basically, I placed save points right before hard challenge,
save points right before hard challenge, but I tried not to make it too often. It
but I tried not to make it too often. It was just for reducing a kind of useless
was just for reducing a kind of useless action before retry. Yeah,
action before retry. Yeah, for the same reason, I tried a lot to
for the same reason, I tried a lot to place spikes in proper location while
place spikes in proper location while making games. If I try to make to play
making games. If I try to make to play or die, they always die. So I tried to
or die, they always die. So I tried to make them to threaten player, not to
make them to threaten player, not to kill players. In addition to make making
kill players. In addition to make making our game's long jump more attractive, I
our game's long jump more attractive, I placed the spikes st slightly down
placed the spikes st slightly down position on the normal jump path. It
position on the normal jump path. It could yeah give a feeling like yeah
could yeah give a feeling like yeah kind of yeah slightly good jump to
kind of yeah slightly good jump to players that makes yeah the player
players that makes yeah the player excited without dying.
excited without dying. We had such an interesting experience
We had such an interesting experience while we made the second page of the
while we made the second page of the game. I made about 200 levels and
game. I made about 200 levels and selected 50 levels for the game. At
selected 50 levels for the game. At first we'd set five words which have 10
first we'd set five words which have 10 levels and try to make a different
levels and try to make a different gravity space in each word like braid
gravity space in each word like braid did it well with variety mechanics with
did it well with variety mechanics with time but everything wasn't good as you
time but everything wasn't good as you know there are tons of gravity puzzle in
know there are tons of gravity puzzle in the world so it was really hard to make
the world so it was really hard to make a kind of unique gravity based puzzle
a kind of unique gravity based puzzle one day I just reversed gravity in some
one day I just reversed gravity in some levels and the magic has started. it.
levels and the magic has started. it. Frankly, reverse gravity is one of the
Frankly, reverse gravity is one of the most popular gravity puzzles, so I
most popular gravity puzzles, so I didn't expect anything, but it changed
didn't expect anything, but it changed all levels totally different. It because
all levels totally different. It because of our game's jump hate.
of our game's jump hate. In other platform games, the player's
In other platform games, the player's character cannot touch the bottom side
character cannot touch the bottom side of the platform.
of the platform. On the other hand, in our game, the moon
On the other hand, in our game, the moon can touch that bottom side of after
can touch that bottom side of after jumping through the screen.
jumping through the screen. So, in normal levels, some spikes aren't
So, in normal levels, some spikes aren't really threatening, but in the reverse
really threatening, but in the reverse gravity, they become critical obstacles
gravity, they become critical obstacles in some cases.
in some cases. Um, yeah. So,
Um, yeah. So, this is normal level.
this is normal level. Yeah, it's a really tiny level.
Yeah, it's a really tiny level. And when we reverse gravity,
And when we reverse gravity, it's a it's a bit different, but yeah,
it have yeah, a a bit different mechanics in in the same space.
mechanics in in the same space. So, as a result, we've got 50 free
So, as a result, we've got 50 free levels for the second page. We should
levels for the second page. We should had to edit a bit several levels though.
had to edit a bit several levels though. As I mentioned when I talked about
As I mentioned when I talked about puzzle objects, if the game mechanic is
puzzle objects, if the game mechanic is unique enough, the freshness remains
unique enough, the freshness remains when it mixed with familiar things.
when it mixed with familiar things. Let's talk about audio. Our game's
Let's talk about audio. Our game's graphic style is very minimal, so we
graphic style is very minimal, so we wanted to fill the lack of visual with
wanted to fill the lack of visual with audio. Actually, we didn't have an
audio. Actually, we didn't have an artist when we made this game. So, I did
artist when we made this game. So, I did the art as well, even though I don't
the art as well, even though I don't have any professional art skill. That's
have any professional art skill. That's why our game has only circles,
why our game has only circles, rectangles, and triangle in the game.
When we made first prototype, yeah, this is one of our games PGM. When
yeah, this is one of our games PGM. When we made the first prototype, we used
we made the first prototype, we used music from my favorite Japanese artist,
music from my favorite Japanese artist, Ray Harakami.
Ray Harakami. He he died
He he died two years ago. Yeah. RIP.
two years ago. Yeah. RIP. The music has a kind of space feeling
The music has a kind of space feeling and it was a great mix with our long
and it was a great mix with our long jump mechanics. So, I requested that
jump mechanics. So, I requested that kind of space filling music to our
kind of space filling music to our composer, actually my wife. This game
composer, actually my wife. This game has a bit slower pace because the player
has a bit slower pace because the player should think before jumping. So I think
should think before jumping. So I think our slow background music makes the
our slow background music makes the player calm down properly and it also
player calm down properly and it also make a great atmosphere when mixed with
make a great atmosphere when mixed with musical effects.
musical effects. Yeah, this is good.
So now I'll talk about our porting process to different platforms for the
process to different platforms for the last. Basically the Xbox One and iOS
last. Basically the Xbox One and iOS version are almost exactly the same as
version are almost exactly the same as our original PC version, but the Wii U
our original PC version, but the Wii U version is a special case. After
version is a special case. After launching the original GameMaker
launching the original GameMaker version, we showed our game at E3's
version, we showed our game at E3's Indicate Showcase
Indicate Showcase 2013. Yeah, we met Nintendo repres
2013. Yeah, we met Nintendo repres representative there and decided to make
representative there and decided to make a console version. At first, Nintendo
a console version. At first, Nintendo proposed that we make a 3DS version. But
proposed that we make a 3DS version. But we we heard that making a game for 3DS
we we heard that making a game for 3DS is too hard. So, we thought that if we
is too hard. So, we thought that if we port our game to Unity 3D, then we could
port our game to Unity 3D, then we could support Wii U and also support many
support Wii U and also support many other platforms easier. So we decided to
other platforms easier. So we decided to port the game to Unity 3D first.
port the game to Unity 3D first. The W game pad was really interesting.
The W game pad was really interesting. It was too big though. We talked a lot
It was too big though. We talked a lot about how to use the game pad screen in
about how to use the game pad screen in our game. Basically, we are always
our game. Basically, we are always interested in making something new and
interested in making something new and weird thing. So, we didn't want to use
weird thing. So, we didn't want to use it as a typical second screen. We didn't
it as a typical second screen. We didn't want to make it uh mini map viewer or
want to make it uh mini map viewer or inventory like other games.
inventory like other games. Our game feature uh connected space as
Our game feature uh connected space as the main mechanic. So we try to connect
the main mechanic. So we try to connect both of screens. So the player can jump
both of screens. So the player can jump from Wii U gamepad to TV and vice versa.
from Wii U gamepad to TV and vice versa. Yeah, super complicated.
Yeah, super complicated. Of course, that means that all our
Of course, that means that all our existing levels didn't works in two
existing levels didn't works in two screen space. So, we had to make
screen space. So, we had to make entirely new levels for the Wii U
entirely new levels for the Wii U version.
version. Frankly speaking, this is not a popular
Frankly speaking, this is not a popular use of the Wii U gamepad. We already
use of the Wii U gamepad. We already knew that Wii U players like its TV off
knew that Wii U players like its TV off feature, but we didn't want to quit our
feature, but we didn't want to quit our experiment as a developer. Even though
experiment as a developer. Even though we would fail to succeed with this, we
we would fail to succeed with this, we wanted to finish this experiment. Well,
wanted to finish this experiment. Well, like the original PC version, connected
like the original PC version, connected TV and gamepad would be frustrating to
TV and gamepad would be frustrating to some people. So, I tried to reduce that
some people. So, I tried to reduce that confusion.
confusion. So,
So, Oh, what? Why?
Oh, what? Why? Why you don't move?
Oh, sorry the timing. Let's get back.
Okay, so this is Yeah. gameplay footage of Wii
so this is Yeah. gameplay footage of Wii U version.
U version. Complicated.
Complicated. Yeah. For example, I tried not to make
Yeah. For example, I tried not to make levels that make player move super fast
levels that make player move super fast between TV and gamepad.
between TV and gamepad. So yeah,
So yeah, this is game play. Um, we released W
this is game play. Um, we released W version several weeks ago in US and
version several weeks ago in US and Europe. Many reviewers said that this is
Europe. Many reviewers said that this is the best version of 6180 the moon. I
the best version of 6180 the moon. I think we did well.
As your research, we made a game which has both a likes and dislikes. Some
has both a likes and dislikes. Some people said our minimal graphic is
people said our minimal graphic is really beautiful, but and others said
really beautiful, but and others said it's like an Atari game. Also, some
it's like an Atari game. Also, some people said our game is really
people said our game is really experimental and unique and others said
experimental and unique and others said that's another copycat of we we or
that's another copycat of we we or geometry dash.
geometry dash. Anyway,
yeah, if if one of you thought about it, try our
if one of you thought about it, try our game. It's totally different.
game. It's totally different. Anyway, we really love our game. Why
Anyway, we really love our game. Why should I care about the taste of other
should I care about the taste of other people? I'm indie. I played hundreds of
people? I'm indie. I played hundreds of time while testing our game but I think
time while testing our game but I think this is really great fun game if I play
this is really great fun game if I play this game again now.
this game again now. Yeah. So yeah we are indie and I love
Yeah. So yeah we are indie and I love it. That's enough.
it. That's enough. So the most important lesson we learned
So the most important lesson we learned is yeah love our own game. This is the
is yeah love our own game. This is the most important thing while make games.
most important thing while make games. Every time we decided something we did
Every time we decided something we did something we did what we liked not what
something we did what we liked not what people liked and we are satisfied with
people liked and we are satisfied with it and and think I'm not special person
it and and think I'm not special person you too we are not special so if we love
you too we are not special so if we love our own game other would love your game
our own game other would love your game right
right so love your own game thanks for
so love your own game thanks for listening
listening [Applause]
[Applause] Hold on. Wait. Let me
Hold on. Wait. Let me [Applause]
We're turning off tweet. Sorry.
Wait, how does this How do you do this? Oh, sorry. Here.
Oh, sorry. Here. Oh, there we go.
What's happening? Can I just do to um Are you trying to do
Can I just do to um Are you trying to do presentation? Can we Can we just do
presentation? Can we Can we just do regular? Yeah. Um that's here.
regular? Yeah. Um that's here. Let's do this.
Oh, there we go. Can you see it? Yeah. Awesome. Hi,
Awesome. Hi, I'm
I'm [Music]
[Music] my public. Um, can you hear me? Okay,
my public. Um, can you hear me? Okay, great. Um, so my name is AVB and I wrote
great. Um, so my name is AVB and I wrote a game called We Know the Devil. And now
a game called We Know the Devil. And now you're going to know a whole lot more
you're going to know a whole lot more about the devil. Um, and so let's see.
about the devil. Um, and so let's see. Um, I've been a games critic for an
Um, I've been a games critic for an awful long time, about eight years,
awful long time, about eight years, which is horrifying. Um, and I've been
which is horrifying. Um, and I've been freelancing for a lot of different
freelancing for a lot of different places. Um, I'm currently running my own
places. Um, I'm currently running my own alt website called Zeal. Um, and last
alt website called Zeal. Um, and last summer from June 2nd to September 12th,
summer from June 2nd to September 12th, we conceived of and completed a short
we conceived of and completed a short visual novel called We Know the Devil.
visual novel called We Know the Devil. Um, it's a visual novel about choosing
Um, it's a visual novel about choosing which of the three teens trapped in a
which of the three teens trapped in a weird and unsettling Christian summer
weird and unsettling Christian summer camp will hang out and maybe kiss and
camp will hang out and maybe kiss and which one they'll leave out and then
which one they'll leave out and then what happens when the devil shows up for
what happens when the devil shows up for them all in the end. You know, normal
them all in the end. You know, normal stuff. It's heavily steeped in the
stuff. It's heavily steeped in the aesthetic of unbearable Midwestern
aesthetic of unbearable Midwestern summers 80 horrors movie and growing up
summers 80 horrors movie and growing up gay and repressive religious
gay and repressive religious communities. Um, it has a unique
communities. Um, it has a unique mechanic to it actually and I'm going to
mechanic to it actually and I'm going to spend a lot of this talk talking about
spend a lot of this talk talking about how the mechanic of the visual novel
how the mechanic of the visual novel because visual novels do have game
because visual novels do have game mechanics. Screw you. Um,
mechanics. Screw you. Um, they are games. Um, and how that created
they are games. Um, and how that created a structure um, when it came to
a structure um, when it came to outlining and designing this process cuz
outlining and designing this process cuz we made this game in 100 days actually
we made this game in 100 days actually um, which is an awfully short time. Like
um, which is an awfully short time. Like we didn't have we I pitched the idea on
we didn't have we I pitched the idea on June 2nd. We had an outline a week from
June 2nd. We had an outline a week from then and then it was like a whirlwind
then and then it was like a whirlwind process. So I'm going to mostly focus on
process. So I'm going to mostly focus on uh what I did because I'm I'm the writer
uh what I did because I'm I'm the writer and designer. Um I wasn't the programmer
and designer. Um I wasn't the programmer or the artist. There's they have they're
or the artist. There's they have they're super wonderful talented people who can
super wonderful talented people who can be here today. Um and they have their
be here today. Um and they have their own perspectives. But I thought that it
own perspectives. But I thought that it would most be most useful to frame this
would most be most useful to frame this as a writer. How did I design this as a
as a writer. How did I design this as a writer? How do you marry writing and
writer? How do you marry writing and game design together? Um, and I hope
game design together? Um, and I hope that it will become clear that there's a
that it will become clear that there's a lot of the the the larger structural
lot of the the the larger structural ways in which you frame long pieces of
ways in which you frame long pieces of narrative writing that are not linear
narrative writing that are not linear are actually very similar to game
are actually very similar to game design. Um, if you want to write
design. Um, if you want to write something longer than an essay, at least
something longer than an essay, at least for me, I have to break it into smaller
for me, I have to break it into smaller chunks. Um, and the the structure and
chunks. Um, and the the structure and the the mechanics of We Know the Devil
the the mechanics of We Know the Devil helped us do that. Um,
helped us do that. Um, so I'll go into those in a little bit.
so I'll go into those in a little bit. So this is my talk, how to finish a
So this is my talk, how to finish a visual novel in less than a year if you
visual novel in less than a year if you also know how to do a bunch of other
also know how to do a bunch of other stuff. And here's that other stuff.
stuff. And here's that other stuff. Uh, I won't spend too long on this, but
Uh, I won't spend too long on this, but uh I I want you to know this was my
uh I I want you to know this was my first commercial game. Um, and it was
first commercial game. Um, and it was also the the artist and co-creative
also the the artist and co-creative director Mia Schwarz's first first video
director Mia Schwarz's first first video game. Um, but neither of us had shipped
game. Um, but neither of us had shipped anything before then. Um,
anything before then. Um, is it auto advancing or Okay, cool.
is it auto advancing or Okay, cool. I'm watching you.
I'm watching you. Um, but part of the reason uh why we
Um, but part of the reason uh why we were able to do that is because we were
were able to do that is because we were both experienced storytellers in our own
both experienced storytellers in our own mediums. We had this structure that
mediums. We had this structure that allowed us to start applying it to
allowed us to start applying it to games. Um, and we also knew uh an
games. Um, and we also knew uh an amazing team, the date night, who makes
amazing team, the date night, who makes visual novels in HTML 5, and they had a
visual novels in HTML 5, and they had a programmer, a project manager, and gave
programmer, a project manager, and gave us a whole bunch of startup capital. Um,
us a whole bunch of startup capital. Um, so part of a subtext to this is is make
so part of a subtext to this is is make sure that you know people um make
sure that you know people um make friends, create like make cool stuff on
friends, create like make cool stuff on your own and you might be able to find
your own and you might be able to find some really great collaborative partners
some really great collaborative partners later on. If you prove yourself um in
later on. If you prove yourself um in your own field, even if it has nothing
your own field, even if it has nothing to do with games, they'll be impressed
to do with games, they'll be impressed enough by your your gumption. And all
enough by your your gumption. And all right. So, all right. So, this is we
right. So, all right. So, this is we know the devil or at least this is what
know the devil or at least this is what we know the devil looks like to me. Um,
we know the devil looks like to me. Um, until a few weeks before we shipped. Um,
until a few weeks before we shipped. Um, I wrote this whole thing in Scrier,
I wrote this whole thing in Scrier, which is a very wonderful program that
which is a very wonderful program that I'll talk more. I'll talk your face off
I'll talk more. I'll talk your face off about this. It's really useful because
about this. It's really useful because it is a nonlinear writing program. It
it is a nonlinear writing program. It lets you subdivide things. Um, if you
lets you subdivide things. Um, if you look at the the left hand side of the
look at the the left hand side of the screen, and I'm going to zoom in on it,
screen, and I'm going to zoom in on it, I promise. Um, you can see how every
I promise. Um, you can see how every branch of the game is subdivided into
branch of the game is subdivided into different little folders. So, whenever
different little folders. So, whenever there was a choice, um, then I could
there was a choice, um, then I could have I could nestle those choices
have I could nestle those choices together,
together, and it helped for me visually and it
and it helped for me visually and it also helped for the overall structure.
also helped for the overall structure. Um,
Um, let's see.
let's see. So, what I'm going to do is step by step
So, what I'm going to do is step by step go from the initial concept um to the
go from the initial concept um to the day when I figured out how many words
day when I figured out how many words long this visual novel was going to be.
long this visual novel was going to be. Um cuz all of that stuff there at about
Um cuz all of that stuff there at about 7 days into development, I was like this
7 days into development, I was like this is going to be 15,000 words long. Um and
is going to be 15,000 words long. Um and I knew that because of the groundwork
I knew that because of the groundwork that I did in the first seven days. So,
that I did in the first seven days. So, let's go through it. Here's the plan.
let's go through it. Here's the plan. Um, first there's the premise and the
Um, first there's the premise and the mechanics, like what defines this game.
mechanics, like what defines this game. Um, second, because this is a
Um, second, because this is a character-driven game, um, and there are
character-driven game, um, and there are three characters in it, we needed to
three characters in it, we needed to have a firm idea of who they were, what
have a firm idea of who they were, what they looked like, um, what their
they looked like, um, what their personalities were. Because the entire
personalities were. Because the entire mechanic of the game is putting these
mechanic of the game is putting these characters in a room with each other,
characters in a room with each other, um, and seeing the, let me describe the
um, and seeing the, let me describe the mechanic. You actually have there are
mechanic. You actually have there are three main characters. Um, and at every
three main characters. Um, and at every choice point you decide which two of
choice point you decide which two of them hang out and which one gets left
them hang out and which one gets left out. Um, and the ending is different
out. Um, and the ending is different depending on which two were together the
depending on which two were together the most and which person was left out the
most and which person was left out the most. Um, so two people will find some
most. Um, so two people will find some sort of happiness with each other and
sort of happiness with each other and then the one who's left off um will have
then the one who's left off um will have an awesome time with the devil at the
an awesome time with the devil at the end.
end. Um, so that's it. And then so from the
Um, so that's it. And then so from the beginning premise and mechanics, the
beginning premise and mechanics, the character profile profiles um and then
character profile profiles um and then the chapter branch and editing structure
the chapter branch and editing structure um was was basically what would the
um was was basically what would the nitty-gritty of this be and from that we
nitty-gritty of this be and from that we got to go to the word count. So, let's
got to go to the word count. So, let's start um
start um with the premise um because we both
with the premise um because we both wanted to actually complete this game in
wanted to actually complete this game in a month. Um because we originally did
a month. Um because we originally did this for the I Love You Game Jam, which
this for the I Love You Game Jam, which is a visual novel dating sim uh game jam
is a visual novel dating sim uh game jam that takes the place over a month. Um
that takes the place over a month. Um Mia, my my artist was like, I want
Mia, my my artist was like, I want something that feels complete. I don't
something that feels complete. I don't want like a proof of concept or a
want like a proof of concept or a vertical slice or something like that.
vertical slice or something like that. Let's like make a short story in visual
Let's like make a short story in visual novel form. Um, and I thought that was a
novel form. Um, and I thought that was a really good idea because I I didn't want
really good idea because I I didn't want it to feel unsatisfying. I wanted to
it to feel unsatisfying. I wanted to take this concept and explore it as much
take this concept and explore it as much as I could. So that meant like the
as I could. So that meant like the smallest possible implementation of the
smallest possible implementation of the single mechanic. There was originally
single mechanic. There was originally four characters and we know the devil.
four characters and we know the devil. Um, and that's exponentially more
Um, and that's exponentially more interactions between those characters.
interactions between those characters. So we cut it down to three. Um, just as
So we cut it down to three. Um, just as a sort of like, yeah, three people.
a sort of like, yeah, three people. That's all you need to have three
That's all you need to have three different combinations. three different
different combinations. three different people, three endings. Um, a very easy
people, three endings. Um, a very easy to to see branching structure. Um, and
to to see branching structure. Um, and from that we started coming up with like
from that we started coming up with like premise and aesthetics that would
premise and aesthetics that would emphasize the mechanics but also be
emphasize the mechanics but also be within our budget. So '8s horror movies,
within our budget. So '8s horror movies, we decided to use uh realistic
we decided to use uh realistic photograph backgrounds. We actually took
photograph backgrounds. We actually took them with a disposable camera in the
them with a disposable camera in the woods. It was really, really scary. Um,
woods. It was really, really scary. Um, I was sure I was going to get ax
I was sure I was going to get ax murdered. Um, but because of that, we
murdered. Um, but because of that, we were able to have something that was
were able to have something that was really thematically resonant, um, but
really thematically resonant, um, but also very easy to do because we didn't
also very easy to do because we didn't have the money for a background artist
have the money for a background artist and we didn't, um, want to go through
and we didn't, um, want to go through all of that effort. Um, let's see. Um,
all of that effort. Um, let's see. Um, and it's also representative of other
and it's also representative of other indie visual novels, um, which like like
indie visual novels, um, which like like Sukiime and Umeo, which are, um,
Sukiime and Umeo, which are, um, Japanese visual novels, actually do a
Japanese visual novels, actually do a kind of like cheaply filtered
kind of like cheaply filtered backgrounds. We thought if we unfiltered
backgrounds. We thought if we unfiltered them it they would stand out more and
them it they would stand out more and seem like a really cool artistic choice
seem like a really cool artistic choice instead of like we were just lazy and
instead of like we were just lazy and didn't have a lot of money. Um the small
didn't have a lot of money. Um the small cast was also really important because
cast was also really important because uh we ran into memory constraints later
uh we ran into memory constraints later on. Um so let's talk about character
on. Um so let's talk about character development. Um so Mia and I had a
development. Um so Mia and I had a really good working relationship where I
really good working relationship where I would basically pitch I would write up
would basically pitch I would write up this profile of the character. she would
this profile of the character. she would draw that character. Um, and then the
draw that character. Um, and then the two of us would just kind of like
two of us would just kind of like spitball and come up with scenarios for
spitball and come up with scenarios for that um, for those characters
that um, for those characters interacting with each other because Mia
interacting with each other because Mia is not just like a character designer
is not just like a character designer and a visual artist. She's a cartoonist.
and a visual artist. She's a cartoonist. Um, and she does she does storytelling
Um, and she does she does storytelling in comics. Um, I think this is a I think
in comics. Um, I think this is a I think comics are such an untapped medium for
comics are such an untapped medium for video games. It's like we want somebody
video games. It's like we want somebody we want to like hire the art person.
we want to like hire the art person. It's like just draw this thing and I'm
It's like just draw this thing and I'm going to put it in my game. Um, my
going to put it in my game. Um, my relationship with Mia though was more
relationship with Mia though was more like we designed the characters
like we designed the characters together. We co-created each and every
together. We co-created each and every one of them. Um, which is why I'm the
one of them. Um, which is why I'm the co-creative lead on this this this
co-creative lead on this this this title. And even though I wrote every
title. And even though I wrote every single word in this, um, the characters,
single word in this, um, the characters, the ideas for the characters, their
the ideas for the characters, their personalities and stuff were shaped very
personalities and stuff were shaped very much by Mia like emailing or
much by Mia like emailing or sending me a message on Slack at like
sending me a message on Slack at like two in the morning saying like, "This
two in the morning saying like, "This vine is totally like Venus." and and
vine is totally like Venus." and and those sorts of like us kind of like
those sorts of like us kind of like finding the characters and their
finding the characters and their preferences and their likes and dislikes
preferences and their likes and dislikes in the world helped us come up with
in the world helped us come up with scenarios for them. Um because the whole
scenarios for them. Um because the whole game was going to be like, okay, we're
game was going to be like, okay, we're going to put these you can choose
going to put these you can choose between these two characters drinking
between these two characters drinking underage together or these two
underage together or these two characters drinking underage together.
characters drinking underage together. What would it be like if they were in
What would it be like if they were in that situation? Um,
that situation? Um, part of the reason why that's so so
part of the reason why that's so so important, um,
important, um, oh, here's a, so
oh, here's a, so this was the first thing that I sent Mia
this was the first thing that I sent Mia of the Scrier file and the final chapter
of the Scrier file and the final chapter list is on the other side. Um,
list is on the other side. Um, we came up with this um, when Mia was
we came up with this um, when Mia was like when I was like, I need some sort
like when I was like, I need some sort of structure. We were going for a horror
of structure. We were going for a horror movie thing. Mia said like let's just do
movie thing. Mia said like let's just do it over the course of a single day and I
it over the course of a single day and I cut it to 12 hours because it seemed
cut it to 12 hours because it seemed like oh an evening um you know from
like oh an evening um you know from afternoon to early morning feels like an
afternoon to early morning feels like an appropriate length of time and this is a
appropriate length of time and this is a totally arbitrary mechanism but it
totally arbitrary mechanism but it allowed us essentially what is like no
allowed us essentially what is like no different than like a worldle
different than like a worldle structure like you would see in Mario or
structure like you would see in Mario or like virtually any other like platformer
like virtually any other like platformer or something like that. Um it's just
or something like that. Um it's just it's based off of this idea, but it
it's based off of this idea, but it ensures that we have 12 slots. We have
ensures that we have 12 slots. We have to fill each of those 12 slots with
to fill each of those 12 slots with something. What will go into them? Um
something. What will go into them? Um and how will the dramatic structure kind
and how will the dramatic structure kind of like go from there? Um I decided
of like go from there? Um I decided that it would be let's see a character
that it would be let's see a character work. Throw them together and what
work. Throw them together and what happens? Um,
happens? Um, so
so after after a while of just spitballing
after after a while of just spitballing together, we decided that like there's
together, we decided that like there's going to be seven seven different events
going to be seven seven different events cuz that's going to create an uneven
cuz that's going to create an uneven number of choices. And I decided to only
number of choices. And I decided to only have two possible pairings, even though
have two possible pairings, even though there's three there's three possible
there's three there's three possible pairings for each interaction. I decided
pairings for each interaction. I decided to to narrow it down to two um because
to to narrow it down to two um because it would force characters to pick
it would force characters to pick pairings that they didn't necessarily
pairings that they didn't necessarily want because they wouldn't always have
want because they wouldn't always have their favorite pairing available to
their favorite pairing available to them. Um and also because it would be
them. Um and also because it would be less work. Um and that was the really
less work. Um and that was the really important thing. Um again, it's the
important thing. Um again, it's the smallest implementation of a really
smallest implementation of a really potentially huge idea. Um and in order
potentially huge idea. Um and in order for us to explore and see that it
for us to explore and see that it worked, we really didn't need to go any
worked, we really didn't need to go any more ambitious. Um, and the less
more ambitious. Um, and the less ambitious we were, the more able we were
ambitious we were, the more able we were to actually do this. Like I said, this
to actually do this. Like I said, this is about making a plan to write
is about making a plan to write something in one month so that you can
something in one month so that you can actually write it in three and a half
actually write it in three and a half months. Um, if we had the more that we
months. Um, if we had the more that we overcoped, the more we would have
overcoped, the more we would have overshot this completely. Um,
overshot this completely. Um, all right. So, word count goals. So, I I
all right. So, word count goals. So, I I decided on this. Um, we had the we had
decided on this. Um, we had the we had the setting, we had the chapter
the setting, we had the chapter structure. We knew that there would be
structure. We knew that there would be several different choices. There would
several different choices. There would be an intro chapter. There would be an
be an intro chapter. There would be an extended ending sequence. Um, so I knew
extended ending sequence. Um, so I knew exactly how many of those little slots
exactly how many of those little slots that I made in the Scriber file would
that I made in the Scriber file would exist practically within a few days of
exist practically within a few days of coming up with this concept. Um, then I
coming up with this concept. Um, then I decided, okay, what can I actually do as
decided, okay, what can I actually do as a writer? Um, I can write about a
a writer? Um, I can write about a thousand words a day. Um, I could and
thousand words a day. Um, I could and potentially I can write more than that.
potentially I can write more than that. Um, but if you've ever had the exper I
Um, but if you've ever had the exper I know anyone who has ever written has had
know anyone who has ever written has had the experience of looking at a blank
the experience of looking at a blank sheet of paper and having no idea what
sheet of paper and having no idea what to put there for like hours and hours.
to put there for like hours and hours. Um, no matter how good of a writer you
Um, no matter how good of a writer you are, if you don't know what you're
are, if you don't know what you're writing about, you can't do it, which is
writing about, you can't do it, which is a very logical thing. Um, so by coming
a very logical thing. Um, so by coming up with this plan though, I knew what I
up with this plan though, I knew what I had to write. I had a series of writing
had to write. I had a series of writing assignments for myself. Every one of
assignments for myself. Every one of those little empty files in the Scriber
those little empty files in the Scriber thing represented a thing that I knew
thing represented a thing that I knew that I needed to write. I need to write
that I needed to write. I need to write these two characters
these two characters playing truth or dare under this
playing truth or dare under this circumstance. I need to write these
circumstance. I need to write these other two characters playing truth or
other two characters playing truth or dare under this circumstance. I need to
dare under this circumstance. I need to write them with this scene. There's this
write them with this scene. There's this ending.
ending. This person freaks out in this ending.
This person freaks out in this ending. What would this other character freaking
What would this other character freaking out in this ending look like? because of
out in this ending look like? because of all of this v visual novels because of
all of this v visual novels because of their choice structure give you all of
their choice structure give you all of this beautiful parallel structure um
this beautiful parallel structure um that's really easy to kind of like see
that's really easy to kind of like see the connections between but also
the connections between but also continuously
continuously um inform each other so that you're not
um inform each other so that you're not reinventing the wheel every time that
reinventing the wheel every time that you open up a file. Um otherwise I would
you open up a file. Um otherwise I would have been like staring at blank pages
have been like staring at blank pages every single day trying to decide what
every single day trying to decide what happened. Um instead I basically
happened. Um instead I basically assigned myself homework. Um,
assigned myself homework. Um, I'm really glad that I did this even
I'm really glad that I did this even though like you'd think, oh, she can
though like you'd think, oh, she can probably write 30,000 words in a month
probably write 30,000 words in a month then. Um, but that's what if you miss a
then. Um, but that's what if you miss a day, what if you go on vacation? What if
day, what if you go on vacation? What if something comes up? I have a full-time
something comes up? I have a full-time job. So, there were a lot of reasons why
job. So, there were a lot of reasons why I couldn't meet this goal. Um,
I couldn't meet this goal. Um, as we'll see. So, we had that plan. Um,
as we'll see. So, we had that plan. Um, and it didn't quite work out, but it
and it didn't quite work out, but it didn't quite work out enough that we had
didn't quite work out enough that we had a structure for the rest for the rest of
a structure for the rest for the rest of this to follow. Um, I didn't hit all of
this to follow. Um, I didn't hit all of my word counts. Um, I had a lot of
my word counts. Um, I had a lot of metaphors that I hadn't decided what
metaphors that I hadn't decided what they meant yet.
they meant yet. Um, my actual my my approach to world
Um, my actual my my approach to world building is that you write the
building is that you write the characters interactions and you decide
characters interactions and you decide while that happened later. Um, because
while that happened later. Um, because you don't need like a big wiki
you don't need like a big wiki beforehand. you you get to invent the
beforehand. you you get to invent the backstory. So you invent the backstory
backstory. So you invent the backstory that makes most sense for the for the
that makes most sense for the for the premise. Um more so let's go into these
premise. Um more so let's go into these um thing by thing. Um so it's impossible
um thing by thing. Um so it's impossible to not overreach is the first lesson.
to not overreach is the first lesson. There's no idea that's not more work
There's no idea that's not more work than you think it's going to be. Um,
than you think it's going to be. Um, like when I nearly died in the woods for
like when I nearly died in the woods for those visible photographs, I went like,
those visible photographs, I went like, you know, so the thing about film is
you know, so the thing about film is that it needs a lot of light to work.
that it needs a lot of light to work. Um, and this wasn't a thing that I was
Um, and this wasn't a thing that I was uh thinking about too hard. So I took 20
uh thinking about too hard. So I took 20 photographs. There were four usable
photographs. There were four usable ones. Um, I had to send the send the
ones. Um, I had to send the send the camera to to New York because I live in
camera to to New York because I live in this tiny town in Washington um to get
this tiny town in Washington um to get the film developed and we had to do a
the film developed and we had to do a whole bunch of last minute scrambling to
whole bunch of last minute scrambling to get the rest of our art assets. Um, you
get the rest of our art assets. Um, you think something's going to be easy and
think something's going to be easy and low cost and it turns out to be very
low cost and it turns out to be very different. Um, however, because we had
different. Um, however, because we had scoped at this particular or at this
scoped at this particular or at this particularly low level, filling in those
particularly low level, filling in those gaps was much much easier.
gaps was much much easier. Um,
Um, character breakdown. Yeah. Um, so a lot
character breakdown. Yeah. Um, so a lot of stuff didn't end up the same. Um, the
of stuff didn't end up the same. Um, the characters, if you read the character
characters, if you read the character descriptions now, they don't feel very
descriptions now, they don't feel very much like the actual characters that are
much like the actual characters that are in the final game, but that was fine.
in the final game, but that was fine. Um, it was useful for two reasons. One,
Um, it was useful for two reasons. One, so that we had an we had a starting
so that we had an we had a starting place. And secondly, so that when the
place. And secondly, so that when the characters started moving away from the
characters started moving away from the things that made them interesting, we
things that made them interesting, we had this ability to go back to basics.
had this ability to go back to basics. Oh, I'm going way over time. Is that
Oh, I'm going way over time. Is that okay?
okay? Somebody give me a sign. I'm going to
Somebody give me a sign. I'm going to assume it is because you all are still
assume it is because you all are still here.
All right. Thank you.
Thank you. Okay. Um,
Okay. Um, so one of the things
structure, so I'm gonna I'm talking about this as a writer. Um, so what do
about this as a writer. Um, so what do you do after you hit the word count
you do after you hit the word count goal? Um, well, one of the things you
goal? Um, well, one of the things you can do is you can write more words. And
can do is you can write more words. And I did in fact write I I found that some
I did in fact write I I found that some that the goals that I set myself made
that the goals that I set myself made the visual novel too short. Um, the
the visual novel too short. Um, the final product uh was 25,000 words
final product uh was 25,000 words instead of 15,000. Um, it's like around
instead of 15,000. Um, it's like around that. So we added about 10,000 words
that. So we added about 10,000 words which was a pretty big addition. Um but
which was a pretty big addition. Um but more so than that I spent the second the
more so than that I spent the second the second month of this. So we tried to
second month of this. So we tried to write it this month. We didn't. We
write it this month. We didn't. We pitched it to date night. We got all of
pitched it to date night. We got all of their we got startup capital. We got
their we got startup capital. We got zero minutes. Oh, are you kicking me off
zero minutes. Oh, are you kicking me off now? Okay. All right. Well, bye.
[Applause] See here.
See here. Um, I would say control what you can
Um, I would say control what you can control. Um, and give yourself enough
control. Um, and give yourself enough room to up.
room to up. [Applause]
[Applause] [Music]
[Music] [Applause]
[Applause] [Music]
[Music] [Applause]