[Music] Okay, first of all, before I begin,
Okay, first of all, before I begin, could I see a show of hands? Uh, how
could I see a show of hands? Uh, how many artists are here?
many artists are here? Phew. Okay. Uh, and how many of you wish
Phew. Okay. Uh, and how many of you wish you were stood here in front of all
you were stood here in front of all these people looking right at you at
these people looking right at you at this very second?
this very second? Yeah, I didn't think so.
So, my name's Grant Duncan. I'm the art director at Hello Games. We're a very
director at Hello Games. We're a very tiny little indie studio in England. And
tiny little indie studio in England. And I'm very aware that I shouldn't be here
I'm very aware that I shouldn't be here right now because I'm working on a game
right now because I'm working on a game called No Man's Sky. And the reason I
called No Man's Sky. And the reason I shouldn't really be here is because
shouldn't really be here is because first of all, the game's not finished.
first of all, the game's not finished. It's always a little bit strange talking
It's always a little bit strange talking about things like art on a title that's
about things like art on a title that's not finished. And obviously, the fact
not finished. And obviously, the fact I'm here means the game is not getting
I'm here means the game is not getting finished and so it's getting delayed and
finished and so it's getting delayed and all this kind of thing. But I've been to
all this kind of thing. But I've been to GDC in the past few years and I'm one of
GDC in the past few years and I'm one of those people that always moans about
those people that always moans about there's not enough art talks, there's
there's not enough art talks, there's too many tech talks, everyone's talking
too many tech talks, everyone's talking about freeto play and all that
about freeto play and all that incredibly boring stuff. So when they
incredibly boring stuff. So when they asked me to come, I couldn't really say
asked me to come, I couldn't really say no. So I'm going to talk about No Man's
no. So I'm going to talk about No Man's Sky. So, No Man's Sky is a science
Sky. So, No Man's Sky is a science fiction game and it's all about that
fiction game and it's all about that kind of feeling of discovery and about
kind of feeling of discovery and about exploring the unknown. It's that kind of
exploring the unknown. It's that kind of feeling that you had when you were a kid
feeling that you had when you were a kid and you'd go to the beach and
and you'd go to the beach and you just you'd be surrounded by
you just you'd be surrounded by sandjunes and you wouldn't know what was
sandjunes and you wouldn't know what was over the next hill or you'd find a
over the next hill or you'd find a rockpool and you'd go poking it with a
rockpool and you'd go poking it with a stick and a little crab would crawl out
stick and a little crab would crawl out and everything was new and everything
and everything was new and everything was exciting.
was exciting. And it's inspired by fantastic artwork
And it's inspired by fantastic artwork like this, science fiction covers from
like this, science fiction covers from the 70s. And why I love this is because
the 70s. And why I love this is because it's not, you know, it's not a great
it's not, you know, it's not a great piece of artwork, but it's really weird.
piece of artwork, but it's really weird. Like, what are they doing? Who are those
Like, what are they doing? Who are those guys? Is that like some kind of jacuzzi?
guys? Is that like some kind of jacuzzi? I don't really know. And the
I don't really know. And the perspectives are all off. some kind of
perspectives are all off. some kind of blue water, orange mountains, but it's
blue water, orange mountains, but it's just you just wouldn't have this these
just you just wouldn't have this these days. Nobody would buy a book with this
days. Nobody would buy a book with this on the cover anymore. If games had this
on the cover anymore. If games had this kind of artwork, I don't know if I'd
kind of artwork, I don't know if I'd sell many copies, which is a bit
sell many copies, which is a bit worrying since I'm working on a game
worrying since I'm working on a game with this kind of artwork.
with this kind of artwork. So, I'm going to spend the next few
So, I'm going to spend the next few minutes
minutes talking about just kind of being
talking about just kind of being self-indulgent, talking about my
self-indulgent, talking about my favorite sci-fi artists. This is a guy
favorite sci-fi artists. This is a guy called Chris Foss. And this is actually
called Chris Foss. And this is actually some of the first sci-fi books that I
some of the first sci-fi books that I got into. The main reason I got into it
got into. The main reason I got into it is because they had one of these cool
is because they had one of these cool three-way covers, which just means I'm
three-way covers, which just means I'm guaranteed to buy all three because of
guaranteed to buy all three because of my OCD, and I just need to have them
my OCD, and I just need to have them arranged perfectly on the shelf.
arranged perfectly on the shelf. Anyone who's played Home World, you'll
Anyone who's played Home World, you'll look at these ships and you'll realize
look at these ships and you'll realize that they were clearly inspired by the
that they were clearly inspired by the same kind of artwork that's inspired me.
same kind of artwork that's inspired me. And what's great about Chris Foss is
And what's great about Chris Foss is that he actually began his career as a
that he actually began his career as a erotic artwork creator. I think he
erotic artwork creator. I think he worked for Penthouse. He illustrated the
worked for Penthouse. He illustrated the joy of sex and apparently his
joy of sex and apparently his understanding of the female anatomy is
understanding of the female anatomy is what's led to him creating such
what's led to him creating such incredible designs.
This is uh why this is a perfect example of sci-fi art. It's like what even is
of sci-fi art. It's like what even is this? That's water? Is it clouds? I
this? That's water? Is it clouds? I don't know. But it's it's absolutely
don't know. But it's it's absolutely incredible to me. Like I can't even
incredible to me. Like I can't even imagine what it must feel like to go to
imagine what it must feel like to go to bed after you've just created that piece
bed after you've just created that piece of artwork. I don't think I'd be able to
of artwork. I don't think I'd be able to sleep.
sleep. This is another one. What I really love
This is another one. What I really love about him is he created this kind of art
about him is he created this kind of art when everyone else was creating black
when everyone else was creating black starfields,
starfields, gray dull monolithic spacecraft. And
gray dull monolithic spacecraft. And he'd created this and people loved it.
he'd created this and people loved it. And I can't imagine somebody just taking
And I can't imagine somebody just taking that kind of risk and just doing
that kind of risk and just doing something so
something so different to what everyone else is
different to what everyone else is doing. And I think that's why he's one
doing. And I think that's why he's one of my favorite artists.
of my favorite artists. This is another guy, John Harris. He's a
This is another guy, John Harris. He's a little bit different. Like he
little bit different. Like he he is quite formulaic in that he'll have
he is quite formulaic in that he'll have it's always a sort of flat horizon line,
it's always a sort of flat horizon line, but he just has like the the image on
but he just has like the the image on the left that could be Kenya. You know,
the left that could be Kenya. You know, those trees that could work. But then
those trees that could work. But then you've got this giant building. Like how
you've got this giant building. Like how big is that building? It doesn't even
big is that building? It doesn't even make any sense. The same on the right.
make any sense. The same on the right. Like those people are so tiny. It's just
Like those people are so tiny. It's just and the size of that planet. It wouldn't
and the size of that planet. It wouldn't even work. But it's just sci-fi. And
even work. But it's just sci-fi. And it's just beautiful.
it's just beautiful. And what I like about these is that
And what I like about these is that these vessels, they could be military
these vessels, they could be military vessels. They're kind of bristling with
vessels. They're kind of bristling with what could be guns or lasers of some
what could be guns or lasers of some sort, but it's the softness that he kind
sort, but it's the softness that he kind of gets with his brush strokes. And it
of gets with his brush strokes. And it just
go I can't even talk. It's so good. Like the green he's using on the left is just
the green he's using on the left is just everyone else is using black in space.
everyone else is using black in space. He's done a giant green space and that
He's done a giant green space and that blows my mind.
blows my mind. Another one who's slightly more unusual,
Another one who's slightly more unusual, but I think every artist in this room
but I think every artist in this room probably loves this guy and we were all
probably loves this guy and we were all gutted when he died a few years ago. But
gutted when he died a few years ago. But Mobius, he kind of walks that line
Mobius, he kind of walks that line between science fiction and fantasy.
between science fiction and fantasy. What I love about it is that it's it's a
What I love about it is that it's it's a place you want to be. So much science
place you want to be. So much science fiction,
fiction, especially in games, they're these
especially in games, they're these horrible post-apocalyptic war zones and
horrible post-apocalyptic war zones and there's not really everyone's just
there's not really everyone's just trying to kill each other in different
trying to kill each other in different ways. And every game that's set in
ways. And every game that's set in science fiction universes seems to be
science fiction universes seems to be like you're in this amazing world and
like you're in this amazing world and you can kill each other there and you
you can kill each other there and you just you're in this spaceship and you
just you're in this spaceship and you kill each other here. And it's there's
kill each other here. And it's there's something about Mobius's work that
something about Mobius's work that nobody's killing each other. They
nobody's killing each other. They probably could if they wanted to, but
probably could if they wanted to, but they're not. And I find that quite
they're not. And I find that quite refreshing.
refreshing. And things like this where you've got
And things like this where you've got they're kind of whales, but they're also
they're kind of whales, but they're also sharks. I don't know if they're
sharks. I don't know if they're underwater, but it's just filled with
underwater, but it's just filled with questions and it you want to you want to
questions and it you want to you want to know the history. You want to know like
know the history. You want to know like that guy's on like a flying duck
that guy's on like a flying duck pterodactyl. You want to know what
pterodactyl. You want to know what they're doing. those those diploidocus
they're doing. those those diploidocus snails on the ground. You want to you
snails on the ground. You want to you want to fly down. You want to understand
want to fly down. You want to understand what those creatures are and what
what those creatures are and what they're doing.
they're doing. And this image is just classic sci-fi.
And this image is just classic sci-fi. It's a little man and some kind of giant
It's a little man and some kind of giant interesting thing. And that is just
interesting thing. And that is just something I've been doing far too much
something I've been doing far too much in No Man's Sky and getting away with
in No Man's Sky and getting away with murder.
murder. And I didn't really want to include
And I didn't really want to include Ralph because it's almost too
Ralph because it's almost too predictable. But you can't you can't
predictable. But you can't you can't pretend that Ralph McCroy wasn't a huge
pretend that Ralph McCroy wasn't a huge influence. Like his work on Star Wars
influence. Like his work on Star Wars and like X- Wings, Tie Fighters,
and like X- Wings, Tie Fighters, it's that thing with that all great
it's that thing with that all great artwork has, especially art
artwork has, especially art directionwise, where everything fits
directionwise, where everything fits together and it just is coherent. And
together and it just is coherent. And even though the ships and the universe,
even though the ships and the universe, they're different and they're not like
they're different and they're not like our universe, you don't question it, you
our universe, you don't question it, you just accept it. And this is some of the
just accept it. And this is some of the work that's not as well known, but he
work that's not as well known, but he just has that same sort of fantasy
just has that same sort of fantasy sci-fi softness.
sci-fi softness. And I think this is actually was one of
And I think this is actually was one of Ralph McCrory's favorite pieces,
Ralph McCrory's favorite pieces, which this has. It could be Earth, but
which this has. It could be Earth, but you've got twin sons. You got a
you've got twin sons. You got a mysterious alien landscape.
mysterious alien landscape. So, to me, science fiction, it's not
So, to me, science fiction, it's not about war. It's about that feeling of
about war. It's about that feeling of the frontier, that feeling of adventure.
the frontier, that feeling of adventure. It's not
It's not post-apocalyptic.
post-apocalyptic. It's exciting. It's full of hope. I also
It's exciting. It's full of hope. I also thought Star Trek, even though I've
thought Star Trek, even though I've never been a massive fan, it had that,
never been a massive fan, it had that, you know, humanity had done okay. We'd
you know, humanity had done okay. We'd managed to get to a place where we just
managed to get to a place where we just had wonderful technology and there was
had wonderful technology and there was wars going on. There were enemies, but
wars going on. There were enemies, but as a species we were doing really well
as a species we were doing really well and it was a place you wanted to be.
and it was a place you wanted to be. And another inspiration from No Man's
And another inspiration from No Man's Sky is this book, which I read when I
Sky is this book, which I read when I was a tiny little kid, and it's it's
was a tiny little kid, and it's it's great. It's that classic adventure sort
great. It's that classic adventure sort of thing where you've got, if you look
of thing where you've got, if you look at the cover, what are we seeing? We've
at the cover, what are we seeing? We've got a pterodactyl in the sky. Got
got a pterodactyl in the sky. Got adventurers taking photographs. We've
adventurers taking photographs. We've got Iguanadon in the center there.
got Iguanadon in the center there. Stegosaurus. But if you look up on the
Stegosaurus. But if you look up on the tree, some kind of wild Tarzan man. In
tree, some kind of wild Tarzan man. In the bottom left, we've got angry
the bottom left, we've got angry natives. And if you look in the very
natives. And if you look in the very middle, you can see this like a giant
middle, you can see this like a giant alligator fighting a some kind of
alligator fighting a some kind of prehistoric fish. And I just I love
prehistoric fish. And I just I love that. And it's just
that. And it's just books like this and movies that came
books like this and movies that came around at the same time. Journey to the
around at the same time. Journey to the Center of the Earth,
Center of the Earth, adventurers, explorers going off into
adventurers, explorers going off into the unknown, movies like The Mysterious
the unknown, movies like The Mysterious Island or Simbad or The Odyssey, where
Island or Simbad or The Odyssey, where it's even though they're pioneers going
it's even though they're pioneers going to islands, there's a definite crossover
to islands, there's a definite crossover with sci-fi, whereas rather than going
with sci-fi, whereas rather than going to an island, you're going to a whole
to an island, you're going to a whole new planet. And obviously these movies
new planet. And obviously these movies are quite cheesy. They'd have giant
are quite cheesy. They'd have giant crabs and things like that. But it it
crabs and things like that. But it it definitely captured that feeling of
definitely captured that feeling of especially watching them as a kid being
especially watching them as a kid being like, "You've arrived at this island.
like, "You've arrived at this island. Anything is possible."
I remember when we first announced No Man's Sky, it was incredible how many
Man's Sky, it was incredible how many developers and artists came up to us
developers and artists came up to us afterwards and they were all saying
afterwards and they were all saying like, "Ah, that's the game I've always
like, "Ah, that's the game I've always wanted to be making." Or, "I started
wanted to be making." Or, "I started working on a game a bit like this." And
working on a game a bit like this." And it's that thing that we're not
it's that thing that we're not pretending like No Man's Sky is this
pretending like No Man's Sky is this idea that nobody else has ever had
idea that nobody else has ever had because everyone has had this idea. It
because everyone has had this idea. It it's just ever since you were children
it's just ever since you were children probably if you've been thinking about
probably if you've been thinking about working on artwork that you'd build a
working on artwork that you'd build a world and then you populate it with your
world and then you populate it with your creatures, with your characters. And No
creatures, with your characters. And No Man's Sky is the ultimate art project
Man's Sky is the ultimate art project for that. That I can create a planet and
for that. That I can create a planet and I can do whatever I want. And that is
I can do whatever I want. And that is absolutely terrifying.
absolutely terrifying. So this is a piece of key art we created
So this is a piece of key art we created quite early on. Hopefully you can see a
quite early on. Hopefully you can see a lot of the influences of what I just
lot of the influences of what I just talked about like Ralph McQuary, Chris
talked about like Ralph McQuary, Chris Foss and all the lost world and the
Foss and all the lost world and the journey to the center of the earth,
journey to the center of the earth, mysterious floating islands, the cresant
mysterious floating islands, the cresant planet on the horizon. And we create
planet on the horizon. And we create this kind of artwork almost as a as
this kind of artwork almost as a as something we could as artists we can all
something we could as artists we can all look at and agree that this is the vibe
look at and agree that this is the vibe we're going for.
we're going for. So, we wanted that feeling of a world
So, we wanted that feeling of a world you want to explore, a world that you
you want to explore, a world that you don't know about,
don't know about, and a world that has history. It's very
and a world that has history. It's very easy to kind of forget about history on
easy to kind of forget about history on a planet that is a jungle, but it's
a planet that is a jungle, but it's actually really important. Like when we
actually really important. Like when we first started creating environments,
first started creating environments, you just add trees, rocks, bushes, and
you just add trees, rocks, bushes, and things. But unless you can see where
things. But unless you can see where they came from, your brain kind of
they came from, your brain kind of rejects it. So you have to have little
rejects it. So you have to have little hints that you know, younger trees,
hints that you know, younger trees, signs that like ivy and hanging
signs that like ivy and hanging branches, just all these little hints
branches, just all these little hints that it hasn't just popped up, erosion
that it hasn't just popped up, erosion has been involved. various sequences
has been involved. various sequences have occurred.
have occurred. So with that in mind, the very first
So with that in mind, the very first thing we did was that we started with
thing we did was that we started with terrain.
terrain. No Man's Sky is one of these projects
No Man's Sky is one of these projects that I can't I'd love to take full
that I can't I'd love to take full credit for, but it is incredibly
credit for, but it is incredibly coder orientated in that I have had to
coder orientated in that I have had to work very closely with programmers and
work very closely with programmers and since we're a room full of artists, you
since we're a room full of artists, you can imagine what that was like. Oh my
can imagine what that was like. Oh my god.
god. But I spent the first year because No
But I spent the first year because No Man's Sky began as like a little
Man's Sky began as like a little prototype within Hello Games. So there's
prototype within Hello Games. So there's four of us working on it, me and three
four of us working on it, me and three coders, and we were we stuck ourselves
coders, and we were we stuck ourselves in a little room together and noodled
in a little room together and noodled around. And it started with a terrain
around. And it started with a terrain engine, which Sean, our main code dude,
engine, which Sean, our main code dude, he was um I shouldn't say dude any um he
he was um I shouldn't say dude any um he was in his bedroom basically and in his
was in his bedroom basically and in his spare time he started working as terrain
spare time he started working as terrain engine.
engine. And one of the things we really wanted
And one of the things we really wanted to do was really focus on the real world
to do was really focus on the real world because it's so tempting when you're
because it's so tempting when you're working on a sci-fi game just to go
working on a sci-fi game just to go straight in and make crazy alien
straight in and make crazy alien landscapes and giant tentacle trees and
landscapes and giant tentacle trees and all this kind of thing which we all love
all this kind of thing which we all love drawing. But what we tried to do was
drawing. But what we tried to do was look at the real world and understand
look at the real world and understand things like landscape and why things
things like landscape and why things occur. And this is why I wish I'd paid
occur. And this is why I wish I'd paid more attention to geography because I
more attention to geography because I vaguely remembered all these terms like
vaguely remembered all these terms like glaciers and
glaciers and limestone caves and
limestone caves and coastal erosion and all these kind of
coastal erosion and all these kind of things which I now know I'm an absolute
things which I now know I'm an absolute expert in now. So what we tried to do
expert in now. So what we tried to do was we're not simulating these things
was we're not simulating these things because doing that in real time would be
because doing that in real time would be pretty crazy. What we try to do is
pretty crazy. What we try to do is get a similar result. So we have
get a similar result. So we have limestone caves, we have lava caves, we
limestone caves, we have lava caves, we have wind erosion, coastal erosion,
have wind erosion, coastal erosion, glacial erosion, and volcanic islands.
glacial erosion, and volcanic islands. At least we have things that appear to
At least we have things that appear to be those kind of things.
be those kind of things. I'm going to show you a little video of
I'm going to show you a little video of our terrain in action.
So what you're seeing on the right here, you have our loading system.
you have our loading system. So if you watch this is all this terrain
So if you watch this is all this terrain is being generated as you're traveling
is being generated as you're traveling along the ground. So it's not stored
along the ground. So it's not stored anywhere.
anywhere. And on the right you can see three
And on the right you can see three levels of lot. The top one is a far
levels of lot. The top one is a far distance and the bottom one is a near
distance and the bottom one is a near distance. So you'll see things like the
distance. So you'll see things like the little rocks, little shrubs. They're all
little rocks, little shrubs. They're all in the low l. We're in a debug cam here
in the low l. We're in a debug cam here flying along. Obviously, you wouldn't
flying along. Obviously, you wouldn't ever see this in game, but what we can
ever see this in game, but what we can do is we can fly incredibly fast. And
do is we can fly incredibly fast. And when we do that, you'll see because this
when we do that, you'll see because this is faster than you'll ever fly in game,
is faster than you'll ever fly in game, but you'll actually see the train can't
but you'll actually see the train can't keep up. And that's because it's trying
keep up. And that's because it's trying to calculate too much at once. So, if
to calculate too much at once. So, if you slow down, you'll see that that's
you slow down, you'll see that that's like the visible pop, and that's just
like the visible pop, and that's just the LOD trying to catch up.
the LOD trying to catch up. And this is all
And this is all created using noise. So it's different
created using noise. So it's different algorithms that Sean and the code team
algorithms that Sean and the code team have created to give this illusion of
have created to give this illusion of like a real place. What you're seeing
like a real place. What you're seeing here is like setting it to something
here is like setting it to something really basic which is just a sign curve
really basic which is just a sign curve as just an example of actually what's
as just an example of actually what's going on behind the scenes.
going on behind the scenes. And this is fairly standard stuff in the
And this is fairly standard stuff in the world of procedural generation like
world of procedural generation like Minecraft is a similar thing. But what
Minecraft is a similar thing. But what we have is because we can have overhangs
we have is because we can have overhangs and caves and complex cave systems and
and caves and complex cave systems and it means we can have a lot more
it means we can have a lot more believable terrain
believable terrain things like this. This shows um like
things like this. This shows um like volcanic not volcanic sorry um glacial.
volcanic not volcanic sorry um glacial. So you can sort of see the sort of
So you can sort of see the sort of trademark spiky mountains. But we can
trademark spiky mountains. But we can also do by breaking these rules that
also do by breaking these rules that we've learned we can create more
we've learned we can create more interesting terrain. And so we can have
interesting terrain. And so we can have floating islands or mysterious crystals
floating islands or mysterious crystals and it's quite fun to play about with.
and it's quite fun to play about with. And the way we do like things like
And the way we do like things like textures will build a huge library of
textures will build a huge library of these. This is um in Zbrush we'll have
these. This is um in Zbrush we'll have tiling materials and we can spit out
tiling materials and we can spit out height maps from that. And I was like
height maps from that. And I was like really proud of this system. I was
really proud of this system. I was talking to Andrew from Naughty Dog the
talking to Andrew from Naughty Dog the other day and he's like, "Oh yeah, we
other day and he's like, "Oh yeah, we did that in ch Uncharted one." And I was
did that in ch Uncharted one." And I was like, "Okay, so maybe it wasn't that
like, "Okay, so maybe it wasn't that clever." But what it means is we can
clever." But what it means is we can have cliff faces and we can have sand on
have cliff faces and we can have sand on the ground and when the angle's correct,
the ground and when the angle's correct, you'll get sand pooling in the cracks
you'll get sand pooling in the cracks and the mountains. And it adds this real
and the mountains. And it adds this real believability to the world. And we have
believability to the world. And we have hundreds and hundreds of these materials
hundreds and hundreds of these materials and we can blend between them and we can
and we can blend between them and we can tag them to say how dense they are and
tag them to say how dense they are and how likely they are to erode, which
how likely they are to erode, which means we can create things like plateaus
means we can create things like plateaus and overhangs. And that's all based on
and overhangs. And that's all based on how dense a material is. And depending
how dense a material is. And depending on how dense it is, it'll kind of pick
on how dense it is, it'll kind of pick it'll have different specular values and
it'll have different specular values and have different uh it's a good way to
have different uh it's a good way to explain. Uh essentially the more it'll
explain. Uh essentially the more it'll have finer detail if it's more dense.
have finer detail if it's more dense. That's I'll do. So, we had this system
That's I'll do. So, we had this system for creating all these different looking
for creating all these different looking terrains with all these different
terrains with all these different materials, but that wasn't really enough
materials, but that wasn't really enough because that didn't get across that lost
because that didn't get across that lost world, Journey to Center of the Earth
world, Journey to Center of the Earth vibe, which they always had those kind
vibe, which they always had those kind of you'd go to an island and it would
of you'd go to an island and it would always have something interesting,
always have something interesting, interesting foliage, interesting
interesting foliage, interesting jungles.
And especially once the guys started to talk to me about procedural generation
talk to me about procedural generation and I was the only artist working on the
and I was the only artist working on the game at the time and we were obviously
game at the time and we were obviously it was early days so they were
it was early days so they were experimenting and they started to use
experimenting and they started to use 64bit seed values which meant that they
64bit seed values which meant that they could do 18 quintilian unique planets
could do 18 quintilian unique planets which was very scary to me at the time.
which was very scary to me at the time. Uh so there's four artists now so we
Uh so there's four artists now so we it's not as scary
it's not as scary but um obviously as an artist had to uh
but um obviously as an artist had to uh figure out a way of how you divide up 18
figure out a way of how you divide up 18 quintilian planets between four of us.
quintilian planets between four of us. How and that was quite a big task. So it
How and that was quite a big task. So it turns out you have to be very
turns out you have to be very methodical. You have to divide things
methodical. You have to divide things up. You have to become a little bit of a
up. You have to become a little bit of a robot. And the reason for that is
robot. And the reason for that is without constraints
without constraints you just end up with a real mess. So we
you just end up with a real mess. So we kind of added our own constraints by
kind of added our own constraints by dividing these things into different
dividing these things into different categories so that we could actually
categories so that we could actually tackle small problems at once because if
tackle small problems at once because if we tried to think about everything all
we tried to think about everything all at once we probably would give up. So
at once we probably would give up. So one of the things at the very beginning
one of the things at the very beginning we we thought about doing was that we
we we thought about doing was that we were going to divide up the kind of
were going to divide up the kind of foliage system into biomes which is the
foliage system into biomes which is the way games like Minecraft and loads of
way games like Minecraft and loads of different games do it. It's the
different games do it. It's the equivalent of like playing Sonic where
equivalent of like playing Sonic where you have like a fire level, you have an
you have like a fire level, you have an ice level, you have a, you know, a
ice level, you have a, you know, a jungle level. But so you'd fly down to a
jungle level. But so you'd fly down to a planet and this one would be like a sort
planet and this one would be like a sort of alpine sort of coniferous forest kind
of alpine sort of coniferous forest kind of planet. And so we're gathering lots
of planet. And so we're gathering lots of reference from the real world. Again,
of reference from the real world. Again, the logic being that if we could mimi
the logic being that if we could mimi mimic the real world and get the rules
mimic the real world and get the rules to be in that sort of a believable
to be in that sort of a believable universe, then at the very end or
universe, then at the very end or towards the end, we could do really fun
towards the end, we could do really fun things, break those rules and get all
things, break those rules and get all the alien variation from that. So, we
the alien variation from that. So, we had like woodland, which be deciduous
had like woodland, which be deciduous trees and that kind of thing, which is
trees and that kind of thing, which is more like Britain, which is what I'm
more like Britain, which is what I'm used to, although it's normally a lot
used to, although it's normally a lot grayer than that. And there's your
grayer than that. And there's your jungle level. This weird little bird
jungle level. This weird little bird guy. And this would be like a Sahara
guy. And this would be like a Sahara desert type planet or more like your
desert type planet or more like your American Nevada deserts with your cacti
American Nevada deserts with your cacti and your harsh spiky terrain. Swamp
and your harsh spiky terrain. Swamp planets, deabar, they're always good.
planets, deabar, they're always good. But what we found by having by creating
But what we found by having by creating those sort of biomes, those separate
those sort of biomes, those separate biomes that you'd human beings are
biomes that you'd human beings are really really good at spotting patterns.
really really good at spotting patterns. So you'd fly down to a planet and it
So you'd fly down to a planet and it would be a swamp planet and you'd go,
would be a swamp planet and you'd go, "Oh, it's a swamp planet." And and
"Oh, it's a swamp planet." And and instantly that breaks this illusion and
instantly that breaks this illusion and you just realize what's going on behind
you just realize what's going on behind the scenes.
the scenes. And the thing with video game artwork is
And the thing with video game artwork is so much of what we do is an illusion.
so much of what we do is an illusion. Like you know, especially linear games
Like you know, especially linear games where you can look out a window and you
where you can look out a window and you can see a mountain in the distance, but
can see a mountain in the distance, but we all know that, you know, you can't
we all know that, you know, you can't get to that mountain. As artists work in
get to that mountain. As artists work in the industry, everything we do is, you
the industry, everything we do is, you know, where it's all pretend and we
know, where it's all pretend and we don't want anybody to see behind the
don't want anybody to see behind the scenes.
scenes. And having those separate biomes, it
And having those separate biomes, it absolutely revealed that. And our game
absolutely revealed that. And our game is so
is so it's incredibly important that you don't
it's incredibly important that you don't get that sense of illusion.
get that sense of illusion. So, what we ended up doing was creating
So, what we ended up doing was creating what I call a super biome, which is a
what I call a super biome, which is a biome which covers all those biomes in
biome which covers all those biomes in one fell swoop. And it's what's a good
one fell swoop. And it's what's a good way of explaining if you imagine a uh if
way of explaining if you imagine a uh if you've ever used like a terrain
you've ever used like a terrain generation tool where you'll have diff
generation tool where you'll have diff lots of different sliders that control
lots of different sliders that control different things like spikiness of
different things like spikiness of mountains, trees, and we have that, but
mountains, trees, and we have that, but we have hundreds of different sliders.
we have hundreds of different sliders. And we have min and max values for all
And we have min and max values for all those different sliders. But I don't
those different sliders. But I don't have to go into every planet and
have to go into every planet and manually move those sliders. What
manually move those sliders. What happens is when a planet is terraformed,
happens is when a planet is terraformed, those sliders are moved to different
those sliders are moved to different positions. Now, originally those
positions. Now, originally those positions were random. But what we found
positions were random. But what we found really interesting is if we start to
really interesting is if we start to link those sliders to things within the
link those sliders to things within the universe like distance from a sun,
universe like distance from a sun, whether the planet has a moon or not,
whether the planet has a moon or not, then the results start to become
then the results start to become believable and you start to spot
believable and you start to spot patterns. But it's patterns that you
patterns. But it's patterns that you accept because you start to realize
accept because you start to realize like, oh, this planet's really close to
like, oh, this planet's really close to the sun, so the foliage is either going
the sun, so the foliage is either going to be non-existent or it's going to be
to be non-existent or it's going to be it's just not going to be very green.
it's just not going to be very green. And that's um where the believability
And that's um where the believability comes into it.
comes into it. And another thing from looking at the
And another thing from looking at the real world is I realized that our planet
real world is I realized that our planet is a very strange place
is a very strange place like these in the Philippines. They're
like these in the Philippines. They're called the Chocolate Hills. Uh there's a
called the Chocolate Hills. Uh there's a really cool folklore about this which is
really cool folklore about this which is uh apparently two giants had a really
uh apparently two giants had a really big fight and they were throwing
big fight and they were throwing boulders at each other uh but then they
boulders at each other uh but then they made up and they walked away but they
made up and they walked away but they forgot to take their boulders with them
forgot to take their boulders with them and that's where the chocolate hills
and that's where the chocolate hills came from.
came from. Anchorwat if you ever been to Cambodia
Anchorwat if you ever been to Cambodia and seen these it's it is like something
and seen these it's it is like something HR geiger would make with these weird
HR geiger would make with these weird tentacle like roots destroying the old
tentacle like roots destroying the old ruins.
ruins. I don't know how you pronounce that.
I don't know how you pronounce that. Guiuelin Guian in China which are uh
Guiuelin Guian in China which are uh again a lot of these are natural
again a lot of these are natural formations and it it does make sense
formations and it it does make sense from a geography point of view but when
from a geography point of view but when you see them it's just it is like an
you see them it's just it is like an alien landscape
and I love these acid pools. I've used two images because it absolutely blows
two images because it absolutely blows my mind that that's a real place. And
my mind that that's a real place. And the conclusion from these images is
the conclusion from these images is something we kind of realize quite early
something we kind of realize quite early on that we don't actually need to go
on that we don't actually need to go full full alien. We could actually just
full full alien. We could actually just mimic the real world and we get
mimic the real world and we get absolutely incredible spectacle just
absolutely incredible spectacle just from doing that.
from doing that. At the giant's causeway in Ireland, this
At the giant's causeway in Ireland, this has got a good folktale as well.
has got a good folktale as well. Apparently there was an Irish giant and
Apparently there was an Irish giant and a Scottish giant and I think it was the
a Scottish giant and I think it was the Irish guy slagged off the Scottish guy.
Irish guy slagged off the Scottish guy. So what happened is the Irish guy
So what happened is the Irish guy started to build this causeway because
started to build this causeway because he was going to go and beat him up and
he was going to go and beat him up and the Scottish guy started to do the same
the Scottish guy started to do the same thing and they've actually got two
thing and they've actually got two examples of this causeway either sides
examples of this causeway either sides of the channel. I don't know who won but
of the channel. I don't know who won but I imagine it was the Scottish guy.
I imagine it was the Scottish guy. So, um,
So, um, what we wanted to do was
what we wanted to do was create a few key concepts that would
create a few key concepts that would capture the vibe of this
capture the vibe of this lost world, this No Man's Sky. And like,
lost world, this No Man's Sky. And like, if anyone's seen the the video we
if anyone's seen the the video we released years ago now, the E3 video
released years ago now, the E3 video where you walk down to the watering hole
where you walk down to the watering hole and the antelope runaway, this was the
and the antelope runaway, this was the piece of key art that kind of influenced
piece of key art that kind of influenced that.
that. These are real quick sketches, but all
These are real quick sketches, but all trying to kind of get across the vibe
trying to kind of get across the vibe that we wanted to have each time you fly
that we wanted to have each time you fly down to a new planet.
And what this did, it gave us targets. It meant we could tweak things like
It meant we could tweak things like slider values to try to try to make
slider values to try to try to make these kind of events more likely.
And you'll see they all well a lot of them have this kind of these landmarks.
them have this kind of these landmarks. And we always wanted to have that sense
And we always wanted to have that sense that you fly down there's always
that you fly down there's always something on the horizon that draws you
something on the horizon that draws you to it rather than just being a dull
to it rather than just being a dull terrain. There's always something you
terrain. There's always something you see that you want to go to.
see that you want to go to. And uh obviously that's fine having all
And uh obviously that's fine having all these nice little pictures but actually
these nice little pictures but actually getting that with a procedural system
getting that with a procedural system has been probably the most challenging
has been probably the most challenging thing. Like I should mention this
thing. Like I should mention this project has been by far the hardest
project has been by far the hardest thing any of us have ever done. And if
thing any of us have ever done. And if you're thinking about doing procedural
you're thinking about doing procedural game, I probably wouldn't. It's really
game, I probably wouldn't. It's really difficult. I was trying to um I did a
difficult. I was trying to um I did a talk on Monday and I was uh surrounded
talk on Monday and I was uh surrounded by people much better than I am. um like
by people much better than I am. um like uh Neil from Boware and I was asking him
uh Neil from Boware and I was asking him if you might consider you know taking
if you might consider you know taking this the the strength of Boware and
this the the strength of Boware and maybe creating some procedural tools for
maybe creating some procedural tools for the rest of us to use so we don't have
the rest of us to use so we don't have to create them all ourselves because
to create them all ourselves because it's just too much too much work for us.
it's just too much too much work for us. So procedural white boxing, I'm getting
So procedural white boxing, I'm getting distracted, is the idea being that you
distracted, is the idea being that you have props that get placed in a terrain
have props that get placed in a terrain just like anytime you decorate an
just like anytime you decorate an environment. But because it's
environment. But because it's procedural, you don't necessarily know
procedural, you don't necessarily know what those objects are going to be
what those objects are going to be because they get created procedurally.
because they get created procedurally. So what we do is we like we know that
So what we do is we like we know that procedural props will be within a
procedural props will be within a certain scale or will have a certain
certain scale or will have a certain silhouette and that's how we kind of
silhouette and that's how we kind of control it. So when we
control it. So when we procedurally white box like this, it
procedurally white box like this, it means like even though these aren't
means like even though these aren't props, these are just rough rough
props, these are just rough rough versions of it. It means when we're
versions of it. It means when we're balancing
balancing like min max values, we kind of get a
like min max values, we kind of get a vague idea what it might look like. So
vague idea what it might look like. So if I was loading this environment and
if I was loading this environment and replacing all these props with real
replacing all these props with real procedural props, they'd kind of roughly
procedural props, they'd kind of roughly fill those shapes. It means we can kind
fill those shapes. It means we can kind of ensure it's more likely to look
of ensure it's more likely to look artistically pleasing.
artistically pleasing. And talking about procedural props, we
And talking about procedural props, we use our blueprint system to create
use our blueprint system to create these. So, it's not
these. So, it's not talking to I've had I've been talking to
talking to I've had I've been talking to a few artists over this over the past
a few artists over this over the past week and they're all really interested
week and they're all really interested in procedural artwork, but also very
in procedural artwork, but also very skeptical of it, understandably so,
skeptical of it, understandably so, because a lot of the way it's presented
because a lot of the way it's presented on the internet and things is just this
on the internet and things is just this magic button that you click and then
magic button that you click and then artwork pops out. But that's and I
artwork pops out. But that's and I imagine some people do that, but that's
imagine some people do that, but that's not how we do it. we it's still
not how we do it. we it's still incredibly artisticdriven and it's
incredibly artisticdriven and it's it's your procedural artwork's only as
it's your procedural artwork's only as good as the base template that we
good as the base template that we create.
create. I'm going to talk about that. So this is
I'm going to talk about that. So this is a tree trunk
a tree trunk and this is the blueprint system. It
and this is the blueprint system. It adds a type of branch.
adds a type of branch. It then adds a type of leaf.
It then adds a type of leaf. It then selects a bark type and a leaf
It then selects a bark type and a leaf type and it is then decorated to match
type and it is then decorated to match the environment
the environment and it is then skewed
and it is then skewed to be different. And then we can see it
to be different. And then we can see it for a different version where we take
for a different version where we take the same trunk, a different set of
the same trunk, a different set of branches selected, different leaves,
branches selected, different leaves, different texture and different shape.
different texture and different shape. And essentially
And essentially every single prop in the game
every single prop in the game is created like this. And what you're
is created like this. And what you're seeing here is in the same way I talk
seeing here is in the same way I talk about the train having all these
about the train having all these different sliders. We have the same for
different sliders. We have the same for trees. So all that's happened here is
trees. So all that's happened here is it's gone. I'm going to add some
it's gone. I'm going to add some branches. How many branches will I add?
branches. How many branches will I add? Select it based on a slider. What kind
Select it based on a slider. What kind of leaf am I going to have? Select that
of leaf am I going to have? Select that based on a slider. So these are just two
based on a slider. So these are just two examples. And that's just one type of
examples. And that's just one type of trunk. We have hundreds of kinds of
trunk. We have hundreds of kinds of trunks and thousands of different leaves
trunks and thousands of different leaves and hundreds of different bark types.
and hundreds of different bark types. And the way it feels is that we're
And the way it feels is that we're actually, if you've ever played like
actually, if you've ever played like World of Warcraft, where you load up the
World of Warcraft, where you load up the game and you spend the first 10 hours
game and you spend the first 10 hours fiddling around with the character
fiddling around with the character creation, just scaling bones, moving
creation, just scaling bones, moving decals. We have that, but for every
decals. We have that, but for every single prop in the game. So, it's all
single prop in the game. So, it's all based on this set of parameters that we
based on this set of parameters that we custom make for each thing.
custom make for each thing. And what's cool with that as well is
And what's cool with that as well is that we can have
that we can have to say here about the age of a prop, but
to say here about the age of a prop, but that's I hate the word prop. It can be
that's I hate the word prop. It can be age, the age of anything. So we can have
age, the age of anything. So we can have trees and you can say,
trees and you can say, you know, if you want a tree to be
you know, if you want a tree to be within a certain age, you know that the
within a certain age, you know that the trunk will be thinner. It'll have less
trunk will be thinner. It'll have less branches. And the same with a creature,
branches. And the same with a creature, you know that the head stays roughly the
you know that the head stays roughly the same size, the body will be smaller, the
same size, the body will be smaller, the legs will be shorter. And it means you
legs will be shorter. And it means you can very easily have like a a whole
can very easily have like a a whole flock of sheep and you can have
flock of sheep and you can have adolescence, you can have babies, you
adolescence, you can have babies, you can have grown adults. And it's I don't
can have grown adults. And it's I don't have to custom make those. All I have to
have to custom make those. All I have to do is say when you spawn a group of
do is say when you spawn a group of sheep, you should spawn, you know, 10
sheep, you should spawn, you know, 10 adults, 15 adolescence, and it knows
adults, 15 adolescence, and it knows because you tell it the min and max
because you tell it the min and max values of those that it'll just create
values of those that it'll just create them. And that adds to the believability
them. And that adds to the believability of the world.
of the world. This is a blueprint system on the trees.
This is a blueprint system on the trees. So what you see on the left here is just
So what you see on the left here is just all the variants and on the right you
all the variants and on the right you essentially see what is currently
essentially see what is currently picked. This is just an in-game tool we
picked. This is just an in-game tool we have for viewing variants. So I click on
have for viewing variants. So I click on view variants and it creates a load more
view variants and it creates a load more on the left and you can see the
on the left and you can see the currently selected one on the right.
currently selected one on the right. This works for plants as well. Every
This works for plants as well. Every plant in the game you see all the
plant in the game you see all the variation on the left. I can cycle
variation on the left. I can cycle through them.
And the way that's possible is when I was talking about being turning yourself
was talking about being turning yourself into a little robot, that's kind of what
into a little robot, that's kind of what I had to do. So, we just have a system
I had to do. So, we just have a system for creating as many kind of trunks as
for creating as many kind of trunks as we can. I mean, that's essentially what
we can. I mean, that's essentially what it is. It's just we do as many as we can
it is. It's just we do as many as we can and as just try to change the silhouette
and as just try to change the silhouette as much as possible to get as much
as much as possible to get as much variation as possible. So, we'll have
variation as possible. So, we'll have trunks, branches, leaves, different
trunks, branches, leaves, different materials, and various extras that we
materials, and various extras that we can add on like fungus, moss, and each
can add on like fungus, moss, and each one of those small extras adds to the
one of those small extras adds to the variation.
variation. This is an example of some of the alphas
This is an example of some of the alphas we create for leaves. And these are
we create for leaves. And these are really cool because you just create as
really cool because you just create as many as you want and it's amazing the
many as you want and it's amazing the impact it has.
And what you're seeing here is an example of the blueprint system. Like
an example of the blueprint system. Like this is what I'm showing here is exactly
this is what I'm showing here is exactly the same planet, but all I've tweaked is
the same planet, but all I've tweaked is the seed value of the trees. So you're
the seed value of the trees. So you're stood in exactly the same place and I've
stood in exactly the same place and I've just clicked view variance and it's
just clicked view variance and it's moved. It's just changed the the type of
moved. It's just changed the the type of tree. And here you can see it again. And
tree. And here you can see it again. And what this is showing is that even if we
what this is showing is that even if we weren't to change a terrain at all, if
weren't to change a terrain at all, if we weren't to touch mineral colors or
we weren't to touch mineral colors or anything like that, you can still get a
anything like that, you can still get a very different feeling planet just from
very different feeling planet just from changing tree shapes, which to us was
changing tree shapes, which to us was really amazing because one of the number
really amazing because one of the number one the number one thing people seem to
one the number one thing people seem to worry about is how you make every planet
worry about is how you make every planet feel different. And the moment we
feel different. And the moment we started to fiddle around with those kind
started to fiddle around with those kind of values, it made us all feel a lot
of values, it made us all feel a lot calmer.
calmer. This is a video that's showing a uh a
This is a video that's showing a uh a few of the worlds.
few of the worlds. Hopefully, it'll work.
[Music] yeah.
Heat. Heat.
[Music]
Yeah. So, this is a message I got from one of our coders at Christmas time.
one of our coders at Christmas time. It's always It's always nice.
Uh yeah, this is the Milky Way, which is our galaxy. It's a a spiral arm and
our galaxy. It's a a spiral arm and we're somewhere in there. That's quite
we're somewhere in there. That's quite scary thought.
scary thought. So, what I'm going to talk about is our
So, what I'm going to talk about is our galactic map or our our in-game galaxy.
galactic map or our our in-game galaxy. And it's a really strange thing to talk
And it's a really strange thing to talk about because this game more than any
about because this game more than any other game I've ever worked on, it's
other game I've ever worked on, it's been quite an educational sort of
been quite an educational sort of process because like I was saying about
process because like I was saying about geography and things like that, I never
geography and things like that, I never as an artist, I didn't really pay a lot
as an artist, I didn't really pay a lot of attention to school. I was very
of attention to school. I was very interested in what I was interested in.
interested in what I was interested in. So
So making when having to do galactic
making when having to do galactic artwork has meant I've had to Google
artwork has meant I've had to Google things like spiral arms and it's really
things like spiral arms and it's really really scary and
really scary and I don't know if any of you have read uh
I don't know if any of you have read uh Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy
Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy but it mentions something which is
but it mentions something which is called the total perspective vortex
called the total perspective vortex and the story goes something like this.
and the story goes something like this. So there was a scientist and
So there was a scientist and he had a loving wife, but his wife used
he had a loving wife, but his wife used to nag him a great deal. And she would
to nag him a great deal. And she would always just pull him up on these really
always just pull him up on these really small, insignificant, at least in his
small, insignificant, at least in his eyes, little things. So he thought like
eyes, little things. So he thought like if there was only some way I could show
if there was only some way I could show her how unimportant these things she's
her how unimportant these things she's moaning about are. And being a
moaning about are. And being a scientist, he thought, I know what I'll
scientist, he thought, I know what I'll do. I'll invent a machine that she can
do. I'll invent a machine that she can put on and what that machine can do is
put on and what that machine can do is in a split second it will show you the
in a split second it will show you the entire universe
entire universe and it will at that same split second
and it will at that same split second show you in comparison to the entire
show you in comparison to the entire universe.
universe. And I imagine it's something a little
And I imagine it's something a little bit like an Oculus Rift. You'd put it on
bit like an Oculus Rift. You'd put it on and he turned it on and it destroyed her
and he turned it on and it destroyed her brain.
brain. So that was our main kind of inspiration
So that was our main kind of inspiration for our galactic map
as well as cool things like the pillars of creation which I think is an awesome
of creation which I think is an awesome title. This is the Eagle Nebula which is
title. This is the Eagle Nebula which is also really cool. Space is filled of
also really cool. Space is filled of really cool things.
really cool things. And this is a little video. So I should
And this is a little video. So I should mention like
mention like one of the things I've tried to stay
one of the things I've tried to stay away from in No Man's Sky is the color
away from in No Man's Sky is the color black. And that was one of those bold
black. And that was one of those bold things I said at the very beginning of
things I said at the very beginning of the project. Chris Foss, he uses colors,
the project. Chris Foss, he uses colors, you know, none of this black. But when
you know, none of this black. But when you're trying to do a starfield and
you're trying to do a starfield and you're staying away from black, it
you're staying away from black, it becomes this real weird challenge
becomes this real weird challenge because it stops feeling like you're
because it stops feeling like you're flying through space. It's really easy
flying through space. It's really easy for it to feel like you're flying
for it to feel like you're flying underwater. So finding images like this
underwater. So finding images like this of the Pillars of Creation was really
of the Pillars of Creation was really useful to me because it's it's still
useful to me because it's it's still obviously space, but it's colorful. So,
obviously space, but it's colorful. So, this was a massive uh a really useful
this was a massive uh a really useful image when I found it.
image when I found it. Oh, wrong way. Um, so what you're going
Oh, wrong way. Um, so what you're going to see here is every single one of these
to see here is every single one of these little dots is a solar system you can
little dots is a solar system you can fly down to. And that's until you play
fly down to. And that's until you play the game, it's not obvious. Um, you just
the game, it's not obvious. Um, you just have to keep that in mind.
Heat.
[Music] problem with the end. Uh, spaceships.
problem with the end. Uh, spaceships. So, you can't really make a science
So, you can't really make a science fiction game without thinking about
fiction game without thinking about spaceships at some stage. So, I thought
spaceships at some stage. So, I thought I'd talk about it straight after that.
I'd talk about it straight after that. I asked Aaron, who is uh one of the
I asked Aaron, who is uh one of the artists I work with. He is an incredible
artists I work with. He is an incredible artist. He he's one of those guys that
artist. He he's one of those guys that lives and breathes hard surface
lives and breathes hard surface modeling. And so, I asked him if he
modeling. And so, I asked him if he could he's he's the main guy. He is
could he's he's the main guy. He is responsible for all our spaceships
responsible for all our spaceships basically in the game. I can't take
basically in the game. I can't take credit for those. I did like the one in
credit for those. I did like the one in the prototype video, but he has taken
the prototype video, but he has taken those and he has done amazing things.
those and he has done amazing things. So, I asked him to put together an image
So, I asked him to put together an image that showed what he was thinking when
that showed what he was thinking when he's been designing spaceships and he
he's been designing spaceships and he thought he would use comic sands in his
thought he would use comic sands in his image. So, uh I was I was going to take
image. So, uh I was I was going to take it out, but screw him. It's his problem.
it out, but screw him. It's his problem. So
So what we're seeing here is we have three
what we're seeing here is we have three types of ships play that you can uh
types of ships play that you can uh get hold of in the game. So we have
get hold of in the game. So we have trading ships, fighter ships, and
trading ships, fighter ships, and explorer ships. And essentially you can
explorer ships. And essentially you can pick any of those ships, whatever you
pick any of those ships, whatever you want, but certain ships are more useful.
want, but certain ships are more useful. If you want to be a trader, then you're
If you want to be a trader, then you're going to get a ship that has a bigger
going to get a ship that has a bigger cargo hold and is more armored. And
cargo hold and is more armored. And fighters generally are smaller and
fighters generally are smaller and nippier. and explorers are weird and
nippier. and explorers are weird and scientific. So, this image just kind of
scientific. So, this image just kind of shows some of the inspiration that Aaron
shows some of the inspiration that Aaron took from various places. So, let's get
took from various places. So, let's get away from that comic sands.
away from that comic sands. One of the things he was saying is
One of the things he was saying is it's absolutely impossible not to tread
it's absolutely impossible not to tread on some toes when you're designing
on some toes when you're designing spaceships. Like, we get so much stick
spaceships. Like, we get so much stick online of just being like, "Oh, they've
online of just being like, "Oh, they've just copied an X-wing or they just
just copied an X-wing or they just copied a Viper." And it's like, you
copied a Viper." And it's like, you should try to create a spaceship and not
should try to create a spaceship and not tread on some toes. It's absolutely
tread on some toes. It's absolutely impossible. But the way we've tried to
impossible. But the way we've tried to do it is to kind of look at a lot of the
do it is to kind of look at a lot of the World War II planes because they have
World War II planes because they have that sort of chunky style which is
that sort of chunky style which is something at Hello Games we've always
something at Hello Games we've always been real fans of.
been real fans of. These are some of the early concepts of
These are some of the early concepts of the fighters.
the fighters. And it's an interesting thing with
And it's an interesting thing with procedural systems because we could if
procedural systems because we could if we wanted
we wanted make spaceships abs, you know,
make spaceships abs, you know, completely procedural and unpredictable.
completely procedural and unpredictable. But when we were doing that, we found it
But when we were doing that, we found it made like as an artist sometimes people
made like as an artist sometimes people talk about things like gameplay and
talk about things like gameplay and gameplay is something that's been
gameplay is something that's been created to make make art worse. So we
created to make make art worse. So we have to listen to these guys and then we
have to listen to these guys and then we make our art worse and it makes the game
make our art worse and it makes the game better and people are happy.
better and people are happy. So we have
So we have fighters and we have drop ships and we
fighters and we have drop ships and we have explorer ships. And the problem we
have explorer ships. And the problem we had is when we when they're entirely
had is when we when they're entirely procedural, you couldn't really tell the
procedural, you couldn't really tell the difference between them. So although
difference between them. So although they are still procedural, we just have
they are still procedural, we just have a set of rules. So we with fighters,
a set of rules. So we with fighters, even though they're all different ships,
even though they're all different ships, you can kind of tell like a similar
you can kind of tell like a similar vein. They'll have like two wings and
vein. They'll have like two wings and they'll have an engine and they'll have
they'll have an engine and they'll have a cockpit and they'll have a nose. And
a cockpit and they'll have a nose. And all that is is like a set of
all that is is like a set of constraints. That means your the end
constraints. That means your the end result is recognizable and readable for
result is recognizable and readable for the player. You can see some more
the player. You can see some more examples here.
examples here. And this is like the in-game blueprint
And this is like the in-game blueprint view. It's the same system as uh as all
view. It's the same system as uh as all the trees and things. You can see all
the trees and things. You can see all the variation on the left, the main one
the variation on the left, the main one on the right. I click on view variants.
We can also have procedural decals. These are the drop ships. And you'll see
These are the drop ships. And you'll see they have a different set of rules. So
they have a different set of rules. So they don't have the same engines. They
they don't have the same engines. They don't have noses,
don't have noses, but it means you get like very readable
but it means you get like very readable shapes.
shapes. Like even on the left, even though
Like even on the left, even though they're all very different ships, you
they're all very different ships, you know they're drop ships. You know
know they're drop ships. You know they're traders.
they're traders. And what it means is when you're flying
And what it means is when you're flying through the galaxy and you see a ship
through the galaxy and you see a ship flying along, you can very quickly
flying along, you can very quickly understand what kind of ship it is. And
understand what kind of ship it is. And it's that was hugely important from a
it's that was hugely important from a gameplay point of view.
gameplay point of view. The same with freighters. We don't need
The same with freighters. We don't need to have as much variation within them,
to have as much variation within them, but they're all procedural as well. And
but they're all procedural as well. And because we have factions within the
because we have factions within the game, they can all be linked together
game, they can all be linked together really easily. We can have certain
really easily. We can have certain shapes that are more likely to be used
shapes that are more likely to be used in certain factions. We can have certain
in certain factions. We can have certain decals, symbols. Same with space
decals, symbols. Same with space stations. Space stations can be
stations. Space stations can be procedural and they can be linked to the
procedural and they can be linked to the factions, which is really cool fun to
factions, which is really cool fun to play around with.
play around with. Uh, also we have creatures in the game.
Uh, also we have creatures in the game. Just going to drink some water.
I don't think we actually have camels. So that's a false advertising there.
So that's a false advertising there. Uh so the same at the beginning we
Uh so the same at the beginning we started to as I was in full robot mode.
started to as I was in full robot mode. So I thought I'll try to categorize
So I thought I'll try to categorize creatures to what kind of environments
creatures to what kind of environments they might inhabit.
they might inhabit. So snow creatures.
So snow creatures. But as I was going through this process,
But as I was going through this process, the same way, the same revelation, which
the same way, the same revelation, which everyone else would probably just
everyone else would probably just immediately know, but was news to me,
immediately know, but was news to me, that some really crazy creatures on our
that some really crazy creatures on our planet.
planet. And like
And like these creatures could easily be in a
these creatures could easily be in a sci-fi movie and you would just accept
sci-fi movie and you would just accept it.
like if you was going to reveal the protagonists in the game, this is who
protagonists in the game, this is who you actually play as in No Man's Sky.
So, another thing I discovered, even though I'd been a character artist for
though I'd been a character artist for many years, I'd made a load of creatures
many years, I'd made a load of creatures and rigs and whatnot, uh, in looking at
and rigs and whatnot, uh, in looking at skeletons, because essentially what we
skeletons, because essentially what we when we were breaking things up and
when we were breaking things up and dividing things up, we looked at the
dividing things up, we looked at the real world, looked at those photos from
real world, looked at those photos from earlier and said it would we would we
earlier and said it would we would we want to have creatures that are a bit
want to have creatures that are a bit like a deer or a bit like a rhino. And
like a deer or a bit like a rhino. And in doing that, like immediately,
in doing that, like immediately, obviously, when we're thinking like
obviously, when we're thinking like that, we're limiting ourselves. But
that, we're limiting ourselves. But luckily, I'm really glad I did. I have
luckily, I'm really glad I did. I have this really big uh anatomy encyclopedia
this really big uh anatomy encyclopedia uh at work and I was flicking through it
uh at work and I was flicking through it and I was literally about to start
and I was literally about to start building a rig when I think I just
building a rig when I think I just randomly flicked between dog and cat and
randomly flicked between dog and cat and uh I discovered that dogs are basically
uh I discovered that dogs are basically cats.
cats. See,
See, isn't that interesting? Dogs are also
isn't that interesting? Dogs are also horses.
horses. Horses are pigs, just a bit more bent
Horses are pigs, just a bit more bent over. Pigs are sheep. Lions are red
over. Pigs are sheep. Lions are red pandas.
pandas. And red pandas are triceratops. So
And red pandas are triceratops. So that might seem like nonsense, but it
that might seem like nonsense, but it I'm sure I had a point. So the point is
I'm sure I had a point. So the point is that if you would have a system where
that if you would have a system where you could move bones around and lengthen
you could move bones around and lengthen bones and tweak bones without having to
bones and tweak bones without having to redo a rig, then you could make all
redo a rig, then you could make all those creatures on a single rig, which
those creatures on a single rig, which for you know Boware, they wouldn't
for you know Boware, they wouldn't bother doing that. They just throw a
bother doing that. They just throw a thousand artists at them and create all
thousand artists at them and create all the creatures. But uh we don't have that
the creatures. But uh we don't have that luxury. So we had to come up with a
luxury. So we had to come up with a system for being able to create all
system for being able to create all these creatures and have them share
these creatures and have them share rigs. And that involved, I can't take
rigs. And that involved, I can't take credit for this either, we have a very
credit for this either, we have a very clever guy called Charlie who has
clever guy called Charlie who has created this beautiful IK system which
created this beautiful IK system which means we can pull joints around. We can
means we can pull joints around. We can completely push a rig to its absolute
completely push a rig to its absolute limits and the IK system compensates.
limits and the IK system compensates. So, you know, I can do terrible things
So, you know, I can do terrible things to a rig and make it look absolutely
to a rig and make it look absolutely hideous, but the creature will still
hideous, but the creature will still somehow find a way to traverse the
somehow find a way to traverse the terrain.
So, that meant we knew we could have these shared rigs. So when we're
these shared rigs. So when we're designing creatures, suddenly
designing creatures, suddenly again I talk about how we added
again I talk about how we added constraints to ourselves, but we kept
constraints to ourselves, but we kept doing this where we'd add a constraint
doing this where we'd add a constraint and then suddenly the coders would find
and then suddenly the coders would find a way of avoiding that constraint and
a way of avoiding that constraint and we're like ah I was quite looking
we're like ah I was quite looking forward to just creating a small set of
forward to just creating a small set of things but suddenly it all blew up and
things but suddenly it all blew up and we could be like oh it turns out that a
we could be like oh it turns out that a wartthog can have the same rig as a duck
wartthog can have the same rig as a duck build platypus and or a frog and which
build platypus and or a frog and which is great because it means we get all
is great because it means we get all this variation but it's also just like
this variation but it's also just like as an artist I'm a complete troll freak
as an artist I'm a complete troll freak and having that kind of power. Uh yeah,
and having that kind of power. Uh yeah, I just wanted to get back in my little
I just wanted to get back in my little box and kind of curl up.
box and kind of curl up. So these were um yeah, I'm just getting
So these were um yeah, I'm just getting ahead of myself. These are like some of
ahead of myself. These are like some of the concepts which we kind of created to
the concepts which we kind of created to as like in our blueprint system when we
as like in our blueprint system when we have built like a base template
have built like a base template you as I was saying that that base
you as I was saying that that base template needs to be really really good
template needs to be really really good otherwise
otherwise it's like it is the foundation on which
it's like it is the foundation on which all the generation is built. So if you
all the generation is built. So if you have a bad template then all the
have a bad template then all the creatures you create will be bad. So we
creatures you create will be bad. So we have to be really careful at the very
have to be really careful at the very beginning to plan exactly the kind of
beginning to plan exactly the kind of variation we want to get from a rig.
variation we want to get from a rig. This is the uh the whale/ shark/water
This is the uh the whale/ shark/water eel alien crocodile rig.
eel alien crocodile rig. And
And this is a little blue dude. This is our
this is a little blue dude. This is our blueprint system for creatures. So you
blueprint system for creatures. So you have the base template
have the base template and it gets skewed.
and it gets skewed. It then selects type of ear tail.
It then selects type of ear tail. It selects the texture. This is again
It selects the texture. This is again like the tree just one one possible
like the tree just one one possible version out of thousands or however many
version out of thousands or however many hundreds of thousands we want. Then get
hundreds of thousands we want. Then get skewed. This is the bone scaling where
skewed. This is the bone scaling where you can pick any silhouettes.
That's real fun. And this was like once we got this
And this was like once we got this system working, it was absolutely
system working, it was absolutely amazing because suddenly we were
amazing because suddenly we were populating these worlds with even when
populating these worlds with even when we only had a single rig and we they
we only had a single rig and we they were being spawned on every planet.
were being spawned on every planet. Suddenly you were flying down to a
Suddenly you were flying down to a planet and I wouldn't know what I was
planet and I wouldn't know what I was going to see and it was unpredictable
going to see and it was unpredictable and I'd never had that before because as
and I'd never had that before because as an artist you normally know exactly what
an artist you normally know exactly what you're going to see. And these are like
you're going to see. And these are like some of the Zbrush because we have like
some of the Zbrush because we have like a system where you can um create normal
a system where you can um create normal maps that we can blend between a bit
maps that we can blend between a bit like how some uh like AAA games they'll
like how some uh like AAA games they'll have like wrinkles and things that they
have like wrinkles and things that they can blend on and off. We have a similar
can blend on and off. We have a similar thing for like scales or muscle groups.
thing for like scales or muscle groups. I'm going to show you a little video of
I'm going to show you a little video of the blueprint system on the creatures.
the blueprint system on the creatures. So what you see here is again on the
So what you see here is again on the left you've got the variation. We've got
left you've got the variation. We've got the parameters set to be within a small
the parameters set to be within a small amount. So, you'll see when I click view
amount. So, you'll see when I click view variance, it'll be similar looking
variance, it'll be similar looking creatures. So, you know, the scale is
creatures. So, you know, the scale is roughly the same size. It's not a
roughly the same size. It's not a million miles away from what's before,
million miles away from what's before, but we can change the values, which I'll
but we can change the values, which I'll do in a second. And so, yeah, that's a
do in a second. And so, yeah, that's a slightly fatter version, but if I change
slightly fatter version, but if I change the scale, put it right down, then
the scale, put it right down, then you'll see a very different looking
you'll see a very different looking creature, hopefully.
creature, hopefully. There we go. So that's exactly the same
There we go. So that's exactly the same rig, but hopefully you'll also notice it
rig, but hopefully you'll also notice it it chooses a different animation
it chooses a different animation depending on what type of creature it
depending on what type of creature it gets. So you've got a cow, it knows that
gets. So you've got a cow, it knows that because it's a heavier creature, it's
because it's a heavier creature, it's going to use a slower walk. And if I can
going to use a slower walk. And if I can tweak the scaling there, so you can see
tweak the scaling there, so you can see I've made him with really skinny little
I've made him with really skinny little back legs and really heavy four legs.
back legs and really heavy four legs. But hopefully what it's demonstrating,
But hopefully what it's demonstrating, and you can get robots. You got to have
and you can get robots. You got to have robots in a sci-fi game. What it's
robots in a sci-fi game. What it's demonstrating is that you're getting a
demonstrating is that you're getting a an awful lot for very little.
an awful lot for very little. It's a shark dude. A little alligator.
It's a shark dude. A little alligator. And the next guy I really like. This is
And the next guy I really like. This is like our unicorn guy. Unicorn whale. And
like our unicorn guy. Unicorn whale. And his attack animation. He has like a
his attack animation. He has like a little happy happy face.
So at this stage we have all those creatures. You're clicking view
creatures. You're clicking view variants. You're getting very different
variants. You're getting very different looking creatures with the trees. You're
looking creatures with the trees. You're clicking in view variants. You're
clicking in view variants. You're getting lots of different looking trees
getting lots of different looking trees and plants and the terrain. We're
and plants and the terrain. We're talking about those sliders and each one
talking about those sliders and each one has a min and max.
has a min and max. But so imagine like you've got a planet,
But so imagine like you've got a planet, you've clicked on random basically. It's
you've clicked on random basically. It's just picked, you know, that antelope
just picked, you know, that antelope creature. It's picked the uh unicorn
creature. It's picked the uh unicorn whale and it's picked pink trees and
whale and it's picked pink trees and it's picked like blue grass.
it's picked like blue grass. It's all going to well I know for a fact
It's all going to well I know for a fact it looks absolutely disgusting when you
it looks absolutely disgusting when you have that. And that's what I'm referring
have that. And that's what I'm referring to when I say procedural soup because if
to when I say procedural soup because if you don't try to control that, you'll
you don't try to control that, you'll end up with a real ugly mess. And I
end up with a real ugly mess. And I think that is what as artists we get
think that is what as artists we get terrified with procedural stuff because
terrified with procedural stuff because generally you don't have any control. So
generally you don't have any control. So you're just click you're just randomly
you're just click you're just randomly hoping that the result you get is a
hoping that the result you get is a pleasing one.
pleasing one. So the way we kind of get around this is
So the way we kind of get around this is uh again I wish I could do all myself
uh again I wish I could do all myself but I work with some really talented
but I work with some really talented guys and girls and
guys and girls and uh
uh it wasn't a pleasant experience but
it wasn't a pleasant experience but there's a lot of back and forth. Um we
there's a lot of back and forth. Um we work together teamwork it's always rosy
work together teamwork it's always rosy and there's never any arguments and we
and there's never any arguments and we all agree and we all do what's best for
all agree and we all do what's best for the game. But essentially what happens
the game. But essentially what happens is we'd implement a system we'd load up
is we'd implement a system we'd load up the game. I would be offended with my
the game. I would be offended with my eyes would bleed and I would then paint
eyes would bleed and I would then paint over and try to stop whatever was
over and try to stop whatever was happening. And then what would happen is
happening. And then what would happen is the co the whoever I was working
the co the whoever I was working normally Sean like I've known Sean for
normally Sean like I've known Sean for like I've worked with him for seven
like I've worked with him for seven years now and we have a very healthy
years now and we have a very healthy relationship. So we don't mess around
relationship. So we don't mess around who I just say Sean let's look
who I just say Sean let's look let's change this and what he's really
let's change this and what he's really good at is looking at what I've done and
good at is looking at what I've done and then he makes me a better artist. He
then he makes me a better artist. He says, "Why have you done this in a
says, "Why have you done this in a paintover? Why have you done that?" And
paintover? Why have you done that?" And there some artists are really good at
there some artists are really good at knowing what they're doing. Whereas I've
knowing what they're doing. Whereas I've just always been a little bit more gut
just always been a little bit more gut driven. I just do things because I think
driven. I just do things because I think they look nice. But being a robot man
they look nice. But being a robot man like Sean is, he thinks, why why are you
like Sean is, he thinks, why why are you doing this? And I think, I don't know,
doing this? And I think, I don't know, because it looks nice. And what he was
because it looks nice. And what he was really good at doing was saying, well,
really good at doing was saying, well, oh, so you I noticed you've put like
oh, so you I noticed you've put like bushes around the base of that tree or
bushes around the base of that tree or you've put little rocks and things like
you've put little rocks and things like that. And I'm like, "Yeah, of course.
that. And I'm like, "Yeah, of course. That's what you do when you're doing
That's what you do when you're doing environments in games." And so what all
environments in games." And so what all he does is, "Well, why don't we just
he does is, "Well, why don't we just tweak the environment system so that
tweak the environment system so that every time you place a tree, then it
every time you place a tree, then it does that?" And so it's that's like a
does that?" And so it's that's like a really simple example of just like one
really simple example of just like one of the little rules we have. It's it's
of the little rules we have. It's it's all these tiny little rules and systems
all these tiny little rules and systems that basically make it more likely for
that basically make it more likely for the procedure result to be like
the procedure result to be like something I would have painted. Whe
something I would have painted. Whe whether that's a good thing or not is
whether that's a good thing or not is for you to decide.
for you to decide. We also have rules when it comes to
We also have rules when it comes to things like shapes and we talk about
things like shapes and we talk about believability like say like a a sort of
believability like say like a a sort of swamp environment that's been when the
swamp environment that's been when the planet's been terraformed it'll have
planet's been terraformed it'll have it'll have generated this climate and
it'll have generated this climate and ecosystem and again based on all these
ecosystem and again based on all these nice little universe rules like how how
nice little universe rules like how how far away from the sun or just the
far away from the sun or just the minerals in the soil and that's all just
minerals in the soil and that's all just like nice little controllable factors
like nice little controllable factors but what happens is we know that certain
but what happens is we know that certain we can tag certain types of leaf and
we can tag certain types of leaf and tree and branch as being
tree and branch as being matching to an a climate. So essentially
matching to an a climate. So essentially what that means is on a swamp planet you
what that means is on a swamp planet you will get swamp leaves and swamp
will get swamp leaves and swamp branches. That's sounds like it's
branches. That's sounds like it's limiting but it works over a huge number
limiting but it works over a huge number of things and it means that that can
of things and it means that that can also get filtered through to creatures.
also get filtered through to creatures. So in a sort of damp environment, you're
So in a sort of damp environment, you're going to get these more coldblooded sort
going to get these more coldblooded sort of waxy damp looking creatures and it
of waxy damp looking creatures and it and also some of the color from the
and also some of the color from the environment will leak through to the
environment will leak through to the creatures so they'll be natural
creatures so they'll be natural camouflage. And in the same way we can
camouflage. And in the same way we can have the opposite of that where we can
have the opposite of that where we can add in props that are complimentary so
add in props that are complimentary so they'll stand out. And that's that's
they'll stand out. And that's that's when the real fun begins.
when the real fun begins. And what I love talking to Sean about is
And what I love talking to Sean about is how objects get placed on a terrain. And
how objects get placed on a terrain. And I know for a fact this is something that
I know for a fact this is something that anyone who's ever worked with procedural
anyone who's ever worked with procedural generation with a terrain will know
generation with a terrain will know exactly what I'm talking about that when
exactly what I'm talking about that when you place objects using noise,
you place objects using noise, humans just know there's something not
humans just know there's something not quite right. And so what we have is like
quite right. And so what we have is like a clumping system
a clumping system and it means that things get placed
and it means that things get placed um in a more pleasing way which means
um in a more pleasing way which means that like they understand shape and they
that like they understand shape and they will add like a large prop and they will
will add like a large prop and they will place medium props and small props and
place medium props and small props and it will kind of gradiate down and every
it will kind of gradiate down and every environment artist does these kind of
environment artist does these kind of things but setting the rules it meant we
things but setting the rules it meant we were guaranteed for that kind of thing
were guaranteed for that kind of thing to happen.
to happen. Another thing I had to do was uh this
Another thing I had to do was uh this isn't I teach color theory to a robot. I
isn't I teach color theory to a robot. I just love that idea. Essentially, it's a
just love that idea. Essentially, it's a bit like having a junior artist when
bit like having a junior artist when you're working in procedural technology,
you're working in procedural technology, but it's a junior artist who is like the
but it's a junior artist who is like the worst. He's complete idiot and like you
worst. He's complete idiot and like you cannot you can't teach him anything and
cannot you can't teach him anything and he just doesn't listen. So you have to
he just doesn't listen. So you have to be absolutely rigid and just
be absolutely rigid and just it's a bit I remember I was talking to
it's a bit I remember I was talking to another guy and he said that um he found
another guy and he said that um he found that when he did tutorials as an artist
that when he did tutorials as an artist that it made him realize why he made the
that it made him realize why he made the decisions he did. And in doing this I've
decisions he did. And in doing this I've had a similar experience that there's
had a similar experience that there's all sorts of decisions I make that I
all sorts of decisions I make that I just did automatically. But in having to
just did automatically. But in having to implement these rules,
implement these rules, it meant that that I was understanding
it meant that that I was understanding why I was doing what I was doing. So we
why I was doing what I was doing. So we have like materials have different
have like materials have different pallets. So you'll have like I can which
pallets. So you'll have like I can which I can define
I can define and so there's no random colors. You can
and so there's no random colors. You can have hue variation, but I can still say
have hue variation, but I can still say if I want like to say dirt is always one
if I want like to say dirt is always one color. I can absolutely do that. But
color. I can absolutely do that. But obviously in doing that dirt would then
obviously in doing that dirt would then be the same color in the entire universe
be the same color in the entire universe and that would be really boring.
and that would be really boring. But it means that I can control things
But it means that I can control things like I can say what color fur is and I
like I can say what color fur is and I can say I want when you have a creature
can say I want when you have a creature that has scales I want the markings to
that has scales I want the markings to be a complimentary color. I want the
be a complimentary color. I want the underside of certain creatures to always
underside of certain creatures to always be lighter. And it means you don't get
be lighter. And it means you don't get this horrible garish mess.
this horrible garish mess. And I can do the same with trees. And
And I can do the same with trees. And we have a tagging system. So everything
we have a tagging system. So everything is linked together. So the color of the
is linked together. So the color of the grass, the color of minerals and soil
grass, the color of minerals and soil will all filter through to the to like
will all filter through to the to like the trees and the props. And it just
the trees and the props. And it just means it all feels coherent.
means it all feels coherent. And this is our view of our little color
And this is our view of our little color droids that we send down to every planet
droids that we send down to every planet because when you've got this many
because when you've got this many planets, I can't personally fly down to
planets, I can't personally fly down to every single one and decide whether I
every single one and decide whether I like the color of the grass or not. So
like the color of the grass or not. So we have uh these little dudes that fly
we have uh these little dudes that fly down. They spit out animated gifts for
down. They spit out animated gifts for me. I can then and it puts it online. So
me. I can then and it puts it online. So I can then go and look at it at my
I can then go and look at it at my leisure and I can click on the image and
leisure and I can click on the image and get a seed value and then fly down. And
get a seed value and then fly down. And what it means is I can balance colors
what it means is I can balance colors like a god from above and tweak them and
like a god from above and tweak them and then send out my little minions
then send out my little minions and all the all this stuff. All it means
and all the all this stuff. All it means it's a way for me to control the output
it's a way for me to control the output and it means I can link things together
and it means I can link things together and the results are something like I
and the results are something like I would create myself.
would create myself. And hopefully you can see here like we
And hopefully you can see here like we have a tagging system for props. So you
have a tagging system for props. So you can see that the trees in style and
can see that the trees in style and color and shape they kind of match the
color and shape they kind of match the props the uh the shapes you see on the
props the uh the shapes you see on the ground. And even the creatures you'll
ground. And even the creatures you'll see their markings and the the colors.
see their markings and the the colors. They're all linked to the environment.
They're all linked to the environment. So everything just feels like it
So everything just feels like it belongs.
belongs. And you can see the sort of clumping
And you can see the sort of clumping system with the complimentary colors
system with the complimentary colors where you've got the blue against the
where you've got the blue against the orange and you've got the green sky and
orange and you've got the green sky and objects placed around cave mouths. Like
objects placed around cave mouths. Like I haven't placed any of these props, but
I haven't placed any of these props, but hopefully it doesn't look too
hopefully it doesn't look too procedural.
procedural. And we get some really cool bugs. Um I'm
And we get some really cool bugs. Um I'm trying to think the best example I can
trying to think the best example I can give is like I was fiddling around with
give is like I was fiddling around with this. Um I wanted to create these little
this. Um I wanted to create these little hippos that spawned in caves just as
hippos that spawned in caves just as like a little experiment. When I say
like a little experiment. When I say hippos, it just means like a mammal type
hippos, it just means like a mammal type creature that's within a certain scale.
creature that's within a certain scale. And I know that and you I could set it
And I know that and you I could set it to have like a bulbous sort of nose. And
to have like a bulbous sort of nose. And so I'd done this on my PC and I thought,
so I'd done this on my PC and I thought, cool, that's quite fun. I'll just check
cool, that's quite fun. I'll just check it in and just, you know, we'll decide
it in and just, you know, we'll decide on it later. Uh, and then one of the
on it later. Uh, and then one of the guys, he'd obviously got latest and he'
guys, he'd obviously got latest and he' loaded up the game and he'd gone into an
loaded up the game and he'd gone into an underwater cave and obviously I forgot
underwater cave and obviously I forgot that at that stage in time caves were to
that at that stage in time caves were to say whether they were above water or
say whether they were above water or underwater. So he'd swam around the
underwater. So he'd swam around the corner and been
corner and been to his surprise found like 200 hippos
to his surprise found like 200 hippos just splashing about in the water.
just splashing about in the water. And that's the butterfly effect. I can I
And that's the butterfly effect. I can I can tweak tiny little things and it has
can tweak tiny little things and it has this crazy crazy effect which is really
this crazy crazy effect which is really scary. And I'm going to show a final
scary. And I'm going to show a final video
video which hopefully shows all those things
which hopefully shows all those things off.
off. [Music]
Heat.
[Music]
Heat. [Applause]
[Music] Heat
up
here.
Oh,
[Music] [Applause]
crap. [Music]
Yes. [Applause]
So, I've been told to remind people to fill out the little uh judgment cards,
fill out the little uh judgment cards, but you can forget if you're going to
but you can forget if you're going to give me a bad mark. So uh but if anyone
give me a bad mark. So uh but if anyone would like questions then I think
would like questions then I think there's a little microphone. I don't
there's a little microphone. I don't don't know how much time we have but yes
don't know how much time we have but yes in uh creating all these procedural
in uh creating all these procedural systems uh you talked about creating the
systems uh you talked about creating the art cohesiveness rules. Yeah. How did
art cohesiveness rules. Yeah. How did you incorporate things uh like gameplay
you incorporate things uh like gameplay concepts like uh uh threat uh threat
concepts like uh uh threat uh threat level or difficulty or strength or
level or difficulty or strength or things like that? How did you
things like that? How did you incorporate those kind of concepts into
incorporate those kind of concepts into that same system? That's good. So we
that same system? That's good. So we have things like um so the question was
have things like um so the question was how do we incorporate gameplay elements
how do we incorporate gameplay elements like threat into a procedural system and
like threat into a procedural system and through our tagging system we can like
through our tagging system we can like when we create like generated props
when we create like generated props things like horns and spikes that on
things like horns and spikes that on things like creatures then we know like
things like creatures then we know like scale values. So if a horn for example
scale values. So if a horn for example gets above a certain size, we can say a
gets above a certain size, we can say a creature becomes more dangerous. And
creature becomes more dangerous. And what it means is when you see a
what it means is when you see a creature, you can kind of predict how
creature, you can kind of predict how dangerous it's going to be just by the
dangerous it's going to be just by the way it looks. So like the more ferocious
way it looks. So like the more ferocious the larger and the more spiky a creature
the larger and the more spiky a creature is, the more likely to be dangerous it
is, the more likely to be dangerous it is. And but we can also play with that
is. And but we can also play with that and have like a little fluffy white
and have like a little fluffy white bunny and have him be really dangerous.
bunny and have him be really dangerous. But you just don't know.
But you just don't know. Hi.
Hi. Um, I had a couple questions about your
Um, I had a couple questions about your production pipeline, like for your art
production pipeline, like for your art assets, because it's kind of really
assets, because it's kind of really unique. Um, so when you guys were doing
unique. Um, so when you guys were doing R&D for your proceduralism and all the
R&D for your proceduralism and all the different things that you guys were
different things that you guys were trying out, so you guys have multiple
trying out, so you guys have multiple rigs, you have multiple geometries. Yes,
rigs, you have multiple geometries. Yes, we can. And so do you guys how much do
we can. And so do you guys how much do you guys rely on like blend shapes and
you guys rely on like blend shapes and morph targets? Like you guys blend in
morph targets? Like you guys blend in different normal maps. Can you talk
different normal maps. Can you talk about that a little bit? Uh, yep. So we
about that a little bit? Uh, yep. So we have the thing with um procedural
have the thing with um procedural systems is you almost want to have as as
systems is you almost want to have as as much flexibility as possible. So we can
much flexibility as possible. So we can we do have entirely generated
we do have entirely generated uh systems where the artist has no
uh systems where the artist has no control and things like UVs are
control and things like UVs are automatically generated and um textures
automatically generated and um textures are automatically applied. But what we
are automatically applied. But what we do is if a if the result isn't good
do is if a if the result isn't good enough that's when we'll start adding in
enough that's when we'll start adding in handmade assets. And like you were
handmade assets. And like you were saying, we have blend shapes. And
saying, we have blend shapes. And because we have bone scaling and bone
because we have bone scaling and bone positioning, it means we don't actually
positioning, it means we don't actually have to have too much different geometry
have to have too much different geometry because it just kind of works by pulling
because it just kind of works by pulling it around. And it's and we'll with
it around. And it's and we'll with normal maps, we create as many different
normal maps, we create as many different ones as we want for like a creature. And
ones as we want for like a creature. And often that's just things like muscular
often that's just things like muscular or bulbous. And we can blend between
or bulbous. And we can blend between those or scaly. And we found you don't
those or scaly. And we found you don't actually need to create that many to get
actually need to create that many to get the variation. But the more we do, the
the variation. But the more we do, the the better it becomes. Is that cool?
the better it becomes. Is that cool? Thanks. Hi. Oh, sorry. What? Oh, time's
Thanks. Hi. Oh, sorry. What? Oh, time's up. Sorry. Um, if you want to ask me
up. Sorry. Um, if you want to ask me more questions, I'll be in room. This is
more questions, I'll be in room. This is important. 2002. We can chat later if
important. 2002. We can chat later if you want.
you want. Cool. Thank you very much, everyone.
Cool. Thank you very much, everyone. Yeah. Yeah, I will.
Yeah. Yeah, I will. Okay.