Welcome to the way we work.
Five micro talks, breaking down the science of work culture
in the game industry, what works? What definitely doesn't
and more importantly how all of us,
all of us can remake it.
The goal here is to shift leaders from a conversation from conversation to action.
We want you to leave armed with the knowledge to enact practical solutions.
The empathy to consider people first culture
and the will to bet on long term human sustainability in our industry.
So if you may have surmised,
we're not gonna waste your time
trying to convince you that things need to change in our industry
from layoffs to burn out to abuse.
And more the average shelf life of a game developer is only 3 to 7 years,
less than a decade.
We're seeing the burnout of entire generations, entire micro
generations of developers.
So for the purposes of today,
consider the need to change as an accepted premise, settled science.
What we're instead going to focus on is what
to change and more most importantly how to change
because now that we see the problem, the next step is solving it.
So let's meet our speakers.
Uh We're gonna start off with Lisette teacher Montgomery.
She'll be speaking on the front of the pipeline and hiring standards.
Dr
JC Lau will be speaking on developing from IC to leadership.
I will be speaking on building or rebuilding healthy work culture,
LaToya Peterson on my left will be speaking on funding and
ECA will be speaking on how to put this all together
in your, in the
studio.
Now, let's hear from Lisette.
Welcome everyone.
It's clear by the turnout that we've all really believe that
this is important at this critical time in our industry.
So I think it speaks to all of us that we are here because we want to see a change.
I'll do a quick intro. My name's Lisette
Trisha
Montgomery. I've been making games for over 23 years.
Um I've shipped 15 titles,
um won several awards and nominations for Game of the Year for Psychonaut,
uh South Park Sims and Transformers.
So, some of the things I'm talking about today
are a reflection of my 23 years of experience as an art director,
but also is my 10 years experience on the board developing game heads.
Uh The local, well, I'm now an online worldwide accelerator.
So the first area we want to focus on is talent development and retention.
That's what my talk is going to be focused on.
And we'll be focusing on curriculum standardization
and tr level requirements,
hiring challenges and success or as we found through game,
hence tackling some of these issues,
talent development and retention has never been more challenging
for all roles, but especially in technical roles and programming.
My talk will cover my experience as an art director,
a founding member of game heads and someone who has worked
diligently to make the future of games more accessible to all.
So let's start with game schools.
Game schools are quite frankly simply under training The next generation
of devs most schools don't set people up for success.
And even if you do don't go to a notable school,
there's no guarantee that you will be ready to work day one.
I attribute this to two main factors, poor teacher hiring and salaries.
And secondly, dev process knowledge.
Most game school teachers are underpaid.
For example, when I was working as a a teacher at expressions,
I was getting $50 an hour and only part time.
Now if you compare that to the salaried or hourly game pay, you get it in most studios,
you're already getting underpaid just trying to work part time.
That creates a situation
where most teachers have little to know
in studio or product development experience.
And the side effect of that is that now,
tools are mostly taught and not the process of actual game development.
Programming and development processes need standardization
and fundamental curriculum driven by industry experts.
With a recent game dev experience
primarily driven by on on site project learning with teams,
you should be making games in school.
I can't really understand how important this is.
You can't really understand how games are actually made without
building at least one yourself and several before you graduate.
Adding to this is that most employers do
not provide entry level training of any sort.
So you literally have to learn all of this on your own
if you're not getting it from your university degree and programs.
One of the solutions that I found to be
successful is when students spend their extra time,
the little they do have going to game jams,
game jams like mandated kitchen
um
Global Game Jam
and several others. You can see the link here of some options.
So if you don't have the necessarily
support you're getting from your university program,
you can reach out to game jams and participate in them to get
the experience you need in actually development
next challenge, entry level requirements.
Um Quite frankly, they're insane.
Three years minimum is not a realistic entry level requirement.
Employers are better served looking for students with demonstratable capacity
games they've created and gave assets. They've made work on their own,
proven that they're able to work.
One of the side of the effects of this is outsourcing,
outsourcing began in earnest in 2004 after the E A spouse lawsuit
and here we are 20 years later
and the effects are hitting the industry very hard.
We've seen major burnout of our mid-level talent and some of our most,
a lot of our senior talent.
So most DEVS quit between 3 to 5 or seven years.
This
has led to mid and junior Devs without proper mentorship or support who then burn out
adding to that outsourcing.
Artists are also underpaid overwork and rarely get to work in engine
or are part of a DEV team and understand what processes are.
There are
a lot of our,
our new and entry level talent are just
not le learning the whole product development pipeline.
This has created a limited experience, talent pool
and a lack of technical expertise.
And this has had a very total negative impact on Black Brown and Fame game um
Femme game developers,
it has quite frankly been devastating.
The numbers have not moved despite all the optics and the pr
when I started in the industry,
Black Game devs represented 4% of the industry and now we are
anywhere between one and 3% depending on what stat you look at.
The industry has grown but not along with us.
We
black females are less than one, a fraction of 1% of the industry.
The next challenge is hiring and talent development.
Quite frankly, more internship and mentorship programs with studios are needed.
Ideally partnering with nonprofit schools and accelerators
along with game studios to help build long term
pathway programs like game heads are the solution.
The other opportunities that we can provide are internships.
They provide valuable on the ground training and
expose entry level talent to current debt processes.
On the slip side,
unpaid internships are extremely at least and quite frankly illegal.
Very few people are independently we wealthy enough to work for free.
Please. People need to pay their bills. This whole model is unsustainable.
Please do not take an unpaid internship.
Instead look for pathway programs like game heads
and pathway programs at schools like Carnegie Mellon
and university programs that actually
work alongside studios to develop pipelines
at game heads. We work with industry professionals and creating our curriculum,
teaching up to date skills and to
build relationship for their internship opportunities.
And finally, we'll have a,
a lighter note and that is our success stories with game heads.
Um
The
p the purpose of game heads is that we paper over the cracks for our students.
So they have a supported pathway to careers in games and tech.
We don't replace a four year university.
We are a complement to them by providing standard
industry training and game development support and internships.
Our students are pair with mentors and they are training
alongside of them as a developer games throughout the years.
And um especially during our summer intensive program,
this continued relationship and recurring
game development experience year over year
has helped our students create portfolios
and resumes that show demonstratable capacity to potential employers.
They help us build valuable connections with studios like Sony, for example,
um this recent last month we released a
skin pack that actually benefits game heads 100%.
And our students work directly with insomniac
to develop the skins.
And
in turn, that has given them practical day of experience
and their first shipping credit.
So these are the type of programs that we feel can help bridge the gap
and help
fuse the public and private sector
in order to improve our talent pipelines.
And with that, I will hand it over to the talented
Dr JC.
Hello,
I'm standing on a box.
This is great.
I 4 ft my my ass is 4 ft 11. So yeah, anyways,
hello, I am Doctor JC Lau.
I am a producer at Probably Monsters
and I've been in the games industry for about eight years now.
So I think I'm the baby on this panel,
but here's a bit about me. So here are some of the studios I've worked at
and some of the leadership accelerators that I've been part of.
But before I got into games at all, I was a college professor.
I, my areas of expertise was political philosophy and
I spent a lot of time studying
power structures and collective decision making processes.
So for today's talk,
I'm going to take some of my learnings from that
past life and apply it to the way we work.
Now,
I don't need to tell you that a lot of things
suck really hard for a lot of people right now.
But when toxic workplace practices or code business
decisions drive people out of this industry.
This is a lust for us all.
Like functional teams are broken up and for the survivors, we have to
re invent wheels,
train up new people and often we're doing this against existing timelines, which
effectively means you're more behind than you
were before because you had to redo work
and that sucks. So, so far, we've heard
Lisette talk about strategies for getting diverse talent into the industry.
But what do you do when they're here?
I'm currently moving into leadership roles and sometimes it's really hard to
look at this industry and think this is what I'm inheriting.
Like,
what,
how can I help my reports feel confident about their career choices and they work?
Like,
how can we all feel confident about our career choices?
How can we collectively transform this industry's
future into something safe and sustainable?
It's really easy to despair at the scale of the problem.
But while you cannot fix the entire industry,
you can make a difference in the space where you have the most impact.
That is the space that is immediately around you.
And I think the way to do this is to intentionally and
proactively grow and become better leaders who can support a better culture.
So think back on your careers, are there people who you thought were like, yeah,
I would love to work with that person.
Again,
you know,
people that were like good communicators and collaborators and people who
were just able to work with all kinds of personalities.
What did those people have in common?
Fundamentally,
those are people who have built connections and
empathy and psychological safety with their peers.
And as leaders,
we should want to be those people and we should also want to grow those people.
So I think there are three ways that this applies.
Firstly, we do this through collective action.
So we all do our part to grow people in our teams.
Secondly, we do this through leadership that is informed by soft power,
that is we lead through empathy and co opting.
And finally, we do this through incremental progress.
That is we work on getting better every day.
So
let's talk about collective action. First,
you may have heard of a little game
called hell divers too
as a single hell diver, you can't win the galactic war by yourself. But if
enough other hell divers all did their individual missions and
you will like brought democracy to your regions,
you can solve this sector by sector and that's how you win the war.
It has a larger effect than what any individual can achieve.
So this is actually an example of a collective action to solve a problem.
Other examples might be things like, you know,
we all collectively follow driving laws, things like boycotts,
unionization is a collective action
coming together for a conference is a collective action.
These are actions that require co ordination and working together.
And the idea here is
I can support my reports and my team and you can support your reports and your team.
And
if we all do this and there's enough of us
doing this in our own little spheres of influence,
we might collectively make the industry a little bit better.
So keep that in mind, let's look at leadership informed by soft power.
Now, what do I mean by soft power?
Normally when we talk about power, we talk about hard leadership power
that is you have the coercive power of your title or role to drive change.
Organizational structures are just by definition,
structures of hard power like you've got hierarchy, you have directors,
you have managers and so on
and hard power is often imposed by people who have it on people who don't.
And in a lot of these cases saying things like
well do this because I say so is
like a acceptable justification to do something.
But by contrast,
soft power appeals to your values or culture
to drive change rather than rigid authority.
So it's the ability to co opt rather than coerce.
And this is what you do as peers or like, you know, when you manage upwards,
like when you talk to your managers,
soft power actually allows for the democratization of
your company culture because it is what everyone experiences
like it's how you treat each other regardless of what your
old structure is or where you are in your company hierarchy.
So
if you're a leader,
you have both and you might see soft power as a threat to your hard power.
But I argue that soft power necessarily coexists with hard power.
Because remember before you had hard power, you had soft power.
And by its very nature,
even in the largest organizations with the hardest hierarchical power,
your entire operation would just fall apart if you didn't have
people feeling empowered to influence each other and do their work.
So as an example,
if you're in a meeting and everyone has the same title and the
same level of experience that is you will have the same hard power.
You still need to make decisions through soft power and influence.
And finally, soft power isn't a limited resource,
there's plenty to go around and giving some to
others doesn't actually take away from your hard power.
So soft power and hard power are therefore
both tools you can use in different situations.
And if you have both,
which one you use will impact how open, safe and engaged your team is.
That is your culture.
So as an example in times of disruptive behavior,
it's easier just to use your hard power to shut it down.
Like if you're a leader, you can just come in and say stop it.
But
does that really bring about the long term? Change that you want
doing,
that doesn't actually solve the underlying problem of why
someone was behaving that way in the first place.
So it might stop the behavior,
but then they might also stop engaging and participating on your team.
And then you've just lost a perspective from someone
on your team and you've become less psychologically safe.
But instead framing the behavior as an opportunity for a
conversation helps to address the root cause of the issue.
So you can
say something like
why is this so important to you?
I wanna know. So I can better understand even if I don't agree.
And this invites people to discuss and
engage while acknowledging what their needs are.
And then once you've understood what the underlying issue is,
we can go and solve that.
So here's an example of how we practice soft power
on my team. We have this weekly ritual called open forum
and once a week,
we have this often meeting where people can bring up any
issues they want about like gameplay or culture or company policy.
An open forum is one of the biggest cultural touchstones for our studio.
We all come to the conversation as peers with soft power
and we have a director that facilitates it.
But the vast majority of the conversation is driven by the team,
we all hold space for each other and it's really transparent.
Like the most junior person on the team has the same voice or the,
as much of a voice as someone who is more close to the leadership,
it's technically an open meeting,
but we consistently have a 90% or higher attendance rate.
And the goal of open forum isn't actually like agreement.
The goal is engagement because remember,
soft power is about making change through co opting and shared values.
And this naturally puts guide rails around how you want to give feedback.
So for example,
if you're in a play test and you didn't like how the character's jump ability felt,
you can't just come to open forum and say, hey,
jump sucks because that's not effective for change when you say that to your peers.
But if you trust that your peers are,
you know, skilled at their,
what they do and their experts are knowledgeable about their craft,
you could try to understand why jump was implemented that way.
So you might say something like,
hey jump there feel good to me, like why does the arc do this
good designs and good culture need to be challenged to become great.
So give your team the space and
power to do exactly that.
So when you can have open,
honest and psychologically safe conversations around your work and culture,
it creates more effective teams by reducing the cognitive cost of interactions.
So effective team spent less time in deliberation,
resolving process issues or tripping over issues with communication.
So at this point, you don't have to like
have a conversation to just have the conversation
and this might seem really granular,
but it adds up in terms of project time and energy.
So you can practice soft power and still get results. But because
soft power relies on things like trust and bravery and psychological safety,
it takes time and effort to foster through incremental and regular practice.
So this is an idea that
I am taking from James Clear's books, Atomic Habits.
The idea here is you basically, if you want to win a marathon,
you don't just win a marathon, you have to,
you know, get up and practice and it takes time in forming habit.
And this is similar to like, you know,
if you use agile for constant improvement in your deliverables,
take the same principle here
and um use it to improve your team.
So much of this industry is focused on short term goals like we get the next
update out the door we hire to meet scope and then when we ship the game,
we cut that team.
And then the next time you need a bunch of people for a project,
you have to rehire them and retrain them.
And
this is just really ineffective.
So
what I want to propose is that intentionally taking small
amounts of time regularly to hold space for your team
and encourage them to connect with each other
is this is the leadership skill you can
develop in everyone regardless of their title or role
and this makes everyone better across successive projects.
So here is an interesting point from Clare's book.
If you improve 1%
every day over a course of a year, you end up 37 times better by the time you're done.
And conversely, if you get 1% worse
every day for a year, you go down to nearly zero.
So what starts out as a small win or
a minor setback actually accumulates into something much more.
So,
think about what this could look like if we all work
to improve our industry by improving the way that we lead.
Like as an example, Super Mario Brothers came out in 1985
and it was made by a team of five people
and this was what 39 years ago,
Super Mario Wonder came out last year in 2023 and of
those five original people that worked on Super Mario Brothers,
four of them worked on Super Mario Wonder.
So imagine what that level of collaboration could look like in our industry
and imagine what we could have if we could have that across the entire industry.
And we could just say game development is a forever career,
think of how we could use all that institutional
knowledge just to make our projects even better.
So as a quick wrap up,
I hope I've shown you a lens by which you can look at
sustainability by practicing soft power and empowering a team to do so,
it creates a kind of engaging human centered industry,
which is one where we can create leaders and cultures that we can be proud of.
Again, this is not a magical like one size fits all.
So,
but by thinking about what you can do to positively impact
the people around you and by leading with soft power,
we can all do a small part in improving the way we work.
OK. I'm JC LA.
Thank you for listening. This is where you can find me on the internet.
And next up is Sinead Bryant to talk about culture.
Thank you JC.
Changing the way we work requires changing hearts and
minds from the IC level to the leadership level.
We just heard from JC about soft power and incremental progress in the day to day.
I'm here to talk about driving long term culture change that
is turning that day to day into the year over year.
Let's talk about workplace culture and
building sustainability into the business.
I had an old manager once
he did not want to talk about culture.
He wanted to talk about game mechanics. He wanted to talk about pnls and break evens.
He even wanted to talk about the art that we had hanging on the wall,
but he did not want to talk about culture, didn't want to think about it.
He always say
Sinead. All we have to do is hire the right people and we'll get a good culture
and it's understandable, right?
Like workplace culture,
those are two of the most terrifying words that you can hear as a leader.
Chances are, if someone's talking to you about culture,
it's because something has already gone horribly, horribly wrong.
And we've already seen the ways that workplace cultures can go wrong in,
in recent years.
I mean,
we were already in the midst of a cultural earthquake even
before the studio consolidations and mass layoffs of the last year.
Plus
something's gotta give
but good culture doesn't just happen
to build it.
You have to talk about it.
So today
we're gonna talk about it.
I'm gonna challenge you to talk and think about your company's culture
and we're gonna get proactive about fixing the culture
problem that you probably know that you have.
So, my name is Sinead Bryant. I'm an executive producer over at Oculus Publishing.
Uh I've been in the professional game development for more than 20 years.
Um Here's some of the stuff I do,
some of the stuff I've written some of the games I've shipped,
you know, over the years,
I've worked at companies from Xbox and
take two to Capcom and Midway Home Entertainment
on projects with simply massive budgets
to those with barely uh ₹2 to rub together.
I've seen how a lot of teams work and how
a lot of companies run and I'm excited to talk about
the way we work
now when it comes to making a new culture or remaking an old one.
I want you to keep three guiding principles in mind.
Number one,
what do you value?
Number two,
culture is not one size fits all.
Number three
values first, hiring
more on those later.
Now, uh
I like to get interactive so quick show of hands who
here works at a company with less than 10 people.
Anyone. OK. We've got a few folks. All right.
Now who here works at a company with more than 10 people.
That's what I thought. Ok, so the majority of folks, more than 10 people.
Now, what if I told you that your 1st 10 hires decide or decided
your company's culture? Your 1st 10?
Now, let's break that down.
Like at a shiny new company,
a bold statement about your 1st 10 hires can be a blueprint.
Something to keep in mind as you're developing hiring strategy.
But what if you're not hiring your 1st 10? What if you've already hired them?
What if you're hiring employee number 110 or number 1010?
That bold statement feels more like another bolder that
you're being asked to push up yet another hill?
So
what do you do?
Well, let's start talking about culture by first defining workplace culture.
Now, to me, culture is the shared values,
behaviors and beliefs that you want your team
to rally behind to achieve organizational goals.
Uh There are many ways in which culture shows up in the workplace.
It can encompass everything from who you hire
to the balance between work and life.
Uh,
from the speed at which people get promoted to how
many types of cereal you offer in your micro kitchen.
It can be open door policies or open office floor plans.
Put another way.
Culture is the name of the blanket
that we throw over the mystery
that creates the day to day experience your people have at work.
And yes, that was me paraphrasing a CDC
in a G DC talk.
Now I've described what culture is to me.
Let's get back to you.
How would someone describe the workplace culture at your company?
Or actually let me put that a different way.
How would you want people to describe your culture?
Do you want them to say it's empowering
that they feel respected
that the work they do is valued
that management cares about them as people and not just as human resources,
good cultures, healthy cultures like that don't just happen.
They require deliberate decision and deliberate planning
and sometimes difficult conversations.
Now we've talked about the good,
let's talk about
the not so good.
Here's how the culture has been described at a
few prominent places in the industry and don't worry,
names have been changed. So we all have jobs. Tomorrow.
One studio was described as
the poster child for poor work life balance.
Sorry Travis Kelsey
for another,
I was advised that only 50% of the job is actually knowing how to do the job.
The other 50%
politics,
another still was described as a,
as a blank slate.
But is it a good thing if no one knows who you are or what you stand for,
whether it's obsessed with heroics, uh hypercompetitive or
hierarchical
greedy, competitive,
combative cliquey people will describe your company
by how your culture made them feel
and their trust in you as competent leaders is directly proportional
to the how big of a gap there is between the truth
and the brochure.
So now
let's fix it.
Let's talk about making or remaking a deliberate workplace culture.
Number one,
what do you value?
Remember our definition of culture, uh the shared values, behaviors and beliefs,
the,
the blanket the mystery,
the keyword in all that
is shared
culture picks up where the employee handbook leaves off
and the team will lean on a good set of shared
values to direct them through the course of the many,
many decisions that they make every day.
Ask my team how often I use our difficult conversations value
as a reminder that consensus and collaboration
aren't always easy.
So here's what I want you to do before you leave. When you leave here today,
talk about it.
Talk about your culture, talk about your values to each other as leaders,
but most importantly to your peers, your directs, your teams
don't just talk about it to the hr to hr the DE I director or
the marginalized folks in your office who already have too much to do
a good rule of thumb for culture change.
You should be talking about your culture and your values as much or
more than you talk about the cool game that you're all making together
and certainly more than you talk about the wall art.
Number two,
culture is not one size fits all.
Even as an expression of shared values,
people can experience work culture very differently.
Consider the team value, work hard play hard.
That's an especially common one in the game industry. No idea why,
but just as common is forgetting that there's no universal definition of play.
If you don't believe me,
let me tell you a tale of surprise off his kittens day,
quick show of hands who here loves kittens.
All right. Yes, this is a kitten
kitten friendly zone who here isn't a big fan of cats or kittens.
Well, there's a couple of people. Ok, I'm talking to the kitten folks though. So,
so
like most people, like most game developers,
I love kittens.
So when my job decided they were going to surprise us all with a, hey,
there's kittens over in the conference room you can play with all day.
I should have been ecstatic, right?
Well, one thing to know about me is I am also horribly allergic to cats.
So while an office kitten day
sounds like a dream come true,
a surprise office kitten day,
just sort of with a whole lot of this.
By the way, I do take daily meds
for my allergies now.
So if Zuck would like to surprise us with kittens, I would not complain,
but shared values, different experiences.
So here's what I want you to do when you leave today.
Ask yourself what are some of the ways our company
culture might be experienced in different ways by different people?
Ask why that is?
And then lastly ask, what can we do about it? How can we make?
Make sure our culture is more deliberately inclusive?
Oh, and speaking of inclusive,
can we
all agree to stop playing that team building? Guess the baby picture game
I always lose.
And if you ask why I'm gonna guess you've never been the only black woman
on a team before.
Lastly, number three
values first. Hiring,
in other words, hire for values first. And I know
I know that this sounds backwards, but hear me out,
companies tend to hire for skills first and everything else after.
But when you're building or rebuilding a culture
values are the skill that you most need.
One mistake,
larger companies often make is trying to skip all the work by just hiring
a single DE I director to be accountable for everything to fix everything.
And I don't even have to tell you
that doesn't work
whether it's a culture you built
or one that you inherited it's not solely up to them
to fix your culture, problem leaders. It is up to you.
Your next 10 hires can radically change your company. Culture,
done, right? These culture carriers bring skills and value based leadership
and can aid in recalibrating even resetting your culture.
But you can't skip to the end,
you can't skip the hard work.
So here's what I want you to do when you leave here today,
take everything you've learned about your company values and number one
and your team's consumption of those values. And number two
and then rethink who and how you would hire if your only job requirements
were value based.
What would the job description look like? What would the candidate pool look like?
I can imagine it would look very different from who you're courting right now.
Remember,
culture work is collective action in action.
It takes an entire team working together,
pushing the same direction to make or remake a culture.
Our job as leaders is not merely to direct products,
but to direct the people who make the products
and speaking of people,
it has to be said the way that you hire and
the way that you fire are part of your culture too.
To say this last year has been challenging is an understatement.
56% of, of survey devs
are worried about upcoming layoffs and with almost 18,000 G
game jobs gone in just the last 14 months.
It's no surprise.
People are struggling and many leaders seem to think the solution
is in figuring out how to have good layoffs or to
fire perfectly as a certain tech CEO just coined.
But
the truth is
you can't perfect trauma
and we're applauding ourselves while doing little to understand
how to actually support our former and future colleagues.
That's your culture too.
Leaders, we can do better,
we can do better today.
We can support our former current and future colleagues
by building cultures centered on psychological safety,
empathetic management with the tools to weather even this instability.
Now, I started my talk by saying your culture is decided in your 1st 10 hires.
Let me end it by paraphrasing another popular phrase,
culture eats your studio strategy
for breakfast.
So be culture minded,
rethinking the way we work is the way we win.
Thank you very much. My name is Shae
Bryant. Um Here's how to find and follow me.
And next up, let's hear from LaToya Peterson with games funding.
All right. Hello. Hello, good afternoon.
Um So we've just heard three wonderful micro talks and we
have one coming up after me from the Fabulous Echo.
Um I wanted to take a quick moment to talk about something slightly different.
We normally focus on what's happening internally
at the workplace.
Um But gaming is for folks who don't know me.
Sorry, I'm LaToya Peterson, co-founder and CXO of Globe Games.
One of the first all women of color founded game Studios
and
gaming is my third career.
So, first I was a writer, blogger and um radio host, uh did a lot of those things,
a little bit of TV, hosting as well.
Then I transitioned out of that, went into newsroom management,
did news and then sports um worked at Al Jazeera, uh fusion, Univision
and ESPN and Disney.
And then, uh after that,
my good friend Matthieu asked if I wanted to co found a
studio and we started Glow Up Games uh back in 2019.
And so I've been a leader and a manager and executive for about 10 years now.
And there are some common threads that I started seeing industry over industry.
And I have to admit I'm struggling a little bit of this talk
today because I presented the award uh for the Indie Studio Award,
Indie Developer Award
to Zoar
Nelson at the Blacks and Gaming Awards and he delivered,
have you guys seen that talk on Twitter?
Please look up
Zoars talk where he exhorts this audience to
not lay ourselves at the mercy of this industry
that is going to take so much from us and give so little as Sinead. Just pointed out,
we've lost 18,000 game jobs. 18,000 people's lives were upended. 18,000
little points of institutional knowledge
have been eliminated.
So when I look at this issue, when I start thinking about what I've seen,
what happened,
what we were able to build it glow up what we've never had the money to properly do.
We started thinking about, let's talk about the macro influences that
influence your studio culture that are far outside of what's happening day to day.
So there's an article in Mother Jones that I
really love called the Smash and Grab Economy.
And it talks a lot about the entrance of private equity.
And so what happens when we are looking at the ways in which funding models are
designed to exploit specifically to look at what
they feel like is the most valuable piece.
The IP generally never the people, but we'll get to that in a second.
But what's the most valuable piece of the
corporation of the organization strip that out,
take it away from the people who help build that
and then turn it into another commodity.
And so as you think about that and you think
about the ways in which games funding is structured,
you start seeing a lot of similarities.
But I had mentioned before,
I came from another industry before this, I came from journalism
and a lot of journalism over the last 10 years was managing, through downturns,
managing layoffs, managing
just the destruction over and over again
when I was at ESPN.
Uh I was there for three years and there were five distinct rounds of layoffs.
It's a really tough environment to be in.
Uh But I really resonated with uh
Sinead's point that you can't perfect trauma.
Um Up there on the screen is the Hollywood reporter,
uh reporting on one of the most traumatic days of my life as a manager
when I arrived to work and realized my entire team
was laid off and no one had told us beforehand.
So all of the talent I had nurtured all the juniors, all the folks who had moved,
had to break leases, all the things that happened, all the chaos,
the executives at Al Jazeera at the time
um were planning to come down from New York
to make the announcement, but they never made it.
And so everyone was just sitting there, key cards, not working,
freaking out what was happening.
Finding out that
uh of the team of 50 I was one of nine left
and those kind of experiences change you as Sinead
pointed out a layoff is not something that happens
just on a balance sheet.
It's not just numbers,
it also impacts the people both who have to leave and those who stay.
And so after that, I took my career as an executive,
a lot more seriously figuring that if I was in charge of the pnls,
if I was the one that could help figure out how to raise the money,
if I was going to do this, I could do this differently,
that people wouldn't have to suffer the way that I saw my team suffer that day.
However,
it's been interesting after going into news watching
that collapse going into sports and entertainment,
which is kind of on its last legs
and then coming into gaming.
A lot of things just feel eerily familiar
if you've been through this before.
Um You can look at the headlines from Politico to the headlines against Daily Biz.
Uh You can see all of these different
headlines coming through where time and time again,
we are seeing layoffs are the solution
to cash flow problems. We are going to fix our balance sheet.
We are going to make our shareholders happy.
We are going to move to our investors by making sure that we are cutting jobs,
cutting labor because labor is expensive.
And so the argument that I'm making today is that,
you know,
we have this whole fear about the invisible hand that controls the markets
in particularly there's a lot that we can talk about in capitalism,
free market economy, we can talk about that later.
Um
But in the games industry funding is that invisible hand that is controlling labor.
Um JC had mentioned unions being a powerful form of collective action and they are.
Um but for those of us who came from again,
journalism or film where unions are plentiful.
And when we have many of them,
one of the things you learn is that unions don't fix cash flow.
They cannot help in that respect.
And in that regard, they might be able to negotiate a better severance package,
but they can't fix a structural issue like funding.
So we're gonna talk a little bit about what's
going on and what's impacting the labor market,
how games are funded,
how Indie studios are funded and how even large studios
are still at the mercy of this House of Cards.
That is a funding system that we have built.
So first, there's publishing, I'm not gonna go too deeply into that one.
Goat
was never formally published
so it's not something I could speak to echo will talk a little bit more
um in his talk about what happened with Outer
Loop.
But what was interesting about publishing
was understanding. Does your game fit into our preferred box?
One of the big things that you see is that there's so
many ideas or so many talented folks who want to create games.
But when you're trying to find someone that is going to fund your game,
a lot of times you are trying to fit into their vision
for what they want.
And if your vision is too far outside of that,
you might not ever get funding regardless of the quality of your idea.
Uh One of my favorite publisher, rejections
was essentially all green lights. They love the concept,
they love what they were doing.
They agreed that the market that we were serving,
we were looking at uh gamers of color and women in particular were underserved.
They knew this was important, they could see the cultural impact
but their response to us was we have never tried to speak to this audience.
We're not gonna be able to help you.
We hope it works.
So we ended up with venture capital, which is a whole other type of conversation.
And in venture capital,
the question that they tend to ask the most is do you fit the pattern?
And if you all look at the headlines and, uh, and look at who is getting funded
one, you'll start to notice it's very winner. Take all
I believe last year it was uh there was a huge drop
in the industry which we'll talk about in a little bit,
but there were 572 deals done
representing about $14 billion.
But that was poured into 500 studios.
It's a very, very small percentage of who's active, who's operating,
what's currently happening.
The other thing that's very interesting. Oh, sorry.
One of the things to,
to also remember is that they're looking for a
profile that they feel like is gonna be successful.
You'll notice if you look at who has been funded,
there's a disproportionate amount of people who have led large Game studios.
And so back to
Sinead's presentation,
when you're talking about the gender discrimination,
we're talking about people being forced out before
they get to mid level management before they get
to upper level management,
you see that then reflected when we go out to try to
get funding and we go out to raise for our studios.
If you have not led a large game, if you have not led a large studio,
you are seen as a risk.
And if the culture doesn't allow for folks like us to come up right
there becomes that uh intractable issue, it's very hard to solve it.
The other issue is that in the eyes of venture capital, labor is not an asset.
Now, if you look at any of the history of video games, if you look at the team,
the beautiful team building that JC was talking about.
Um Lisette's,
you know, love for the students that she has a game heads,
which is so obvious every time she talks about it,
uh we invest a lot in our people. We invest a lot in our institutional knowledge,
but that's actually a detriment
in funding the more employees you have, the more vulnerable.
You look, the more funders are going to wonder why you're not using contractors.
Why are you trying to offer people benefits?
All right.
And one of the running jokes I have about Founding Glow Up is that,
uh starting a for-profit studio in America is gonna turn me into a socialist.
The amount of questions you get about health insurance,
how can you help people is difficult,
especially when you're just a small studio owner trying to make sure
you have enough runway to get to the end of the project.
But what's interesting
as Well,
we fought this out in the Indie Space and while we fought
through all the different hardships and headwinds that come from there,
we're seeing the same thing in other avenues as well.
So when volition shut down,
I found that to be very interesting. Saints Row is an enormous franchise well known.
And if you look in the commentary, what happened? Well, a $2 billion deal
with the Savvy Games Group fell through
and that took out the studio
once again,
gaming funding is essentially a house of cards
where you're jumping from deal to deal,
hoping that you can get enough runway to last,
get to a hit or cash back out before you run out of, of money and opportunity.
And for most people, when they play that game, we lose.
In addition, we're looking at one of the hardest markets in a long time.
If you've noticed again,
I'm sure all of us are looking around thinking about the friends that should be here
and didn't make it through the layoffs.
The friends that we saw last year, the studios that we saw last year
I closed. Some of our investors, studios have closed
and we're looking at friends and mentors trying to weather this in huge downturn
that just happened.
So if games funding dries up
and if we're looking at the ways in which
um
LP S and people who are essentially the larger funders are sitting on capital
at the same time where we have,
you know, millions at this point,
it feels like millions and probably tens
of thousands of extremely talented designers,
n designers, technical artists and things like that,
who cannot get jobs because everyone is unsure
what is gonna happen in the fate of their project. From the Indies to the majors,
we are facing a crisis level and this crisis is being sparked by funding.
So I went and searched to try to try to explain this a little bit more.
And again, I have at least the benefit of working in different industries.
So when I looked for, OK, so how are we talking about funding and financing games?
This was a chart
that was on a blog post
and I looked at this chart and I was like, oh Lord, no, this is not,
this is not remotely accurate. Number one, there's a spelling error.
I just, it was just
I had to like fix that real quick.
But two these things are presented as equal options which they are not OK.
The vast majority of people will never get venture capital funding project.
Diane talks about particularly for black women entrepreneurs.
Uh We got and this was last year when it was still OK.
Uh 0.67%
of all venture capital funding. That number is smaller in games.
When I look at black women who have raised money, Lisette will be the next.
But when I look at black women who have raised money.
It's me, it's Jessica from Wicked Saints. It's Kai from Ramen VR.
It's not a lot.
There are more men from Riot,
ok,
that we'll ever be able to raise. We have this joke at ESPN.
There's more men named John on the management team than women.
And I feel like we're starting to develop one for funding a game so we'll get there.
But anyway,
these sources are not equal, not remotely equal, the vast majority of,
of developers
and studios will never get venture funding and angel funding only goes so far.
You're really looking at friends and family, cash flow from other games,
crowd funding,
the other ways you cobble together, which again
creates that constant cycle of instability where it's really hard to plan to say.
Yes, I can guarantee you 18 months of wages.
Yes, I can guarantee you health insurance.
I can guarantee that I can do these things for you that I
can give you a 401k that we can contribute to your financial stability.
As a thank you for what you are contributing to our work in our studio.
But contrast that to film and not to say that film is perfect.
We have all kinds of drama on that side as well.
But this is just from one year of funding.
That was a data analysis done by a group looking at how films are funded
and the diversity of funding sources that you see on the left
allows for a little bit more stability in these projects.
So even as I'll explain in other game devs things about just like finishing funds.
A lot of times in Game Dev that comes through
a publisher who still wants to take 50 to 70%
of your game's profits for helping you distribute.
Even they didn't necessarily put the cash down to help you make it.
Versus in film. A lot of times that's just a grant, it's unrestricted. Right.
Here's the 75,000, 100,000 that you will need to finish your documentary.
There are different ways that we can look at other types of funding structures.
Other countries uh particularly like the UK
uh have different types of funding and
investment schemes that allow for more stability
and allow for us to have a more predictable and more equitable funding system
that will allow for a lot of these things to start being solved.
Once we start asking harder questions about why we have allowed the
funding to be so shaky and so focused on winner takes all.
So just to conclude,
um I think one of the big things that we
have to remember talking about is that we can always sit
and try to improve our interior studio cultures
and figure out where we can improve.
But until we start looking at the funding
landscape and asking hard questions of why is it
only certain people that get funded why is
it that everyone else has to fight for scraps
as we are trying to create cultures that we believe in.
Many of us are refugees from studios that burnt us out, that treated us terribly.
And yet when it comes time to fund things and to do things differently,
we are starving for the capital that we need.
I'd love the idea of soft power and being able to look at the ways in which,
um, we run our studio culture,
but soft power still answers to hard money
and we have to figure out a more equitable way of distributing
funding in the games industry before we will see this change.
So now I'll pass it off to ECA to wrap up what a successful
in the studio,
uh, that is funded by publishers Kind Deer.
Yeah.
Hello.
Let me adjust this. Ok.
Hi, I'm
Chatan
Aaya. I'm the co-founder and create director of Outer Loop Games.
wanna talk about our approach to long term sustainability, uh,
as in the studio and the way you know, we do it, I guess,
uh, before we start out of loop, I spent 20 years working in traditional studios.
Um, but never felt like it was sustainable.
There was a lot of crunching shifts and direction
chasing trends, restarts council projects, lots of council projects.
Um, it was always moving to,
I was always moving to cities that I had other game to do just in case I lost my job,
I wanted to figure out how to do.
I survive another 20 years because I, I still like making games
with a better work life balance and a different approach
while focusing on games about underrepresented uh themes and stories and to
work with folks in the US and also outside the US.
So we started a fully remote studio in 2017
out of necessity.
Um
Let's go,
we're gonna talk about our approaches, what went well and what didn't go so well.
Uh We've been in business for seven years now
and we're starting on our third project. We wanna look at how we got there.
We'll talk about our two ship games.
First one that took two years and the second one that was in development for 3.5,
what we,
what we learn on each project and about the process
and what we adjusted between projects for longer term focus.
The first game we released was called Falcon H.
It's a first person action adventure game
about raising a Falcon and fighting colonizers.
Uh
With this project, we saw our, uh we saw our culture and values as a way to stand out.
Of course, we couldn't start the studio without funding.
We didn't, we didn't have any money.
Um So that was the first step.
Myself and my two co-founders worked on a pitch and prototype in
our spare time while working full time jobs in a game studio.
Uh with the goal idea that we could make a,
make a really small and shitty game if we had to with three people.
Um
Our ambitions were very realistic. Uh At that time,
uh we were gonna scale the game, an idea to fit the team size, depending on,
on the funding amount.
And we budgeted to pay livable wages
uh with benefits. And that was a must.
After five months of work, we pitched our five minute demo at G DC in 2017
to various publishers and platforms.
We're able to get project funding for a nine person
team for two years to make the first game happen.
Falcon Age was released in 2019,
uh had decent reviews, but we also made a ton of mistakes after the project,
things needed to change.
Um
While we did focus on cultural perspective and themes,
our process was still lacking
in certain areas.
Let's talk about what went right? And what didn't
we over scoped
as all teams do? Even after 20 years of experience
started a VR game but also released a non VR
uh version while also trying to build the studio.
I as a lead was doing too many jobs, design, art production, biz dev lawyers,
uh various admin tasks.
We ended up trying to do too much with a team of dying.
Our goal was still to
have a better work life balance and do stories about marginalized the
uh themes
we need to grow the studios that our
ambitions and goals align better with our capabilities.
As Sinead mentioned in our talk,
we've focused refocused on hiring for our values and culture.
We knew we need time to figure out our next steps, which meant bringing in more money.
We use Falcon Age age as a way to expand beyond VR to non VR platforms.
We also took in some work for hire,
did some platform deals with Falcon Age. That money gave us time to figure out
what we were gonna do
to hit our goals and that we suffer ourselves.
It was important for us to have a mixture of senior mid level and new talent.
As the team grew to 14,
currently, we're spread across eight cities and four continents.
We're spending more time mentoring one on one on ones using more
async work methods and tools like Miro Slack and Discord as needed.
Sharing knowledge is part of our weekly workflow uh with show and tells and as
a remote team communication became so much more uh crucial to everything we do,
talking to team members.
Uh We also do spend a lot of time talking
to team members about long term goals and their current projects
and testing out ideas doing pitching. So I'll do like uh
almost like a play test for pitches when I go
out before we actually figure out what we do next.
As part of our process, we'll so we'll do multiple pitchess at dice
and G DC and things like that.
Uh And then really,
we're thinking about how do we stand out as we're going to the team.
What we decided to build in prototype was 30 suitors.
A game about a queer brown woman coming back to her small town in Washington
and having to face her past mistakes
and fighting her exes in a narrative serial, turn based combat,
uh cooking with their parents to repair that relationship and also skating.
Um We started this in March 2020 as the world shut down.
It's important for us to keep
the team together over multiple projects as long as they want to. Of course,
we believe the teams that work together
over multiple projects make for better games.
How do we make sure folks aren't burnt out? Our approach has been
more time to rest and also work on interesting uh projects and problems.
We init initially switched to a half day Fridays for
several months over the summer and then that went well and
then we switched fully switched to a four day work
week three years ago and shipped thirsty suitors that way.
Last November,
we were realistic about shipping and working with external partners.
Uh At the end of production,
we switched back to five days per week for several
of us on the project for the last two months.
Over the last three years,
we found that folks were more rested and more focused
during the week and were able to be more productive,
meaningful individual contribution is an important part of team health.
On any project.
We do monthly,
one on ones to give space to talk about whatever team members wanna talk about.
The team drives. What goes into the game?
Anyone on the team can point to something on the game and say I made that happen.
We treat our team members as adults.
Uh
We set goals and expectations, uh trust individuals
that will manage their time to hit those goals.
If it's not working, we talk through make adjustments, not just for sort of the,
the labor part of it, but also the design part of it and expectations and,
and timeline
offer support and change
as needed.
So how do we stand out as a 1414 person in the studio?
There are thousands of games released every year.
I think it was 14,000 on Steam last year.
What makes us different?
We ask ourselves, what unique perspectives can we bring to our games and B
and balance that with market expectations?
Why is this the game, the one we should make?
We incorporate, incorporate uh talent
and wants from the folks on the team
into the game.
We believe specificity of team experience and talent leads to a game.
An audience can emotionally connect with.
We look at genre conventions expectations in the case
of uh turn based combat like uh thirsty suitors.
It was the them humor. Drama, the cultural perspective packaged together
in a tighter visually engaging experience that made it stand out.
Uh We assume the current game sells zero copies.
Uh We start to think about our next project
before shipping the current one out of necessity,
out of, out of need to survive,
we start planning and pitching and have the next project lined up.
Our approach has been project funding and retaining control of our IP.
Again, it's more focus for long term.
We work with various platform deals and see what lines up with our needs.
We wanna pay people well and try to keep our size of game to match the size of team.
We're a lifestyle company like we're not looking to grow and you know,
return a three X or sell the company
and not focus on,
you know, really having some kind of exit
which
our, our goal is to, can we make another one
anything beyond that is, is gravy.
We want to control our destiny without too many external cooks in the kitchen.
Part of that is working with publishing partners that
are aligned with our values and also self publishing.
When that makes sense,
we sh thirsty suitors
on all PC and council platforms. In November,
we took all of December off,
uh started back in January and talked through as a
team of what worked in our process and what didn't.
Uh I read every comment, watch every review.
It's probably not healthy but that's just the way I work.
Um, what worked in the game and what didn't. And, um,
and we're starting on our next project.
We've already seen the benefits of rest and adjustments.
We're making more progress already,
more than we did in the beginning of the previous project.
We're hopeful and understand that we'll keep
making adjustments and improvements going forward.
Thank you.
All right.
Thank you. Echa.
So, let's recap.
You heard from Lisette about how we need
to commit to training and realistic job requirements.
You heard from JC about hard power and soft power,
both skills needed to be effective leaders.
You heard from me,
Sinead
about making and remaking your work culture
and thinking more about culture than your wall art.
You heard from LaToya about the challenges of game industry, funding structures.
And lastly,
you heard from Eka about running an indie studio where you put people first
embracing human sustainability is about making better games,
but it's also about making games better.
We can absolutely do this leaders.
Let's make game development a forever career.
Thank you so much for joining us. Uh Come on over to the wrap up room.
If you have questions for the speakers,
don't forget to fill out your feedback, surveys and
have a wonderful rest of your G DC.