[Music] Okay. Uh, looks like we're ready to get
Okay. Uh, looks like we're ready to get started. Uh, just a quick message from
started. Uh, just a quick message from all the guys in the red shirts. Make
all the guys in the red shirts. Make sure you turn off your, uh, noise
sure you turn off your, uh, noise makers, your phones, and everything
makers, your phones, and everything else. And, yeah, we'll get stuck into
else. And, yeah, we'll get stuck into it. So, my name is Luke Muscat. I'm the
it. So, my name is Luke Muscat. I'm the chief creative officer at Halfick
chief creative officer at Halfick Studios. I've made these games. Uh,
Studios. I've made these games. Uh, people will probably know me best from
people will probably know me best from Fruit Ninja and Jetack Joyide. But today
Fruit Ninja and Jetack Joyide. But today I'm going to be talking about something
I'm going to be talking about something else completely different. A game that
else completely different. A game that no one here has played at all. It's only
no one here has played at all. It's only been played by 17 guys at Half Brick.
been played by 17 guys at Half Brick. And this talk is really a story. It's
And this talk is really a story. It's not going to be one of those talks
not going to be one of those talks that's full of lots of scientific facts
that's full of lots of scientific facts and lots of, you know, really accurate
and lots of, you know, really accurate graphs and do these things to make your
graphs and do these things to make your game better. It's really, you know, a
game better. It's really, you know, a story about something that happened at
story about something that happened at work. And I learned a lot from uh from
work. And I learned a lot from uh from this thing happening to me. So, I really
this thing happening to me. So, I really hope that everyone else will get
hope that everyone else will get something else out of it, too. So, just
something else out of it, too. So, just a quick disclaimer as I start. These are
a quick disclaimer as I start. These are the guys from Half Brick, and they are
the guys from Half Brick, and they are really, really great guys. Like, they
really, really great guys. Like, they are really the nicest bunch of people
are really the nicest bunch of people you'll ever meet. Uh, they're definitely
you'll ever meet. Uh, they're definitely not monsters, despite what I may or may
not monsters, despite what I may or may not say in all of this presentation,
not say in all of this presentation, except for maybe
except for maybe Chevy. He's looking pretty monstrous
Chevy. He's looking pretty monstrous right
right there. So, a little bit of backstory
there. So, a little bit of backstory before I begin. So myself and uh one
before I begin. So myself and uh one programmer and one artist worked on
programmer and one artist worked on Fruit Ninja and then we spent a long
Fruit Ninja and then we spent a long time updating that game. We were on it
time updating that game. We were on it for almost two years just shipping
for almost two years just shipping updates and finally you know we managed
updates and finally you know we managed to ship that off onto another team to
to ship that off onto another team to work on all of the updates and we were
work on all of the updates and we were finally ready to do something new. We'd
finally ready to do something new. We'd been so burnt out from working on the
been so burnt out from working on the one thing for so long. So we started
one thing for so long. So we started doing some prototyping. Here are a bunch
doing some prototyping. Here are a bunch of abandoned prototypes uh that we
of abandoned prototypes uh that we worked on. And you know, they were they
worked on. And you know, they were they were looking pretty good and they were
were looking pretty good and they were feeling pretty good, but you know, we
feeling pretty good, but you know, we just weren't quite sure about what we
just weren't quite sure about what we were doing and whether we were on the
were doing and whether we were on the right track. We really didn't have any
right track. We really didn't have any goals or objectives to define our
goals or objectives to define our success. So, we said, let's set some
success. So, we said, let's set some tougher goals. Let's come up with some
tougher goals. Let's come up with some tricky stuff. So, the goal one was to
tricky stuff. So, the goal one was to make it massively multiplayer. By
make it massively multiplayer. By massively multiplayer, I don't mean, you
massively multiplayer, I don't mean, you know, a thousand person server or
know, a thousand person server or anything like that, but something that
anything like that, but something that the whole company could play at once was
the whole company could play at once was the idea. The second one was to keep it
the idea. The second one was to keep it really super simple to play, as you
really super simple to play, as you might expect from someone who's made a
might expect from someone who's made a game about slicing fruit and spent 10
game about slicing fruit and spent 10 months working on a onebutton game. I
months working on a onebutton game. I really like simple stuff and really
really like simple stuff and really simple ideas and mechanics. Uh, this
simple ideas and mechanics. Uh, this picture in the background is a flowchart
picture in the background is a flowchart from Warhammer 40,000. And I see that in
from Warhammer 40,000. And I see that in my head just
explodes. And the final goal and the most important one for me was to really
most important one for me was to really get people in the office talking and
get people in the office talking and engaged. And I really just wanted people
engaged. And I really just wanted people to be super into this game and talking
to be super into this game and talking about it all of the time. And this was
about it all of the time. And this was my at any cost. I really want to make
my at any cost. I really want to make sure people get engaged in the
sure people get engaged in the game. So for all of these really
game. So for all of these really exciting goals and objectives, spent a
exciting goals and objectives, spent a bit of time. I worked with another
bit of time. I worked with another designer called Joe Gatling uh for a
designer called Joe Gatling uh for a while and we came up with this amazing
while and we came up with this amazing idea that was going to hit all of those
idea that was going to hit all of those goals and it looked like
goals and it looked like this is made out of uh paper sticky
this is made out of uh paper sticky taped down onto a table. We wanted to do
taped down onto a table. We wanted to do a massively multiplayer game but it
a massively multiplayer game but it didn't really seem feasible for us to
didn't really seem feasible for us to make a whole heap of backend
make a whole heap of backend infrastructure. So we did it all the old
infrastructure. So we did it all the old school way pen and
school way pen and paper. So it was a 17 player and it
paper. So it was a 17 player and it wasn't 17 player deliberately. I just
wasn't 17 player deliberately. I just simply asked who in the office wants to
simply asked who in the office wants to play this game and we had exactly 17
play this game and we had exactly 17 people sign up. Real time strategy game
people sign up. Real time strategy game with a really strong focus on diplomacy
with a really strong focus on diplomacy and
and cooperation. So, let me explain to you
cooperation. So, let me explain to you how it
how it worked. This is a nice big closeup of
worked. This is a nice big closeup of what it looked like. These were your
what it looked like. These were your tanks. These were actually uh little
tanks. These were actually uh little pieces of um magnetic whiteboard strips
pieces of um magnetic whiteboard strips with marker on it. Uh all the pages were
with marker on it. Uh all the pages were just glued together onto the table and
just glued together onto the table and that was how it was constructed. Very,
that was how it was constructed. Very, you know, not fancy, not like a Jason's
you know, not fancy, not like a Jason's titanium board game yesterday, that's
titanium board game yesterday, that's for sure. And here are the rules. You
for sure. And here are the rules. You have three
have three hearts and you are able to do basically
hearts and you are able to do basically two things by and large. You can either
two things by and large. You can either move or you can shoot. Both of these
move or you can shoot. Both of these cost action points. So, if you move one
cost action points. So, if you move one space, that costs one action point. And
space, that costs one action point. And if you shoot, that costs one action
if you shoot, that costs one action point. And we'll deduct one heart every
point. And we'll deduct one heart every time from whoever you shoot at. You have
time from whoever you shoot at. You have a range. Uh, the range is by default
a range. Uh, the range is by default two. So, quite close. It certainly
two. So, quite close. It certainly wasn't a very wide range. You could also
wasn't a very wide range. You could also invest action points in upgrading your
invest action points in upgrading your range. And the basic rule is last player
range. And the basic rule is last player standing wins. Pretty simple. So the way
standing wins. Pretty simple. So the way action points worked was, you know, we
action points worked was, you know, we weren't going to be able to do this turn
weren't going to be able to do this turn by turn with 17 players. And to keep our
by turn with 17 players. And to keep our objective of making it massively
objective of making it massively multiplayer if we scaled it up to 50
multiplayer if we scaled it up to 50 people, that's just not going to work.
people, that's just not going to work. So at the beginning of every single day,
So at the beginning of every single day, everyone gets an action point and then
everyone gets an action point and then you can spend those action points
you can spend those action points whenever you want. That's kind of how we
whenever you want. That's kind of how we resolved the that many players issue.
resolved the that many players issue. The action points are literally leftover
The action points are literally leftover badges we had from packs. Um, and you
badges we had from packs. Um, and you dropped them into a box with a hole cut
dropped them into a box with a hole cut in the top and there was a little log
in the top and there was a little log book next to it and that was uh, you
book next to it and that was uh, you know, that was just people would log
know, that was just people would log what they were doing and that way we
what they were doing and that way we knew no one was
knew no one was cheating. Very simple, very low
cheating. Very simple, very low tech. And then the last rule was about
tech. And then the last rule was about trading. So you could send your action
trading. So you could send your action points to someone else. And this was
points to someone else. And this was what was really interesting to me about
what was really interesting to me about the game. The way we visualized it was
the game. The way we visualized it was you couldn't just trade points with
you couldn't just trade points with anyone on the board. you had to actually
anyone on the board. you had to actually shoot that action point to them. So you
shoot that action point to them. So you had the same range as you did for
had the same range as you did for attacking. And so that way anyone within
attacking. And so that way anyone within your range is both friend and foe at the
your range is both friend and foe at the same time. You know, you could
same time. You know, you could potentially shoot that person or you
potentially shoot that person or you could help them out by giving them
could help them out by giving them action points. And that was really the
action points. And that was really the crux of what I thought would make this
crux of what I thought would make this game very
game very interesting. So just a really quick uh
interesting. So just a really quick uh demonstration just to clarify these
demonstration just to clarify these rules. This is the grid. The yellow
rules. This is the grid. The yellow squares are the players. Uh every day
squares are the players. Uh every day everyone gets an action point. In this
everyone gets an action point. In this case, one of the guys moves. That costs
case, one of the guys moves. That costs an action
an action point. One player trades over an action
point. One player trades over an action point. So now this player has two and
point. So now this player has two and they shoot twice, which takes off those
they shoot twice, which takes off those hearts. Next day there's more action
hearts. Next day there's more action points. The player down the bottom who
points. The player down the bottom who has done nothing has now collected two
has done nothing has now collected two action points. You're not obligated to
action points. You're not obligated to have to use
have to use them. And then the final thing about the
them. And then the final thing about the game was there was a jury. And this was
game was there was a jury. And this was basically lifted straight from Survivor.
basically lifted straight from Survivor. It's very similar idea. Dead players
It's very similar idea. Dead players form a jury. I really wanted a way that
form a jury. I really wanted a way that the dead players would still be involved
the dead players would still be involved and active in the game. And so the way
and active in the game. And so the way this worked was every day the jury would
this worked was every day the jury would vote for a player they wanted to help.
vote for a player they wanted to help. And any player that got at least three
And any player that got at least three votes from the jury would get an
votes from the jury would get an additional action point that day. So
additional action point that day. So what this would do is as the game kind
what this would do is as the game kind of more and more people died and the
of more and more people died and the player base shrunk, it would accelerate
player base shrunk, it would accelerate the game towards a conclusion. That was
the game towards a conclusion. That was the idea. And um it also meant you
the idea. And um it also meant you couldn't just be a complete backstabbing
couldn't just be a complete backstabbing bastard, right? Because you really need
bastard, right? Because you really need friends on the jury if you're going to
friends on the jury if you're going to win right right at the end. Very similar
win right right at the end. Very similar to
to Survivor. So I kicked off the game. This
Survivor. So I kicked off the game. This is what it looked like. It was set up in
is what it looked like. It was set up in a room uh in a meeting room that
a room uh in a meeting room that happened to have glass walls. Uh and I
happened to have glass walls. Uh and I just sticky taped the rules up on the
just sticky taped the rules up on the ball, told everyone how it worked, and I
ball, told everyone how it worked, and I left and went to my desk, gave everyone
left and went to my desk, gave everyone their first action point, and then I was
their first action point, and then I was done. And I I was really thinking, you
done. And I I was really thinking, you know, I wonder how long it's going to
know, I wonder how long it's going to take someone to actually make a move in
take someone to actually make a move in this game. I'm really expecting everyone
this game. I'm really expecting everyone to start hoarding their action points
to start hoarding their action points and, you know, saving it up for right at
and, you know, saving it up for right at the end and then it just being this
the end and then it just being this crazy allout thing that happens all at
crazy allout thing that happens all at once. So 3 hours later, I'm sitting at
once. So 3 hours later, I'm sitting at my desk and there's all this kind of
my desk and there's all this kind of commotion that I can hear from the other
commotion that I can hear from the other side of the room. I'm like, "What the
side of the room. I'm like, "What the hell is going on?" And so I walk in to
hell is going on?" And so I walk in to where the board is set up to check out
where the board is set up to check out what's going on. And it is a [ __ ]
what's going on. And it is a [ __ ] graveyard in
graveyard in there. And not a graveyard in the sense
there. And not a graveyard in the sense that it's very quiet. A graveyard in the
that it's very quiet. A graveyard in the sense that a lot of players are dead.
sense that a lot of players are dead. And immediately I'm like, "What the hell
And immediately I'm like, "What the hell is going on? I don't I don't even
is going on? I don't I don't even understand how that could possibly
understand how that could possibly happen so quickly. You guys all only
happen so quickly. You guys all only have one action point. How did this
have one action point. How did this happen?" It turns out that there's
happen?" It turns out that there's definitely no one cheating. And the
definitely no one cheating. And the reason I was surprised was because the
reason I was surprised was because the way I had designed the trading rules did
way I had designed the trading rules did not work the way I thought they would.
not work the way I thought they would. This is what I had expected to happen on
This is what I had expected to happen on a bit of a bigger Zoom this time. I
a bit of a bigger Zoom this time. I thought that what the trading rules
thought that what the trading rules would do would be localize them into
would do would be localize them into little factions. You'd get little groups
little factions. You'd get little groups of two, three, four, five people working
of two, three, four, five people working together trying to get an advantage that
together trying to get an advantage that way because, you know, alliances in this
way because, you know, alliances in this kind of game are really going to help.
kind of game are really going to help. It turns out this is definitely not what
It turns out this is definitely not what happened at all. So this slide just for
happened at all. So this slide just for reference is all animated in PowerPoint
reference is all animated in PowerPoint and it took me like two and a half hours
and it took me like two and a half hours to make this thing happen. So I'm really
to make this thing happen. So I'm really hoping it it illustrates the point. So
hoping it it illustrates the point. So this is basically what happened. One
this is basically what happened. One player trades over his action point.
player trades over his action point. This is what I expected. What I didn't
This is what I expected. What I didn't expect is the chain that happened next.
expect is the chain that happened next. The second player passes both of those
The second player passes both of those action points to the next
action points to the next player. And what happens is through some
player. And what happens is through some incredibly advanced, incredibly
incredibly advanced, incredibly complicated alliance
making. We managed to get this situation. This we we immediately coined
situation. This we we immediately coined as daisy chaining. That player now has
as daisy chaining. That player now has nine action points. They could kill
nine action points. They could kill three players right now with that. And
three players right now with that. And this is crazy. I mean, I I can see how I
this is crazy. I mean, I I can see how I obviously the rules afford this
obviously the rules afford this happening, but there's no way I
happening, but there's no way I predicted it. I really thought what the
predicted it. I really thought what the what the trading rules were going to do
what the trading rules were going to do would localize these little
would localize these little factions. So, I mean, everyone is
factions. So, I mean, everyone is running around pissed off and angry and
running around pissed off and angry and confused and, you know, and some people
confused and, you know, and some people are really excited because they managed
are really excited because they managed to pull off this move and I'm like,
to pull off this move and I'm like, well, I guess that's a success. People
well, I guess that's a success. People are talking about the game. They're
are talking about the game. They're engaged. So, that what that part Yeah.
engaged. So, that what that part Yeah. All good.
All good. So, a little bit further on now, uh,
So, a little bit further on now, uh, this is day three. You'll see there are
this is day three. You'll see there are a lot of people in this
a lot of people in this room. The way that this would been
room. The way that this would been designed again with the whole, you know,
designed again with the whole, you know, you can make your move at any time was I
you can make your move at any time was I was hoping it wouldn't interfere with
was hoping it wouldn't interfere with work. You'd receive your action point
work. You'd receive your action point and then you could make your move
and then you could make your move anytime during the day whenever you have
anytime during the day whenever you have a spare moment. And now we're even at
a spare moment. And now we're even at day three, we're at a point where there
day three, we're at a point where there are so many people in this room, it's a
are so many people in this room, it's a good thing the walls are made of glass
good thing the walls are made of glass because not everyone can fit in there.
because not everyone can fit in there. Um, there's a really interesting thing.
Um, there's a really interesting thing. This this photo doesn't demonstrate it
This this photo doesn't demonstrate it quite as well, but uh just an
quite as well, but uh just an interesting subtle thing that I only
interesting subtle thing that I only noticed when I was rehearsing this this
noticed when I was rehearsing this this morning was that all the people in this
morning was that all the people in this sl uh in this image basically have their
sl uh in this image basically have their arms crossed, which is some interesting
arms crossed, which is some interesting body
body language. So, day five, things are
language. So, day five, things are getting crazier still. It's a little bit
getting crazier still. It's a little bit difficult to see in this photo, but you
difficult to see in this photo, but you you'll notice now I've added an extra
you'll notice now I've added an extra page below the rules and it says
page below the rules and it says ceasefire 9:00 a.m. till 10:00
ceasefire 9:00 a.m. till 10:00 a.m. The reason is is people were so
a.m. The reason is is people were so into this game that everyone was missing
into this game that everyone was missing their morning scrums because they were
their morning scrums because they were down in the room. So, I literally had to
down in the room. So, I literally had to say, "Right, nothing, no actions allowed
say, "Right, nothing, no actions allowed 9:00 a.m. till 10:00 a.m. Get to scrum
9:00 a.m. till 10:00 a.m. Get to scrum and do your work." Uh, you'll also
and do your work." Uh, you'll also notice the guy in the gray shirt in the
notice the guy in the gray shirt in the middle is actually on crutches. He
middle is actually on crutches. He worked
worked upstairs.
upstairs. So, he was hauling his ass down the
So, he was hauling his ass down the stairs up and down all the time on
stairs up and down all the time on crutches to check out what's going on on
crutches to check out what's going on on the game
the game board. And then things get even crazier.
board. And then things get even crazier. This is day seven. This is an SMS I got
This is day seven. This is an SMS I got in the morning. This is our CFO, Ral. He
in the morning. This is our CFO, Ral. He was calling in sick that day. and he was
was calling in sick that day. and he was so worried about the outcome of the game
so worried about the outcome of the game that he's asking me to veto his powers
that he's asking me to veto his powers to another player called Bibbs. Um, he's
to another player called Bibbs. Um, he's going to love this. His name's Justin,
going to love this. His name's Justin, so his nickname went from Bieber to
so his nickname went from Bieber to Bibbs. Uh, cuz he was allowed to veto
Bibbs. Uh, cuz he was allowed to veto Bieber. Um, and he's even got an image
Bieber. Um, and he's even got an image there attached of the game board from
there attached of the game board from the previous days that he would be able
the previous days that he would be able to give very detailed instructions to to
to give very detailed instructions to to that player to make sure that his move
that player to make sure that his move that day wouldn't be wasted. And I mean
that day wouldn't be wasted. And I mean this is just getting crazy. And then you
this is just getting crazy. And then you know I said yeah sure okay you can
know I said yeah sure okay you can someone can play on your behalf and it
someone can play on your behalf and it caused this massive uproar and it's
caused this massive uproar and it's dramas. At this point I decided to do an
dramas. At this point I decided to do an anonymous survey. I wanted to find out a
anonymous survey. I wanted to find out a bit about what people were thinking and
bit about what people were thinking and no one would tell me anything. I would
no one would tell me anything. I would go up and ask people and they knew that
go up and ask people and they knew that I was trying to find out what was going
I was trying to find out what was going on between players and everyone thought
on between players and everyone thought I was going to rat them out to the
I was going to rat them out to the enemy cuz I was the only person across
enemy cuz I was the only person across all the players. So the only way I could
all the players. So the only way I could get any information out of them was
get any information out of them was through an anonymous survey. So I wanted
through an anonymous survey. So I wanted to find out about two things. There's a
to find out about two things. There's a lot of questions, but these were the
lot of questions, but these were the interesting
interesting things. Diplomacy and interacting with
things. Diplomacy and interacting with other players is, and as you can see,
other players is, and as you can see, extremely important to me is way, way up
extremely important to me is way, way up there. So great. I mean, you know, we
there. So great. I mean, you know, we wanted to make a game about cooperation.
wanted to make a game about cooperation. That seems to be working out just
That seems to be working out just fine. The next one was engagement. I
fine. The next one was engagement. I discuss the game with other
discuss the game with other players 11 plus times a day.
players 11 plus times a day. This is just crazy. So again, I'm like,
This is just crazy. So again, I'm like, I'm feeling pretty good. This is a
I'm feeling pretty good. This is a success, right? Like I've I'm hitting
success, right? Like I've I'm hitting all of the things that I wanted to hit
all of the things that I wanted to hit with this prototype. Feeling
with this prototype. Feeling great. So obviously with all of this
great. So obviously with all of this going on, productivity in the workplace
going on, productivity in the workplace is going through the roof, right? Oh,
is going through the roof, right? Oh, wait. No, the other thing it's going
wait. No, the other thing it's going way, way down, it's just disastrous. And
way, way down, it's just disastrous. And other players are coming, sorry, not
other players are coming, sorry, not other players, other employees not
other players, other employees not involved in the game are telling me that
involved in the game are telling me that this game is just tearing their teams
this game is just tearing their teams apart. Like it's just massively
apart. Like it's just massively disruptive. You know, they'll be looking
disruptive. You know, they'll be looking for someone for a code fix and the
for someone for a code fix and the person can't be found. Probably should
person can't be found. Probably should check where they're playing the
game. So, by day nine, things start to get pretty
get pretty tense. And it's not even one particular
tense. And it's not even one particular thing. It's just this general feeling
thing. It's just this general feeling and vibe in the office. You really start
and vibe in the office. You really start to feel that there's some animosity
to feel that there's some animosity between people from playing this game.
between people from playing this game. There's people who would normally be
There's people who would normally be very friendly and they're looking over
very friendly and they're looking over their shoulders and they're paranoid and
their shoulders and they're paranoid and it is just
it is just crazy. And you know, at this point I'm
crazy. And you know, at this point I'm still like kicking back and laughing.
still like kicking back and laughing. I'm like, "Oh my god, this is the best
I'm like, "Oh my god, this is the best thing I've ever made. This is this is so
thing I've ever made. This is this is so great."
So then at some point [ __ ] gets a little too real. And I didn't put a stupid
too real. And I didn't put a stupid Google image on this slide because I
Google image on this slide because I really don't want to like downplay how
really don't want to like downplay how serious this was. A player came to me
serious this was. A player came to me and they were upset. Really, really
and they were upset. Really, really upset. and they were like, "This game I
upset. and they were like, "This game I feel at this point is damaging the
feel at this point is damaging the relationships I have at work, uh,
relationships I have at work, uh, personal friendships I have with other
personal friendships I have with other people here, and generally making me not
people here, and generally making me not want to come to work and be involved in
want to come to work and be involved in this. This is alarm bells, right? Like,
this. This is alarm bells, right? Like, this is not good. This was not the
this is not good. This was not the intention of the game at all." And this
intention of the game at all." And this is pretty serious business. And we're
is pretty serious business. And we're hearing it from a couple of people, not
hearing it from a couple of people, not just one person. One person in
just one person. One person in particular, but, you know, a lot of
particular, but, you know, a lot of other people are starting to resonate
other people are starting to resonate with this as well.
with this as well. So at this point we shut down the game
So at this point we shut down the game because honestly productivity in the
because honestly productivity in the whole office had come to a halt. People
whole office had come to a halt. People are getting upset. That's not what we
are getting upset. That's not what we want to happen at the office at
all. So after that I'm trying to figure out what made this happen. What turned a
out what made this happen. What turned a bunch of really nice people who normally
bunch of really nice people who normally play together really
play together really well to do these kinds of things and to
well to do these kinds of things and to get so upset and worked up about the
get so upset and worked up about the game? I just couldn't really understand
game? I just couldn't really understand and I was trying to figure out at first
and I was trying to figure out at first my response was you know ah these guys
my response was you know ah these guys they're just taking it way too seriously
they're just taking it way too seriously it's really all their own fault but I
it's really all their own fault but I really wanted to understand the
really wanted to understand the mechanics of why this happened and I'm
mechanics of why this happened and I'm in two minds right like on the one mind
in two minds right like on the one mind I'm wow I've made something amazing and
I'm wow I've made something amazing and powerful and incredible and you know
powerful and incredible and you know it's a great story and it's just this
it's a great story and it's just this crazy cool thing and the other mind I'm
crazy cool thing and the other mind I'm really upset because I've done something
really upset because I've done something that's literally damaged the office, the
that's literally damaged the office, the office that I love and the, you know,
office that I love and the, you know, the people that I'm very close with,
the people that I'm very close with, it's causing problems for them. So, I
it's causing problems for them. So, I feel terrible. And in a third mind, I'm
feel terrible. And in a third mind, I'm like, maybe this will make a good GDC
like, maybe this will make a good GDC talk one
talk one day. So, I do another another survey to
day. So, I do another another survey to figure out what turned these guys into
figure out what turned these guys into such monsters. Um, and the first
such monsters. Um, and the first question I ask is, you know, the game
question I ask is, you know, the game was exciting and compelling. And yeah,
was exciting and compelling. And yeah, like look at that. Overwhelmingly, yes,
like look at that. Overwhelmingly, yes, the game was exciting and compelling.
the game was exciting and compelling. Great. That's fantastic.
Great. That's fantastic. But this one's a bit more interesting.
But this one's a bit more interesting. Start to ask a little bit tougher
Start to ask a little bit tougher questions. The game made me feel
questions. The game made me feel paranoid. Almost 75% of people agree or
paranoid. Almost 75% of people agree or strongly agree. And I mean, I don't know
strongly agree. And I mean, I don't know about you guys, but paranoia I don't
about you guys, but paranoia I don't think is a positive
think is a positive feeling. And so then, you know, I asked
feeling. And so then, you know, I asked a final question that was really a tough
a final question that was really a tough question, which was the game made me
question, which was the game made me feel upset at times. And that was the
feel upset at times. And that was the response I got, which to me was pretty
response I got, which to me was pretty incredible. like more than half the
incredible. like more than half the players at some point felt upset in the
players at some point felt upset in the game. And again, you know, I'm really
game. And again, you know, I'm really not trying to make a game to upset
not trying to make a game to upset people. I want them to be excited. I
people. I want them to be excited. I want them to be embracing the positives
want them to be embracing the positives of the game and not really responding to
of the game and not really responding to the
the negatives. So, I'm in two minds. you
negatives. So, I'm in two minds. you know, the game is a success in that I
know, the game is a success in that I did that did manage to make something so
did that did manage to make something so compelling and so engaging, but in the
compelling and so engaging, but in the other hand, it's a failure because I've
other hand, it's a failure because I've done something that's hurt people and
done something that's hurt people and damaged people and been, you know, a
damaged people and been, you know, a detriment to the office. And again, at
detriment to the office. And again, at this point, I'm still kind of like, ah,
this point, I'm still kind of like, ah, maybe it's those guys. They just taken
maybe it's those guys. They just taken it too seriously and and all of that.
it too seriously and and all of that. So, I decided to launch an investigation
So, I decided to launch an investigation to, you know, get a bit of better
to, you know, get a bit of better understanding why all this happened more
understanding why all this happened more than just beyond a survey. Um, I start
than just beyond a survey. Um, I start going and talking to various people and,
going and talking to various people and, you know, really drilling down into what
you know, really drilling down into what they were doing and what was happening
they were doing and what was happening behind the scenes that I couldn't see as
behind the scenes that I couldn't see as an observer. And it turns out there was
an observer. And it turns out there was a lot happening behind the scenes that
a lot happening behind the scenes that was completely invisible to me. And some
was completely invisible to me. And some of it is just way escalated beyond what
of it is just way escalated beyond what I thought it would be. So, this is one
I thought it would be. So, this is one of the very first things I uncovered,
of the very first things I uncovered, secret plans. So, this is a secret plan
secret plans. So, this is a secret plan put together by the artist of Fruit
put together by the artist of Fruit Ninja, Shaft. Um, and you can see this
Ninja, Shaft. Um, and you can see this is a pretty complicated plan. This is
is a pretty complicated plan. This is involving a large amount of action
involving a large amount of action points moving through a very large
points moving through a very large amount of people. And then you can see
amount of people. And then you can see the uh the green numbers is displaying
the uh the green numbers is displaying how many action points are in the pool
how many action points are in the pool at that particular time. And it's timed
at that particular time. And it's timed all the way down to killing Shaz, which
all the way down to killing Shaz, which is our boss, Chenille Dio, with the very
is our boss, Chenille Dio, with the very last action
last action point. To think about how long it would
point. To think about how long it would have taken to coers with so many players
have taken to coers with so many players to make this plan happen is incredible.
to make this plan happen is incredible. Like, that's a massive amount of
Like, that's a massive amount of organization and a massive amount of
organization and a massive amount of time effort. So, this blew me away. But
time effort. So, this blew me away. But not as much as when I found this, which
not as much as when I found this, which is the actual secret plan.
So, the first secret plan was just to throw everyone else off the scent. This
throw everyone else off the scent. This is the actual plan to take all of those
is the actual plan to take all of those action points from that those players.
action points from that those players. They think they're about to take out all
They think they're about to take out all the guys on the left side and then turn
the guys on the left side and then turn around and backstab all the guys on the
around and backstab all the guys on the other
other side. So, before I'd been thinking, wow,
side. So, before I'd been thinking, wow, this is a lot of forethought, a lot of
this is a lot of forethought, a lot of really, you know, really deep strategic
really, you know, really deep strategic stuff going on. And then it turns out
stuff going on. And then it turns out it's like another layer deeper.
it's like another layer deeper. This is just crazy. I I love
This is just crazy. I I love this. And so this was reflected in
this. And so this was reflected in productivity. This is a quote from one
productivity. This is a quote from one of the guys at work, uh, Fruity. Sorry,
of the guys at work, uh, Fruity. Sorry, we use a lot of nicknames at Half Rick.
we use a lot of nicknames at Half Rick. So all of these names sort of might seem
So all of these names sort of might seem a bit weird. So yeah, I would normally
a bit weird. So yeah, I would normally spend normally have 11 or 12 tabs open
spend normally have 11 or 12 tabs open in Spark, which is our little internal
in Spark, which is our little internal messaging program, talking about the
messaging program, talking about the game for up to 6 hours of the day every
game for up to 6 hours of the day every day. So these guys actually sent me
day. So these guys actually sent me through a bunch of chat logs. I some of
through a bunch of chat logs. I some of them are hilarious. I should put them up
them are hilarious. I should put them up somewhere at some point, but I I didn't
somewhere at some point, but I I didn't have enough time to fit it all into this
have enough time to fit it all into this presentation, but there's one great one
presentation, but there's one great one from Fruity and he's talking to he's got
from Fruity and he's talking to he's got like nine conversations on the fly. It's
like nine conversations on the fly. It's really difficult to keep up with. And
really difficult to keep up with. And then he says, "Ah, okay. That's probably
then he says, "Ah, okay. That's probably enough of that. I should probably
enough of that. I should probably actually get stuck into work." And the
actually get stuck into work." And the time stamp next to it says 3:30
p.m. And you know, people are getting so invested. This is another player.
invested. This is another player. They've created this Excel sheet and
They've created this Excel sheet and they're trying to track all the action
they're trying to track all the action points and which players they're with
points and which players they're with and the two kind of different sides
and the two kind of different sides understanding the total pool of action
understanding the total pool of action points they have available. So, what
points they have available. So, what this really shows is that at this point,
this really shows is that at this point, the main currency isn't really action
the main currency isn't really action points at all. It's information. That's
points at all. It's information. That's what people are really trying to get
what people are really trying to get to. And that leads us to spies.
to. And that leads us to spies. So, let's say hypothetically there are
So, let's say hypothetically there are two players playing the game and they're
two players playing the game and they're in the kitchen chatting about it and
in the kitchen chatting about it and talking about their potential plans. And
talking about their potential plans. And say there's a third person in there, not
say there's a third person in there, not involved in the game at all, just
involved in the game at all, just quietly making a coffee. That person
quietly making a coffee. That person might overhear things and these things
might overhear things and these things might be interesting to the players.
might be interesting to the players. So the players actually start recruiting
So the players actually start recruiting spies and there are up to five people
spies and there are up to five people who are not playing the game at all who
who are not playing the game at all who are relaying information and then
are relaying information and then there's even double agents who are
there's even double agents who are feeding fake information and it is just
feeding fake information and it is just incredible. It's just getting out of
incredible. It's just getting out of control and it sort of starts to explain
control and it sort of starts to explain why players who weren't even sorry
why players who weren't even sorry employees who weren't even part of the
employees who weren't even part of the game, you know, really their time was
game, you know, really their time was getting impinged on a
getting impinged on a lot. And the spies thing gets even
lot. And the spies thing gets even crazier somehow. So, this is a really
crazier somehow. So, this is a really poorly drawn map top down of one section
poorly drawn map top down of one section of the office. All of the brown tables,
of the office. All of the brown tables, uh, sorry, brown squares there are
uh, sorry, brown squares there are tables where people sit at. The green
tables where people sit at. The green one is where the game is set up. Those
one is where the game is set up. Those blue lines there, that shows where the
blue lines there, that shows where the walls of that office are. And those
walls of that office are. And those walls are made of glass. As I mentioned
walls are made of glass. As I mentioned before, turns out this is an important
before, turns out this is an important point because if you were going to
point because if you were going to employ a
employ a spy, the people sitting at these desks
spy, the people sitting at these desks can see that table all day long. They
can see that table all day long. They always know what's going on in the game.
always know what's going on in the game. They're just sitting there working away.
They're just sitting there working away. And if someone happens to walk into the
And if someone happens to walk into the office, they can jump on and say, "Hey,
office, they can jump on and say, "Hey, guess what? I think there's some [ __ ]
guess what? I think there's some [ __ ] going down. you should probably jump
going down. you should probably jump over and check out. And at first people
over and check out. And at first people were getting baffled by this. They turn
were getting baffled by this. They turn up to the room and then all of a sudden
up to the room and then all of a sudden there's a crowd of like 20 people
there's a crowd of like 20 people instantly. It's just, you know, and you
instantly. It's just, you know, and you know, at this point it's pretty obvious
know, at this point it's pretty obvious the game has kind of it's it's not just
the game has kind of it's it's not just a game anymore. It's infected the
a game anymore. It's infected the office. It's gone out of it's not
office. It's gone out of it's not contained to this little room. It's
contained to this little room. It's running through the chat system. It's
running through the chat system. It's depending on where people are sitting in
depending on where people are sitting in the office. It's just crazy.
So then there's also things happening in the jury that I was completely blind to
the jury that I was completely blind to while the game was happening. Obviously,
while the game was happening. Obviously, as I was saying, the jury is really
as I was saying, the jury is really important because you want people to
important because you want people to vote for you. That's how you are going
vote for you. That's how you are going to, you know, right at the end game win
to, you know, right at the end game win the game. So it turns out there's an
the game. So it turns out there's an email thread among all the players
email thread among all the players running in secret. And in that email
running in secret. And in that email thread, people are running propaganda
thread, people are running propaganda campaigns and giving you reasons why you
campaigns and giving you reasons why you should give them action points and not
should give them action points and not other people action points. And it's
other people action points. And it's just again, it's just like this whole
just again, it's just like this whole other level of strategy that I had no
other level of strategy that I had no idea. And it certainly wasn't part of
idea. And it certainly wasn't part of the original intention with the
the original intention with the design. And then it starts getting even
design. And then it starts getting even crazier. People create anonymous email
crazier. People create anonymous email accounts and they jump in on this thread
accounts and they jump in on this thread and they're effectively poisoning the
and they're effectively poisoning the jury. This one's pretty mild. I And you
jury. This one's pretty mild. I And you know, I've actually blacked out the
know, I've actually blacked out the names because I was talking to people
names because I was talking to people about this and they've they felt deeply
about this and they've they felt deeply ashamed about what they were doing here
ashamed about what they were doing here because they're saying, you know, like
because they're saying, you know, like don't trust this person. And that might
don't trust this person. And that might be one thing, but when you're in an
be one thing, but when you're in an office environment and you're saying,
office environment and you're saying, you know, I'm not saying don't trust
you know, I'm not saying don't trust Game Master 69. This person is saying
Game Master 69. This person is saying don't trust Luke Muscat. He's a bastard.
don't trust Luke Muscat. He's a bastard. And so that's, you know, that's getting
And so that's, you know, that's getting personal. That's very personal at that
personal. That's very personal at that point. So what was it about the game
point. So what was it about the game that made everyone go crazy, I wondered.
that made everyone go crazy, I wondered. Definitely the context is a big deal. I
Definitely the context is a big deal. I mean, I'm certainly not blind to that.
mean, I'm certainly not blind to that. The fact that it happened in the office
The fact that it happened in the office among friends, that's going to make a
among friends, that's going to make a really big change to it, but I don't
really big change to it, but I don't think that's the entire blame. I mean,
think that's the entire blame. I mean, we play games at Half Rick all of the
we play games at Half Rick all of the time, constantly. That's mostly what we
time, constantly. That's mostly what we do. We play video games. We play poker
do. We play video games. We play poker every Friday night. We've had three
every Friday night. We've had three monthlong 500
monthlong 500 tournaments. Every game you can imagine,
tournaments. Every game you can imagine, we've played it and it's never had an
we've played it and it's never had an effect like this on the office. So in
effect like this on the office. So in this case, I really don't think the
this case, I really don't think the context can be blamed. I think the
context can be blamed. I think the context is just an amplifier that
context is just an amplifier that increased everything that
increased everything that happened. The time investment, I think,
happened. The time investment, I think, was a really big thing, too. Don't you
was a really big thing, too. Don't you love how literal Google image search is?
love how literal Google image search is? sometimes going to search time
sometimes going to search time investment and you get a clock sitting
investment and you get a clock sitting on the word
on the word investing. I mean, by the time you put
investing. I mean, by the time you put in five or six or seven days worth of
in five or six or seven days worth of work into this game, you know, you've
work into this game, you know, you've built up these relationships, even
built up these relationships, even though like at first it's just this
though like at first it's just this arbitrary thing and it's just little
arbitrary thing and it's just little pieces of paper sliding around some
pieces of paper sliding around some other paper, they begin to develop
other paper, they begin to develop meaning. The time really, really makes a
meaning. The time really, really makes a big difference.
big difference. But then I think there were some really
But then I think there were some really key rules that really set this whole
key rules that really set this whole thing off. I'm going to go through a
thing off. I'm going to go through a couple of them really
couple of them really quick. The daisy chaining implications
quick. The daisy chaining implications is really I think the biggest culprit
is really I think the biggest culprit here. So this is the same image as
here. So this is the same image as before um just with arrows so you can
before um just with arrows so you can see it visually. So what's interesting
see it visually. So what's interesting in most games if you decide you don't
in most games if you decide you don't want to be a part of an alliance fine
want to be a part of an alliance fine you're out of that alliance and you know
you're out of that alliance and you know it might have been a fourperson alliance
it might have been a fourperson alliance before but now you're on the edge and
before but now you're on the edge and it's a threeperson alliance. But look
it's a threeperson alliance. But look what happens in this game if you decide
what happens in this game if you decide you don't want to be a part of the
you don't want to be a part of the alliance. This purple player here has
alliance. This purple player here has decided to opt out. They have completely
decided to opt out. They have completely destroyed this chain. They've really
destroyed this chain. They've really caused massive disruption to the
caused massive disruption to the strategies of these
strategies of these guys. And I mean this is basically peer
guys. And I mean this is basically peer pressure 101, right? If you say, "I'm
pressure 101, right? If you say, "I'm not going to be a part of this," and
not going to be a part of this," and then that pisses off nine other people
then that pisses off nine other people and completely there's something they're
and completely there's something they're going to feel passionate about this big
going to feel passionate about this big grand strategy and you're the one thing
grand strategy and you're the one thing getting in the way of that happening.
getting in the way of that happening. Imagine the pressure you feel about
Imagine the pressure you feel about that. It's Yeah. I mean, join us or die
that. It's Yeah. I mean, join us or die pretty much. And even then, you know,
pretty much. And even then, you know, you could you could uh not join and
you could you could uh not join and you'd probably get killed straight away
you'd probably get killed straight away and then it would form back around you.
and then it would form back around you. There's literally nothing to incentivize
There's literally nothing to incentivize you from straying away from the major
you from straying away from the major group.
group. The zero randomness thing was
The zero randomness thing was interesting, too, because when you have
interesting, too, because when you have three action points and you're in range
three action points and you're in range of someone, guaranteed 100% you could
of someone, guaranteed 100% you could kill that person and take them out of
kill that person and take them out of the game. There's no randomness. There's
the game. There's no randomness. There's no, you know, ah, you got a lucky shot.
no, you know, ah, you got a lucky shot. That's cool. There's no um, you know,
That's cool. There's no um, you know, oh, that was unlucky for you. The reason
oh, that was unlucky for you. The reason I have a screenshot of Fruit Ninja here
I have a screenshot of Fruit Ninja here is this is something that, you know, the
is this is something that, you know, the role of randomness is something we're
role of randomness is something we're very interested in. And what we do in
very interested in. And what we do in Fruit Ninja is deliberately put bombs
Fruit Ninja is deliberately put bombs overlapping fruit sometimes and create
overlapping fruit sometimes and create unfair situations randomly. The reason
unfair situations randomly. The reason is is unless you're really skilled,
is is unless you're really skilled, you're probably going to slice the bomb
you're probably going to slice the bomb and die. And this means you can you get
and die. And this means you can you get to place some of the blame and some of
to place some of the blame and some of the burden that you're feeling onto the
the burden that you're feeling onto the game itself. You say to yourself, I
game itself. You say to yourself, I could have got a high score if it wasn't
could have got a high score if it wasn't for that bomb there. Or sometimes, you
for that bomb there. Or sometimes, you know, I got a really lucky run. And when
know, I got a really lucky run. And when you do that in a competitive
you do that in a competitive environment, it really takes the edge
environment, it really takes the edge off. It's the same as in poker, you
off. It's the same as in poker, you know, you'll be all playing and
know, you'll be all playing and someone's just bluffing and doing rising
someone's just bluffing and doing rising and rising and then all of a sudden they
and rising and then all of a sudden they get something on the river and it's
get something on the river and it's hilarious. Everyone laughs and it's a
hilarious. Everyone laughs and it's a good fun interaction. This had none of
good fun interaction. This had none of that. It was all this pure clinical, you
that. It was all this pure clinical, you know, no randomness at all.
know, no randomness at all. I also had a theory about the jury uh
I also had a theory about the jury uh which I sort of mentioned before that
which I sort of mentioned before that because it was real people this had a
because it was real people this had a really big effect on the game and you
really big effect on the game and you know you're actually personally
know you're actually personally attacking people and it really blurs the
attacking people and it really blurs the lines between you the relationship you
lines between you the relationship you have in the game versus the relationship
have in the game versus the relationship you have in the office and you know most
you have in the office and you know most of the guys at Halfbreak are really good
of the guys at Halfbreak are really good friends as well. They go out on the
friends as well. They go out on the weekends together and so it was really
weekends together and so it was really you know making a lot of worlds collide
you know making a lot of worlds collide and really causing a lot of stress.
and really causing a lot of stress. So originally this was the end of my
So originally this was the end of my talk when I uh pitched this talk to the
talk when I uh pitched this talk to the GDC board. I said you know I'm basically
GDC board. I said you know I'm basically going to tell a story and tell how it
going to tell a story and tell how it all goes. And then they sort of
all goes. And then they sort of encouraged me to instead of doing a
encouraged me to instead of doing a 25minut talk about that actually fill it
25minut talk about that actually fill it out to an hour and explore some other
out to an hour and explore some other games and all of that. So I said okay
games and all of that. So I said okay cool that that sounds interesting let's
cool that that sounds interesting let's do that. And it was actually been a
do that. And it was actually been a really interesting process for me by
really interesting process for me by doing this. It's really I'm really glad
doing this. It's really I'm really glad they pushed me to do it because I've had
they pushed me to do it because I've had a lot of time to go through and look at
a lot of time to go through and look at other games and, you know, really do
other games and, you know, really do some thinking about what I was doing
some thinking about what I was doing with the game and how I feel about how
with the game and how I feel about how everything went
everything went down. So, I wanted to look at a couple
down. So, I wanted to look at a couple of other games that make people crazy.
of other games that make people crazy. Who's played Neptune's
Who's played Neptune's Pride? I have not very not many people
Pride? I have not very not many people at all. Okay, I'm glad that I have a
at all. Okay, I'm glad that I have a little thing here that explains how it
little thing here that explains how it works. It's a free browserbased strategy
works. It's a free browserbased strategy game. Um, it's very simple. This is kind
game. Um, it's very simple. This is kind of a simplification of the rules, but
of a simplification of the rules, but you know, you capture stars by moving
you know, you capture stars by moving around ships. You collect money every 24
around ships. You collect money every 24 hours, similar to to the game I did. Um,
hours, similar to to the game I did. Um, and you can invest that money to produce
and you can invest that money to produce either economy or industry. If you
either economy or industry. If you invest in economy, you get more money
invest in economy, you get more money next payday, next 24 hours. Industry
next payday, next 24 hours. Industry generates ships. And is the first to
generates ships. And is the first to capture 50% of the stars wins. Again,
capture 50% of the stars wins. Again, it's very simple, very clinical. Um, if
it's very simple, very clinical. Um, if you have if you're on the same kind of
you have if you're on the same kind of weapon level and you know, 80 ships
weapon level and you know, 80 ships attacks a 100 ships, then the 100 ships
attacks a 100 ships, then the 100 ships wins and have 20 ships left over. It's
wins and have 20 ships left over. It's just an
just an algorithm and I it's amazing. So, this
algorithm and I it's amazing. So, this is a great quote straight off the uh
is a great quote straight off the uh Neptune's Pride website. The most
Neptune's Pride website. The most horrible game you will ever play. It is
horrible game you will ever play. It is brilliant. And there's a lot of
brilliant. And there's a lot of similarities here with uh with the
similarities here with uh with the prototype. There's a constant influx of
prototype. There's a constant influx of actionable points that then you can do
actionable points that then you can do whenever you want because effectively
whenever you want because effectively Neptune's Pride and it takes even longer
Neptune's Pride and it takes even longer to play out up to a month, but it's
to play out up to a month, but it's effectively real time. Moving between
effectively real time. Moving between the stars can take like 3 days because
the stars can take like 3 days because of how slow everything moves. You can
of how slow everything moves. You can execute at any time. There's an abstract
execute at any time. There's an abstract representation, you know, just like how
representation, you know, just like how we had little squares with people's
we had little squares with people's names on it. This has little circles and
names on it. This has little circles and triangles representing stars and ships.
triangles representing stars and ships. Really heavy focus on diplomacy. no
Really heavy focus on diplomacy. no randomness and time investment. These
randomness and time investment. These are all very similar. There's a lot of
are all very similar. There's a lot of differences as well, but there's
differences as well, but there's definitely some, you know, repeating
definitely some, you know, repeating kind of themes here. The first time I
kind of themes here. The first time I played a game, it was probably about a
played a game, it was probably about a year ago. Uh, it was a eight player
year ago. Uh, it was a eight player game. I knew three of the players, and
game. I knew three of the players, and it was the most terrifying, horrible
it was the most terrifying, horrible experience of playing a game that I've
experience of playing a game that I've ever had, but so so memorable. So
ever had, but so so memorable. So incredibly memorable. And a similar
incredibly memorable. And a similar thing happened where as I was playing,
thing happened where as I was playing, you know, at first you don't really
you know, at first you don't really care, but then the time investment gets
care, but then the time investment gets in and you're getting more and more into
in and you're getting more and more into it and you're messaging all of the other
it and you're messaging all of the other players and getting ready to backstab
players and getting ready to backstab someone. And then at some point, uh,
someone. And then at some point, uh, this is right near the end of the game.
this is right near the end of the game. One of the friends I was playing with
One of the friends I was playing with rings me at 4:00 a.m. in the morning and
rings me at 4:00 a.m. in the morning and wakes me up and he says, "Look, I know
wakes me up and he says, "Look, I know it's 4:00 a.m., but we need to do
it's 4:00 a.m., but we need to do something right now. We're about to lose
something right now. We're about to lose this game. Um, so much for being able to
this game. Um, so much for being able to play whenever you want.
play whenever you want. So, I played a second game leading up to
So, I played a second game leading up to this GDC talk because I thought that
this GDC talk because I thought that would be a good idea. I should refresh
would be a good idea. I should refresh myself on how the game works, and it was
myself on how the game works, and it was just as horrible as last
just as horrible as last time. I I had a couple of theories that
time. I I had a couple of theories that I wanted to test out by playing the game
I wanted to test out by playing the game again. One of them was that
again. One of them was that uh this is the actual chat log from like
uh this is the actual chat log from like two days ago that I just screen capped
two days ago that I just screen capped out. Um, one of the theories I had was
out. Um, one of the theories I had was maybe what we should do is everyone
maybe what we should do is everyone assume an alias and no one will know who
assume an alias and no one will know who anyone is and then nothing will hurt
anyone is and then nothing will hurt quite as bad. It won't feel so personal.
quite as bad. It won't feel so personal. So, we had eight friends all jump in on
So, we had eight friends all jump in on this game and we all set these crazy
this game and we all set these crazy aliases so no one would be able to be
aliases so no one would be able to be able to do it. But the same thing
able to do it. But the same thing happened again. And you know, we'd be
happened again. And you know, we'd be talking about the game on GTO and in
talking about the game on GTO and in person. And you know, slowly the game
person. And you know, slowly the game seeps out into the real world. And then
seeps out into the real world. And then soon enough, you know, you start
soon enough, you know, you start figuring out who is who. And by this
figuring out who is who. And by this point, you know, I'm not saying, uh, I'm
point, you know, I'm not saying, uh, I'm going to attack the red guy. I'm
going to attack the red guy. I'm literally saying, I'm going to attack
literally saying, I'm going to attack Jonathan. And, you know, he's literally
Jonathan. And, you know, he's literally communicating to me that he's sorry for
communicating to me that he's sorry for attacking me. So, that whole theory kind
attacking me. So, that whole theory kind of just went up in my face. And it was
of just went up in my face. And it was just as horrible as last time. It just
just as horrible as last time. It just kind of kicked in a bit later.
kind of kicked in a bit later. And it's because the rules are so
And it's because the rules are so evocative. It's nothing to do with the
evocative. It's nothing to do with the theme. It could wouldn't matter if it
theme. It could wouldn't matter if it was in space. It wouldn't matter if it
was in space. It wouldn't matter if it looked as terrible as my prototype did.
looked as terrible as my prototype did. The rules are just so evocative. So,
The rules are just so evocative. So, with this screenshot here, this was from
with this screenshot here, this was from about a week and a half ago. I woke up
about a week and a half ago. I woke up in the morning um and checked the game
in the morning um and checked the game to see what was happening. And this is
to see what was happening. And this is the screen I opened up to. I was the
the screen I opened up to. I was the blue player. And I felt physically sick
blue player. And I felt physically sick looking at this screen. And without any
looking at this screen. And without any context, you're looking at this and it
context, you're looking at this and it just looks like a bunch of ships moving
just looks like a bunch of ships moving around. But this represented to me three
around. But this represented to me three weeks worth of work that was about to
weeks worth of work that was about to turn on me. I could tell by the way that
turn on me. I could tell by the way that the ships were moving around that I was
the ships were moving around that I was about to get backstabbed big time by my
about to get backstabbed big time by my friends and I saw this screen and oh my
friends and I saw this screen and oh my god like my chest was tightening up. I
god like my chest was tightening up. I thought I was going to have a stroke. is
thought I was going to have a stroke. is such a powerful actual physical reaction
such a powerful actual physical reaction to the game. And again, just because the
to the game. And again, just because the rules are so
rules are so evocative and I just started, you know,
evocative and I just started, you know, I really started thinking, you know,
I really started thinking, you know, about this engagement versus fun idea.
about this engagement versus fun idea. You know, when I was doing uh the
You know, when I was doing uh the prototype, I just wanted something that
prototype, I just wanted something that was exciting and as compelling as
was exciting and as compelling as possible at any costs, like I said, but
possible at any costs, like I said, but there's definitely a correlation here
there's definitely a correlation here between the game being exciting and
between the game being exciting and compelling and it being having negative
compelling and it being having negative feelings as well, it being making you
feelings as well, it being making you feel paranoid.
feel paranoid. So you I really wanted to find out a bit
So you I really wanted to find out a bit more about
more about that. So what happened was I uh I got
that. So what happened was I uh I got onto the Neptune's Pride website and I
onto the Neptune's Pride website and I sent an email to the the developer and
sent an email to the the developer and said, "Hey, I doing this GDC talk. I
said, "Hey, I doing this GDC talk. I really think I want to have a big
really think I want to have a big section about Neptune's Pride in it.
section about Neptune's Pride in it. Would you be available to have a chat on
Would you be available to have a chat on Skype or something sometime?" And the
Skype or something sometime?" And the person gets back to me, his name is Jay,
person gets back to me, his name is Jay, and he goes to me like, "Oh yeah, that's
and he goes to me like, "Oh yeah, that's cool. We should meet up and have a beer.
cool. We should meet up and have a beer. I live up the road." Now, this might
I live up the road." Now, this might happen all the time if you live in San
happen all the time if you live in San Francisco, but this does not happen in
Francisco, but this does not happen in Australia in Brisbane, that's for
Australia in Brisbane, that's for sure. So, I met up with Jay and I had
sure. So, I met up with Jay and I had some questions for him. Uh, you know,
some questions for him. Uh, you know, he's a really good guy, really smart,
he's a really good guy, really smart, um, really knows what he's doing. And I
um, really knows what he's doing. And I asked him about, you know, what his
asked him about, you know, what his intent was when he was making the game.
intent was when he was making the game. He didn't mean for it to be so intense.
He didn't mean for it to be so intense. He didn't mean for it to, you know,
He didn't mean for it to, you know, bring out such these amazing strong
bring out such these amazing strong feelings in people. But I had a
feelings in people. But I had a particular question in mind that I
particular question in mind that I wanted to ask him about. So on edge.com
wanted to ask him about. So on edge.com there, Neptune's Pride got given this
there, Neptune's Pride got given this award for the most effective tool for
award for the most effective tool for ending
ending friendships. And so I said to Jay, you
friendships. And so I said to Jay, you know, how does it make you feel when you
know, how does it make you feel when you see this? You know, what do you how do
see this? You know, what do you how do you respond to seeing this comment? This
you respond to seeing this comment? This is what he said. This is slightly
is what he said. This is slightly paraphrased. That's awesome. The game
paraphrased. That's awesome. The game made an impact. It obviously made an
made an impact. It obviously made an impact on you as well. making an impact
impact on you as well. making an impact is why we make games. And this was
is why we make games. And this was really amazing for me. You know, I was
really amazing for me. You know, I was listening to him and, you know, he did
listening to him and, you know, he did mention that there was some things that
mention that there was some things that he wasn't happy about, such as it's
he wasn't happy about, such as it's difficult to make the game really
difficult to make the game really popular because most people only want to
popular because most people only want to play it once.
play it once. Um, he he also mentioned a particular
Um, he he also mentioned a particular scenario where players have emailed him
scenario where players have emailed him asking him to block their account so
asking him to block their account so they can't come back and play it again.
they can't come back and play it again. um just like you know gambling addicts I
um just like you know gambling addicts I guess. But you know his his main
guess. But you know his his main sentiment here was that you know he's so
sentiment here was that you know he's so happy that the game had such a big
happy that the game had such a big impact. And so after I had this beer
impact. And so after I had this beer with him I sort of went away and I was
with him I sort of went away and I was really thinking and you know really
really thinking and you know really reflecting on myself going you know so
reflecting on myself going you know so you know making games making impact
you know making games making impact that's why we do it. Is that why I make
that's why we do it. Is that why I make games to make an impact? I guess kind of
games to make an impact? I guess kind of my goal was to make an impact when I
my goal was to make an impact when I look back at what my main goals were for
look back at what my main goals were for the prototype, but I'm not sure that's
the prototype, but I'm not sure that's the whole story for me. I don't think
the whole story for me. I don't think it's impact at any cost. If I wanted to
it's impact at any cost. If I wanted to make an impact, I could just stab
make an impact, I could just stab someone in the leg. That would be one
someone in the leg. That would be one way to make an impact. That's for
sure. So, another set of game rules that make people go crazy is Dota, League of
make people go crazy is Dota, League of Legends, and all of the MOBAs. And I'm
Legends, and all of the MOBAs. And I'm sure most people here are pretty
sure most people here are pretty familiar with the infamy that comes
familiar with the infamy that comes along with the the uh communities in
along with the the uh communities in these games. So before I'd done this
these games. So before I'd done this talk, you know, when the GDC board said
talk, you know, when the GDC board said you should check out some other games,
you should check out some other games, they said, you know, you got to do a
they said, you know, you got to do a section about either Dota or LOL. It's,
section about either Dota or LOL. It's, you know, it's infamously toxic. You
you know, it's infamously toxic. You really need to find out about it. I'd
really need to find out about it. I'd never played the games at all. I didn't
never played the games at all. I didn't even understand how they worked. Um,
even understand how they worked. Um, just to give a really, really quick
just to give a really, really quick overview for anyone who's not familiar
overview for anyone who's not familiar with how the game works. And this is a
with how the game works. And this is a gross simplification of what is a very
gross simplification of what is a very rich, very complex genre. But basically,
rich, very complex genre. But basically, you have a few heroes per side. Uh, you
you have a few heroes per side. Uh, you go and you kill guys, and when you kill
go and you kill guys, and when you kill guys, you level up and get stronger. And
guys, you level up and get stronger. And your goal is to destroy the other team's
your goal is to destroy the other team's base. And defending that base, there's
base. And defending that base, there's turrets. I'm really sorry for everyone
turrets. I'm really sorry for everyone who plays this game a lot. I know that's
who plays this game a lot. I know that's such a simple version, but you know, you
such a simple version, but you know, you could do a whole talk just about
could do a whole talk just about this. And you know, this is a great
this. And you know, this is a great quote. This is uh from Idle Thumbs
quote. This is uh from Idle Thumbs recently. Uh and it really kind of sums
recently. Uh and it really kind of sums up about when people are playing Dota. I
up about when people are playing Dota. I I think I just lose my mind when I'm
I think I just lose my mind when I'm playing Dota. I forget who I even am.
playing Dota. I forget who I even am. I'm like the Hulk. And you know, this is
I'm like the Hulk. And you know, this is something you see a lot of is you jump
something you see a lot of is you jump on the forums and it's all people
on the forums and it's all people talking about how terrible the community
talking about how terrible the community is and how enraged everyone is and that
is and how enraged everyone is and that everyone needs to relax.
everyone needs to relax. So, a guy called Jeffrey Lynn is doing a
So, a guy called Jeffrey Lynn is doing a lot of interesting stuff here. He did a
lot of interesting stuff here. He did a really fantastic presentation and I
really fantastic presentation and I think it was on Wednesday maybe. Really
think it was on Wednesday maybe. Really excellent. He's the lead behavior
excellent. He's the lead behavior science guy. He's got a more official
science guy. He's got a more official title than that, but I don't remember
title than that, but I don't remember what it is. And he's doing some really
what it is. And he's doing some really great stuff leading a team trying to
great stuff leading a team trying to figure out how to make League of Legends
figure out how to make League of Legends much less toxic than it currently is.
much less toxic than it currently is. But what's interesting is, you know,
But what's interesting is, you know, what he's focusing on isn't really about
what he's focusing on isn't really about changing the gameplay and the rules
changing the gameplay and the rules itself. It's all of the meta systems
itself. It's all of the meta systems that surround it. So, you know, he's
that surround it. So, you know, he's looking at doing tribunals to punish
looking at doing tribunals to punish players and honor to uh to reward good
players and honor to uh to reward good players. But I really wanted to look at
players. But I really wanted to look at those core kind of rules and figure out
those core kind of rules and figure out why why this happens in the first
why why this happens in the first place. And again, we start to see a
place. And again, we start to see a couple of similarities here. The time
couple of similarities here. The time investment to play a game of League of
investment to play a game of League of Legends is high. It takes a long time.
Legends is high. It takes a long time. not one month long time but it's still
not one month long time but it's still you know probably by the time you open
you know probably by the time you open the game can take up to a solid hour and
the game can take up to a solid hour and during that hour you have to be 100%
during that hour you have to be 100% focused you get that time investment
focused you get that time investment effect and you know if you're playing a
effect and you know if you're playing a game of Counterstrike or whatever you
game of Counterstrike or whatever you could play a game for an hour but you
could play a game for an hour but you might cycle through a whole set of
might cycle through a whole set of players and you know people dropping in
players and you know people dropping in and dropping out but that can't happen
and dropping out but that can't happen in League of Legends not at all in there
in League of Legends not at all in there the players are leveling up and so you
the players are leveling up and so you know if someone's been playing for half
know if someone's been playing for half an hour and then they drop out I I mean,
an hour and then they drop out I I mean, what are you going to do? Add a new
what are you going to do? Add a new player that's back on level one? That's
player that's back on level one? That's not going to work
not going to work out. And every player is a vital link.
out. And every player is a vital link. And again, this really reminded me of
And again, this really reminded me of the whole peer pressure kind of thing,
the whole peer pressure kind of thing, but in a different way. Um, if a with
but in a different way. Um, if a with only five players per team, if someone
only five players per team, if someone isn't performing at their best, you
isn't performing at their best, you know, say they're only playing at half
know, say they're only playing at half their ability, that's that takes your
their ability, that's that takes your team from 100% effective to 90%
team from 100% effective to 90% effective. And that's a big deal. you
effective. And that's a big deal. you know, the team is really relying on
know, the team is really relying on every player to play well and do well to
every player to play well and do well to win in the game. And you want to win cuz
win in the game. And you want to win cuz you're putting a whole hour of unbroken
you're putting a whole hour of unbroken time into that
time into that game. But more than all of this, I think
game. But more than all of this, I think what is really the crux of it is the
what is really the crux of it is the underpinning structure of the game
underpinning structure of the game experience. And it's what I think
experience. And it's what I think creates such intensity in the player
creates such intensity in the player behavior. And I want to use the word
behavior. And I want to use the word intensity here, not toxicity. because
intensity here, not toxicity. because the intensity means, you know, you get
the intensity means, you know, you get those really toxic players, but then you
those really toxic players, but then you get the guys who just love the game and,
get the guys who just love the game and, you know, do really great things in the
you know, do really great things in the community as well. So, I think what it
community as well. So, I think what it comes down to is this. There's a really
comes down to is this. There's a really big positive feedback loop in this game.
big positive feedback loop in this game. You kill stuff, which lets you level up,
You kill stuff, which lets you level up, which lets you kill stuff easier. Again,
which lets you kill stuff easier. Again, sorry for the very simp, you know,
sorry for the very simp, you know, oversimplification. Pushing against this
oversimplification. Pushing against this though is the defensive advantage. So,
though is the defensive advantage. So, as you push into the person's territory,
as you push into the person's territory, as you're gaining the advantage and
as you're gaining the advantage and you're able to attack more and more and
you're able to attack more and more and you push towards their base, they gain a
you push towards their base, they gain a defensive advantage through the turrets
defensive advantage through the turrets which are helping them defend and the
which are helping them defend and the fact that they're closer to their base
fact that they're closer to their base so they can get there faster after they
so they can get there faster after they respawn. And, you know, there's a whole
respawn. And, you know, there's a whole bunch of mechanics there that give the
bunch of mechanics there that give the defenders an advantage. And so, you get
defenders an advantage. And so, you get this scenario where you have these two
this scenario where you have these two forces pushing against each other. you
forces pushing against each other. you have the everinccreasing positive
have the everinccreasing positive feedback loop of leveling up, leveling
feedback loop of leveling up, leveling up, leveling up, getting stronger and
up, leveling up, getting stronger and stronger, and then that's getting pushed
stronger, and then that's getting pushed in the other way from the defensive
in the other way from the defensive advantage. And you know, when you're
advantage. And you know, when you're pressing a defensive advantage, you
pressing a defensive advantage, you probably get a few kills. So then you
probably get a few kills. So then you start to level up and these two forces
start to level up and these two forces are kind of pushing back and forth
are kind of pushing back and forth against each
against each other. And then at some point, maybe
other. And then at some point, maybe about 60 70% of the way through the
about 60 70% of the way through the game, you hit the tipping point. And all
game, you hit the tipping point. And all of a sudden the positive feedback loop
of a sudden the positive feedback loop manages to overcome the defensive
manages to overcome the defensive advantage. And after this point, you
advantage. And after this point, you know, the game is in most scenarios as
know, the game is in most scenarios as good as lost. And the thing is is this
good as lost. And the thing is is this tipping point happens at a very specific
tipping point happens at a very specific time. Usually experienced players
time. Usually experienced players especially who can kind of see the
especially who can kind of see the entire game and understand everything
entire game and understand everything that's going on can see that moment when
that's going on can see that moment when that happens and all of a sudden one
that happens and all of a sudden one side has the advantage.
side has the advantage. And the thing is is once you have that
And the thing is is once you have that advantage, it's not like the game is
advantage, it's not like the game is over straight away. If you're on the
over straight away. If you're on the losing side, you're now going to get
losing side, you're now going to get your ass beaten for a solid 5 minutes.
your ass beaten for a solid 5 minutes. You're just going to get swarmed over
You're just going to get swarmed over and over and over. And you know, that
and over and over. And you know, that really doesn't feel good. They really
really doesn't feel good. They really punish you once you hit that point. I
punish you once you hit that point. I mean, this is what it looks like when uh
mean, this is what it looks like when uh your Nexus is getting destroyed and
your Nexus is getting destroyed and there's just so many minions and champs
there's just so many minions and champs just all over you. You generally spawn
just all over you. You generally spawn and get completely destroyed instantly.
and get completely destroyed instantly. And you can see this kind of positive
And you can see this kind of positive feedback loop in this. I got this
feedback loop in this. I got this screenshot, you know, straight off
screenshot, you know, straight off Google images. And if you look up
Google images. And if you look up closely, you can see in the corner, you
closely, you can see in the corner, you know, one player is just really pressing
know, one player is just really pressing that that advantage with the positive
that that advantage with the positive feedback loop and just getting kill
feedback loop and just getting kill after kill after
after kill after kill. And to really rub salt into the
kill. And to really rub salt into the wounds near the end, um, oh, sorry,
wounds near the end, um, oh, sorry, yeah, the blame game. If if it happens
yeah, the blame game. If if it happens at this particular tipping point, it's
at this particular tipping point, it's really easy to blame someone in
really easy to blame someone in particular, right? you know, you say,
particular, right? you know, you say, "Ah, if this person hadn't have done
"Ah, if this person hadn't have done that thing, even though you'd been
that thing, even though you'd been working together as a team for a solid
working together as a team for a solid half an hour, maybe you hit that tipping
half an hour, maybe you hit that tipping point and all of a sudden it's one
point and all of a sudden it's one person's fault." And to make it worse,
person's fault." And to make it worse, the best time for you to express
the best time for you to express that is when you have the least amount
that is when you have the least amount of things competing for your attention,
of things competing for your attention, which is when you're dead. So, if you've
which is when you're dead. So, if you've just died, you're probably not in a
just died, you're probably not in a great state of mind uh and in a really
great state of mind uh and in a really good mood to be communicating with some
good mood to be communicating with some other
people. All of that said, I'm not going to let the players completely off the
to let the players completely off the hook. The players definitely have to
hook. The players definitely have to wear some of the
wear some of the responsibility. And for me, the example
responsibility. And for me, the example that sums this up the best of all games
that sums this up the best of all games is Monopoly. So, if you're like a
is Monopoly. So, if you're like a nuclear 1950s family playing Monopoly,
nuclear 1950s family playing Monopoly, it's probably going to be quite, you
it's probably going to be quite, you know, quite nice. You're playing, it's
know, quite nice. You're playing, it's pleasant. It's this the rules and you
pleasant. It's this the rules and you know, oh, you you get some good wins and
know, oh, you you get some good wins and you get some unlucky losses and things
you get some unlucky losses and things like that. But then you play a game
like that. But then you play a game against Monopoly with a group of people
against Monopoly with a group of people who are all about those like the under
who are all about those like the under the table deals, the deal cutting, the,
the table deals, the deal cutting, the, you know, the bargaining, the ransoms,
you know, the bargaining, the ransoms, you know, I'm taking this property and
you know, I'm taking this property and you've got to pay me some exorbitant
you've got to pay me some exorbitant amount of money. That game is very
amount of money. That game is very different. It has a very different
different. It has a very different feeling. It really changes the game. The
feeling. It really changes the game. The rules have stayed the same, but the
rules have stayed the same, but the players have changed and the player the
players have changed and the player the game feels different. So, I'm not going
game feels different. So, I'm not going to let the players completely off the
to let the players completely off the hook on this one. They definitely have
hook on this one. They definitely have some
responsibility. So, getting towards the end here, I have some
end here, I have some conclusions. Um, through all of this, I
conclusions. Um, through all of this, I learned a lot.
learned a lot. You know, I didn't just learn about game
You know, I didn't just learn about game design through analyzing this. And you
design through analyzing this. And you know, I just loved the fact that having
know, I just loved the fact that having to prepare for this talk really made me
to prepare for this talk really made me reflect on myself as a designer. So, I
reflect on myself as a designer. So, I learned a lot about design game design
learned a lot about design game design in general. And, you know, played some
in general. And, you know, played some new games and, you know, really got to
new games and, you know, really got to spend some time analyzing them. I
spend some time analyzing them. I learned a lot about players, about how
learned a lot about players, about how they respond, about how players are
they respond, about how players are really smart and really good at taking
really smart and really good at taking your rules and twisting them and coming
your rules and twisting them and coming up with ways to kind of subvert the
up with ways to kind of subvert the game. But I also learned a lot about
game. But I also learned a lot about myself as a
myself as a designer. Game design is really
designer. Game design is really powerful. Like really, really, really
powerful. Like really, really, really powerful. Just the pure mechanics of the
powerful. Just the pure mechanics of the game have the ability to completely
game have the ability to completely change people and the way that they act.
change people and the way that they act. And I think this is something that I
And I think this is something that I hadn't really respected before I did
hadn't really respected before I did this prototype. I was, you know, as I
this prototype. I was, you know, as I said at the beginning, I wanted the game
said at the beginning, I wanted the game to be as engaging as possible at any
to be as engaging as possible at any cost. And I hadn't really thought about
cost. And I hadn't really thought about that that much and how well I would, you
that that much and how well I would, you know, how compelling something could be
know, how compelling something could be and just how powerful the pure mechanics
and just how powerful the pure mechanics of the game could be. I was really
of the game could be. I was really thinking, you know, how could
possib that that bad? But game design is very powerful. Just the pure mechanics.
very powerful. Just the pure mechanics. And again, Neptune's pride shows that as
And again, Neptune's pride shows that as well. I learned about a lot a lot about
well. I learned about a lot a lot about players as well about how they react uh
players as well about how they react uh and how I guess if anything I learned
and how I guess if anything I learned how much I don't know about them and how
how much I don't know about them and how unpredictable they are and finally I
unpredictable they are and finally I learned a lot about myself as well and
learned a lot about myself as well and realized I'd never really taken time as
realized I'd never really taken time as a designer to stop and think and look
a designer to stop and think and look kind of introspectively at what I was
kind of introspectively at what I was doing and what my goals
doing and what my goals were after doing all of this and doing
were after doing all of this and doing all of this process. You know, I I
all of this process. You know, I I really think, you know, I still want to
really think, you know, I still want to make a very compelling, very engaging
make a very compelling, very engaging game, but I'm no longer willing to do it
game, but I'm no longer willing to do it at any cost. If it's going to be
at any cost. If it's going to be compelling and engaging, the thing I
compelling and engaging, the thing I want the players to take away from the
want the players to take away from the game is the positive experiences they
game is the positive experiences they had. I want them to be at the pub
had. I want them to be at the pub talking about that great thing they did
talking about that great thing they did together and not kind of mourning over
together and not kind of mourning over the terrible thing that happened to
the terrible thing that happened to them. And for me, these are really, you
them. And for me, these are really, you know, my first steps. I've been doing
know, my first steps. I've been doing game design for not long compared to a
game design for not long compared to a lot of people, but six and a half years.
lot of people, but six and a half years. This is really the first time I've
This is really the first time I've thought hard about what I'm trying to
thought hard about what I'm trying to achieve as a designer and you know where
achieve as a designer and you know where my limits
my limits are. The prototype Tank Turns Tactics
are. The prototype Tank Turns Tactics will live on. I'm going to do it again
will live on. I'm going to do it again at some point. I've actually tried to do
at some point. I've actually tried to do it a couple of times, but uh I haven't
it a couple of times, but uh I haven't figured out a way to do it without
figured out a way to do it without destroying the office again. One
destroying the office again. One potential idea is to take it down to the
potential idea is to take it down to the university and destroy
university and destroy them. Um, alternatively, I could test it
them. Um, alternatively, I could test it out at rival game companies. That might
out at rival game companies. That might work out okay,
work out okay, too. But I want to change it to make it
too. But I want to change it to make it a more positive experience eventually. I
a more positive experience eventually. I really think that there's something
really think that there's something powerful here, and I've kind of
powerful here, and I've kind of accidentally stumbled across something
accidentally stumbled across something really interesting. I just don't know
really interesting. I just don't know how to get it there yet. I'm still still
how to get it there yet. I'm still still thinking about it. I have some ideas,
thinking about it. I have some ideas, but
but yes. So, anyway, that's my story about a
yes. So, anyway, that's my story about a crazy game experiment. It made me learn
crazy game experiment. It made me learn a lot not about just games, but myself.
a lot not about just games, but myself. I haven't really heard other people tell
I haven't really heard other people tell stories like this I guess and you know
stories like this I guess and you know uh heard about other people's journeys
uh heard about other people's journeys as designers and how they learned things
as designers and how they learned things about themselves and what
about themselves and what self-realizations they had. So I really
self-realizations they had. So I really hope now other people will share theirs.
hope now other people will share theirs. Thanks.
So, we have some time for some questions. If people want to come up to
questions. If people want to come up to the microphones, uh, also there will be
the microphones, uh, also there will be emailed out the evaluation forms. If you
emailed out the evaluation forms. If you guys could fill that out and give me
guys could fill that out and give me feedback, that would be awesome. That'd
feedback, that would be awesome. That'd be fantastic. Uh, yes. So, um, thank you
be fantastic. Uh, yes. So, um, thank you for sharing the story. It makes me
for sharing the story. It makes me realize we're not alone cuz we also had
realize we're not alone cuz we also had to ban a game in the office for very,
to ban a game in the office for very, very similar reasons. Oh, wow. Cool.
very similar reasons. Oh, wow. Cool. Although, although our game was, uh, the
Although, although our game was, uh, the classic game of diplomacy. Yes. Have you
classic game of diplomacy. Yes. Have you tried that in your office? No. Actually,
tried that in your office? No. Actually, we have done it a couple of times in the
we have done it a couple of times in the office. I haven't been involved. Uh that
office. I haven't been involved. Uh that was, you know, one of the games when I I
was, you know, one of the games when I I mentioned this one, people say, you
mentioned this one, people say, you know, it's definitely got that kind of
know, it's definitely got that kind of diplomacy vibe. Uh I think, you know,
diplomacy vibe. Uh I think, you know, even though
even though diplomacy, you know, has definitely has
diplomacy, you know, has definitely has those similar effects when the guys in
those similar effects when the guys in the office have played it, it's never
the office have played it, it's never had that ability where it's kind of
had that ability where it's kind of spread virally out into the rest of the
spread virally out into the rest of the office. So I mean people have played it
office. So I mean people have played it and gotten very invested and you know
and gotten very invested and you know had their ups and downs but it's kind of
had their ups and downs but it's kind of remained contained to a fairly small set
remained contained to a fairly small set of players and I think that was one of
of players and I think that was one of the differentiators between the
the differentiators between the prototype and deployment. Interesting.
prototype and deployment. Interesting. Thank you. Thanks. Uh yes. So you
Thank you. Thanks. Uh yes. So you mentioned that um the adding randomness
mentioned that um the adding randomness to a game can actually give players an
to a game can actually give players an outlet to essentially blame the game
outlet to essentially blame the game mechanics instead of each other uh for
mechanics instead of each other uh for if something didn't necessarily go their
if something didn't necessarily go their way. uh is actually is introducing
way. uh is actually is introducing randomness like rolling a dieice to
randomness like rolling a dieice to actually hit another tank like one of
actually hit another tank like one of the things you thought of or yeah those
the things you thought of or yeah those those values that's something that I
those values that's something that I definitely want to try out I think for a
definitely want to try out I think for a couple of reasons one for the randomness
couple of reasons one for the randomness factor but it also means that people
factor but it also means that people will have to be when they're devising
will have to be when they're devising their tactics they're going to have to
their tactics they're going to have to build in fail safes so I mean the very
build in fail safes so I mean the very similar idea I had was you know we could
similar idea I had was you know we could make it a coin make it 50/50 whether a
make it a coin make it 50/50 whether a hit lands or not that means you can't
hit lands or not that means you can't you know very clinically build up six
you know very clinically build up six action points and then know that you
action points and then know that you need to move three and then you've got
need to move three and then you've got three shots and you'll take them out.
three shots and you'll take them out. You're going to need to build in a bit
You're going to need to build in a bit of you know a bit of buffer room there.
of you know a bit of buffer room there. And you know sometimes even though you
And you know sometimes even though you build in buffer you might you know you
build in buffer you might you know you might get out of it and keep lots of
might get out of it and keep lots of action points at the end or you might uh
action points at the end or you might uh you know use all your action points and
you know use all your action points and not manage to kill them and they have
not manage to kill them and they have one heart left. I think it would be
one heart left. I think it would be really interesting. I'd be interested to
really interesting. I'd be interested to know when we do it whether that takes
know when we do it whether that takes some of the intensity and the edge off
some of the intensity and the edge off and whether that makes it less engaging
and whether that makes it less engaging for people. I'm really not sure. Um it's
for people. I'm really not sure. Um it's something I'm certainly looking to try
something I'm certainly looking to try and be really interested to see the
and be really interested to see the results. Thanks. Thanks. Yeah, I feel
results. Thanks. Thanks. Yeah, I feel like uh I kind of wonder if the game
like uh I kind of wonder if the game would benefit from a negative feedback
would benefit from a negative feedback loop. Like maybe instead of giving
loop. Like maybe instead of giving action points, the judges could actually
action points, the judges could actually take away action points. Um, but one
take away action points. Um, but one question I had was given that you kind
question I had was given that you kind of mentioned that the game was sort of
of mentioned that the game was sort of poisonous, did anyone in the office ask
poisonous, did anyone in the office ask you to bring it back?
you to bring it back? And yeah, interesting question. Um, so
And yeah, interesting question. Um, so when I decided I wanted to investigate
when I decided I wanted to investigate more about the game, I sent out an email
more about the game, I sent out an email and um, I said, "Okay, anyone who played
and um, I said, "Okay, anyone who played the game, anyone who played the
the game, anyone who played the prototype, you know the one I'm talking
prototype, you know the one I'm talking about, let me know cuz I want to talk to
about, let me know cuz I want to talk to you and I want to find out more about
you and I want to find out more about your
your experience." And about 5 minutes later,
experience." And about 5 minutes later, I had an email from almost every single
I had an email from almost every single person who is involved in the game. And
person who is involved in the game. And I think about 70% of them said something
I think about 70% of them said something along the lines of, you know, I'm curled
along the lines of, you know, I'm curled up in the fetal position right now and
up in the fetal position right now and don't want to have anything to do with
don't want to have anything to do with it. 30% of the players said, oh my god,
it. 30% of the players said, oh my god, yes, let's do it again. Let's play. Um,
yes, let's do it again. Let's play. Um, interestingly, the people who were
interestingly, the people who were saying, "Yes, let's do it, let's play,"
saying, "Yes, let's do it, let's play," were the kind of uh the mastermind
were the kind of uh the mastermind players. You know, they were definitely
players. You know, they were definitely those Kingmaker players and then the
those Kingmaker players and then the players, for one of a better word, that
players, for one of a better word, that were very much pawns in someone else's
were very much pawns in someone else's game. Um, so I mean it but everyone
game. Um, so I mean it but everyone agreed that there was something there's
agreed that there was something there's something there. There has to be
something there. There has to be something for it to evoke such powerful
something for it to evoke such powerful emotions and that you know we should we
emotions and that you know we should we should you know keep on exploring that
should you know keep on exploring that and see what else there is to learn. Did
and see what else there is to learn. Did the game ever resolve itself? Did you
the game ever resolve itself? Did you actually have a winner at the end or you
actually have a winner at the end or you never got that far? It kind of did and
never got that far? It kind of did and kind of didn't. I mean, you know, we
kind of didn't. I mean, you know, we pretty much said, "Okay, look, we got to
pretty much said, "Okay, look, we got to shut it down." And they the players kind
shut it down." And they the players kind of mutually agreed to what the first,
of mutually agreed to what the first, second, third, fourth place was. Uh, I
second, third, fourth place was. Uh, I mean, it kind of concluded, but not in a
mean, it kind of concluded, but not in a natural sort of way. It was kind of
natural sort of way. It was kind of stunted by the fact that we said we were
stunted by the fact that we said we were cutting it off. Cool. Thanks.
cutting it off. Cool. Thanks. Um, did did people feel worse or better
Um, did did people feel worse or better when they were in the jury?
when they were in the jury? So, that was interesting as well. Um, a
So, that was interesting as well. Um, a lot of players were once they were in
lot of players were once they were in the jury and they it didn't seem like
the jury and they it didn't seem like they were so actively involved in the
they were so actively involved in the game. That was one thing. But then
game. That was one thing. But then active players, they obviously knew who
active players, they obviously knew who was in the jury. And these active
was in the jury. And these active players would start like hassling people
players would start like hassling people in the jury to vote for them. And it was
in the jury to vote for them. And it was kind of you in the jury, you couldn't
kind of you in the jury, you couldn't really escape. So in Survivor, for
really escape. So in Survivor, for example, all of people who are out and
example, all of people who are out and they're in the jury, they leave the
they're in the jury, they leave the island, right? and then they come back
island, right? and then they come back once a week to vote and and that's sort
once a week to vote and and that's sort of it or actually it's right at the end,
of it or actually it's right at the end, isn't it? They they come back in so they
isn't it? They they come back in so they kind of get separated from it. In this
kind of get separated from it. In this jury, the players were still always
jury, the players were still always there and they kind of get hassled and
there and they kind of get hassled and that caused a lot of negative feelings
that caused a lot of negative feelings as well.
as well. And then the other thing I was going to
And then the other thing I was going to suggest was um if you an idea might be
suggest was um if you an idea might be if you give if you give an action point
if you give if you give an action point that you're like immune to that person's
that you're like immune to that person's shots for a couple of turns or something
shots for a couple of turns or something and that way like it makes the daisy
and that way like it makes the daisy chains if you give that guy nine AP he
chains if you give that guy nine AP he can't kill anybody because everybody's
can't kill anybody because everybody's immune to his shots for the next and so
immune to his shots for the next and so it it might cause some of that that
it it might cause some of that that crazy daisy chaining to to they'd have
crazy daisy chaining to to they'd have to take that into account that Yeah,
to take that into account that Yeah, definitely. Gift meant something more
definitely. Gift meant something more than just an a way to aggregate power.
than just an a way to aggregate power. Yeah. No, that's a that's a great
Yeah. No, that's a that's a great suggestion. Thanks. Hi. So, uh I was in
suggestion. Thanks. Hi. So, uh I was in digital games for about 11 years and
digital games for about 11 years and I've gone into teaching and I I agree
I've gone into teaching and I I agree that preparing talks on a subject, it
that preparing talks on a subject, it really makes you think so hard about
really makes you think so hard about what you're doing. So, it's lovely to
what you're doing. So, it's lovely to see people still in the industry doing
see people still in the industry doing that as well. One of the things I teach
that as well. One of the things I teach is uh paper prototyping. Uh, so it's
is uh paper prototyping. Uh, so it's lovely to see you guys doing that. Do
lovely to see you guys doing that. Do you think though that the physicality of
you think though that the physicality of the tokens made them worth more like the
the tokens made them worth more like the AD points? I definitely think that it
AD points? I definitely think that it could have. Yes, because
could have. Yes, because um I mean there's something powerful
um I mean there's something powerful there where you physically handing it to
there where you physically handing it to someone. That's a lot different to um to
someone. That's a lot different to um to you know passing it off in a system or
you know passing it off in a system or just like sending a message. Uh we
just like sending a message. Uh we actually started building a digital
actually started building a digital version of this because I was very
version of this because I was very interested to see if just taking the
interested to see if just taking the exact same rules and then making it
exact same rules and then making it digital what effect that would have. Uh
digital what effect that would have. Uh unfortunately we didn't manage to get
unfortunately we didn't manage to get around to doing it before this talk.
around to doing it before this talk. Yeah, there's a psychological principle
Yeah, there's a psychological principle called uh reciprocity but basically when
called uh reciprocity but basically when you've given something to somebody they
you've given something to somebody they feel very indebted to you which would
feel very indebted to you which would obviously amplify the betrayal if that
obviously amplify the betrayal if that person intended turns on you. That's
person intended turns on you. That's right. Although, yeah, Neptune's Pride
right. Although, yeah, Neptune's Pride was an interesting one because I gave uh
was an interesting one because I gave uh gave one of my friends all of my
gave one of my friends all of my technology and a lot of my money and uh
technology and a lot of my money and uh he certainly didn't feel indebted to me
he certainly didn't feel indebted to me after that. That's for sure.
after that. That's for sure. Thank you. Thanks.
Thank you. Thanks. So, I'm curious about the backstabbing.
So, I'm curious about the backstabbing. Um you know, ostensibly or at a cursory
Um you know, ostensibly or at a cursory analysis, you've got the jury mechanic
analysis, you've got the jury mechanic which should hypothetically discourage
which should hypothetically discourage the the backstabbing and yet it
the the backstabbing and yet it completely didn't. And I'm wondering if
completely didn't. And I'm wondering if you have any insights into why that
you have any insights into why that happened. Is it because there was so
happened. Is it because there was so much propaganda and politics within the
much propaganda and politics within the office environment that did it or was
office environment that did it or was there something else mechanically that
there something else mechanically that wasn't working to uh to disincentivize
wasn't working to uh to disincentivize that backstabbing? I guess you know at a
that backstabbing? I guess you know at a simple level you needed three jurors to
simple level you needed three jurors to aggregate one extra action point. if you
aggregate one extra action point. if you took out enough of the other players um
took out enough of the other players um and you know had a strong enough force
and you know had a strong enough force yourself, all of the players that you're
yourself, all of the players that you're allied with are generating one action
allied with are generating one action point per day. Whereas in the jury like
point per day. Whereas in the jury like you know technically they're generating
you know technically they're generating onethird of an action point per day. So
onethird of an action point per day. So I think that kind of imbalance there was
I think that kind of imbalance there was a large part of it. Uh I think it'd be
a large part of it. Uh I think it'd be really interesting if they could just
really interesting if they could just straight up give a whole action point.
straight up give a whole action point. Every person in the jury could pass off
Every person in the jury could pass off what action point they normally would
what action point they normally would have gotten onto any player they wish.
have gotten onto any player they wish. That said, it frightens me what that
That said, it frightens me what that would do to the jury as well. The jury
would do to the jury as well. The jury was already pretty intense, but that
was already pretty intense, but that would make it even crazier. So, but
would make it even crazier. So, but yeah, it was interesting. It really
yeah, it was interesting. It really didn't curb that kind of backstabbing
didn't curb that kind of backstabbing the way that I thought it would. Now, it
the way that I thought it would. Now, it was just like uh any three jurors uh
was just like uh any three jurors uh could get that one action point. So, I
could get that one action point. So, I guess in that case, um you didn't have
guess in that case, um you didn't have to have all friends on the jury. You
to have all friends on the jury. You just had to have three friends on the
just had to have three friends on the jury and you could alienate everyone
jury and you could alienate everyone else or uh
else or uh Yes, that that's true. Although um I'm
Yes, that that's true. Although um I'm not sure if I mentioned it, but the way
not sure if I mentioned it, but the way that works is it actually stacks as
that works is it actually stacks as well. So if nine people vote for you,
well. So if nine people vote for you, you get three action points, okay, from
you get three action points, okay, from that. So, you know, it was it was
that. So, you know, it was it was interesting that way and a lot of people
interesting that way and a lot of people there was a little bit of a thing going
there was a little bit of a thing going around where multiple people were in one
around where multiple people were in one alliance and what they did was they
alliance and what they did was they pretended they were all on different
pretended they were all on different factions and then they'd target three
factions and then they'd target three different jurors each. So then
different jurors each. So then effectively that kind of faction would
effectively that kind of faction would capture the majority of the uh the
capture the majority of the uh the action points from the jury is it's
action points from the jury is it's crazy these guys. It turns out people
crazy these guys. It turns out people who are like game developers think
who are like game developers think really deeply about games they're
really deeply about games they're playing and yeah I think we have time
playing and yeah I think we have time for one more question. Yeah. So, um,
for one more question. Yeah. So, um, your the talk about about this kind of
your the talk about about this kind of game reminds me a lot of, um, years ago,
game reminds me a lot of, um, years ago, um, I had a tiptop, uh, game club at my,
um, I had a tiptop, uh, game club at my, uh, college and, uh, we're playing this
uh, college and, uh, we're playing this one board game. I don't know how many
one board game. I don't know how many people are familiar with it, uh, the
people are familiar with it, uh, the Battlestar Galactica board game, which
Battlestar Galactica board game, which actually really I definitely recommend
actually really I definitely recommend it to everybody because it really
it to everybody because it really captures that, you know, feeling of like
captures that, you know, feeling of like the show. But um what was really
the show. But um what was really interesting that you know what you're
interesting that you know what you're talking about reminded me of is that the
talking about reminded me of is that the one of the main sort of dramatic
one of the main sort of dramatic mechanics there is that every character
mechanics there is that every character is dealt a loyalty card in secret. So
is dealt a loyalty card in secret. So one of one person is the Sylon who is
one of one person is the Sylon who is secretly trying to screw everyone over
secretly trying to screw everyone over but the mechanics are such that you
but the mechanics are such that you don't necessarily know exactly who that
don't necessarily know exactly who that is. So it creates this interesting
is. So it creates this interesting scenario where everyone's paranoid of
scenario where everyone's paranoid of each other yet the overall game itself
each other yet the overall game itself is cooperative. People aren't
is cooperative. People aren't necessarily
necessarily um basically it's like it's it's like
um basically it's like it's it's like the a team of people against the one
the a team of people against the one sabotur who's trying who's basically I
sabotur who's trying who's basically I guess helping the board win if you will.
guess helping the board win if you will. So, so that that might be actually a
So, so that that might be actually a good a good board game to look at in,
good a good board game to look at in, you know, sort of figuring out, you
you know, sort of figuring out, you know, how to leverage those really
know, how to leverage those really strong dramatic mechanics yet to rein it
strong dramatic mechanics yet to rein it in. I think really that sort of
in. I think really that sort of cooperative aspect with the sabotur I
cooperative aspect with the sabotur I think really helps because then players
think really helps because then players it it gives more it puts the focus more
it it gives more it puts the focus more on um teamwork and and sort of mitigates
on um teamwork and and sort of mitigates some of those toxic factors you were
some of those toxic factors you were talking about. That's awesome. That's a
talking about. That's awesome. That's a great suggestion. Thanks very much.
great suggestion. Thanks very much. Okay, thanks everyone.