[Music]
Okay, so thanks for coming to session. Uh, throwing out the dopamine shots,
Uh, throwing out the dopamine shots, rewards without the neurotrash. Just to
rewards without the neurotrash. Just to get started, we've got the housekeeping
get started, we've got the housekeeping stuff. Please turn off your cell phones
stuff. Please turn off your cell phones or put them on silent and please do the
or put them on silent and please do the evaluation afterwards. Would be really
evaluation afterwards. Would be really cool.
cool. Okay. Uh, so my name is Ben. Uh, I'm a
Okay. Uh, so my name is Ben. Uh, I'm a UX researcher at Epic Games. I have a
UX researcher at Epic Games. I have a PhD uh, in psychology. I've worked in
PhD uh, in psychology. I've worked in neuroscience departments and uh human
neuroscience departments and uh human factors departments and I'm a Kiwi.
factors departments and I'm a Kiwi. That's the nationality, not the fruit or
That's the nationality, not the fruit or the bird. Um
the bird. Um you can reach me at that email address
you can reach me at that email address or on Twitter or I like playing games.
or on Twitter or I like playing games. So please feel free to add me on any of
So please feel free to add me on any of these services. I kind of hop around
these services. I kind of hop around between them. Okay, so that out of the
between them. Okay, so that out of the way. Who's ever said or heard someone
way. Who's ever said or heard someone say that a a game mechanic gives a
say that a a game mechanic gives a player a shot of dopamine? Hands up.
player a shot of dopamine? Hands up. Okay, a lot of people. So what does this
Okay, a lot of people. So what does this mean? I want to talk about that very
mean? I want to talk about that very quickly. Dopamine is a compound. It's
quickly. Dopamine is a compound. It's found in various parts of the body. Uh
found in various parts of the body. Uh it's a precursor to adrenaline, for
it's a precursor to adrenaline, for example. So anywhere that adrenaline is
example. So anywhere that adrenaline is produced, there's dopamine. But most
produced, there's dopamine. But most people when they're saying a shot of
people when they're saying a shot of dopamine are talking about its use as a
dopamine are talking about its use as a neurotransmitter in the brain where you
neurotransmitter in the brain where you will find it. And I think what a lot of
will find it. And I think what a lot of people talk about when they're saying
people talk about when they're saying gives you a shot of dopamine, they're
gives you a shot of dopamine, they're talking about pleasure or a good feeling
talking about pleasure or a good feeling is what's occurring right now. And based
is what's occurring right now. And based on the science, this is an idea that's
on the science, this is an idea that's about uh 30 years or so old. And it was
about uh 30 years or so old. And it was based on an idea that of course if
based on an idea that of course if animals are going to work for a reward,
animals are going to work for a reward, it must feel good because none of us
it must feel good because none of us work for things that feel bad, right? Um
work for things that feel bad, right? Um and that was kind of the idea when it
and that was kind of the idea when it came around. And certainly if we look at
came around. And certainly if we look at dopamine and its impact on animals, uh
dopamine and its impact on animals, uh if you genetically engineer mice to not
if you genetically engineer mice to not produce dopamine, you get a different
produce dopamine, you get a different type of behavior. So the mouse that's
type of behavior. So the mouse that's running around, that's normal mousy
running around, that's normal mousy behavior. The one that's just sitting
behavior. The one that's just sitting there and letting the other one walk all
there and letting the other one walk all over top of it is uh dopamine deficient,
over top of it is uh dopamine deficient, not producing any dopamine. And
not producing any dopamine. And certainly these mice, they lack
certainly these mice, they lack motivation and they will eventually die
motivation and they will eventually die unless you make sure that they eat
unless you make sure that they eat enough. So it certainly does something.
enough. So it certainly does something. The idea that it's responsible for
The idea that it's responsible for pleasure and for liking rewards uh has
pleasure and for liking rewards uh has fallen fallen away within the scientific
fallen fallen away within the scientific community. And there's various reasons
community. And there's various reasons for that. One is that with animals, they
for that. One is that with animals, they still showed that they get pleasure that
still showed that they get pleasure that they like things. If you give mice a
they like things. If you give mice a choice between water or sugar water that
choice between water or sugar water that don't produce dopamine, they'll choose
don't produce dopamine, they'll choose the sugary water, suggesting that they
the sugary water, suggesting that they still get pleasure from things. If
still get pleasure from things. If you're not convinced by animal research
you're not convinced by animal research and want people that can actually talk
and want people that can actually talk to you and talk about the pleasure
to you and talk about the pleasure they're getting, you can look at
they're getting, you can look at Alzheimer's patients. Alzheimer's is uh
Alzheimer's patients. Alzheimer's is uh defined by a drop of dopamine, but these
defined by a drop of dopamine, but these people still report pleasure. They still
people still report pleasure. They still report liking things. That's my father,
report liking things. That's my father, by the way. He doesn't have Alzheimer's,
by the way. He doesn't have Alzheimer's, but he looks like he's having fun.
but he looks like he's having fun. Um,
Um, so what so the idea that dopamine's to
so what so the idea that dopamine's to do with getting pleasure or reward
do with getting pleasure or reward system and all this kind of stuff has
system and all this kind of stuff has kind of fallen away. uh and it fell away
kind of fallen away. uh and it fell away quite a while ago. It's just the popular
quite a while ago. It's just the popular way that it's talked about has not um
way that it's talked about has not um and even the people that originally put
and even the people that originally put forward the idea of dopamine being
forward the idea of dopamine being pleasure have said okay it's not. And
pleasure have said okay it's not. And what followed after that was a some
what followed after that was a some thinking that it's to do with learning
thinking that it's to do with learning and this was based on the idea that in
and this was based on the idea that in the brain just before a reward is
the brain just before a reward is delivered there's a increase in
delivered there's a increase in dopamine. So you're anticipating
dopamine. So you're anticipating something happening. Now this is
something happening. Now this is interesting but there's some problems in
interesting but there's some problems in that dopamine deficient mice have been
that dopamine deficient mice have been able to learn where rewards are in a
able to learn where rewards are in a maze. uh rats that don't produce
maze. uh rats that don't produce dopamine have been able to be uh
dopamine have been able to be uh operately conditioned to learn new
operately conditioned to learn new things. So maybe it's got something to
things. So maybe it's got something to do with learning, but it obviously
do with learning, but it obviously doesn't look like it's necessary. So
doesn't look like it's necessary. So where most people talk about dopamine uh
where most people talk about dopamine uh in the literature nowadays is around
in the literature nowadays is around wanting or needing or compulsion. Uh the
wanting or needing or compulsion. Uh the idea is that dopamine has something to
idea is that dopamine has something to do with uh a real magnetic draw or need
do with uh a real magnetic draw or need for something. Um, often what's talked
for something. Um, often what's talked about is in Europe as junkies,
about is in Europe as junkies, particularly for drugs like meth, once
particularly for drugs like meth, once they take a lot of it, they stop getting
they take a lot of it, they stop getting pleasure pleasure from the drug, but
pleasure pleasure from the drug, but they feel very compelled to still get
they feel very compelled to still get the drug even though it's an unpleasant
the drug even though it's an unpleasant experience. And certainly this is
experience. And certainly this is reflected in change in the dopamine
reflected in change in the dopamine system.
system. So if you're saying your game gives
So if you're saying your game gives people a shot of dopamine, you're not
people a shot of dopamine, you're not necessarily saying it's fun or anything
necessarily saying it's fun or anything worthwhile to them, just that it's
worthwhile to them, just that it's compelling them to play it, which may
compelling them to play it, which may not be a nice thing to say. Um, and even
not be a nice thing to say. Um, and even if that was the case, it's really not
if that was the case, it's really not that simple. If our brains were simple
that simple. If our brains were simple enough for us to understand, we would be
enough for us to understand, we would be so simple that we couldn't. This is a
so simple that we couldn't. This is a nice uh quote. It doesn't necessarily
nice uh quote. It doesn't necessarily mean don't study the brain. Of course,
mean don't study the brain. Of course, like that's silly. It's more like it's
like that's silly. It's more like it's not that simple and we need to be
not that simple and we need to be careful of simple explanations like a
careful of simple explanations like a shot of dopamine.
shot of dopamine. These simple explanations are very uh
These simple explanations are very uh appealing to a lot of people and there's
appealing to a lot of people and there's been a rise in neuro things in the
been a rise in neuro things in the recent years. Neurotraining, neuro food,
recent years. Neurotraining, neuro food, neuro exercise, all these things are
neuro exercise, all these things are real things and there's a lot more of
real things and there's a lot more of them. You can pay money and have people
them. You can pay money and have people do these things. And the reaction the
do these things. And the reaction the neuroscience uh community as a large has
neuroscience uh community as a large has been to declare these neurotrash to say
been to declare these neurotrash to say the brain is more complicated than this
the brain is more complicated than this and all this stuff is preying on on uh
and all this stuff is preying on on uh cognitive biases and praying on people
cognitive biases and praying on people with money.
with money. And I want to ask us uh here at GDC is
And I want to ask us uh here at GDC is why do we care about this? Why do I hear
why do we care about this? Why do I hear people talking about neuroscience here?
people talking about neuroscience here? Well, first of all, science. Science is
Well, first of all, science. Science is cool. I like science. I have a PhD. I
cool. I like science. I have a PhD. I think data is really cool. I think
think data is really cool. I think science is amazing. And I think look,
science is amazing. And I think look, you can put a put a piece of broccoli in
you can put a put a piece of broccoli in fMRI machine and it looks [ __ ]
fMRI machine and it looks [ __ ] awesome.
awesome. So that's cool. Science is cool. But if
So that's cool. Science is cool. But if we look at a statement like this,
we look at a statement like this, rewards delivered on a variable schedule
rewards delivered on a variable schedule strongly motivated players due to
strongly motivated players due to activating a complex web of neurons
activating a complex web of neurons resulting in various neurotransmitters
resulting in various neurotransmitters being released. Okay, but this is what
being released. Okay, but this is what we care about, right? If we're making
we care about, right? If we're making games, we compare care that what we can
games, we compare care that what we can do, rewards delivered on a variable
do, rewards delivered on a variable schedule and what the behavioral outcome
schedule and what the behavioral outcome is, strongly motivated players.
is, strongly motivated players. So, I really want to say let's throw
So, I really want to say let's throw away the dopamine shots. Let's not
away the dopamine shots. Let's not really care about neuroscience, not
really care about neuroscience, not because it's not important, but because
because it's not important, but because what neuroscience is doing is it's
what neuroscience is doing is it's explaining already known principles.
explaining already known principles. They want neuroscientists want to know
They want neuroscientists want to know the physiology behind these principles
the physiology behind these principles that already exist. They're often not
that already exist. They're often not finding new things other than the
finding new things other than the physiological pathways, which are
physiological pathways, which are interesting, but from a practical
interesting, but from a practical standpoint, it's not that useful.
standpoint, it's not that useful. So, let's get rid of those.
So, let's get rid of those. Um, if you do want to hear me talk about
Um, if you do want to hear me talk about ways you can measure physiology and
ways you can measure physiology and stuff like that, uh, look up my Twitter
stuff like that, uh, look up my Twitter handle. I gave a talk about it a couple
handle. I gave a talk about it a couple of years ago at another GDC. But I'm not
of years ago at another GDC. But I'm not going to talk about biometrics anymore.
going to talk about biometrics anymore. I'm going to talk about rewards,
I'm going to talk about rewards, motivation, and what we already know.
motivation, and what we already know. So I'm going to start off by talking
So I'm going to start off by talking about intrinsic and in exttrinsic
about intrinsic and in exttrinsic motivation. And this is not because uh I
motivation. And this is not because uh I feel that these theories require
feel that these theories require particularly important u attention paid
particularly important u attention paid to them. Rather that I know that they're
to them. Rather that I know that they're very popular in in games right now.
very popular in in games right now. Who's heard of intrinsic motivation and
Who's heard of intrinsic motivation and extrinsic motivation? Okay, nearly
extrinsic motivation? Okay, nearly everybody. Right? So this idea is a
everybody. Right? So this idea is a popular theory in games at the moment
popular theory in games at the moment and it's the idea that intrinsic
and it's the idea that intrinsic motivation is personal gratification.
motivation is personal gratification. intrinsic motivation is to get something
intrinsic motivation is to get something from the environment. Now this is just
from the environment. Now this is just one model, one theory and to give you an
one model, one theory and to give you an idea, this was my wall during my PhD. My
idea, this was my wall during my PhD. My PhD was on just one area of human
PhD was on just one area of human behavior which was driving behavior. And
behavior which was driving behavior. And this was a snapshot in time of every
this was a snapshot in time of every single model or theory I could find that
single model or theory I could find that had been made to explain driver
had been made to explain driver behavior. And there was ones I didn't
behavior. And there was ones I didn't have up on this wall. There was a lot of
have up on this wall. There was a lot of them. And there are a lot of them. And
them. And there are a lot of them. And that doesn't mean that they're all worth
that doesn't mean that they're all worth worthless or we shouldn't think about
worthless or we shouldn't think about them. But as applied psych psychologists
them. But as applied psych psychologists which such as myself and working in an
which such as myself and working in an applied area like game design, what we
applied area like game design, what we can do and the advantage of this is we
can do and the advantage of this is we can look at all these models and we can
can look at all these models and we can find the commonalities between them
find the commonalities between them because if lots of models are agreeing
because if lots of models are agreeing on certain things, then that's
on certain things, then that's important. So here's where the models
important. So here's where the models currently agree and it's what I'm going
currently agree and it's what I'm going to go over. You don't need to read it
to go over. You don't need to read it all right now. I'm just letting you know
all right now. I'm just letting you know I'm going to step through these as we
I'm going to step through these as we go.
go. And these may sound like the things that
And these may sound like the things that fit your model of choice that you may
fit your model of choice that you may think about. And that's because these
think about. And that's because these models are often uh explaining the same
models are often uh explaining the same thing, but
thing, but like the brain not being so simple,
like the brain not being so simple, human behavior is not so simple. So try
human behavior is not so simple. So try to not be dogmatic about what you're
to not be dogmatic about what you're talking about. So the first is feedback
talking about. So the first is feedback is important. And I want to start with
is important. And I want to start with this because feedback is vitally
this because feedback is vitally important for rewards. If you take
important for rewards. If you take nothing away from this talk, please have
nothing away from this talk, please have it be that. If players don't know they
it be that. If players don't know they got a reward, they can't get it again.
got a reward, they can't get it again. If players don't know why they got a
If players don't know why they got a reward, they can't do it again. And if
reward, they can't do it again. And if players don't know the value of a
players don't know the value of a reward, then they may not care about it.
reward, then they may not care about it. You can give them all the stuff in the
You can give them all the stuff in the world and they're like, "Eh."
world and they're like, "Eh." So
So rewards are feedback fundamentally and a
rewards are feedback fundamentally and a lot of feedback can be reward and
lot of feedback can be reward and usability and clarity of feedback is a
usability and clarity of feedback is a core component of what we do in user
core component of what we do in user experience work which is why I'm here at
experience work which is why I'm here at a UX summit talking about it because UX
a UX summit talking about it because UX is fundamentally about reward in a lot
is fundamentally about reward in a lot of ways.
of ways. You're a wonderful audience by the way.
You're a wonderful audience by the way. I really mean it. Paying attention
I really mean it. Paying attention especially you.
especially you. All right. So, if we're going to go back
All right. So, if we're going to go back to kind of basics, we can talk about
to kind of basics, we can talk about some learning principles. We can talk
some learning principles. We can talk about classical conditioning, which is
about classical conditioning, which is linking old responses to new or
linking old responses to new or responding for a reward. So, as an
responding for a reward. So, as an example of this, seeing this image is
example of this, seeing this image is probably quite rewarding uh for a lot of
probably quite rewarding uh for a lot of people because of the activity that's
people because of the activity that's often associated with it. Hearing this
often associated with it. Hearing this sound also probably quite rewarding. And
sound also probably quite rewarding. And that's because they're often linked
that's because they're often linked together. And let's stop that. They're
together. And let's stop that. They're linked together and linked together. in
linked together and linked together. in a performative way when playing the game
a performative way when playing the game and it gives you progress. So they've
and it gives you progress. So they've been associated, they've become a
been associated, they've become a reward. Uh maybe more practical example
reward. Uh maybe more practical example of this is in uh a lot of games
of this is in uh a lot of games currencies that are used are gold and
currencies that are used are gold and gems and
gems and dollar amounts and things like that. And
dollar amounts and things like that. And that's because we already have an
that's because we already have an association with these as having value.
association with these as having value. And by using them in a game, you don't
And by using them in a game, you don't have to reestablish the value of the
have to reestablish the value of the reward. You can use a completely madeup
reward. You can use a completely madeup space thing as your currency, but you're
space thing as your currency, but you're going to have to teach players the value
going to have to teach players the value of it. By using an established one, it
of it. By using an established one, it lets players immediately know this is
lets players immediately know this is something valuable. And that's why it's
something valuable. And that's why it's so commonly done.
so commonly done. Another example of of classical
Another example of of classical conditioning is if you look at the uh
conditioning is if you look at the uh idol games, often you get those going
idol games, often you get those going and then they kind of run by themselves.
and then they kind of run by themselves. And because we're so used to uh
And because we're so used to uh association numbers going up and
association numbers going up and feedback like this with progress, it
feedback like this with progress, it feels like we're doing something even
feels like we're doing something even though that we're not really. We're just
though that we're not really. We're just watching a game play itself.
watching a game play itself. So another learning principle we can
So another learning principle we can talk about is operant conditioning. It's
talk about is operant conditioning. It's rather than responding uh to a reward,
rather than responding uh to a reward, it's responding for a reward. You're
it's responding for a reward. You're doing something to get a reward.
doing something to get a reward. So when we talk about operate
So when we talk about operate conditioning, we can go through
conditioning, we can go through schedules. Um, I don't want to spend too
schedules. Um, I don't want to spend too much time on this, but it is important.
much time on this, but it is important. Fixed ratio is when you have to do a
Fixed ratio is when you have to do a certain number of responses to get the
certain number of responses to get the reward. So, turns in a unit uh until a
reward. So, turns in a unit uh until a unit or building is ready. In a
unit or building is ready. In a turn-based game would be a classic
turn-based game would be a classic example of this. You just have to wait
example of this. You just have to wait and hit that next turn button. Or clicks
and hit that next turn button. Or clicks in a clicker that doesn't have a
in a clicker that doesn't have a critical hit system or anything like
critical hit system or anything like that. You have to click a certain amount
that. You have to click a certain amount of time, then you get enough gold, and
of time, then you get enough gold, and then you can buy your reward and then
then you can buy your reward and then click some more.
click some more. And the reason these are important is if
And the reason these are important is if you look at these graphs, you you've got
you look at these graphs, you you've got the number of responses up this side and
the number of responses up this side and then the time across there. And these is
then the time across there. And these is are the responses over time with each
are the responses over time with each tick being a reward. And what you
tick being a reward. And what you typically see with a fixed ratio, and
typically see with a fixed ratio, and this is just one single fixed ratio
this is just one single fixed ratio running at a certain length, so maybe
running at a certain length, so maybe you have to press 20 times and then
you have to press 20 times and then something happens each time, is that
something happens each time, is that what happens is you get pretty fast
what happens is you get pretty fast responding, then they get the reward and
responding, then they get the reward and they stop for a little bit and then they
they stop for a little bit and then they go up. And it's because once you've got
go up. And it's because once you've got the reward, you've got that whole
the reward, you've got that whole process ahead of you again before you
process ahead of you again before you can get for the next one. So it's kind
can get for the next one. So it's kind of like a rest. And the way that these
of like a rest. And the way that these turn-based games work to stop that rest
turn-based games work to stop that rest is you always have multiple things going
is you always have multiple things going at once, right? So your build building
at once, right? So your build building buildings done, but you've got three
buildings done, but you've got three other buildings on the way. So you just
other buildings on the way. So you just take one more turn. You get a lot of
take one more turn. You get a lot of things going.
things going. Fixed interval appointment gaming type
Fixed interval appointment gaming type stuff. This is example from Paragon of
stuff. This is example from Paragon of our uh jungle minions spawning at set
our uh jungle minions spawning at set times. So the players know be there at
times. So the players know be there at this time, kill the minions, get the
this time, kill the minions, get the reward. it. The response that this kind
reward. it. The response that this kind of interval of reward produces is like
of interval of reward produces is like this. You show up at a set time,
this. You show up at a set time, respond, and then you go away until that
respond, and then you go away until that set time. It's used a lot in mobile
set time. It's used a lot in mobile games for timers and daily login
games for timers and daily login bonuses, which is effectively trying to
bonuses, which is effectively trying to pace out people using the game and have
pace out people using the game and have them coming back at certain times.
them coming back at certain times. Variable ratio is probably the most
Variable ratio is probably the most famous of these. It's used a lot in
famous of these. It's used a lot in gambling. It leads to reward chasing
gambling. It leads to reward chasing behavior and it is where there's a
behavior and it is where there's a variable number of responses until the
variable number of responses until the reward shows up. So it's not 10, it
reward shows up. So it's not 10, it might be 10 to 50, something within that
might be 10 to 50, something within that range. And loot drops like uh the loot
range. And loot drops like uh the loot crate system in Paragon are example of
crate system in Paragon are example of this and critical hits are an example of
this and critical hits are an example of this where you hit a certain amount of
this where you hit a certain amount of times and will do damage. And the
times and will do damage. And the response rate that that tends to get is
response rate that that tends to get is high and relatively steady.
high and relatively steady. The reason it's steady is because it's
The reason it's steady is because it's unsure when the next critical hit, say,
unsure when the next critical hit, say, will come along. You want to keep on
will come along. You want to keep on trying to maximize those critical hits.
trying to maximize those critical hits. There's no like I've already got it and
There's no like I've already got it and I know I have to work harder until the
I know I have to work harder until the next one comes at a certain set point.
next one comes at a certain set point. The last is variable interval or
The last is variable interval or event-seeking behavior. An example of
event-seeking behavior. An example of this uh I found is from Destiny with
this uh I found is from Destiny with their public events. These happen at
their public events. These happen at certain times, but around that certain
certain times, but around that certain time and may not happen every time. And
time and may not happen every time. And it generally encourages people to move
it generally encourages people to move into an area and hang around because
into an area and hang around because they don't know exactly when it's going
they don't know exactly when it's going to happen. And this kind of random world
to happen. And this kind of random world event is a little bit more if you want
event is a little bit more if you want to drive people to a zone and then have
to drive people to a zone and then have them wait around for things. It gets a
them wait around for things. It gets a pretty good rate of responding because
pretty good rate of responding because you're not sure when when the event's
you're not sure when when the event's going to occur and people will stick
going to occur and people will stick around. Now, of course, this this is
around. Now, of course, this this is just a diagram. I've copied off uh data
just a diagram. I've copied off uh data from textbooks. And in a real game, in a
from textbooks. And in a real game, in a lot of cases, you'll be mixing all these
lot of cases, you'll be mixing all these schedules together. They'll be running
schedules together. They'll be running over top of each other. But it's kind of
over top of each other. But it's kind of interesting to pull them out one by one
interesting to pull them out one by one like this and look at their kind of
like this and look at their kind of fundamental characteristics. So, moving
fundamental characteristics. So, moving on from those, we want to talk about
on from those, we want to talk about reward timing and uncertainty. Ideally,
reward timing and uncertainty. Ideally, reward should come immediately for
reward should come immediately for success uh mechanisms, progress
success uh mechanisms, progress mechanisms, and choice mechanisms. If I
mechanisms, and choice mechanisms. If I make a choice, if I'm succeeding or I'm
make a choice, if I'm succeeding or I'm progressing in your game, I should know
progressing in your game, I should know about it straight away and I should be
about it straight away and I should be rewarded straight away. Now, this ne
rewarded straight away. Now, this ne doesn't necessarily mean we can't have
doesn't necessarily mean we can't have long-term rewards that we're aiming for,
long-term rewards that we're aiming for, but people are generally not great at
but people are generally not great at long-term rewards. There's the famous
long-term rewards. There's the famous marshmallow test where you give a kid a
marshmallow test where you give a kid a marshmallow and say, "If you wait and
marshmallow and say, "If you wait and I'll come back in a few minutes, you can
I'll come back in a few minutes, you can have two marshmallows and you leave the
have two marshmallows and you leave the room and the kid just shoves the
room and the kid just shoves the marshmallow in their face." And as
marshmallow in their face." And as adults, we like to go, "Haha, children."
adults, we like to go, "Haha, children." But actually, we're all pretty bad at
But actually, we're all pretty bad at that. So, if you want people to work to
that. So, if you want people to work to a long-term goal, they need to know
a long-term goal, they need to know there's a long-term goal. And you give
there's a long-term goal. And you give short little feedback bursts on the way
short little feedback bursts on the way there. Progression bars or experience
there. Progression bars or experience bars are a classic example of this.
bars are a classic example of this. They're little bursts of feedback,
They're little bursts of feedback, little bursts of reward to let you know
little bursts of reward to let you know you're making progress towards a big
you're making progress towards a big thing.
thing. Now, I've been talking a lot about I
Now, I've been talking a lot about I just talked about things being immediate
just talked about things being immediate rewards. Of course, you can also have
rewards. Of course, you can also have unexpected rewards, and unexpected
unexpected rewards, and unexpected rewards can be very strongly motivating.
rewards can be very strongly motivating. So, an example of that would be in a
So, an example of that would be in a game like Portal 2. You unexpectedly
game like Portal 2. You unexpectedly work out a way to solve the solution. It
work out a way to solve the solution. It feels very satisfying. It's not
feels very satisfying. It's not something you necessarily saw coming,
something you necessarily saw coming, and it can feel good, right?
and it can feel good, right? Surprise puppy.
Surprise puppy. Um, but the problem with unexpected
Um, but the problem with unexpected rewards is if I in six slides time
rewards is if I in six slides time showed this puppy again, it probably
showed this puppy again, it probably would have less impact. And if I kept
would have less impact. And if I kept doing it, it would have even less
doing it, it would have even less impact. And even if I mixed up different
impact. And even if I mixed up different puppies, you might start to expect the
puppies, you might start to expect the unexpected. So unexpected rewards can be
unexpected. So unexpected rewards can be really valuable, but they're hard to
really valuable, but they're hard to pull off and they're hard to pull off
pull off and they're hard to pull off repeatedly.
repeatedly. The next thing I want to talk with
The next thing I want to talk with feedback is game feel. The way it feels
feedback is game feel. The way it feels to play your game. And I want to argue
to play your game. And I want to argue to go back to this idea of intrinsic
to go back to this idea of intrinsic motivation that this is the ultimate in
motivation that this is the ultimate in intrinsic motivation. A lot of uh
intrinsic motivation. A lot of uh companies when they talk about intrinsic
companies when they talk about intrinsic motivation will talk about a lot of goal
motivation will talk about a lot of goal structures and adding a bunch of stuff
structures and adding a bunch of stuff on top of the game. And that can work.
on top of the game. And that can work. But if you look at the games that are
But if you look at the games that are commonly cited, games like Destiny as
commonly cited, games like Destiny as having great intrinsic motivation,
having great intrinsic motivation, they're games that just feel satisfying
they're games that just feel satisfying to play. That the action of just moving
to play. That the action of just moving a controller or a mouse feels impactful
a controller or a mouse feels impactful and immersive. So, there's an example of
and immersive. So, there's an example of this from Gears of War, and it's the
this from Gears of War, and it's the active reload mechanic where it takes
active reload mechanic where it takes the simple action of just pressing a
the simple action of just pressing a button to reload and makes it into a
button to reload and makes it into a miniame. So,
miniame. So, Oh, yeah.
Oh, yeah. You got a nice little bit of feedback
You got a nice little bit of feedback there, a chance to succeed more or to
there, a chance to succeed more or to fail.
fail. Oh, yeah.
Oh, yeah. Of course, rhythm games like Thumper
Of course, rhythm games like Thumper heavily rely on having a good game feel
heavily rely on having a good game feel in order to succeed, cuz all you're
in order to succeed, cuz all you're doing in these games is pressing left,
doing in these games is pressing left, right, up, down, and buttons. in rhythm.
right, up, down, and buttons. in rhythm. It's not that complicated a thing to be
It's not that complicated a thing to be doing really, but by using the rhythmic
doing really, but by using the rhythmic design and the sounds and the ramping up
design and the sounds and the ramping up the difficulty, they can create a very
the difficulty, they can create a very compelling game feel.
compelling game feel. It feels satisfying. It feels like it
It feels satisfying. It feels like it builds it feels like you're doing an
builds it feels like you're doing an important thing.
I already mentioned uh Destiny, but Destiny, the developers at Bungie, work
Destiny, the developers at Bungie, work very hard on making the animations and
very hard on making the animations and everything like that feel just really
everything like that feel just really satisfying to reach out and every action
satisfying to reach out and every action in the game makes it feel like has
in the game makes it feel like has impact. Even though say this melee
impact. Even though say this melee attack, all you're really doing is
attack, all you're really doing is pressing a bumper on a controller, but
pressing a bumper on a controller, but it feels like you're really reaching out
it feels like you're really reaching out there and hitting your enemies.
there and hitting your enemies. And even a simple screen shake, even
And even a simple screen shake, even though it may not be to everyone's
though it may not be to everyone's tastes, makes this space marine in space
tastes, makes this space marine in space marine feel like he has weight. Even
marine feel like he has weight. Even though the all all that's happening is
though the all all that's happening is pushing forward on a stick, feels like
pushing forward on a stick, feels like he's physically in the world. This is
he's physically in the world. This is something we've done in Paragon with
something we've done in Paragon with several of our heroes. And I want to
several of our heroes. And I want to just give a brief example of that.
[Music] Okay, of course that's exaggerated for
Okay, of course that's exaggerated for the trailer, but Steel's this big
the trailer, but Steel's this big android, and you can feel the weight to
android, and you can feel the weight to his moves, the weight to simply moving
his moves, the weight to simply moving with him and simply pressing the button
with him and simply pressing the button makes it feel satisfying to play, even
makes it feel satisfying to play, even outside of the other structures of the
outside of the other structures of the game.
game. I had six slides, by the way. Um,
I had six slides, by the way. Um, all right, moving on. The next thing is
all right, moving on. The next thing is progression.
progression. Progression towards clear goals. This is
Progression towards clear goals. This is kind of pretty easy stuff. Progression
kind of pretty easy stuff. Progression towards clear goals, whether those are
towards clear goals, whether those are internally set or externally set by the
internally set or externally set by the game, is rewarding and of course relies
game, is rewarding and of course relies on feedback. I already mentioned having
on feedback. I already mentioned having to give progression feedback for
to give progression feedback for long-term goals. And typical examples of
long-term goals. And typical examples of this would be, this is from Paragon. We
this would be, this is from Paragon. We have a bunch of things, weekly quests,
have a bunch of things, weekly quests, uh your progression in game as you level
uh your progression in game as you level up and get new abilities in our mobile.
up and get new abilities in our mobile. Uh daily victory chests, living up your
Uh daily victory chests, living up your account progress. All of this is
account progress. All of this is progression and to show to players that
progression and to show to players that things are happening and that their
things are happening and that their actions are being rewarded.
actions are being rewarded. Progression is also commonly used uh in
Progression is also commonly used uh in tutorials or at least tutorials that do
tutorials or at least tutorials that do things well. Uh this is the tutorial
things well. Uh this is the tutorial from Unreal Tournament. It's clearly
from Unreal Tournament. It's clearly telling the player what to do to jump.
telling the player what to do to jump. It's showing a uh modeling character
It's showing a uh modeling character doing that action and the player cannot
doing that action and the player cannot progress out of that room without doing
progress out of that room without doing the action. They can't leave without
the action. They can't leave without jumping over that barrier. And once they
jumping over that barrier. And once they do, they have immediate feedback that it
do, they have immediate feedback that it was successful because they're out of
was successful because they're out of the area. The interesting thing about
the area. The interesting thing about the UT tutorial, which I think is a a
the UT tutorial, which I think is a a nice element to it, is it has optional
nice element to it, is it has optional skill tokens in it. Optional skill
skill tokens in it. Optional skill tokens are as the game teaches you,
tokens are as the game teaches you, there'll be skill tokens hidden around
there'll be skill tokens hidden around the tutorial that kind of build on what
the tutorial that kind of build on what you've already learned. So, if you've
you've already learned. So, if you've learned jumping and wall running, maybe
learned jumping and wall running, maybe in the next room, off in the corner,
in the next room, off in the corner, it's not required for you to do. There's
it's not required for you to do. There's a token spinning up there that requires
a token spinning up there that requires you to jump and wall run to get it. You
you to jump and wall run to get it. You don't have to do it, but it's a way for
don't have to do it, but it's a way for you to put together what you've
you to put together what you've previously learned and show your
previously learned and show your progression.
progression. So, this would be an example. Uh, this
So, this would be an example. Uh, this is probably the hardest one in the
is probably the hardest one in the tutorial. It's It's pretty difficult to
tutorial. It's It's pretty difficult to get. You can't jump over there. So, you
get. You can't jump over there. So, you need to scoop around
need to scoop around like slide up a wall, jump around, and
like slide up a wall, jump around, and then slide out to get it. It's pretty
then slide out to get it. It's pretty difficult, but it's a nice way to show
difficult, but it's a nice way to show players progress that's doesn't also
players progress that's doesn't also make them feel forced.
make them feel forced. Progression can also be shown via social
Progression can also be shown via social comparison. Um, this is the postgame
comparison. Um, this is the postgame screen that was added to Dota 2 a while
screen that was added to Dota 2 a while ago where it shows after the game is
ago where it shows after the game is over the progression of each player
over the progression of each player during the match. And it lets the
during the match. And it lets the players look and rank rank themselves
players look and rank rank themselves within this information and know how
within this information and know how well they did at at certain times over
well they did at at certain times over the match and hopefully learn from this
the match and hopefully learn from this or be rewarded by it. Now, comparison,
or be rewarded by it. Now, comparison, especially to other players, can open
especially to other players, can open the path to abuse. So, often making it
the path to abuse. So, often making it only available after a game where
only available after a game where players cannot interact with each other
players cannot interact with each other is a good idea. Hiding MMR is a good
is a good idea. Hiding MMR is a good idea so people don't uh attack each
idea so people don't uh attack each other for you're on my team and you've
other for you're on my team and you've got 200 less MMR than me. So I'm
got 200 less MMR than me. So I'm instantly going to think that you're
instantly going to think that you're worse off at playing the game because
worse off at playing the game because your matchmaking ranks lower. And making
your matchmaking ranks lower. And making stat tracking websites opt in. So if you
stat tracking websites opt in. So if you want to see how good I am at Dota by
want to see how good I am at Dota by looking on a stack tracking website, you
looking on a stack tracking website, you can't because I haven't opted in.
can't because I haven't opted in. And what's actually uh been happening
And what's actually uh been happening recently, it's interesting in games is
recently, it's interesting in games is the idea of comparison within yourself.
the idea of comparison within yourself. So, in uh Overwatch, for example, at the
So, in uh Overwatch, for example, at the end of the match, they don't compare you
end of the match, they don't compare you against the other players. They compare
against the other players. They compare you against your own progression over
you against your own progression over the game. So, even if you've lost the
the game. So, even if you've lost the game, maybe you've got better at
game, maybe you've got better at something. Maybe that was your best ever
something. Maybe that was your best ever game at healing or your third best ever
game at healing or your third best ever game at healing or whatever it might be.
game at healing or whatever it might be. It's some kind of reward that lets you
It's some kind of reward that lets you know that you're progressing yourself,
know that you're progressing yourself, but is not potentially a negative
but is not potentially a negative comparison against other people. And
comparison against other people. And Dota's similarly got this thing that
Dota's similarly got this thing that shows you your average for the hero over
shows you your average for the hero over over certain metrics.
over certain metrics. Okay, so that's feedback. A lot of this
Okay, so that's feedback. A lot of this other stuff is also feedback, but I'll
other stuff is also feedback, but I'll talk about it in a different way. Uh
talk about it in a different way. Uh control and choice is important. So what
control and choice is important. So what we're talking about here is feeling in
we're talking about here is feeling in control. We like to feel like we have
control. We like to feel like we have choice and control. And generally
choice and control. And generally speaking, we dislike feeling limited,
speaking, we dislike feeling limited, controlled or out of control.
controlled or out of control. And there is a slight difference between
And there is a slight difference between feeling controlled and feeling out of
feeling controlled and feeling out of control. I I hope that you can get even
control. I I hope that you can get even though they're kind of the same thing.
though they're kind of the same thing. There's an exception to this and that's
There's an exception to this and that's unless we choose to be controlled and
unless we choose to be controlled and limited. If we choose to cut off paths
limited. If we choose to cut off paths uh for ourselves that are presented to
uh for ourselves that are presented to us making interesting meaningful choices
us making interesting meaningful choices within the game, then that can make us
within the game, then that can make us feel in control as well. So the
feel in control as well. So the statement like people don't like feel
statement like people don't like feel controlled doesn't nec necessarily mean
controlled doesn't nec necessarily mean they don't like feeling limited. They
they don't like feeling limited. They just like feeling like they have choice
just like feeling like they have choice in those limitations.
in those limitations. So, this is often talked about around
So, this is often talked about around story. And there's different approaches
story. And there's different approaches that can be taken here. You can go crazy
that can be taken here. You can go crazy like The Witcher 2 where a whole act of
like The Witcher 2 where a whole act of content can be skipped based on a
content can be skipped based on a decision by a player. They completely
decision by a player. They completely miss a massive chunk of hours and hours
miss a massive chunk of hours and hours of content based on a choice. It makes
of content based on a choice. It makes choices feel very meaningful in the
choices feel very meaningful in the game.
game. You can also look at performative
You can also look at performative stories where there isn't actually much
stories where there isn't actually much formal story and there's not much choice
formal story and there's not much choice in a game like Journey except for the
in a game like Journey except for the way that you play out the game and the
way that you play out the game and the way that the story is created around
way that the story is created around your character.
your character. And then you can look at maybe more
And then you can look at maybe more traditional structures of story games
traditional structures of story games like the original Walking Dead where
like the original Walking Dead where they very successfully created a feeling
they very successfully created a feeling of choice. it was uh praised for its
of choice. it was uh praised for its feelings of choice. Even though if you
feelings of choice. Even though if you go back and play through the game and
go back and play through the game and make different decisions, you'll find
make different decisions, you'll find out that actually the choice doesn't
out that actually the choice doesn't strongly matter to how the game plays
strongly matter to how the game plays out. There'll be different people that
out. There'll be different people that fill in at different times for people
fill in at different times for people you let die or whatever might happen,
you let die or whatever might happen, but because it felt like you're making a
but because it felt like you're making a decision at the time, it feels
decision at the time, it feels important. And this can be contrasted
important. And this can be contrasted against Mass Effect 3, which came out
against Mass Effect 3, which came out the same year and used a similar
the same year and used a similar structure, but because players had
structure, but because players had expectations built up over two games
expectations built up over two games beforehand, and maybe they were more
beforehand, and maybe they were more likely to play through more often,
likely to play through more often, players would know, oh, it doesn't
players would know, oh, it doesn't really matter. This play, this character
really matter. This play, this character shows up here anyway. And some players
shows up here anyway. And some players were disappointed by that. Now, that's
were disappointed by that. Now, that's not to say that this was fundamentally
not to say that this was fundamentally wrong. It's just I'm trying to make a
wrong. It's just I'm trying to make a point about player expectation about
point about player expectation about control and how it can be good but can
control and how it can be good but can also backfire.
also backfire. It also interacts with activities and
It also interacts with activities and progression. So what I'm talking about
progression. So what I'm talking about here is uh examples like uh side
here is uh examples like uh side activities in open world games. If the
activities in open world games. If the site activities feel forced upon a
site activities feel forced upon a player or they feel like they have to do
player or they feel like they have to do them in order to progress or they're
them in order to progress or they're being bugged to do a side activity, they
being bugged to do a side activity, they may resist doing it. It may feel like
may resist doing it. It may feel like control. Escort quests can also be very
control. Escort quests can also be very controlling because they're essentially
controlling because they're essentially taking away success from the player and
taking away success from the player and putting at the hands of an NPC they have
putting at the hands of an NPC they have to look after that can get in trouble or
to look after that can get in trouble or die or break stealth. Modern uh escort
die or break stealth. Modern uh escort quest type games like Last of Us solve
quest type games like Last of Us solve this by making the person you're
this by making the person you're escorting not do these behaviors. So, uh
escorting not do these behaviors. So, uh they can't break your cover or they
they can't break your cover or they can't die. This, of course, is a
can't die. This, of course, is a trade-off for immersion, but it's a
trade-off for immersion, but it's a worthwhile one for the player not
worthwhile one for the player not feeling controlled and frustrated. And
feeling controlled and frustrated. And then the other one is, of course, grind.
then the other one is, of course, grind. If players don't feel like the
If players don't feel like the activities they're doing in a game have
activities they're doing in a game have meaning, are showing progression, and
meaning, are showing progression, and are meaningful to them, then they're
are meaningful to them, then they're more likely to view like having to make
more likely to view like having to make a lot of um daggers to level up in
a lot of um daggers to level up in Skyrim as a grinding activity.
Skyrim as a grinding activity. And in fact, this idea about control
And in fact, this idea about control being so important has come up in the
being so important has come up in the recent literature as a suggestion to
recent literature as a suggestion to replace intrinsic versus extrinsic and
replace intrinsic versus extrinsic and to talk about instead autonomous or
to talk about instead autonomous or controlled behavior. And internally
controlled behavior. And internally motivated behavior, if you feel
motivated behavior, if you feel obligated to yourself, can feel
obligated to yourself, can feel controlling and be demotivating, just
controlling and be demotivating, just like external behavior can feel
like external behavior can feel autonomous if there's a lot of choices
autonomous if there's a lot of choices set up for you. So this idea of control
set up for you. So this idea of control seems to be a core point where a lot of
seems to be a core point where a lot of theories are agreeing
theories are agreeing and I've been saying it's perception of
and I've been saying it's perception of control that matters and that is the
control that matters and that is the important point. You can give players an
important point. You can give players an illusion of control and get just as much
illusion of control and get just as much uh impact as real control. So games like
uh impact as real control. So games like Pegle where you fire into a random zone
Pegle where you fire into a random zone but because you pick where you fire and
but because you pick where you fire and you have a have a special skill can feel
you have a have a special skill can feel like you're more skilled than the game
like you're more skilled than the game is actually uh working on. And of course
is actually uh working on. And of course match three games can be masters of
match three games can be masters of this. You have no control over what's
this. You have no control over what's about to fall on the screen at all as a
about to fall on the screen at all as a player, but because of the way that the
player, but because of the way that the feedback is presented to you, it feels
feedback is presented to you, it feels like you made a really weighty important
like you made a really weighty important decision even though you just like
decision even though you just like matched one line.
matched one line. The last well, one of the last things
The last well, one of the last things about control is this interesting idea
about control is this interesting idea of counter control that uh came out of
of counter control that uh came out of behaviorism. It's been around for a
behaviorism. It's been around for a while and it's typically the idea that
while and it's typically the idea that when people feel controlled, we often
when people feel controlled, we often counter to this and this is often talked
counter to this and this is often talked about in a negative way. If people feel
about in a negative way. If people feel controlled in your game, they feel like
controlled in your game, they feel like it's grindy, they'll stop playing it.
it's grindy, they'll stop playing it. That's how they break the control of
That's how they break the control of your game. They're like, "Nope, stop.
your game. They're like, "Nope, stop. I'm out." However, it can actually be
I'm out." However, it can actually be used as a game mechanic because it feels
used as a game mechanic because it feels very rewarding to break control. So, a
very rewarding to break control. So, a classic example of this would be The
classic example of this would be The Stanley Parable, which is a game all
Stanley Parable, which is a game all about a narrator trying to control you
about a narrator trying to control you and your attempts to break that control,
and your attempts to break that control, and it feels very satisfying to do so,
and it feels very satisfying to do so, even though you ultimately fail. Um,
even though you ultimately fail. Um, so the last thing is control and
so the last thing is control and tutorials. Now, when a lot of people
tutorials. Now, when a lot of people hear this stuff about control and
hear this stuff about control and feeling uh controlled is negative, um,
feeling uh controlled is negative, um, they'll say, "Okay, we're not going to
they'll say, "Okay, we're not going to put tutorials in or we're going to do
put tutorials in or we're going to do tutorials that have no controlling
tutorials that have no controlling elements, no guidance in them because
elements, no guidance in them because it's better for people to learn things."
it's better for people to learn things." Now, that can work out, but the problem
Now, that can work out, but the problem is it's feeling in control and not
is it's feeling in control and not feeling out of control. And one of the
feeling out of control. And one of the really big ways to feel out of control
really big ways to feel out of control is to feel confused and unclear and not
is to feel confused and unclear and not know what the hell is going on. And so
know what the hell is going on. And so having a little bit of handholding, a
having a little bit of handholding, a little bit of guidance in tutorials, if
little bit of guidance in tutorials, if it lets your players get to the point
it lets your players get to the point where they can feel in control, like
where they can feel in control, like you're telling them what to do, and then
you're telling them what to do, and then suddenly they have control and they can
suddenly they have control and they can show that control, it can be worth it.
show that control, it can be worth it. So this idea of control doesn't
So this idea of control doesn't necessarily mean don't make tutorials.
necessarily mean don't make tutorials. And of course, that's one of the nice
And of course, that's one of the nice things about the optional skill tokens
things about the optional skill tokens in Unreal Tournament is that they're
in Unreal Tournament is that they're optional things players can do to show
optional things players can do to show that they've mastered uh the mechanics
that they've mastered uh the mechanics that you're teaching them.
that you're teaching them. Okay, last thing in control is
Okay, last thing in control is non-contingent rewards.
non-contingent rewards. These might be known as participation
These might be known as participation awards. Who thinks participation awards
awards. Who thinks participation awards are a dumb idea?
are a dumb idea? Well, not as many people as usual. um
Well, not as many people as usual. um participation awards kind of came out of
participation awards kind of came out of SDT and the intrinsic model theory
SDT and the intrinsic model theory and there's a reason for that and it's
and there's a reason for that and it's that uh participation rewards which are
that uh participation rewards which are rewards you get for just showing up are
rewards you get for just showing up are less likely to be be seen as controlling
less likely to be be seen as controlling which we've said is not good and more
which we've said is not good and more likely to be unexpected right because
likely to be unexpected right because you don't have to do anything to get
you don't have to do anything to get them they're not based on your
them they're not based on your performance of course because they're
performance of course because they're not based on your performance they're
not based on your performance they're not really giving you feedback on
not really giving you feedback on anything however there are multiple
anything however there are multiple occasions that they're used in video
occasions that they're used in video games. So, probably the one that the
games. So, probably the one that the people have the most negative
people have the most negative association with is rubber banding. This
association with is rubber banding. This was where mechanics in the game like in
was where mechanics in the game like in Mario Kart will help losers equalize
Mario Kart will help losers equalize with winners. And it's good for casual
with winners. And it's good for casual games cuz nobody wants to just be beaten
games cuz nobody wants to just be beaten over and over again if they're supposed
over and over again if they're supposed to be just having fun with their kids or
to be just having fun with their kids or family.
family. Another example from more hardcore games
Another example from more hardcore games is gold drips in MOBAs. As long as
is gold drips in MOBAs. As long as you're playing a game of a MOA, there's
you're playing a game of a MOA, there's just some constant resource coming to
just some constant resource coming to you, no matter how well you're doing
you, no matter how well you're doing that might let you buy that one item you
that might let you buy that one item you needed to win the team fight and come
needed to win the team fight and come back in a situation you are otherwise
back in a situation you are otherwise losing. A similar example in Titanfall 2
losing. A similar example in Titanfall 2 is the Titan drop uh progression which
is the Titan drop uh progression which like a gold drop in a MOA was just
like a gold drop in a MOA was just constantly coming in in Titanfall 2. So
constantly coming in in Titanfall 2. So even if you're getting beaten and not
even if you're getting beaten and not performing very well, you probably still
performing very well, you probably still got to use your Titan and experience
got to use your Titan and experience that part of the game and that get that
that part of the game and that get that reward during a match. So that's what
reward during a match. So that's what these non-contingent rewards can be
these non-contingent rewards can be quite useful for is this kind of balance
quite useful for is this kind of balance and making sure people experience more
and making sure people experience more of your game. You're a really wonderful
of your game. You're a really wonderful audience, by the way.
audience, by the way. Okay, so I'm not going to do a bunch of
Okay, so I'm not going to do a bunch of slides about this one. In fact, this is
slides about this one. In fact, this is the OD slide, but not getting a reward
the OD slide, but not getting a reward you expect can make a reward a penalty.
you expect can make a reward a penalty. So, this is the idea that if you build
So, this is the idea that if you build something up as really big and
something up as really big and important, like players go around and
important, like players go around and they pick pick up every single
they pick pick up every single consumable and collectible in your
consumable and collectible in your entire game and they get nothing for it.
entire game and they get nothing for it. This can feel like a a bad thing if they
This can feel like a a bad thing if they were expecting something to come out at
were expecting something to come out at the end.
the end. The next is that task inherent rewards
The next is that task inherent rewards motivate more than uh task irrelevant.
motivate more than uh task irrelevant. Or to put that more simply and basically
Or to put that more simply and basically rewards that are meaningful to a player
rewards that are meaningful to a player are more motivating.
are more motivating. A classic example of this would be uh
A classic example of this would be uh the agility orbs from the Xbox game
the agility orbs from the Xbox game Crackdown. These orbs you had to show
Crackdown. These orbs you had to show agility in order to get them. You had to
agility in order to get them. You had to climb up buildings, jump, and generally
climb up buildings, jump, and generally show that you had agility and power in
show that you had agility and power in your character. But by collecting them,
your character. But by collecting them, you also increased your agility. So they
you also increased your agility. So they had meaning in two ways to players. you
had meaning in two ways to players. you showed competence in this to get them
showed competence in this to get them and then you're rewarded by a be able to
and then you're rewarded by a be able to do more of this. You got the progression
do more of this. You got the progression of being able to do that.
of being able to do that. And one way you can do this in games is
And one way you can do this in games is to personalize if you can. If you have
to personalize if you can. If you have data on what people are already doing in
data on what people are already doing in your game, you can reward them in ways
your game, you can reward them in ways that you know uh will be rewarding to
that you know uh will be rewarding to them because it's the type of thing
them because it's the type of thing they're already interested in. But you
they're already interested in. But you don't have to go that far. All you
don't have to go that far. All you really have to do is show value. And
really have to do is show value. And when I was working as a consultant, this
when I was working as a consultant, this was often a problem we would see in uh
was often a problem we would see in uh mobile games that would come to us is in
mobile games that would come to us is in the tutorials, they would throw all
the tutorials, they would throw all their rewards at the players. They would
their rewards at the players. They would say, "Here's premium currency. Here's
say, "Here's premium currency. Here's this, skip this timer, all the things."
this, skip this timer, all the things." And it was like, "Here's all the
And it was like, "Here's all the things." But we're not telling you why
things." But we're not telling you why or what the meaning or what the value
or what the meaning or what the value is. We're going to get you to skip a
is. We're going to get you to skip a 30-second tutorial. What like why is
30-second tutorial. What like why is that important to somebody? And it
that important to somebody? And it doesn't it hurts people's learning and
doesn't it hurts people's learning and it hurts their valuation of the rewards
it hurts their valuation of the rewards if the reward is not meaningful.
if the reward is not meaningful. Okay, interacting with others positively
Okay, interacting with others positively is motivating. And when I say
is motivating. And when I say positively, it's positive for at least
positively, it's positive for at least one person in the equation. So if I beat
one person in the equation. So if I beat someone at a game, it may not be
someone at a game, it may not be positive from them, but it's positive
positive from them, but it's positive for me.
for me. So
So when you're interacting with others, you
when you're interacting with others, you can do performance comparison. You can
can do performance comparison. You can compare your performance against other
compare your performance against other people. And this is potentially
people. And this is potentially rewarding if it's in our favor. It's
rewarding if it's in our favor. It's also potentially u motivating if it
also potentially u motivating if it shows progress or changes expectations
shows progress or changes expectations positively. So even if it's not in our
positively. So even if it's not in our favor, but it shows we made progress or
favor, but it shows we made progress or it changes our expectations like we did
it changes our expectations like we did better than we thought we would. That
better than we thought we would. That can be good. But of course it can be
can be good. But of course it can be demotivating if it's against us or if it
demotivating if it's against us or if it changes our expectations negatively. Now
changes our expectations negatively. Now I'm going to example of this. It's not
I'm going to example of this. It's not necessarily a reward example,
but in Dodo they have these uh conduct summaries. They'll show you about your
summaries. They'll show you about your behavior in terms of how you've been
behavior in terms of how you've been reported by other players. Uh this is a
reported by other players. Uh this is a report of an of a negative player.
report of an of a negative player. They've got six reports and they're
They've got six reports and they're being told that 94% of the population
being told that 94% of the population their report rate is higher than 94% of
their report rate is higher than 94% of the population. So the idea is you're
the population. So the idea is you're supposed to go, "Oh, oh no. I'm a I must
supposed to go, "Oh, oh no. I'm a I must be a really bad person and it's not
be a really bad person and it's not normal to do this and I'm supposed to
normal to do this and I'm supposed to change my behavior."
change my behavior." Now, this is a conduct summary of a nice
Now, this is a conduct summary of a nice person.
person. It's me. um who's got less than three
It's me. um who's got less than three reports when this popped up and they're
reports when this popped up and they're being told that only 77% of players have
being told that only 77% of players have uh three reports. Well, 77% of players
uh three reports. Well, 77% of players have less than three reports. But you
have less than three reports. But you might view that as okay, that's good,
might view that as okay, that's good, but it could also be telling you that
but it could also be telling you that like 20 over 20% of people have more
like 20 over 20% of people have more than three reports. Maybe I don't need
than three reports. Maybe I don't need to be so nice. Um, and certainly in
to be so nice. Um, and certainly in research where they've shown people in
research where they've shown people in neighborhoods energy use where you get
neighborhoods energy use where you get to see, hey, your neighbors using more
to see, hey, your neighbors using more energy than you are, but
energy than you are, but congratulations, you don't use much
congratulations, you don't use much energy. The people that are being told
energy. The people that are being told they don't use much start using more cuz
they don't use much start using more cuz they're like, well, everyone else is
they're like, well, everyone else is doing it. So, you got to be careful when
doing it. So, you got to be careful when presenting this information.
presenting this information. Now, competition is a social interaction
Now, competition is a social interaction that comes naturally to game designers.
that comes naturally to game designers. I think quite often we we think about it
I think quite often we we think about it uh nearly straight away and it's a
uh nearly straight away and it's a strongly motivating force especially if
strongly motivating force especially if you think you can win. Okay. And it does
you think you can win. Okay. And it does have a potentially slight demotivational
have a potentially slight demotivational event immediately after winning. And
event immediately after winning. And that's often because uh competitions are
that's often because uh competitions are often in a fixed ratio or fixed
often in a fixed ratio or fixed interval. They only run at set times or
interval. They only run at set times or only for a set period. And so after
only for a set period. And so after you've won often people kind of take a
you've won often people kind of take a breath and then start competing again.
breath and then start competing again. It's just something to be aware of um to
It's just something to be aware of um to keep people motivated between events of
keep people motivated between events of winning.
winning. Of course, the downside of competition
Of course, the downside of competition is it can demotivate those who think
is it can demotivate those who think they can't win or know they can't win.
they can't win or know they can't win. So, in a mobile game, if you load in and
So, in a mobile game, if you load in and it tells you you're 31st thousandth in
it tells you you're 31st thousandth in the world at this game when you first
the world at this game when you first started playing it, that might be really
started playing it, that might be really demotivating to you, unless of course
demotivating to you, unless of course you make a lot of progression quickly.
you make a lot of progression quickly. So, one way to get around that is to put
So, one way to get around that is to put people in local leagues where they can
people in local leagues where they can actually see uh progression. It's also
actually see uh progression. It's also I'm being hard on competition here maybe
I'm being hard on competition here maybe and it's because I think as game
and it's because I think as game developers we often don't think about
developers we often don't think about the losers in our games and how we can
the losers in our games and how we can make losing a pleasant experience. An
make losing a pleasant experience. An experience that we can let people learn
experience that we can let people learn from and come back from and feel like
from and come back from and feel like they can stay engaged with our game and
they can stay engaged with our game and don't just go well this is over. I'm
don't just go well this is over. I'm going to stop playing.
going to stop playing. Cooperation on the other hand compared
Cooperation on the other hand compared to uh competition is a very powerfully
to uh competition is a very powerfully motivating uh factor for a lot of people
motivating uh factor for a lot of people and this because it allows everyone to
and this because it allows everyone to contribute to it. Nearly every top game
contribute to it. Nearly every top game you can think of nowadays has some kind
you can think of nowadays has some kind of cooperation element in it.
of cooperation element in it. Cooperation uh according to
Cooperation uh according to psychological research motivates people
psychological research motivates people a lot more than competition which has
a lot more than competition which has been shown to competition has been shown
been shown to competition has been shown to do things like suppress creativity,
to do things like suppress creativity, cause conflict, all these kind of
cause conflict, all these kind of things. And it does allow for
things. And it does allow for cooperative competition where guilds can
cooperative competition where guilds can compete against each other. And this
compete against each other. And this gets you kind of the best of both
gets you kind of the best of both worlds. You've got the competition
worlds. You've got the competition stuff, but you've also got the
stuff, but you've also got the cooperation between people. Allows for
cooperation between people. Allows for replicity, which I can never say, but
replicity, which I can never say, but it's basically the idea that people feel
it's basically the idea that people feel like, oh, someone's being nice to me, so
like, oh, someone's being nice to me, so I'll be nice to them. A monetization
I'll be nice to them. A monetization example of this is in uh Game of War
example of this is in uh Game of War Fire Rage, which is anyone in your guild
Fire Rage, which is anyone in your guild spends in the game, it benefits everyone
spends in the game, it benefits everyone in the guild. So this is a monetization
in the guild. So this is a monetization application of it in that by uh spending
application of it in that by uh spending within this game it benefits everybody
within this game it benefits everybody and that's one of the things I want to
and that's one of the things I want to talk about here with that's kind of the
talk about here with that's kind of the idea of positive externalities which is
idea of positive externalities which is a uh economics term that is by spending
a uh economics term that is by spending in an economy I don't just benefit
in an economy I don't just benefit myself I benefit everyone else around me
myself I benefit everyone else around me and this can be a very powerful
and this can be a very powerful motivating force because while it's not
motivating force because while it's not a selfish competitive force it says by
a selfish competitive force it says by me contributing to this game, I'm part
me contributing to this game, I'm part of something bigger. I'm helping other
of something bigger. I'm helping other people. I'm helping friends. And also,
people. I'm helping friends. And also, if I've already spent as much as I want
if I've already spent as much as I want to help myself, I can continue to spend
to help myself, I can continue to spend uh to help other people and feel like a
uh to help other people and feel like a good person. There's an example of this
good person. There's an example of this in uh Paragon. And this is our master
in uh Paragon. And this is our master challenge system where by buying into
challenge system where by buying into these master challenges, you get an
these master challenges, you get an experience boost that goes up the more
experience boost that goes up the more you play. And the more people that have
you play. And the more people that have these experience boosts on your side
these experience boosts on your side when you're playing, the faster
when you're playing, the faster everyone's experience goes outside of
everyone's experience goes outside of the game. So the idea is by purchasing
the game. So the idea is by purchasing this, you're not just helping yourself,
this, you're not just helping yourself, you're helping others.
you're helping others. All right, so last one on this uh big
All right, so last one on this uh big long lists, and that's that rewards can
long lists, and that's that rewards can in certain situations uh be
in certain situations uh be demotivating. I've already tried to call
demotivating. I've already tried to call this out where it comes up in terms of
this out where it comes up in terms of if they felt to be too controlling or
if they felt to be too controlling or they're against expectations, things
they're against expectations, things like that. Now before I finish up I do
like that. Now before I finish up I do want to just briefly talk about some
want to just briefly talk about some cognitive biases and only a couple of
cognitive biases and only a couple of them um that I feel can be important
them um that I feel can be important when it comes to reward. One of them is
when it comes to reward. One of them is the representativeness horistic and this
the representativeness horistic and this is the idea that the more time cost
is the idea that the more time cost effort you put into an activity there's
effort you put into an activity there's a basic expectation that you get more
a basic expectation that you get more reward from it. So, imagine you're a
reward from it. So, imagine you're a relatively tough fighter in an RPG game
relatively tough fighter in an RPG game and you encounter an unconscious goblin
and you encounter an unconscious goblin and you knock it out and kill it,
and you knock it out and kill it, you probably don't expect to get much
you probably don't expect to get much reward from that. You haven't put much
reward from that. You haven't put much effort in. You haven't done very much.
effort in. You haven't done very much. But if you fight something like this,
But if you fight something like this, you probably expect to get a lot more
you probably expect to get a lot more from beating it. And this is somewhat
from beating it. And this is somewhat common sense, but it can be a problem
common sense, but it can be a problem for games that have a lot of randomness
for games that have a lot of randomness or procedural generation in them. I've
or procedural generation in them. I've played quite a few rogue likes where
played quite a few rogue likes where I'll go through a room that was really,
I'll go through a room that was really, really difficult because of the
really difficult because of the configuration of monsters in there or
configuration of monsters in there or the way that it was laid out. And then
the way that it was laid out. And then the room on the other side is just an
the room on the other side is just an empty hallway with nothing in it. And
empty hallway with nothing in it. And that feels against expectations, against
that feels against expectations, against this horistic that if I've put effort
this horistic that if I've put effort in, I expect that effort to be rewarded.
in, I expect that effort to be rewarded. So this can be taken uh into account
So this can be taken uh into account with the reward systems also being tied
with the reward systems also being tied to the uh randomization or the
to the uh randomization or the proceduralization that comes out at the
proceduralization that comes out at the end. If it's uh over a certain amount of
end. If it's uh over a certain amount of difficulty, then there should be more
difficulty, then there should be more reward for doing it.
reward for doing it. This can also apply to monetiz
This can also apply to monetiz monetization. If people spend more in
monetization. If people spend more in your game, they of course to get expect
your game, they of course to get expect to get more from it. So, you need to
to get more from it. So, you need to make sure your economy is balanced to
make sure your economy is balanced to support the people who spend more in
support the people who spend more in your game or at least they feel like
your game or at least they feel like they're getting more value. And in fact,
they're getting more value. And in fact, some games uh so it's important to go
some games uh so it's important to go back to this idea of feedback and making
back to this idea of feedback and making sure that everything's very clear and
sure that everything's very clear and the value of buying things is very clear
the value of buying things is very clear and the value of the things you can
and the value of the things you can purchase with money is really clear even
purchase with money is really clear even before you make the purchase. But some
before you make the purchase. But some games will also once you make a certain
games will also once you make a certain level of purchase, they'll without
level of purchase, they'll without telling you modify the odds of certain
telling you modify the odds of certain good things happening for a little while
good things happening for a little while afterwards. So the game suddenly is more
afterwards. So the game suddenly is more in your favor after you've spent perhaps
in your favor after you've spent perhaps a dark pattern.
a dark pattern. Another thing with uh this is after a
Another thing with uh this is after a string of bad luck, we expect a payout.
string of bad luck, we expect a payout. This is what keeps people gambling. but
This is what keeps people gambling. but it can be something that we can use in
it can be something that we can use in games to reinforce this expectation and
games to reinforce this expectation and make people feel like your game is
make people feel like your game is fairer and more in line with what they
fairer and more in line with what they want. So, an example of this from
want. So, an example of this from Destiny would be the vanguard bonus. In
Destiny would be the vanguard bonus. In Destiny, when you run strikes, you get
Destiny, when you run strikes, you get loot, uh, random loot based on how you
loot, uh, random loot based on how you play through the strike. It just pops
play through the strike. It just pops up. And the more strikes you run in a
up. And the more strikes you run in a row, the higher your Vanguard bonus
row, the higher your Vanguard bonus gets, which increases your chance to get
gets, which increases your chance to get better stuff, which meets this
better stuff, which meets this expectation of the more effort I put in,
expectation of the more effort I put in, the more I get out. Another example of
the more I get out. Another example of this is non-replacing randomness and
this is non-replacing randomness and variable loot rewards, like a loot
variable loot rewards, like a loot crate. Once you've got something out,
crate. Once you've got something out, once it's out, and that increases the
once it's out, and that increases the odds of you getting things that you
odds of you getting things that you actually want out of it, and that feels
actually want out of it, and that feels better to players. It's more in line
better to players. It's more in line with what they expect for their
with what they expect for their increased effort and increased spend.
increased effort and increased spend. You also need to make sure you set
You also need to make sure you set expectations. This is another Destiny
expectations. This is another Destiny example. When Destiny launched, they had
example. When Destiny launched, they had the Ingram system. Uh the Ingram system
the Ingram system. Uh the Ingram system shows you is kind of random loot you
shows you is kind of random loot you pick up in the world. And when it
pick up in the world. And when it launched, the color of the Ingram was
launched, the color of the Ingram was the highest possible reward you could
the highest possible reward you could get out of the Ingram, which set the
get out of the Ingram, which set the expectation. If I see this, it's got to
expectation. If I see this, it's got to be an exotic, which is really cool. But
be an exotic, which is really cool. But you could hand it into the Krypark and
you could hand it into the Krypark and you get a common item out of it. And
you get a common item out of it. And people didn't like that very much
people didn't like that very much because it was against what they felt
because it was against what they felt was being represented to them. So in my
was being represented to them. So in my understanding, what Bungie did is they
understanding, what Bungie did is they didn't change the drop tables. They
didn't change the drop tables. They didn't change the loot or the underlying
didn't change the loot or the underlying math of this. All they did is color the
math of this. All they did is color the Ingrams at the lowest possible thing you
Ingrams at the lowest possible thing you can get out. So now you saw a blue
can get out. So now you saw a blue Ingram. You knew you were going to get
Ingram. You knew you were going to get at least a blue item out of it, but
at least a blue item out of it, but maybe you got a surprise and got an
maybe you got a surprise and got an exotic. So, it's important to be aware
exotic. So, it's important to be aware of what expectations you're setting up
of what expectations you're setting up for your players with the reward
for your players with the reward systems.
systems. The final bias I want to talk about is
The final bias I want to talk about is the idea of loss aversion. This is
the idea of loss aversion. This is simply state that players will often
simply state that players will often work harder to keep something they have
work harder to keep something they have than to get something they could gain.
than to get something they could gain. So maybe a complicated example of this
So maybe a complicated example of this could be if you're designing a mobile
could be if you're designing a mobile and you want people to attack towers,
and you want people to attack towers, you want to encourage them to stop
you want to encourage them to stop playing defensive and get out there and
playing defensive and get out there and attack. One thing you could consider
attack. One thing you could consider doing is lowering the hit points of of
doing is lowering the hit points of of enemy towers, making them easier to take
enemy towers, making them easier to take down and attack. You can achieve your
down and attack. You can achieve your attack more easily. And that might work.
attack more easily. And that might work. Uh or what might happen is defend people
Uh or what might happen is defend people might work that out and they might start
might work that out and they might start playing even more defensive because
playing even more defensive because people view that tower as something that
people view that tower as something that they own and they control. And even
they own and they control. And even though now it's easier to go out and
though now it's easier to go out and gain, it's also easier to lose. And
gain, it's also easier to lose. And people will often work harder to keep
people will often work harder to keep something they have. Other examples from
something they have. Other examples from games will be continuous login bonuses
games will be continuous login bonuses where if you don't log in uh every day
where if you don't log in uh every day you lose progression. Of course, that
you lose progression. Of course, that can be a very negative thing if you
can be a very negative thing if you actually hit that not logging in on the
actually hit that not logging in on the day. So sometimes you can buy that
day. So sometimes you can buy that progression back or sometimes games
progression back or sometimes games don't use a continuous login bonus. You
don't use a continuous login bonus. You just get a increasing bonus every time
just get a increasing bonus every time you open it rather than it being
you open it rather than it being continuous. Consumables and durability.
continuous. Consumables and durability. People often hoard things like potions
People often hoard things like potions and consumables because of this reason.
and consumables because of this reason. We don't like spending something that's
We don't like spending something that's going to go away. So you need to make
going to go away. So you need to make sure that the base rate and the drop
sure that the base rate and the drop rate of these things is good enough that
rate of these things is good enough that maybe people will use it or you really
maybe people will use it or you really demonstrate the value of doing so. And
demonstrate the value of doing so. And pay to continue is a classic example of
pay to continue is a classic example of this. You're paying to keep the
this. You're paying to keep the progression that you have.
progression that you have. All right. So I just want to summarize
All right. So I just want to summarize the points I've gone over today. It's
the points I've gone over today. It's not everything about reward, but it's
not everything about reward, but it's what I feel uh there's a lot of
what I feel uh there's a lot of agreement in the literature.
agreement in the literature. First of all, what I talked about with
First of all, what I talked about with dopamine at the start,
dopamine at the start, I really hope that you can be skeptical
I really hope that you can be skeptical of any simple expectations, whether they
of any simple expectations, whether they be neuro or not. Shots of dopamine are
be neuro or not. Shots of dopamine are not needed. There's practical answers
not needed. There's practical answers out there if you look for them already.
out there if you look for them already. They don't have to be the newest and
They don't have to be the newest and hottest things. There's a whole load of
hottest things. There's a whole load of research and there's more that you can
research and there's more that you can find to go over what I've gone over
find to go over what I've gone over today. Rewarders feedback. Please do
today. Rewarders feedback. Please do provide feedback on rewards as close to
provide feedback on rewards as close to the behaviors you want to reward as
the behaviors you want to reward as possible. Uh this for long-term rewards
possible. Uh this for long-term rewards this can be progression towards them.
this can be progression towards them. Mix certain guaranteed rewards with
Mix certain guaranteed rewards with rewards that feel more random and
rewards that feel more random and unexpected to get different types of
unexpected to get different types of behaviors. They get different kind of
behaviors. They get different kind of response rates.
response rates. Control and value. Help players feel in
Control and value. Help players feel in control. This does not mean not guiding
control. This does not mean not guiding them or teaching them, but help them be
them or teaching them, but help them be able to access your game and get at the
able to access your game and get at the rewards and not feel controlled by those
rewards and not feel controlled by those rewards and show the value of the
rewards and show the value of the rewards and behavior, which can often be
rewards and behavior, which can often be a good way to reduce control.
a good way to reduce control. When we talk about social rewards,
When we talk about social rewards, comparison, competition, and and uh
comparison, competition, and and uh cooperation can motivate, but they do
cooperation can motivate, but they do come with risks. really try and think
come with risks. really try and think about the players in your games that are
about the players in your games that are losing out on your competitions or not
losing out on your competitions or not coming in first place or consistently
coming in first place or consistently not showing any performance uh
not showing any performance uh increases. By giving these players some
increases. By giving these players some way to stay motivated, some way to still
way to stay motivated, some way to still feel in control, to feel like they can
feel in control, to feel like they can progress, you can keep them in your game
progress, you can keep them in your game and keep them retained. Social pressure
and keep them retained. Social pressure in cooperation to do things like give
in cooperation to do things like give gifts to other players or or work
gifts to other players or or work together. It can be good, but it if it's
together. It can be good, but it if it's presented wrong, it can also feel like
presented wrong, it can also feel like control, which may cause people to
control, which may cause people to abandon it.
abandon it. And you should set and meet player
And you should set and meet player expectations. Try and understand what
expectations. Try and understand what these expectations that you're setting
these expectations that you're setting up, maybe unintentionally, and at least
up, maybe unintentionally, and at least meet them, if not exceed them. And
meet them, if not exceed them. And preventing loss can motivate more than
preventing loss can motivate more than working for gain.
working for gain. Okay, thank you very much. And any
Okay, thank you very much. And any questions?
If you have questions, please come up to the mic
the mic and you can contact me at these uh
and you can contact me at these uh addresses down here.
addresses down here. Hi, thanks so much for the talk. Um, so
Hi, thanks so much for the talk. Um, so in a lot of especially casual and mobile
in a lot of especially casual and mobile games, there seems to be an order of how
games, there seems to be an order of how these things are unrolled. like early on
these things are unrolled. like early on there's more simple rewards and like a
there's more simple rewards and like a variable schedule and then only later do
variable schedule and then only later do you get things like social rewards. Is
you get things like social rewards. Is that is there actually like a hierarchy
that is there actually like a hierarchy or is that just kind of convention? Do
or is that just kind of convention? Do you think these kind of roll into each
you think these kind of roll into each other?
other? I think there's a there's a hierarchy in
I think there's a there's a hierarchy in terms of the cost to the developers in
terms of the cost to the developers in some ways. You don't want people getting
some ways. You don't want people getting into social too early in some cases
into social too early in some cases because that might be more load for you.
because that might be more load for you. You want to make sure that they're
You want to make sure that they're engaged with your game first. And a good
engaged with your game first. And a good way to that is to show the value and
way to that is to show the value and roll out these more simple rewards early
roll out these more simple rewards early on and show them kind of the fundamental
on and show them kind of the fundamental nature of your game and why they might
nature of your game and why they might want to have this value of working with
want to have this value of working with others, right? Rather than just forcing
others, right? Rather than just forcing working with others on them before they
working with others on them before they understand what what the potential of
understand what what the potential of doing that is. I think that could be
doing that is. I think that could be what some developers are thinking.
what some developers are thinking. There's not really a formal um hierarchy
There's not really a formal um hierarchy to it, but I think it could be around
to it, but I think it could be around this, you know, get people into the
this, you know, get people into the game, show them the value, and make sure
game, show them the value, and make sure that they uh engage with these later
that they uh engage with these later systems that might be a bit more uh ask
systems that might be a bit more uh ask a bit more more of them in terms of how
a bit more more of them in terms of how much they time they're giving up or how
much they time they're giving up or how much effort they have to put in.
much effort they have to put in. Yeah. Thank you.
Yeah. Thank you. Thank you. That was very interesting
Thank you. That was very interesting talk.
talk. Thank you. So many of the free-to-play
Thank you. So many of the free-to-play games uh rely on boosters and powerups
games uh rely on boosters and powerups to win levels. I wonder if you have any
to win levels. I wonder if you have any insights on when using these boosters
insights on when using these boosters and powerups to have less or more
and powerups to have less or more reward.
reward. Mhm. Yeah. So, I think um one
Mhm. Yeah. So, I think um one interesting trend I've seen in in
interesting trend I've seen in in freetoplay mobile games that use
freetoplay mobile games that use boosters and rewards, which are
boosters and rewards, which are consumables, which people can be kind of
consumables, which people can be kind of adverse to using,
adverse to using, is to instead of having them as things
is to instead of having them as things you collect and then they go away, they
you collect and then they go away, they have them the last one of them goes on a
have them the last one of them goes on a timer. So, it's not gone. You've you've
timer. So, it's not gone. You've you've used it, but it's going to come back in
used it, but it's going to come back in a certain amount of time. And by having
a certain amount of time. And by having it on a timer, which means it's not a
it on a timer, which means it's not a permanent loss, that can help people be
permanent loss, that can help people be more motivated to try them out, see the
more motivated to try them out, see the value of them, and keep using them a
value of them, and keep using them a little bit more than perhaps they would.
little bit more than perhaps they would. But I've also I've experienced doing UX
But I've also I've experienced doing UX tests on mobile games that people don't
tests on mobile games that people don't like consumables very much. And this is
like consumables very much. And this is one way to overcome it.
one way to overcome it. Yeah. Thank you.
Yeah. Thank you. Hi.
Hi. Hi. Um, as somebody else who plays Dota
Hi. Um, as somebody else who plays Dota 2, I love Dota, but um, for people my
2, I love Dota, but um, for people my age, it's kind of this learning curve is
age, it's kind of this learning curve is so steep. So like I was wondering um,
so steep. So like I was wondering um, there aren't the rewards for Dota
there aren't the rewards for Dota consistent. So do you think for like new
consistent. So do you think for like new players if they offered I don't know
players if they offered I don't know more rewards or like different rewards,
more rewards or like different rewards, do you think that would help bring more
do you think that would help bring more players to Dota too? So, I think the
players to Dota too? So, I think the thing with um Dota and other mobers is
thing with um Dota and other mobers is the thing about while they have this
the thing about while they have this really complicated learning curve to
really complicated learning curve to become good at them, they're actually
become good at them, they're actually not that complicated to throw yourself
not that complicated to throw yourself into. And and compared to an RTS where
into. And and compared to an RTS where you had to control a lot of units and
you had to control a lot of units and all this economy, all you're doing is
all this economy, all you're doing is you're controlling this one unit and
you're controlling this one unit and clicking on things. And you can kind of
clicking on things. And you can kind of do that pretty fast. And each game of a
do that pretty fast. And each game of a moa is this nice progression loop where
moa is this nice progression loop where it's a even playing ground and you're
it's a even playing ground and you're cooperating with a bunch of people in a
cooperating with a bunch of people in a competition. So it has a lot of these
competition. So it has a lot of these other elements. And I think those are
other elements. And I think those are what's the really rewarding things about
what's the really rewarding things about mobs and made them so uh popular even
mobs and made them so uh popular even without the need for a bunch of external
without the need for a bunch of external rewards or extra things on top of it.
rewards or extra things on top of it. Thanks.
You had a question. And if you have a collectible game where uh people are
collectible game where uh people are opening booster packs to to get rewarded
opening booster packs to to get rewarded a lot of the times, uh I've noticed that
a lot of the times, uh I've noticed that sometimes opening the 50th booster pack,
sometimes opening the 50th booster pack, it's not quite as fun as the first one.
it's not quite as fun as the first one. So a question for you would be, do you
So a question for you would be, do you uh have any strategies or
uh have any strategies or recommendations for exploring rewarding
recommendations for exploring rewarding players uh whether in booster packs or
players uh whether in booster packs or related to booster packs uh that could
related to booster packs uh that could continue to be motivating even during
continue to be motivating even during demonetization?
demonetization? Right. So, I would say the way to
Right. So, I would say the way to address that is to to maybe talk to
address that is to to maybe talk to players and work out why it's maybe not
players and work out why it's maybe not so motivating. And it could be just
so motivating. And it could be just there's no value in it anymore. Like,
there's no value in it anymore. Like, I've got all the things I need or I've
I've got all the things I need or I've realized that the things I actually want
realized that the things I actually want have so little value uh or so little
have so little value uh or so little chance of coming out that it's not worth
chance of coming out that it's not worth me trying. And if those cases, you maybe
me trying. And if those cases, you maybe you can play with the underlying rates.
you can play with the underlying rates. Once people open a certain amount, then
Once people open a certain amount, then you make certain things more likely.
you make certain things more likely. There's adding new content. Um, but ways
There's adding new content. Um, but ways to demonstrate that value to the players
to demonstrate that value to the players is important to keep them engaged, I
is important to keep them engaged, I feel.
feel. Awesome. Thank you.
Awesome. Thank you. Hi.
Hi. Um, so using Overwatch as a case
Um, so using Overwatch as a case example, when it was in beta, one of the
example, when it was in beta, one of the complaints I heard from people I was
complaints I heard from people I was playing with was that there was no
playing with was that there was no metagame progression,
metagame progression, which is something they did add when the
which is something they did add when the game launched.
game launched. Do you think that's something that is
Do you think that's something that is necessary to keep people interested or
necessary to keep people interested or is that like an easy way out?
is that like an easy way out? Uh,
I don't know. Certainly progression is is important and um, if people were
is important and um, if people were feeling like there was no metag game
feeling like there was no metag game progression and that's the feedback that
progression and that's the feedback that was coming in and that's what they're
was coming in and that's what they're getting, then I would understand doing
getting, then I would understand doing it. It's not something you necessarily
it. It's not something you necessarily need. If your core game is compelling
need. If your core game is compelling enough, but uh, it can certainly add on,
enough, but uh, it can certainly add on, but I'm not familiar enough with that
but I'm not familiar enough with that case, unfortunately.
case, unfortunately. Thank you.
Hi. Um, yeah, when you talk about setting up uh player expectations and
setting up uh player expectations and making sure that you're meeting them,
making sure that you're meeting them, what do you think is the right balance
what do you think is the right balance between having a cadence that's so
between having a cadence that's so expected that your players sort of maybe
expected that your players sort of maybe like save all their money to only
like save all their money to only purchase on sale days and now they're so
purchase on sale days and now they're so trained that you can't really break them
trained that you can't really break them of it. So, what do you think is the
of it. So, what do you think is the right balance of having those
right balance of having those expectations but still wanting them to
expectations but still wanting them to have that intuitiveness about purchasing
have that intuitiveness about purchasing and using and if you see them coming
and using and if you see them coming down this path that you don't really
down this path that you don't really want them to be on where they're so
want them to be on where they're so trained, how do you break that without
trained, how do you break that without making them feel cheated?
making them feel cheated? Right? So, that's going to be different
Right? So, that's going to be different on a on a case- by case basis. Um, but
on a on a case- by case basis. Um, but generally speaking, you can try and cut
generally speaking, you can try and cut off that by mixing different kind of
off that by mixing different kind of schedules. So it's not always like
schedules. So it's not always like what's important is that players
what's important is that players expectations are met and they feel like
expectations are met and they feel like there are certain rewards coming but you
there are certain rewards coming but you can still use randomness or still use
can still use randomness or still use variable schedule so they don't know
variable schedule so they don't know exactly when it comes so it's not
exactly when it comes so it's not completely predictable. It's just be
completely predictable. It's just be aware that if you have built a
aware that if you have built a expectation and don't deliver on it,
expectation and don't deliver on it, that can be a problem. But certainly
that can be a problem. But certainly what you're saying where um because
what you're saying where um because players have built such a strong habit,
players have built such a strong habit, maybe all the funds gone out of it can
maybe all the funds gone out of it can certainly be a problem. And I would say
certainly be a problem. And I would say just mix up mix it up to to get around
just mix up mix it up to to get around that.
that. Okay. Do you know any examples of games
Okay. Do you know any examples of games that you see that's done this
that you see that's done this successfully? Like in some of our games,
successfully? Like in some of our games, we have like a daily login reward and we
we have like a daily login reward and we might have changed that to be like a
might have changed that to be like a collect wheel. So the expected value is
collect wheel. So the expected value is lower, but maybe we think like they
lower, but maybe we think like they won't notice that or something. Um, but
won't notice that or something. Um, but then the players who are the core
then the players who are the core players like they do notice based on the
players like they do notice based on the feel. So do you have any stories of
feel. So do you have any stories of So I think that's an interesting
So I think that's an interesting trade-off because it's hard when you're
trade-off because it's hard when you're designing a game because you're
designing a game because you're designing for most players who will be
designing for most players who will be satisficers. They don't really
satisficers. They don't really understand the core base levels of of
understand the core base levels of of all the probabilities. they don't really
all the probabilities. they don't really care. They just want to play a game and
care. They just want to play a game and that kind of thing will work for them.
that kind of thing will work for them. But your really hardcore players are
But your really hardcore players are optimizers. They look up the tables and
optimizers. They look up the tables and they work out the odds and and
they work out the odds and and everything like that. And certainly the
everything like that. And certainly the idea of adding a random uh reward as a
idea of adding a random uh reward as a daily is a on a a base level kind of a
daily is a on a a base level kind of a good one because it's moving to this
good one because it's moving to this more variable schedule. Um but I don't
more variable schedule. Um but I don't know off the top of my head an example
know off the top of my head an example of a game that's got over that. I would
of a game that's got over that. I would just say uh
just say uh you need to think about when you are
you need to think about when you are designing your rewards that somebody's
designing your rewards that somebody's going to work out the base rates for it
going to work out the base rates for it and how upset are you going to be when
and how upset are you going to be when they do that. Do you feel it will
they do that. Do you feel it will demotivate them if they know the base
demotivate them if they know the base rates and if the answer to that is yes
rates and if the answer to that is yes then maybe you need to reconsider your
then maybe you need to reconsider your base rates or you need to say they're
base rates or you need to say they're going to be such a small amount of the
going to be such a small amount of the population we don't care if they get
population we don't care if they get demotivated it'll be a trade-off there.
demotivated it'll be a trade-off there. Okay. All right. Okay.
Okay. All right. Okay. Hi.
Hi. Hi.
Hi. Do you have any particular framework you
Do you have any particular framework you kind of use when you're designing
kind of use when you're designing rewards or do you kind of just because
rewards or do you kind of just because you're a PhD you know everything like
you're a PhD you know everything like what used to help you when you're coming
what used to help you when you're coming up with
up with I mean
basically the the list I had is where I feel like the research uh comes
feel like the research uh comes together. It's like
together. It's like try and think about all these things
try and think about all these things when you're designing your reward system
when you're designing your reward system and and think about how you're hitting
and and think about how you're hitting the different parts of them and is there
the different parts of them and is there a good clarity and all that kind of
a good clarity and all that kind of thing.
thing. Fair enough. Thank you.
So, you gave some cool examples and some counter examples. I'm wondering in your
counter examples. I'm wondering in your opinion, what's the biggest sin? Like
opinion, what's the biggest sin? Like where has the dopamine naive theory or
where has the dopamine naive theory or naive like incorrect model been
naive like incorrect model been misapplied
misapplied uh widely in gaming? Like if you could
uh widely in gaming? Like if you could wave your wand and fix
wave your wand and fix For me personally, and I don't know if
For me personally, and I don't know if this is the biggest problem, I think
this is the biggest problem, I think it's that point of Okay, thank you. of
it's that point of Okay, thank you. of um a lot of game developers don't think
um a lot of game developers don't think of losers. And if you're uh competition
of losers. And if you're uh competition is fair, usually that means people are
is fair, usually that means people are losing 50% of the time in your game. And
losing 50% of the time in your game. And there's often we like to think about
there's often we like to think about winners because we like to think of
winners because we like to think of ourselves as winners. And winning is
ourselves as winners. And winning is already rewarding in itself, but we also
already rewarding in itself, but we also like to throw a bunch of rewards and
like to throw a bunch of rewards and celebrations and everything on top of
celebrations and everything on top of it. And often our losing screens are
it. And often our losing screens are kind of like heart you lost and then
kind of like heart you lost and then that's it. And we don't allow for our
that's it. And we don't allow for our players to still feel engaged with our
players to still feel engaged with our games at that point. So I I think that
games at that point. So I I think that that is something at least on my
that is something at least on my personal level I think that could be
personal level I think that could be improved.
improved. Thank you.
Thank you. Okay.
Okay. All right. I think that's it. Thank you
All right. I think that's it. Thank you very much.