Owen Mahoney who used to run Nexon has recently started a blog and he did a
recently started a blog and he did a post where he talks about it's actually
post where he talks about it's actually not one games industry there's four
not one games industry there's four think of as a 2x two grid you've got
think of as a 2x two grid you've got single player casual you've got single
single player casual you've got single player four you have mobile and casual
player four you have mobile and casual live and then cing live so when you're
live and then cing live so when you're talking about mobile versus you know
talking about mobile versus you know core gamer like PC console you really
core gamer like PC console you really are essentially talking about two
are essentially talking about two different industries you know succeeding
different industries you know succeeding on a core gamer game for PC and console
on a core gamer game for PC and console gamers these days. Sure, there is
gamers these days. Sure, there is advertising of course and yes, there's,
advertising of course and yes, there's, you know, there's awareness and yes,
you know, there's awareness and yes, there's branding, but it's also so much
there's branding, but it's also so much more word of mouth and influencer
more word of mouth and influencer driven, you know, whether it's Tik Tok,
driven, you know, whether it's Tik Tok, whether it's YouTube, whether it's
whether it's YouTube, whether it's Twitch, you know, there's a lot more
Twitch, you know, there's a lot more word of mouth than the core audience.
word of mouth than the core audience. But if you look down in the the other
But if you look down in the the other corner where you're talking about mobile
corner where you're talking about mobile and casual, you know, these businesses
and casual, you know, these businesses are so driven by how cheaply they can
are so driven by how cheaply they can acquire users and how much lifetime
acquire users and how much lifetime value they can extract from each of
value they can extract from each of them. It's a math business. the the the
them. It's a math business. the the the ones that tend to top the charts. There
ones that tend to top the charts. There is generally some type of gotcha or some
is generally some type of gotcha or some type of pulse mechanic where you know
type of pulse mechanic where you know you want the latest greatest hero. You
you want the latest greatest hero. You need to go spend a 100 tokens, spend a
need to go spend a 100 tokens, spend a 100 tokens, and you're getting a random
100 tokens, and you're getting a random shot at do you get the thing or not? And
shot at do you get the thing or not? And then when you finally get the thing, oh,
then when you finally get the thing, oh, it's only about an eighth as strong as
it's only about an eighth as strong as it could be. I need to repeat that seven
it could be. I need to repeat that seven more times to try to get that hero to
more times to try to get that hero to feed it into the other hero. Right? If
feed it into the other hero. Right? If you did that on a PC uh core gamer game,
you did that on a PC uh core gamer game, you would be run out of town. When you
you would be run out of town. When you look at who's succeeding in core game or
look at who's succeeding in core game or PC and console, you have this, it's
PC and console, you have this, it's almost 180 degrees different from that.
almost 180 degrees different from that. They are selling cosmetics. And
They are selling cosmetics. And meanwhile, any randomness that they
meanwhile, any randomness that they include tends to be in the gameplay
include tends to be in the gameplay itself. And so those two approaches are
itself. And so those two approaches are really really different ways of not just
really really different ways of not just thinking about your game but also how
thinking about your game but also how your company is built.