Uh And today I'm going to speak about urban planning in games.
But before uh a few words about myself,
um it's two years that I've been working at City Project
Grab
and uh 10 years that I'm in Game Dev uh in general w work mostly on environments.
Uh Also, I have a master's degree in urban planning,
although I never work as architect or urban planning planner.
However,
I keep study uh urban planning because it's my
biggest hobby and I'm really into this topic.
So
why do we need urban planning,
first of all? Because urban setting is very common for many games, it can be real.
Uh It can be real city or fictional one like sci fi fantasy, futuristic, whatever.
Still it's an urban environment
and we have to know how to work with it.
What's more urban setting is common, not only for, you know,
big open world projects,
but also for smaller games with maybe like linear gameplay.
Um Still, uh if we have to create,
let's say just one or a few streets instead of uh entire city,
uh We still have to understand what is the street
and what kind of elements
uh make your street actually recognized as a street.
And it's not the trivial question.
Um When we uh cr creating mm
urban environment for games, we're not necessarily have to create it realistic.
The goal is to make it believable.
I really like to compare uh urban planning
for games with uh anatomy for game characters
because
uh when we creating a character, well not we but character artist,
uh they not necessarily follow real human proportions,
but they still have to understand human anatomy.
Uh you know, to follow certain rules and then like sometimes they simplify some,
sometimes they exaggerate, maybe add some additional parts like, I don't know,
horns, wings, whatever.
So the same works with the city,
we have to understand urban environment
and then adjust it to our specific needs.
And of course,
we cannot just simply copy paste real city from Google
maps even in cases when we actually uh you know,
creating like real existing city because real proportions for
cities will not work for for our needs.
Simple example.
Um if we have uh a grocery store, let's say 15 minutes away, walk from our home,
we would consider it a super close and super convenient.
And of course, it would be nice to have this, this short walk to the grocery store.
But
in game, if we have to go
uh you know, for 15 minutes just walking, we would consider this as super boring.
So yeah, it will not work.
Um
Yeah,
and we have to remember that real cities were made for
comfortable living and game cities should be made for fun playing.
And those are completely different tasks.
And I will start with how not to do
because it's very common mistake for uh many artists and designers is that they
perceive a city as a bunch of buildings randomly scattered on the surface.
And at first glance, it might seem like that, but of course, it is not.
Um And I will show my idea on this really simple scheme.
And uh if you look at this,
uh you may notice that actually those two silhouettes uh city one and C two,
they are almost identical.
It's really hard to, you know, to see any difference there.
But
one of those uh is actually a city and
another one is a bunch of randomly scattered buildings.
And in the second,
actually, right now, you understand what I mean?
So I guess now you got my idea.
Uh So first one, the city one is actually a city.
I mean, of course, it's very simplified one,
but we immediately read the structure because we saw it like many times.
Um And when it comes to CT two, the second example,
it's chaos.
And I mean, of course, we can probably make a ni a nice composition out of the cubes,
but we still lack of structure and city, it's always a structure.
But let's see on th
let's have a look at those two examples
from the, you know, street view. So this is how we perceive cities as us as person
uh and uh as a player in uh fir 1st and 3rd
person view games.
Um So if we look at uh first example, the city one
again, uh obviously, we have like lack of details,
but even now we more or less understand that this is a street with buildings.
And I would like to highlight it. We have zero information about this city.
But we understand a lot about the, the space
and I say a lot because I literally put 10 cubes and the order is a street.
And when it comes to second example,
um it's really hard to say what's that like,
it's definitely not a street because uh street supposed
to have certain direction and there is none.
Um maybe it's something like a backyard,
but I would say it's too complicated for backyard.
And it's really hard to imagine the shape
of city block that would create this backyard.
So long story short, it's really hard to, to recognize the space.
It's really hard to say, what's that?
And here is the main idea,
we probably can imitate the city without using urban planning.
I mean, you know, if we put all those cubes in nice composition, like, you know,
level design also could be quite playable.
Uh But
uh if we use urban planning from the very beginning,
if we perceive the city as a structure,
we would just, you know, simplify our lives.
Because as you can see, if we use urban planning,
we can create a distinctive and recognizable space
from the very first step of production.
So
to understand how to make a city first, we should know what the city is made of.
But before short, disc climber,
uh I have to say that uh there are two generally like two types of
urban planning.
Uh It's a city block type uh and uh super block type of
urban planning.
So city block is a dense row of buildings along the street.
We can meet this type like uh everywhere around the world, like in Europe America.
Basically, it's,
I guess it's any city that was built before 20th century
like San Francisco is a great example of such urban planning
and uh super block type. It's uh separately standing buildings
uh usually uh around some infrastructure unit and surrounded by big roads.
And also there can be a lot of like trees and stuff like that.
So this type of urban planning was invented by
uh modernist or brutalist uh architects
uh in the first part of 20th century and it was really popular after a second war.
And also we can meet this type of urban
planning everywhere around the world like Europe America, Asia Africa,
I believe everywhere.
But in my talk, uh I will focus only on city block type of food on planning beca Well,
because I like it
because I believe that it's much better for human perception,
although we can discuss it because, you know, it's my topic.
So
if you have other thoughts, just, you know, reach me out.
Uh but still uh what uh will be said in this talk
uh will can be easily extrapolate to super block type of r
planning is if this is something that you are interested in.
Yeah. So now let's go to the main part.
Uh There are three basic types of city space, it's street
square
and backyard.
Uh in real cities, there can be more types but those three takes,
take uh the biggest surface
and the present like in every city.
Uh There are other examples of uh city space like uh for example,
parks or any type of uh green areas.
Um Also markets, maybe parking uh construction site, you know, list is endless,
you name it.
Um
And uh those ex example,
uh those different types of uh city space can be present in your, in,
in the game city optionally,
but those three will be there for sure.
So just to rephrase this three, these three types are the core of the city,
but not the ultimate list of city space.
And here is an example from, from real life.
Um Like,
I mean, I don't think that uh I should comment a lot about this.
So I guess you understand.
So street and of course,
uh shape of those uh of those space can be different because for example,
here we have straight street, but of course,
street can be also like curved or just angled
uh square also can be uh in the middle of intersection like this example.
But also it can be just, you know, uh a side um on the side of certain street,
the same goes for backyards,
they can be bigger or smaller like different shapes.
Um But still,
and here's the main idea
if we imagine that we were teleported into
random city that we have never been before.
So we have no idea where we are.
We would immediately recognize the space around us.
So if we are in the street, we would understand that, OK, it's a street.
If we are in the middle of the square,
it also would be absolutely clear for us that yeah, it's a square,
the same goes for backyard and there is no
uh there is no chance that we would confuse, I don't know,
backyard to the street or square with, with street or backyard whatever.
So it's, it's quite
uh it's quite, it's quite clear for us.
And I believe that in games it should work the same.
So if uh the player was spawn randomly somewhere in our city,
they should immediately immediately understand where they are
just like that.
And here is examples from Night City. So this is the street. And
again, not, not much to add here.
It's quite clear because we have, we have direction, we have road,
we have sidewalks, we have,
uh, uh, buildings on the left and right. So this is a street,
this is an example of square, uh, pretty much the main one, Coral Plaza.
And again, it's quite readable as a square. Like we have no doubt what, what's that?
Um, and the backyard
And also, as you can see, um Well,
I believe that it's really hard to confuse this three types of space.
They are very distinctive and
uh I guess you would never confuse this backyard with uh with the square, right?
So now uh when we know uh the main uh components of city, once again, it's streets,
squares and backyards.
Uh let's discuss how to actually make a city.
And there are three basic parameters of the city,
its size
proportions
and level of detail.
And I won't surprise you if I say that
these three parameters are very much connected with gameplay,
obviously, because we create in a city for game and not just abstract city.
And to be more precise, these parameters are connected with type of movement
and particularly with speed of movement. And now I will talk about this
more detailed.
So first one is size,
uh size is the simplest parameter. So it's uh literally
square meters or square kilometers or
square feet, I guess like it's popular here. Right.
Um uh So, yeah. Mm
Also, at this stage,
we should think about um about uh borders of our city and the shape of the city
because maybe our city uh is located on
the shoreline or maybe it's surrounded by mountains,
maybe it's in the valley, maybe it's, I don't know, like peninsula or
something like that. So at this stage, we should kind of think about it.
Uh
And uh of course it is connected on gameplay and like I said,
speed of movement because if uh
in our city, we're mostly driving a car which means that our speed is quite big.
Uh So apparently we would need bigger city than
if we're creating a city for mostly walking.
Uh
Example, if we uh making a city, let's say,
I don't know one kilometer above by one kilometer, this like area,
probably not entire city
for driving. It would be super small.
Uh because it would take us like how, how much like five seconds to,
to reach from one side to another.
And uh if we are walking area, uh one kilometer above one kilometer,
it's quite OK for walking and we can spend quite a lot of time, you know,
exploring this area.
So this is about size and of course, this parameter would change during production.
But uh
it's really important to come up with like, you know, basic numbers.
So we just need to understand whether we're creating
five by 55 kilometers or 50 by 50.
So, you know, on this scale, it's not something that you're, you know,
set in stone right away.
And the next parameter is proportions
and this is about lengths and widths of streets,
sizes of city blocks also size of streets.
Yeah, I said that
um
mm and, and all the stuff which is like, you know, inside the city
and it also depends on type of movement because again, if we move fast,
uh then apparently we would need uh longer streets
because uh it would be uncomfortable if we have to make a turn each like, I don't know,
five seconds.
And um
mm
if we, if we mostly walking,
then we can make it uh uh like proportions could be smaller
uh and it would be still, you know, comfortable
and proportions most likely will be different in different
type uh in different parts of the city.
But again, at this stage, we're coming up with some, you know, global idea.
So uh like, we just need to understand
uh whether we're creating something big,
like uh a huge city with like mega buildings, skyscrapers like, I don't know,
broad avenues and that kind of stuff or we're creating small uh I don't know,
medieval town with uh narrow co curved streets and you know,
tiny gingerbread houses.
So again, on this scale, we should decide it
at this stage
and final level of detail.
Also de de depends on gameplay.
Uh because if our game is about slow movement and exploration,
most likely we should put like more details and they should look kinda unique.
Um
And if we move fast, uh then there is no need uh in smallest details.
Uh And we should focus more on um medium and big shapes.
And in night city, we actually have different examples because for example,
on top shot,
mm we have this area where we
only driving because it's hard to imagine why would player just go out and,
and walk there because there is nothing to do, nothing to explore.
Um So here it was important to focus more on bigger shapes,
to create like nice composition,
uh player guidance, et cetera,
uh and bottom image.
Uh it's uh from Dock Town and in dot Town, we actually walk a lot,
we still can drive there, but we're also walking.
And um that's why
uh it was uh
like it was reasonable to create more details, uh You know, to make this area
um interesting for exploration.
So I'm just trying to say that
it doesn't work like as more detail you have as better.
No, the amount of detail should be reasonable
and to summarize this part.
Um
I would just say that
uh
the main thing that affects the street parameters once again,
size proportions and level of detail.
Uh It's gameplay and particular speed of movement.
Uh If we move mostly by car,
we should have long enough streets and quite big
city and maybe not huge amount of details.
And then if we move, move on foot,
uh the city might be smaller and let's say
more compact and with bigger amount of details.
So after we decided how big our city should be,
what proportions we need there and amount of details we aiming for,
uh we should think about visual diversity of the city.
Uh Because every city doesn't look
the same, they there are always like different parts
uh which look different.
Mm The the best example like uh usually we have city center which look often
like fancy or not necessary actually and
and and outskirts suburbs which look differently.
And uh speaking of these areas, I usually use term neighborhoods
and by neighborhood,
I mean city area that shares um same appearance
atmosphere and other features which I will talk about,
and night city is actually a good uh good example, of course,
because we have a lot of different neighborhoods there.
And if you play it, I guess you would never confuse, for example,
Kabuki and Charter Hill, they look completely different.
So to create this uh to create this visual difference,
we have three foundations how to, how it is is it built
first, its layout,
architecture
and landmarks. And now I will talk about all of this free uh things.
So first one is layout
uh and yeah, to create a diverse environment,
we should start with a different layout for each neighborhood.
Mm First of all, let's think about proportions. Yes, we
already
spoke about proportions for entire city.
But like I said,
it was like bigger scale and now let's focus on proportions for each neighborhood
um
in the
because yeah, like I said, cities never built evenly the same. Right.
And uh we still can have uh
mm we, we still can have neighborhoods with
broad broad streets, skyscrapers,
uh et cetera. And of course, we can have uh areas with uh
mm smaller streets, smaller buildings, maybe even slums
and example from,
from night city. So on top, on top shot, we have Rancho Coronado
uh which is, which has this, you know,
small uh one story buildings and city center with this huge uh megabus
and um uh
when it comes to planning features.
So again, looking at this uh this slide,
we can immediately see that uh on top shot in Rancho
Corona,
uh
it's like um flat, quite spacious environment
and uh bottom image, we can see that it's very
uh I don't know, packed with everything.
It's multi layered because we have different levels of streets and sidewalks.
So this is about planning features
and when it uh uh and about patterns, let's have a look on next slides.
So I just create this uh really fast uh schemes.
And again,
I going back to this part when I created
a distinctive and readable environments using just cubes.
Um So
uh
when I was creating this, I was thinking about, you know,
average European city with like
middle size, I would say everything like streets,
buildings and this is how player feel um inside the space.
And here we have a pretty much similar pattern but different size
and impression that we have here is well, I guess quite different
because uh all space uh space is uh much smaller and once again. So this is how we feel
there
and in a smaller uh smaller area.
And the third example, which looks completely different.
So here we have different size, different pattern
and the feeling that we have when we walk there,
it's also like completely different.
So this is something like, I don't know,
um like maybe like townhouses or something like that.
I think quite common pattern for America.
So that was about layout. And now architecture
um So uh we should define architectural features for each neighborhood
and we can start with architectural styles because I don't know,
I guess it's the simplest
uh in that city,
we have uh four main styles and not
only for architectural but pretty much for everything.
It's uh militarism KNK and enthropy.
And here on the slide, you can see
uh city center which was built uh in this uh militarism style
and bottom image uh which is uh built in entropy.
The next one is colors
so each neighborhood can have its own color coding
Mm And uh this top example is from uh Japantown and it's very colorful, very ky
and the bottom image it's more like business district so it's gray
uh like colors are quite calm
and it creates this uh visual difference. Of course.
Mm The next one is hate so we can have um
neighborhoods with uh
high rise buildings and some 123 story buildings
also age
in n city. Of course, we don't have really ancient buildings.
Uh But still there is a difference in age because uh we can have something
uh older.
I don't know,
I would say maybe like nineties to thousands
and uh like really brand new futuristic uh
buildings. Yeah.
Um Also richness. So again, we have rich districts and we have super poor districts
also condition. Uh
We have diff districts with uh which uh
in very uh in very good condition like uh this Charter Hill on the top uh image
uh and something that is in very bad condition like dot Town.
So this is like half destroyed
uh dirty et cetera. So this list is actually can be endless. Like I just give
like a few examples and it's not on uh not even all examples from light city,
but just something that, you know, just give uh
give an idea about that because
uh for your project, maybe some of those examples would be irrelevant
and maybe you would need to come up with something else.
But again, it's just an example.
And the third thing, it's landmarks because besides uh regular buildings,
we should have, uh we should think about landmarks.
Um And ideally for each neighborhood, of course, we should have its own landmark.
And this landmark would become something like a symbol of this neighborhood.
And landmarks should look unique in comparison to other buildings.
But also at the same time, they kind of should belong to this neighborhood.
So when we are there and when we see this landmark,
we should kind of understand why it is it there, uh what's this function?
And you know,
mm Like why it's there basically.
Mm And of course, landmarks should be visible
otherwise it makes no sense.
And uh I would like to extend this topic about
landmark a little bit more because it's really important thing.
Um
uh So, uh besides local landmarks that I just mentioned for each neighborhood, uh
we also should think about uh main landmark for the city.
It can be one la landmark or several of them depends.
So,
uh it's something that would become a symbol of our city and in real life,
like think about
Elf
Eiffel Tower uh in Paris or Golden Gate in San Francisco.
So basically something that you can see on the postcard or you know,
this uh fridge magnet.
And in that city,
uh we have uh this uh
uh advertising race.
Uh they are big,
they are very noticeable and we can see them pretty much everywhere uh in the city.
But also when you working on landmarks, it's very important to think about
uh to make them visually appealing, both from distance and from a close up.
And uh uh
this is example again from, from Night City and about this uh this advertising race
because like I said,
uh we see them and they are very appealing.
And for example, this shot was taken like really far away from the tray.
And like we wanna go there, we wanna see like how, how, how,
how does it look because it's really catchy.
But when we reach this place,
we actually see that it has no bottom.
Like it's really even hard to understand that we
already reached this place that we are already there
because because this ray it goes from the roof of the
building and there is nothing really distinctive in the bottom.
The same, the same works sometimes with some uh megabus.
Uh So those mega buildings, they work as local landmarks
and they also very visible from different points
of view and they are very eye catching.
But when we come closer,
uh it's again,
sometimes really hard to understand that we're already there.
And this shot uh was taken directly um directly under this uh this uh mega building.
So really there is no signs that we already there,
but lesson was learned.
And uh uh when uh landmarks for dot Town were created
um they were created in, in in the way that it's like appealing, uh visual,
appealing balls from distance and from close up.
So this example is this uh black
sapphire club which is really visible from big distance.
And
when we come closer,
there is no chance that we would miss it because uh it's
yeah, it looks uh really unique
and visually interesting from the close distance.
The same goes for stadium.
It's also really noticeable from distance,
especially when we are approaching uh dock
and when they come closer,
uh we can see it in all this uh beauty and glory
uh because yeah, like uh from close up, it also works great.
OK.
So we decided what is the size of our city?
Um And uh what is proportions,
we also know uh how many neighbor neighborhoods we wanna have and uh what,
what kind of features which are those neighborhoods.
And also we have a list of landmarks for our city.
So finally, it's time to actually make a city
and of course,
like any other design of pretty much everything we should start with references.
It's uh much easier if you're creating real existing city because of course,
you can use a lot from, you know, real life
uh uh maps and examples.
Uh But, and yeah, it's a bit harder if you create a fictional city, but still,
I would recommend to stick to existing
um you know, existing layouts, existing
uh examples from, from real cities. And
I made this uh fast exercise.
Uh So I took this place from Vienna because uh well, those, those shots are from,
from Google Maps, but still I was there in this uh place
and I felt that it's really nice, like this small square, this irregular,
irregular shape.
Uh It looks really, it was really comfortable to, to stay, to,
to be there like I like the composition.
So I took this
and use used our um
uh our, our cyberpunk buildings
and as you can see,
it's really hard to recognize Vienna or any European city on the shot.
So it looks pretty much like, like cyberpunk.
Um
So my idea here is that you still can use
uh existing layouts like some parts of the city.
Uh even at first glance, even if they look irrelevant at first glance,
like they still could work if, if uh composition is, is nice.
And if you feel that
it looks interesting
also when you're creating a city, think about alternation of uh
uh narrow and small spaces and some open areas.
Hm. Here at this example, uh I made a square. It's right now. So yeah,
so the guy runs and then suddenly he uh come to some square
and uh it makes this kind of difference,
but also it's not necessary it can be a square like any, any type of,
of open open space.
Like it can be maybe, I don't know destroyed building, I don't know, parking, river,
whatever.
Um Also
in your city, there might be large streets and when you're
in large streets,
they should never end up with some dead ends.
And by dead end, I also mean,
not only like literally dead end but also like t intersection.
Um It will not work.
Mm
Like in real cities, usually bigger streets
never just end up.
They usually merged with other big streets and go just outside the city.
But if you need to, to uh break uh the big street,
uh just use a square.
So you have street,
then it ends up with a square and then it can be divided by
smaller streets and those smaller streets already
can be interrupted by just dead ends.
And also I took this example from just random European cities. So sometimes it
occurs in the real world as well.
Speaking of large streets,
um
think about main street in your city,
in smaller cities, it can be maybe one or two main streets in bigger city,
there can be more.
So this is something like arter
uh in your cities
uh which connects different parts of the city, different neighborhoods.
Uh
And uh it's really good to have some because uh it creates
like uh well, first of all,
it's something that would really simplify the navigation in
your city because once player reach the street,
they would more or less understand where they are and where to go
pretty much the same as in the real world because when you are in bigger street,
usually you kind of feel comfortable if you have to find a way.
Uh, one more thing about landmarks.
So when you draw in streets, uh try to orient them towards landmarks.
Bigger street can go towards main and bigger landmarks,
smaller street can go towards smaller landmarks.
Uh In, uh, in this, in this case, you would,
um you would first uh create better navigation in
your city because when you have landmark something unique.
So it's uh uh it's
um something that you would remember,
something that you would immediately recognize.
And like I said, it's easy to, to navigate.
And also it would give uh more,
it would give more uh visi visibility for your landmarks.
Also think about visual diversity of streets because I,
we already spoke about visual diversity of neighborhoods,
but also different streets in one neighborhood also could be different.
And uh uh this example is from again, Night city, just random streets,
uh two streets in um in city center.
So
the left one
looks quite rich and fancy with all those neon lights and everything.
And the, the right one looks quite gloomy and basically the place when you easily can
be stopped.
So, but the thing is that like they are, they, they both are in the same neighborhood,
they're built with uh more or less same architecture,
but they have completely different mood
and the same, the same works with real city.
Uh This examples was taken from again, Google Maps. Uh It's
pins
and here you can see uh on, on the left example, it's quite a big street with, again,
with different buildings.
Uh And uh the right example,
it's there like it's, it's like uh behind the corner.
So again, it's the same neighborhood, the same architecture, the same,
I don't know property value
but atmosphere and vibes of those streets, they are completely different.
And why is that so?
Well, first of all, because of size, uh I mean the the width of the street.
So of course, when you have narrow, elevate, it feels different
and uh also function because on this um
left street, uh we can see different uh buildings.
I don't know exactly what's that?
But I think it's something like a shop, this yellow building might be a B
or something like that also like office buildings.
And this uh example on right shop,
it's mostly residential areas and also just
kinda back facades of buildings and only this
uh plus uh widths of the street creates this uh difference.
Also, remember about elevation.
Uh hills and
Descents can create very interesting composition and open, unexpected vistas.
Mm
And uh one more example from Night City, from Kabuki basically.
Um If we, if you look,
if we look on top of this neighborhood, we can see
uh like streets and city blocks. Quite
um quite clear, quite simple, I would say. But
uh this, this neighborhood was built on
hills and when we walk there,
mm
we can uh we have like uh a lot of this nice openings to entire city.
Again, we can see this uh landmark from this area.
So and we have it because because we have this uh hills and essence,
this is how it works.
Also be careful with completely straight streets.
Mm Besides that straight street can have
uh often feels like monotonous in terms of movement,
but also
it might bring some problems in future uh when it comes to you know, optimization.
Because if we if you look at this left example,
you you can see the super long streets with a lot of buildings and of course,
now it's only a cube.
So you know, it's not a lot of things there. But if we imagine
that this is already uh like final shot like final cities.
So we have all these buildings with some details.
Also we have probably street traffic, we have N PC. So a lot of details
and it would be quite hard to, you know, to optimize this.
And if we look at
uh right example.
So I made this uh small angle and I cut the
street like I don't know three or four times already.
So we have much less details there.
Well, I mean, of course, if we, if we,
if we should if we have to create a city with completely straight streets,
for example, like most of American cities, they are, they have straight streets.
Uh It would be trickier
but still, it's possible to, you know, to work with it.
And again, another great example from dot town.
So here we had this uh monumental venue that goes almost straight.
And actually when you walk there or drive there,
you feel it as a straight street,
but it has this slight angle, like really almost not noticeable.
But this angle already helped us to cut the view like almost twice.
And uh yeah, when, when, when it was time to actually optimize this area,
we were quite thankful for this uh for this uh small angle
and another one point about uh straight and court
street and you might think that I am ambassador,
of course streets and yes, I am, I love course streets.
So on the left example,
uh player moves very like monotonously evenly straight like, you know,
just along the straight line.
And I would say it's boring.
And again, for this type of movement because apparently if um
if player move by car or just, you know, 10 times faster,
it would be OK to have the straight chunk.
But particularly for this spirit of movement,
it feels really boring and uh you know, very monotonous.
And uh on the right example, player has to make a turn every
some, every few seconds. I don't know,
and it also creates this difference because uh once we make a turn,
we have completely different view and it also creates this kind of diversity.
So mm let's summarize.
So city is a structure and rules and
not just buildings randomly scattered on the surface.
There are three basic types of urban space,
it's street
square
and backyard.
There are three basic parameters of the city,
its size,
proportions
and level of detail.
And there are three foundations of visual diversity,
its layout,
architecture, and landmarks.
So, urban planning for city uh
in for cities and games is the same as anatomy for characters.
It's a base and powerful tool that helps
to create great and high quality urban environments.
Thank you.
Um And also,
yeah, so also I have this uh small advertising shot.
So this is another talks from uh from my awesome colleagues.
Please please join them.
I mean some of them al already was uh
were yesterday but still there are plenty of those.
Um Yeah. And also I have this uh corporate shot
this one.
So if you want to work with us, uh we have like new office in Boston.
So scan the code and uh yeah, we're hiring.
Um
Thank you.
It was quite fast. So I guess we have uh quite some time for questions.
So you are welcome.
Hi. I was wondering um how do you balance
environments that are more enjoyable to traverse with like
walking versus a car,
do you balance it strictly off of how much access the player will have to the car?
Like, you know,
uh if there's a point in the game where they actually gain access to
that is that when you would introduce environments that are more car friendly?
Um Just how would you balance those two modes of movement?
That's great question. And I think it should be addressed to the game designers.
No, honestly, like, uh I don't think that it's me who actually made this decision.
Uh I would say that well, I mean, uh w when, when I work in cities, I,
I kind of make some assumptions
but I don't know, pretty much.
I then it would be different because it's not me who, who make this decision.
So, you know,
thank you.
Hi. I was wondering um
you talked about different neighborhoods having different visual identities.
I was wondering about how the intersections of those neighborhoods work,
like how they blend into one another so you can move from one to the other seamlessly.
That's a great question. Thank you.
Uh So, uh actually, it depends and basically we can,
we can uh go like in two directions
uh or we can make this uh intersect.
Well, not,
I guess not intersection but border between those neighborhoods very contrast.
So uh if player like moves there,
they would immediately understand that they went something, you know, they,
they went to different area or it can be like really smooth.
Uh there will be no border and this difference would be smooth.
So well, you know, the simplest, the simplest way I guess to
make uh to think about something like buffer area.
So for example, there will be let's say
few streets or city blocks that shares,
that shares features of both neighborhoods.
And that's how you would make this the smooth
transition or again, contrast also works great
because
like, you know, for example,
you can have this really nice and fancy neighborhood and then
you make a turn and suddenly you are in poor,
really
dangerous area. So it also might work. It depends on what,
what is your intention, what you want, you know, bring to player.
Thank you.
Any thoughts on how a small team could make
a big interesting city or is that just impossible?
Once again, a small team making a big city?
Well, it will be challenging, I guess.
I mean, of course, for example, maybe if you have 10 years or maybe a century, then
thank you.
Uh I saw that on the pre
presentation, you had a picture of Vienna as a reference.
But in gray scale, what was the purpose on that?
Uh I mean, uh particularly on that slide,
it was just an exercise because I just wanted to take uh something that seems
absolutely irrelevant to cyberpunk because come on
like old seat in Vienna and Cyberpunk.
It's something absolutely, you know, not, not connected to each other,
but I just wanted to show how we can use references, you know,
because because you know, something that would obviously come to your
to actually check some,
you know, this uh modern cities. Uh
Yeah, but also you can go this way and maybe you will find something fresh,
something, you know, something different, something that
was never used before.
So only only because of that, that that example was quite random to be honest. Ah OK.
Yeah. Thank you and thank you for sharing your knowledge. It was awesome.
Thank you.
Um I was just curious when um working on a city more. So I guess a top down city
when you're trying to spawn in enemies, what's a good way to do it without
having it be like, oh, this is where the enemy spawns.
How do you make it feel organic or like, oh, they're now coming for you because
you did something or
so.
Yeah.
So one more question to quest designers,
I guess because I have no idea where to spawn enemies.
Sorry.
Hi. Um Thank you so much.
I guess like one question that I had was
obviously like urban planning and level design has a
lot to do like works very closely with like quests and systems and that kind of thing.
And in my own experience, I've had a lot of times where
the environment has shaped how we
de
like how we set up the quest or vice versa.
I guess I'm just wondering if you have any examples off the top of your
head where you had a particularly challenging
like moment where you were really trying to
either
bend the environment to the quest or vice versa, doing something to make,
make the like environment work for the design goals of the game.
Mm
Well, honestly, this uh this work always goes uh in really close cooper operation.
So,
I mean,
I don't think there ever was any kind of conflict of interest or something
or if it was we try to deal with it in the very beginning.
So,
I mean,
you know, yeah, it's about teamwork and Cooper operation, I guess.
And I don't think I,
I think maybe I'm telling like uh very boring things that everyone knows.
But yeah, it's about Cooper operation and teamwork.
Like if you work together from the very beginning,
you know, what game playing needs.
Uh You have what quest needs you have. That's it. Like you just, you just uh
all, all mm Always keep it in your mind
and you know,
and use it in your layouts so your layout would support the all the gameplay needs.
And yeah, this is essential. This is very important.
Thank you.
Hi.
So, um
I have a question in relation to multi tiered cities,
like if you have regular street layouts,
but imagine you have also flying cars and you have multiple layers of
street level if you will.
So if you have a street, but it's taller, I think sixth element,
but maybe also some cyber punk.
So,
do you have any insight in city layout regarding
that or is that out of scope of cyberpunk?
Uh
Thank God we don't have flying cars.
Well, I mean, no, kinda, it's kind of the same because, uh,
like still if this car uh moves along the
street because I believe this is what you mean.
Right.
I mean, of course, if we can go just up to the sky to, I don't know,
to stratosphere and just, you know, wandering there on top then I don't know.
And
you know, it's, it's a little bit different, I guess,
but still, like if we move
along
the street,
ok.
Yeah, it can be not a street level but higher,
but it makes no difference because still you are in the street,
the street has direction, you still have some
uh intersections like, uh you, you, you still, for example, you know, that,
I don't know, maybe you have a map, you know, where you have to go and, and that's it,
you just move and,
you know, it doesn't matter whether you move on the ground or above.
Yeah, I mean, there are,
there are tunnels and lower areas below buildings in
the uh cyberpunk environment as well as sorry.
Could you please uh speak closer to my,
there are um multi
levels within cyberpunk like the tunnels underneath the buildings
and the bridges or buildings with bridges in between.
So
kind of the same, I guess.
Well, yeah, but again, like uh you can, you can, of course,
here I showed uh maybe like simpler examples because, you know,
just to bring my ideas, but you can, you can um
uh make this, make the structure even more complicated because again,
uh so for example, you, you decided, OK,
so this neighborhood or couple of neighborhoods uh will have this um
complicated multi level structure
like this is important to decide it at some point.
And then you just start, you know, making walk out,
you know.
All right, thank you.
Hello.
Uh Great talk.
I really appreciate your breakdown of the process and the abstract,
the abstraction of it.
Um
The person ahead of me actually kind of already asked my question
but I
would like to if you're OK with it,
get further characterization on your communication with
uh mission designers and um
game designers like a timeline or like,
would you further characterize your interaction with other team members as far as
placement of points of interest, ambient resources,
things that promote player agency in the Cityscape?
Uh I guess the answer is yes,
I mean, well, yeah, I always uh if, if I, if I understood the uh the question correct.
So yeah, I always taken this into account
and I, for example, I know that OK, this is our point of interest, for example,
this is landmark and it should be something that should be visible.
So yeah, it would affect my life.
For example, I would um
orient the streets to this uh to
this place, these points of interest.
Uh because yeah, like uh when uh when you creating layout,
it's really powerful tool and you can make it really visible,
you can make it in a way that it would immediately catch players attention.
And yeah, this is, this is our work pretty much.
Yeah, I'm just interested in.
Would you characterize like some of
the more successful communication team members?
What that looks like?
Sorry. Could you get closer to the microphone? Is this better?
Oh, that's so much better. Oh, that is embarrassing.
OK.
I'd be interested in hearing you characterize um some of the
communication processes between like mission designers
and uh quest designers and,
and your work as far as placement goes and,
and a timeline or something like that or whatever you come up with.
I mean, well, the communication process, well, it's, it's good.
I mean, the,
the processes that are built really great in our company
and all uh designers uh that I work with.
They are my friends
and uh we often like we, we have um
uh like brainstorms and we discuss things together.
It's not like I'm just sitting in my box
drawing something and then just bringing to the table.
Like here I made it No, it's not like that. We, we always uh
like in touch and we creating things together
and even like, again, when it comes to city, it's not like, it's really hard to,
it's not like hard,
it's impossible to name a person who created a city
because it's not person like whole team and we,
we create this together.
Outstanding. Thank you.
Hello. Um So, well, obviously Night City is a very big uh video game space.
It's I think, fair to say quite a bit smaller than uh an equivalent Real World City.
And I guess I was wondering if you could
speak a little more about how some of these techniques go to creating that
sort of illusion of scale and making it feel um closer to like a,
an enormous sort of mega city real World environment while being
geometrically a lot smaller than say like a Los Angeles type environment.
Thank you.
You see uh it's about uh it's all about perception because it's,
it's like this example that I gave like in the very beginning.
So if you have something
uh if you have to go somewhere for fif 15 minutes in real life, it's OK.
It's super close. But if you have to walk for 15 minutes in game,
you would just close their game,
never open it again, right?
So uh it's always like that like uh game proportion, they always smaller, it's OK.
Um I cannot give you a certain formula for example,
like some coefficient that you should use when you create
it and pretty much it's uh it doesn't exist because uh
uh again, it depends on type of movement because maybe in some cases,
you have to use proportions that would be
quite close to Rio City because for example,
if you move really fast
uh then like why not?
Um But yeah, if you, if you mostly walking or walking slash driving,
you have to be smart about these sizes.
And honestly,
I don't know, like I would say that. Uh Yeah, again, there is no formula.
Uh It's only like empiric way that you can just, you know, trials and failures.
So, you know, you just create,
you, you can create like a few streets,
walk there or drive there or fly or whatever you need
and just just ask yourself. OK. Is it comfortable? Do I like it? And that's it.
And once the answer is yes, this is your proportions?
Wonderful. Thank you.
Hello. Hello. Uh
um I just wanted to ask what's the design process
to decide between having a playable or an interactive po I
compared to like a bottomless po I
uh it sounds like if it's visible from every location,
wouldn't it just push itself to be an area of more interest or interactive gameplay?
Damn, I don't think I understood the question. I'm sorry,
what's the difference between the design
process to create something more interactive
compared to a bottomless po I kind of like what you showed.
OK. So again, uh uh it's something that we decide uh together with, um
I don't know, lower team, game design team and initiative on their side.
So I mean, I can suggest something of course, but uh like uh the final word,
I guess after them.
And uh
yeah, I guess it's really, again,
it's really hard for me to answer because I think they rule the process.
Yeah.
Hello. Can you hear me? Ok.
Yeah. Uh Thank you for the talk. First of all,
uh you mentioned that it's often good to have streets lead to or
highlight nearby landmarks and based on your responses to some other questions,
it seems pretty important
in your design flow.
Uh How much are you or other level designers willing to
bend or change the streets that you've made or the layout
to frame landmarks and in the event where that might not
be possible just because of the layout of the city.
Is there like a second best option for a street to highlight or direct to?
Mm. Ok.
So I think this situation won't
be possible if again, if you walk together
from, from the very beginning, you know, I kinda, I kinda have this feeling that
uh some of you really want to force me that yeah, we have fight,
we actually go to a rink, we fight and
so someone who wins, this is how we make it no, it's not the case.
So yeah, we work together from the very beginning we decide like
and again, it's very iterative process.
So because I can, I can provide or OK, not, not like me,
but my team maybe can provide some drafts.
Uh We can discuss it with level designers, with lower team, with quest designers,
whoever is interested.
And uh we have like this first approval or maybe they uh they suggest some,
some things to maybe change something we
work on it.
Then we, we, we meet again and you know,
and this is like really long process from the very beginning from until the very end,
I guess.
And I think
this is not a case where, for example, we are in the closer to the end
and then suddenly uh level designers uh or I don't know,
quiz designers thought that, hey, it's completely not something that we expected.
No, it's impossible.
OK. Thank you.
Uh
Hello.
Uh When designing environments, we have to balance the familiar and the new
since we can only do so much weird,
innovative and unique stuff with cities before the player gets confused.
How do you determine what to spend effort on making new and unfamiliar
and what to just keep basic normal, boring city?
That's
tricky question.
I'm confused to be honest because I don't think that I understood the question.
I'm sorry,
guess the question of, I mean it's the 8020 rule. You do 80% is familiar to the player
and 20% is like new and different.
So when building a futuristic cyberpunk city,
how do you determine what to make familiar that anyone can understand?
And how do you determine?
OK, this is worth putting energy, making new,
exciting and something no one's seen before.
Ok. That's interesting. I don't know.
I think it's, it kinda, it's intuitive process, I think because we,
I don't think that like, OK, I don't have any guidelines.
I don't have any formula
uh I don't know that every,
every 100 m we should have something unexpected. No.
So, uh
and you see, like
this process, like I said, it's very iterative process. Uh We uh and again, like,
uh we started with like very droughts and we try to, you know,
to walk uh around our cities and uh
and yeah, like, and, and if, if it, if it uh at some point, if we feel that OK, it,
it feels boring
then let's kind of change it.
And if it's not, then let's move forward.
So I don't know, I would say for me when I created some city layouts,
I have this uh kind of approach in my mind that
I imagine myself as a tourist
that, you know, I was just wandering around because at these various stages,
we don't have any game play like we have nothing maybe.
And uh there's nothing, there's no activities at this very early stages.
So I just uh I just imagine that I'm a tourist. I just came in the city.
I just wandering around making pictures. So I like you should answer yourself. Ok.
Would you make a picture of this? Would you post it into your, I don't know Instagram.
If yes, then you're good.
Ok, thank you.
Um Hi. I just had a quick question about
when you're designing a city and you don't have access to
uh visual landmarks.
So when you're designing like back alleys and things like that,
uh what kind of strategies do you have to give
like a visual dialogue to the player of like,
hey,
this is like a good direction to get to like a main point or like this is
where you would move to kind of use your
like flow area towards your quest without just using
um like quest markers and stuff like that.
The thing that comes to mind is like these
apartment at the very beginning of the game,
it's kind of like a complex space to navigate.
I just was curious what strategies you have for
uh allowing the player to navigate that without too much confusion.
So um
OK, I need to think how to answer it best
to not, you know, uh repeat myself.
So again, like, like I said,
we work all together and I can maybe make some suggestions.
For example, I can say, OK,
so here we have this landmark and there are multiple street that goes there
and then we just check if it works or not, like
if it's visible uh if it's uh like, you know,
fit the quest. So again, like,
yeah, you ask about strategies.
No, I guess they are known like it's not about strategies,
it's about uh trials and failures.
I, I would say
um and again, maybe what also matters is that, you know,
that kind of visual gallery that I already had in my
have in my head because I have a lot of um
uh examples. So I can, for example, I know, I, I, if I, if I think about some uh
some situation, I can think.
Ah OK,
I think uh I think uh I saw something like that in
certain city that might work in our uh in our game.
And then, for example,
I can try to make fast draft of this layout and check if it works because again,
I don't think that I uh created this, you know, just from my head,
I actually tried to use some existing things because,
you know, we have everything in, in real life. We can just use it, just take it.
Thank you very much.
Yeah.
And I think maybe one last question and, and yeah,
and we can just continue somewhere outside.
Uh All right,
I have a question.
Um You didn't mention anything about public
transportation uh in urban planning and I was
thinking there is a metro system in that city as far as I remember.
How, how does that affect sort of the layout and the,
uh, should I maybe send you to our pr department?
I mean,
aspi help me.
What?
No,
that's, that's a good one. Yeah.
Um,
so, I mean, no, seriously, I, I don't know, like, you know, that metro, metro, it, it,
it, it, uh, appears like in the very
last patches so, you know, in
the very early stages, I guess it didn't affect much.
That's it, I guess. Thank you.