All right.
Uh Hello everyone.
Welcome to my talk lessons and lens,
uh
apologies for the
brief technical difficulties there. But
before we start just a brief introduction.
So uh my name is Anno.
I'm a real time V FX artist at effects
and I've been a hobbyist, photographer, filmmaker and animator for over 20 years.
I'm also a lens flare enthusiast.
So before we get right into it,
I just wanted to give a brief overview of what this presentation is all about.
There's a lot to talk about and limited time.
So I'll be focusing more on discussing the
key behaviors of different lens flares and how to
create your own than giving a technical presentation on
creating lens flares in any specific game engine.
As with many things in game development,
I found that there isn't really a one size
fits all solution for lens flares and game engines.
So in this talk,
I'm going to be focusing more on explaining the key
behaviors of lens flares and my process for creating them.
The reason this is relevant is essentially because
as hardware improves and visual fidelity increases,
lens flares are becoming an increasingly common
task for real-time V effects artists,
whereas they may have previously been considered more of a technical art task.
So today, I'll begin by talking about the interaction between light
and the camera lens.
Before discussing some of the
differences between spherical and anamorphic lenses
using reference footage of shot.
After that,
I'll discuss some general rules and rules of thumb
that help you all through your own lens flares,
supplemented by more footage.
And then finally,
I'll show you my process for making a custom lens flare and after effects
and we'll open it up to a quick Q and A after that if time permits.
All right.
So uh let's begin with the simplification of how light interacts with the camera
in a modern camera lens.
There is generally a bunch of glass lens elements
that makeup will be referred to as the lens.
So before light can reach the image sensor,
it's reflected and refracted as it passes through these lens elements.
When I'm creating a lens flare,
I like to think about the journey of light
from the front element to the rear element and
how that might affect the shapes, colors and behaviors of my flare.
I also look at reference footage and think about
which lens elements correspond to which flare elements.
It's worth noting
lens manufacturers usually apply an anti
reflective coating
to these that tends to influence the color
of flair elements as well as the overall intensity
and certain other factors. But we'll get into that later
to help create lens flares.
In any instance, here's a list of important concepts and rules of compiled,
we'll be discussing each of these in depth,
but I wanted to run them up on the screen
here first so that we can reference this slide later,
knowing these concepts as well as the context in which a flare will exist,
can make it a lot easier to implement a visually compelling lens flare
that truly complements the overall composition of
the frame while also respecting the physical
nature of a real camera.
So first on our list,
the two major types of lenses we typically use are spherical and anamorphic lenses
both produce vastly different lens flares,
image artifacts and out of focus boca effects.
So understanding the difference between these is important
when creating a flare of your own.
So let's start with the far more common spherical lens.
When shooting with a spherical lens,
we generally expect to see radial rays around the light source where the
number of rays will usually correspond to the number of diaphragm blades.
For those who may not know
aperture blades or diaphragm blades are the swiveling
uh mechanical blades that control the size of the aperture,
which essentially dictates how much light is led into the image sensor.
And there's a stock image of what those look like
with spherical lenses. We also expect to see circular or polygonal boca
in ghosts,
which we haven't talked about just yet, but we'll be getting into that soon.
Similarly, we see the number of sides of polygonal boca
correspond to the number of aperture blades.
And while it's perhaps not the most relevant to us in our real time VFX context,
it is important to note that we usually expect a 16
by nine aspect ratio when shooting with a spherical lens,
which is great because 16 by nine is the
most typical aspect ratio for our computer monitors,
tvs, smartphones and other displays.
So generally,
uh the framing an aspect ratio you see when shooting with
a spherical lens is what you ultimately get in the final
image before any post or editing cropping, uh
work has been done.
And so here's some reference footage I shot on a spherical lens.
What you can see is that I have 14 after blades here. So we get 14 radial rays
coming off the light source
and moving right along
to my favorite anamorphic lenses.
So in general,
anamorphic lenses tend to make things look and feel a lot more cinematic.
They can also create a more painterly look than spherical lenses,
which is due in part to their unique boca
or out of focus effects as well as their distortion
with an anamorphic lens.
We tend to get horizontal streaks as our primary flare element.
And depending on the lens,
radial rays may also be present in an anamorphic flare as we'll see here in a moment.
They tend to have slightly different visuals and behaviors than the
radial rays that we'd see or associated with spherical lenses.
But
a good rule of thumb is that they have more asymmetry.
Anamorphic lenses also produce vertically stretched
oval shaped poka for anything that's out of focus.
However,
the ghosts that we see in anamorphic flares
can be vertically or horizontally stretched oval shapes.
And another quirk of anamorphic lenses is that they
produce an aspect ratio of 2.39 by one,
which is standardized as 21 by nine for the digital format.
There's a lot to talk about in this regard. So I'm going to keep it brief.
But essentially when we're shooting with an anamorphic lens,
we're actually shooting on a square.
So the original footage needs to be de squeezed
in an editing or compositing software
so that we ultimately get that 21 by nine widescreen
aspect ratio with the signature cinematic black bars
on the top and bottom of the screen.
And here's some reference footage I shot of my anamorphic lens.
You can see we get that primary, our primary element is
those horizontal streaks and we get boxy shapes,
especially when we're shooting into the sun.
It's very common with anamorphic lenses.
And just to contrast that here's a small reference
of my phone's flashlight. So you can see the flare elements are
quite different.
And then here's what that original footage would
have looked like before the D squeeze.
So we've got a completely square aspect ratio
and everything is sort of uh
squashed horizontally.
All right.
So we've already touched on the radial rays and
horizontal streaks associated with spherical
and anamorphic lenses respectively.
But perhaps the most common flare element is glare.
Generally speaking,
glare appears as a large soft element around the light source that
reduces the contrast of the image in the areas that it occupies.
And next up, let's talk about ghosts.
So ghosts are boca like elements that rotate around the
center of the screen appearing stuck to a line that
is an invisible line.
But one that's drawn between the center of the screen and the light source,
ghosts often appear as copies or inverted copies of the
light source and tend to show the light source shape.
Although that's
another sort of uh rule of thumb
and next up, we have halos which tend to be pretty weird.
These are usually circular or elliptical shaped
elements that radially warp the light source
pillows tend to be especially visible when light is
when the light sources outside the screen edges.
But
again, that depends on the lens.
It's also worth noting that halos can manifest in many different ways,
but something they usually have in common is chromatic aberration.
And finally, my absolute favorite
element,
Leinster.
So if we can imagine a car windshield or
something similar that accumulates dirt and grime
from being exposed to the outdoors lens,
dirt is very similar in concept,
essentially, these are small bits of dust and dirt
that may be caked onto the lens or may just be sitting on top of the front element
that appears out of focus boca shapes.
When the front element is illuminated,
usually a front element reflection is visible simultaneously with lens dirt.
But as with everything else we've covered,
it always depends on the lens being used and every lens is different
and moving right along to wide angle versus telephoto
uh
for our focal length.
So whenever I'm explaining the difference between these two,
I use the example of zooming in and zooming out on a digital camera.
So shooting with a wide angle lens, we might expect to see lots of smaller
uh ghosts and other flare elements.
Whereas when shooting with a telephoto
lens, we generally expect to see fewer larger ghosts and other flare elements,
this is perhaps not the greatest uh reference footage that we're about to see. But
you can maybe see when we zoom in uh
we generally see fewer yet larger flare elements.
So moving right along,
uh the main difference between a glancing and direct light source
in this context is really just the subtlety of the flare,
a light source that's at a glancing angle to the lens will usually
result in a more subtle flare that's barely visible if at all.
Whereas a light source that's shining directly into the lens will
produce a much clearer and sharper flare
with more visible elements.
I'm not going to spend too much time on this next one,
but I thought it was worth uh mentioning just
because it's something that I find very interesting.
Um a
light source that's outside the screen edges
will generally produce a really unique element.
Uh
And there's no official name for this that I've, I've been able to find,
but I generally refer to it as an outside edge flare.
So a light source that's right outside the screen edges,
but still shining directly into the lens uh
will produce this strange element.
And we can think of this sort of like an
anticipatory flare just before the light source comes on screen.
And so here's some reference of a light source that's at a glancing angle
and then
just more reference.
So when it comes to the inclusion of the light source,
ghosts tend to have the most erratic behavior,
their internal shape and color may change and they may
oude in a staggered manner as the light source is occluded.
As far as the other elements are concerned,
they generally tend to become increasingly more subtle
or fade out entirely.
And so we'll see that here as I
swing over to the left
and back again, you can see those ghosts just sort of, it's not a linear fashion.
They're just,
they fade out in a strange order,
unpredictable
and moving right along.
Something that I consider one of the most important concepts depth of field or blur.
So essentially, depending on whether or not the light source is in focus,
flare elements will blur accordingly
with a light source that is in focus.
We'd expect to see sharper clearer flare elements than an out of focus light source.
It's also worth noting that flare elements might change
their shape and size while racking focus and similarly
amorphic flare elements tend to squash and stretch.
So as I wrap focus here,
we'll see that these flare elements enlarge and become a lot softer.
And then everything goes back to being somewhat
squashed or stretched depending on which way I'm racking focus
and finally chromatic aberration
to quote Hannah Montana, nobody's perfect
and that includes lenses.
So chromatic aberration is probably familiar to many of us artists,
especially in the post spider verse era.
But for those who may not know chromatic aberration or color fringing is the
failure of lens to converge or focus all colors to the same point.
This results in color fringing as we get closer to the edges of the image.
So
flare elements uh like ghosts and halos can be affected by this phenomenon.
But
again, it's worth noting that all lenses are different
and these flare elements can manifest
themselves very differently depending on the lens
and moving right along to light source color and
the lens element coding which we
briefly touched on.
But just some notes that I'm going to bring up on the screen,
certain flare elements that there's no good rule of thumb here. It's,
you just gotta look at reference,
but some flare elements will pick up uh the light source color,
whereas some flare elements are gonna pick up
the color that's
sort of given from that flair, that lens element coating.
And this is something that lens manufacturers work really hard to ensure that
players aren't too intense or intrusive
or overwhelming.
And so here's some reference I shot of
a prism
and you can see that the flare elements that we're getting
that white light source from my phone. Uh we
not colored at all uh
or not picking up any uh
other color
other than
what the the lens elements were coded in.
But when I
run that through the prism,
it's
picking up a lot of that color
and now it's time to put it all together.
So to help conceptualize how we might create a lens flare in a game engine,
I'll now demonstrate my process for creating a custom lens flare.
And after effects
before we begin, I'm going to show a list of effects and expressions that I'm using.
And as I mentioned previously,
I'll be doing my best to keep this a little bit less technical and more artistic.
But for the technically minded folks out there,
I will say that the most important thing to
know when creating a lens flare in a game engine
is knowing the screen space position of the light source.
You can use this as well as the distance between the light source and
the center of the screen to drive the majority of your flare elements behaviors.
So before we get into it,
I've got a couple of expressions that I want to run up on the screen here.
This first one is offsetting the exposition of your element
opposite to
whichever way the light source is moving.
So it will maintain its Y position, but it will move in like negative X.
And then similarly, I have a scale X by distance
and I have a couple of these. So I also have a scale opacity by distance.
And really,
it's just this kind of thing with any variation of
or anything you could potentially want to drive any behavior.
It's always going to be
uh driven by the distance between
the center of the screen and the light source
in screen space.
And I didn't really use this one, but it's worth running up here. Rotate a
flair element based on
the light sources position.
All right.
So here's how I start the setup and create the primary streak first,
I create a new composition and I start making my light source shape.
And if I were doing this as a post process effect or to composite over footage,
I'd actually
do this a little bit differently as we'll see here in a moment.
But I actually start by applying a threshold to the scene
and isolating my highlights that way
and you'll see an example of that momentarily
right here.
And so that's what I'm talking about
deriving your light source shape from
whatever you have,
but the highlights in the scene
and then I go ahead and I apply some effects and just start roughing in my shape.
Once I get something that's working,
tend to duplicate it
and just keep building out the shape that way.
And I always mask out my edges, especially when working in after effects.
Cool. So Claire,
this is generally uh something I consider to be one of the easier elements.
It follows the position of the light source. And it's,
you can duplicate your light source shape, uh scale it up and blur it out a bunch
and that should get you something pretty good.
And then of course, mask out the edges.
All right. So for the radial rays, there's a number of different ways to do this.
But uh in this instance,
what I ended up doing is I scaled my light source shape uh horizontally.
I moved it up and I applied a polar coordinates which we'll see in a moment here.
I also apply a wave warp to get uh some shape, breakup and
sort of like a star
kind of shape.
And I do some adjustments
and then we'll see the polar coordinates right here.
And then after that point, you can apply a radial fast blur or something to
radially blur those
bits out.
You can also pinch the center using the bulge effect,
whatever floats your boat.
And it's worth noting that I
always use the ad blend mode when uh
compositing these flare elements together in after effects.
Although if I were compositing this over footage, I'd use the screen blending mode.
However, if I were compositing this in a game engine,
I'd probably want to use an additive material.
And here you can see me uh roughing in some ghosts.
So the key here is to tie the anchor point to the position which gets that
ghost element rotating around the center of the screen.
And
I also apply a radial fast blur to this and set the mode to darkest
which gets some of that occlusion behavior.
So similar to ghosts, we have street ghosts which are
the anamorphic uh
streak elements.
And the way I set these up is a little bit different,
but this is where that expression from the start comes in handy.
And so you can see I'm getting the basic behavior
and once I get something that works,
I just duplicate it and I just keep building it out that way
cool.
So moving right along to our chromatic elements,
I generally uh do this by creating a rainbow
blending it together.
And once I get something that's working, I just sort of duplicate
adjust as needed and I just copy paste those expressions from earlier
and get the same kind of look.
You can also apply a VR glow and certain other effects
to sort of get whatever kind of look you want.
And I do believe we're out of time here, unfortunately. So thank you all for
watching, listening and attending.
I'm just gonna, uh,
get this process, time laps up.
And so here's the whole roughly hour and a half process condensed into like
a minute.
You can see, I made my radial rays slightly differently here
and there you have it
right. So, thank you guys so much.