Thanks for uh being awake at 10 a.m. on a Tuesday, everybody. Um don't forget to
a Tuesday, everybody. Um don't forget to turn off your cell phones, fill out the
turn off your cell phones, fill out the questionnaire at the end, all that good
questionnaire at the end, all that good stuff. Uh and also, we're hoping to have
stuff. Uh and also, we're hoping to have enough time for a little bit of Q&A at
enough time for a little bit of Q&A at the end, but rather than use the
the end, but rather than use the microphones, we are going to ask you if
microphones, we are going to ask you if uh to tweet questions to Stevewink as
uh to tweet questions to Stevewink as you go along. Um so, you know, keep
you go along. Um so, you know, keep those questions in mind. And also, we'll
those questions in mind. And also, we'll go to the wrap-up room after this. By
go to the wrap-up room after this. By the way, panelists, we're going to go to
the way, panelists, we're going to go to the wrap-up room after this. Okay. Um so
the wrap-up room after this. Okay. Um so right this panel uh features five
right this panel uh features five panelists all of whom have released
panelists all of whom have released games into the marketplace and those
games into the marketplace and those games feature a range of success to not
games feature a range of success to not so success uh embodies different
so success uh embodies different platforms different approaches to the
platforms different approaches to the market different backgrounds in indie
market different backgrounds in indie games and as Steve mentioned our goal is
games and as Steve mentioned our goal is to elevate this discussion with hard
to elevate this discussion with hard data both from our own businesses
data both from our own businesses researched uh from the internet and
researched uh from the internet and other places and also some you know
other places and also some you know speculation and subjective ideas as
speculation and subjective ideas as well. One thing that we all agree on is
well. One thing that we all agree on is that this word is super crappy. It's
that this word is super crappy. It's very button pushing and reductionist. It
very button pushing and reductionist. It implies things that no one here believes
implies things that no one here believes in. Uh so we think of this as like a
in. Uh so we think of this as like a market phenomenon, maybe a slump or a
market phenomenon, maybe a slump or a downturn. And we're hoping to address
downturn. And we're hoping to address all of these types of topics. First
all of these types of topics. First panelist is Jeff Vogel. He is the
panelist is Jeff Vogel. He is the president of Spiderweb Software. They've
president of Spiderweb Software. They've been making indie games for 20 years.
been making indie games for 20 years. And because of the consistency in these
And because of the consistency in these games, Jeff has been in a great position
games, Jeff has been in a great position to notice market trends, and this has
to notice market trends, and this has made him a high-profile indie apocalypse
made him a high-profile indie apocalypse blogger in the past few years. Um we
blogger in the past few years. Um we have Rebecca Saltzman, CEO of Fini. This
have Rebecca Saltzman, CEO of Fini. This is a small publisher and developer of
is a small publisher and developer of recognized indie games whose stretches
recognized indie games whose stretches all the way back to Cannibol, but uh
all the way back to Cannibol, but uh they recently released Panoramical and
they recently released Panoramical and Feist, and they have upcoming releases
Feist, and they have upcoming releases Overland and Night in the Woods. We have
Overland and Night in the Woods. We have Iman Iberic, who is a game designer and
Iman Iberic, who is a game designer and PR manager of Coffee Stain Studios, uh
PR manager of Coffee Stain Studios, uh best known for the wildly successful
best known for the wildly successful Goat Simulator, but he's also going to
Goat Simulator, but he's also going to be talking about the Sanctum series of
be talking about the Sanctum series of games. This is Jordan uh Thomas, the
games. This is Jordan uh Thomas, the co-owner of Question, who recently
co-owner of Question, who recently released Magic Circle. He's a recent
released Magic Circle. He's a recent addition into uh from the mainstream
addition into uh from the mainstream industry where he worked on the Bioshock
industry where he worked on the Bioshock series among other things. And myself,
series among other things. And myself, I'm uh Randy Smith, co-owner of Tiger
I'm uh Randy Smith, co-owner of Tiger Style. We're best known for iOS
Style. We're best known for iOS releases. There's two spider games in
releases. There's two spider games in Waking Mars. And we have a little bit of
Waking Mars. And we have a little bit of a foothold in the Steam market as well.
a foothold in the Steam market as well. So, is the Indie Apocalypse even a real
So, is the Indie Apocalypse even a real thing? We've all read those blog posts
thing? We've all read those blog posts about indies not making as much money
about indies not making as much money these days. Sometimes lots lots less
these days. Sometimes lots lots less money. And we've heard scary stories
money. And we've heard scary stories about games that should have been
about games that should have been successful but weren't. I've
successful but weren't. I've unfortunately heard a couple uh since
unfortunately heard a couple uh since I've arrived at GDC this year. And this
I've arrived at GDC this year. And this is usually contextualized as a
is usually contextualized as a relationship of supply versus demand.
relationship of supply versus demand. Supply is going up, demand isn't keeping
Supply is going up, demand isn't keeping pace. So, one of our biggest
pace. So, one of our biggest marketplaces obviously is Steam. And the
marketplaces obviously is Steam. And the data we're looking at here and all of
data we're looking at here and all of our Steam data is credited to Sergy
our Steam data is credited to Sergy Galvankan, the Steam Spy Guy, who
Galvankan, the Steam Spy Guy, who generously provided this stuff. And what
generously provided this stuff. And what we're looking at is how many games were
we're looking at is how many games were released each year into Steam. And um
released each year into Steam. And um you see obviously it curves up. Uh the
you see obviously it curves up. Uh the green light is considered, you know, one
green light is considered, you know, one of the horsemen of the indie apocalypse.
of the horsemen of the indie apocalypse. This is where it was launched in August
This is where it was launched in August of 2012. about a year later is the first
of 2012. about a year later is the first time the hundred a batch of 100 games
time the hundred a batch of 100 games was green lit at once and by the end of
was green lit at once and by the end of 2014 we have um many hundreds of games
2014 we have um many hundreds of games being green lit in just a few days. So
being green lit in just a few days. So no big surprise here you open the
no big surprise here you open the floodgates there's more supply in the
floodgates there's more supply in the market. Uh so looking at demand we can
market. Uh so looking at demand we can take a look at owners. So what this is
take a look at owners. So what this is is the total number of owners for all
is the total number of owners for all those games released in that year. So
those games released in that year. So for all 86 games released in 2010 if you
for all 86 games released in 2010 if you add up all their owners it's something
add up all their owners it's something like $17.1 million. Now, there's an
like $17.1 million. Now, there's an obvious upward trend here, and uh the
obvious upward trend here, and uh the reason it goes down in 2015 is cuz those
reason it goes down in 2015 is cuz those games came out more recently, therefore,
games came out more recently, therefore, they've had less time to acrue owners,
they've had less time to acrue owners, right? So, it's hard to know exactly
right? So, it's hard to know exactly where this should be. Um, but probably
where this should be. Um, but probably we can assume it's at least as big as
we can assume it's at least as big as 2014. Now, there's a really important
2014. Now, there's a really important disclaimer here that because of the way
disclaimer here that because of the way the Steam Spy algorithms work, if a game
the Steam Spy algorithms work, if a game occurs less than a thousand new owners
occurs less than a thousand new owners per month, the margin of error for that
per month, the margin of error for that data is like enormous. So, there's a lot
data is like enormous. So, there's a lot of noise in this data. I included the
of noise in this data. I included the high margin of error uh noise data.
high margin of error uh noise data. So, we can put both of those sets of
So, we can put both of those sets of data on the same graph. And we can even
data on the same graph. And we can even divide total owners by total
divide total owners by total games. And so, the peak here is in 2011
games. And so, the peak here is in 2011 with just shy of like half a million
with just shy of like half a million owners per game. But importantly, that's
owners per game. But importantly, that's just really crude math. There's no
just really crude math. There's no mythical average game. Um, but what we
mythical average game. Um, but what we do see is this general downward
do see is this general downward trend. Um, the reason we use owners as a
trend. Um, the reason we use owners as a metric is because Valve doesn't make
metric is because Valve doesn't make public Steam's total sales numbers each
public Steam's total sales numbers each year. But uh Steam Spy was recently able
year. But uh Steam Spy was recently able to estimate the size of the market and
to estimate the size of the market and hot off the presses here for the very
hot off the presses here for the very first time ever. Thanks to Sergy again,
first time ever. Thanks to Sergy again, the Steam Spy guy. We have some numbers
the Steam Spy guy. We have some numbers which estimate the size of indie games
which estimate the size of indie games market in particular. So um uh there's
market in particular. So um uh there's some important disclaimers I mentioned
some important disclaimers I mentioned below. Most importantly because uh Sergy
below. Most importantly because uh Sergy is a lot more rigorous about data than I
is a lot more rigorous about data than I am. He would he refused to include any
am. He would he refused to include any games that acrew less than 1,000 owners
games that acrew less than 1,000 owners per month. Um but and that includes a
per month. Um but and that includes a lot of indie games, right? But basically
lot of indie games, right? But basically what we can see here is that Valve
what we can see here is that Valve processes significantly more than $1
processes significantly more than $1 billion of indie game sales every year
billion of indie game sales every year and it's right around onethird of their
and it's right around onethird of their overall games market. So that's pretty
overall games market. So that's pretty cool stuff. Uh turning our attention to
cool stuff. Uh turning our attention to the mobile market. This is data
the mobile market. This is data published by Statista. Uh some important
published by Statista. Uh some important disclaimers. This is just Apple the app
disclaimers. This is just Apple the app store. Um and it's not indie games, it's
store. Um and it's not indie games, it's all games. And moreover, only the dark
all games. And moreover, only the dark blue part of this bar is games. The the
blue part of this bar is games. The the rest of it's like all apps. And so what
rest of it's like all apps. And so what we're looking at is between July 2008
we're looking at is between July 2008 and July 2015. This is the number of
and July 2015. This is the number of apps in the app store total in the
apps in the app store total in the thousands. So we're approaching two
thousands. So we're approaching two million apps by the middle of
million apps by the middle of 2015. And then demand, this is sort of
2015. And then demand, this is sort of covering um the same time frame. And
covering um the same time frame. And what we're looking at is the number of
what we're looking at is the number of downloads in the billions. Um and so
downloads in the billions. Um and so we're approaching 100 billion downloads
we're approaching 100 billion downloads by 2015. So you can really crudely
by 2015. So you can really crudely superimpose these two graphs in
superimpose these two graphs in Photoshop and see if there's anything
Photoshop and see if there's anything worth noting. It kind of looks like in
worth noting. It kind of looks like in around 2011 and 2012, supply is growing
around 2011 and 2012, supply is growing faster than demand. catches back up by
faster than demand. catches back up by about 2014. But there's this really
about 2014. But there's this really important disclaimer here, of course,
important disclaimer here, of course, which is that um is that free to play,
which is that um is that free to play, right? So free to the premium apps are
right? So free to the premium apps are only about 11% of the apps on the app
only about 11% of the apps on the app store, but they uh acquire 92% of the
store, but they uh acquire 92% of the revenue. This is the beginning of 2015.
revenue. This is the beginning of 2015. So free to play is another one of the uh
So free to play is another one of the uh horsemen of the indie apocalypse. It was
horsemen of the indie apocalypse. It was introduced uh in the middle of
introduced uh in the middle of 2009 and uh March 2011 is the first time
2009 and uh March 2011 is the first time premium revenue overtook premium revenue
premium revenue overtook premium revenue and it never went back. So, uh, I just
and it never went back. So, uh, I just want to be really clear like it's very
want to be really clear like it's very easy to be misleading with data even if
easy to be misleading with data even if you're not intending to be. So, as a
you're not intending to be. So, as a primary example, those prior slides
primary example, those prior slides don't prove that it's harder to succeed
don't prove that it's harder to succeed today than it was in like 2012, for
today than it was in like 2012, for example. Uh, I've heard a theory that
example. Uh, I've heard a theory that like a lot of the newcomers to the
like a lot of the newcomers to the market are really hobbyists and they're
market are really hobbyists and they're not, you know, adding they're not taking
not, you know, adding they're not taking out more demand than they're putting in.
out more demand than they're putting in. Um, that's a possibility. So, we did our
Um, that's a possibility. So, we did our best this, you know, to do this 100%
best this, you know, to do this 100% properly is a monthslong research
properly is a monthslong research project for each of us. That's not what
project for each of us. That's not what we did. But we are going to try to
we did. But we are going to try to present you with some good information
present you with some good information anyway. So here we go. Without further
anyway. So here we go. Without further ado, let's bring up Jeff
ado, let's bring up Jeff Vogel. That was
terrifying. I'm going to go back to my hotel room and
hotel room and cry. Hi, I'm Jeff. Check. Check. Uh,
cry. Hi, I'm Jeff. Check. Check. Uh, okay. Who am I? Why am I standing here?
okay. Who am I? Why am I standing here? I run a little mom and pop shop called
I run a little mom and pop shop called Spiderweb Software. We're based in
Spiderweb Software. We're based in Seattle. We've are older than the stones
Seattle. We've are older than the stones in the dirt. Uh there's my URL, Twitter,
in the dirt. Uh there's my URL, Twitter, and a blog upon which I've written a
and a blog upon which I've written a fair amount on this topic, which is why
fair amount on this topic, which is why I'm standing here. And uh what do we do?
I'm standing here. And uh what do we do? We write fantasy role playing games.
We write fantasy role playing games. Really old school, cheap, retro, Mac,
Really old school, cheap, retro, Mac, Windows, iPad, Linux, and Android. I can
Windows, iPad, Linux, and Android. I can get someone to do the port for me. Very
get someone to do the port for me. Very textheavy, very storyheavy. Most
textheavy, very storyheavy. Most importantly, all of our games, while not
importantly, all of our games, while not identical, are very similar. That'll
identical, are very similar. That'll become relevant when comparing sales
become relevant when comparing sales later on. Here's a list of our games.
later on. Here's a list of our games. Don't be ashamed if you haven't heard
Don't be ashamed if you haven't heard any of of any of them. I don't write
any of of any of them. I don't write hits. Don't get me wrong. I love hits.
hits. Don't get me wrong. I love hits. I'd love to have one, but I'm more I'm
I'd love to have one, but I'm more I'm in the business of writing respectable
in the business of writing respectable niche titles in order to make a
niche titles in order to make a respectable middle class
respectable middle class income. Here is a picture of my latest
income. Here is a picture of my latest game for the iPad. You can see that, you
game for the iPad. You can see that, you know, it's fine. It's basic. It's
know, it's fine. It's basic. It's simple. It's functional. I mean, it's
simple. It's functional. I mean, it's not going to set the world on fire, but
not going to set the world on fire, but I'm also not publicly soiling myself
I'm also not publicly soiling myself either. So, I want to talk about the
either. So, I want to talk about the indie glut, the indie boom and bust, or
indie glut, the indie boom and bust, or as it is commonly known, an economic
as it is commonly known, an economic phenomenon, I believe, called the
phenomenon, I believe, called the business cycle, which is much discussed
business cycle, which is much discussed and I will get back to in more detail in
and I will get back to in more detail in just a
just a minute. When I wrote about this, I used
minute. When I wrote about this, I used the term the indie bubble, which is a
the term the indie bubble, which is a really nice clickbay title. It got me a
really nice clickbay title. It got me a lot of attention. It is not technically
lot of attention. It is not technically true. Uh it is not a classic speculative
true. Uh it is not a classic speculative bubble in any way. I also will not be
bubble in any way. I also will not be using the word
using the word indep because the word is silly,
indep because the word is silly, childish, and reductive. I like things
childish, and reductive. I like things that are silly, childish, and reductive.
that are silly, childish, and reductive. I'm just not really going to use the
I'm just not really going to use the word because it's basically inaccurate.
word because it's basically inaccurate. There is no apocalypse. Indie games
There is no apocalypse. Indie games aren't going to go away because we're
aren't going to go away because we're awesome and people love what they do we
awesome and people love what they do we do. But business circumstances change
do. But business circumstances change and we need to pay attention. So I'm
and we need to pay attention. So I'm going to tell you a little very brief
going to tell you a little very brief story about what I think happened that
story about what I think happened that will require proof and I'm going to be
will require proof and I'm going to be chipping in some of my sales sales
chipping in some of my sales sales figures just to point in the direction
figures just to point in the direction of what might be going on. This is just
of what might be going on. This is just going to be a few points of data. It's
going to be a few points of data. It's not going to prove anything but it is a
not going to prove anything but it is a start towards accumulating data and
start towards accumulating data and telling stories. So what's the story?
telling stories. So what's the story? Around 2008 there was a confluence of
Around 2008 there was a confluence of three big events. First of all, AAA
three big events. First of all, AAA development could arguably be called
development could arguably be called very stagnant with not a lot of
very stagnant with not a lot of innovation. A lot of people were getting
innovation. A lot of people were getting kind of tired of what they were doing.
kind of tired of what they were doing. At the same time, a bunch of indie
At the same time, a bunch of indie developers showed that they could really
developers showed that they could really bring it could really bring really
bring it could really bring really compelling, awesome, highquality
compelling, awesome, highquality products to market while at the same
products to market while at the same time indie friendly stores like Xbox
time indie friendly stores like Xbox Live, like iTunes, like Steam became
Live, like iTunes, like Steam became available. And as someone who scrambled
available. And as someone who scrambled for individual share sales on CompuServe
for individual share sales on CompuServe in the 1990s can tell you, Steam is an
in the 1990s can tell you, Steam is an infinite bag of
miracles. Indie games became really hot all of a sudden. There was a big demand
all of a sudden. There was a big demand for them. People like me who had a had a
for them. People like me who had a had a back catalog that went on for days were
back catalog that went on for days were able to make far more money than we
able to make far more money than we deserved. Demand became really high. Oh
deserved. Demand became really high. Oh my god, indie games are cool. A lot of
my god, indie games are cool. A lot of people flooded into the market. A lot of
people flooded into the market. A lot of indie games started being written
indie games started being written because people want to follow their
because people want to follow their dreams. Demand's really high. Supply
dreams. Demand's really high. Supply goes up to meet
demand. So what happened was first there and this happens all the time in all
and this happens all the time in all sorts of businesses. There's a growth
sorts of businesses. There's a growth period, a new market with a lot of
period, a new market with a lot of demand appears. People see that there's
demand appears. People see that there's money to be made. They flood in. Supply
money to be made. They flood in. Supply goes up to meet demand. But the supply
goes up to meet demand. But the supply keeps coming in. That's when you pass
keeps coming in. That's when you pass the peak and you enter what I believe we
the peak and you enter what I believe we have been in for a while now, which is
have been in for a while now, which is the recession period, where which is the
the recession period, where which is the long, gruesome, agonizing, bloody
long, gruesome, agonizing, bloody process where the supply, also known as
process where the supply, also known as human beings following their dreams,
human beings following their dreams, goes down until it meets demand.
And there are some hard realities. Human beings only own finite money. There's
beings only own finite money. There's only a finite number of gaming websites.
only a finite number of gaming websites. They only have a finite number of space
They only have a finite number of space to put new articles if titles keep
to put new articles if titles keep flooding in. is just not not enough. And
flooding in. is just not not enough. And that's what leads to the painful
that's what leads to the painful recession process that I believe is
recession process that I believe is happening. But there is no apocalypse.
happening. But there is no apocalypse. Indie games aren't going anywhere. We're
Indie games aren't going anywhere. We're a thing. I mean, we're a billion dollar
a thing. I mean, we're a billion dollar a year business. That's amazing. There's
a year business. That's amazing. There's just going to be the occasional
just going to be the occasional adjustment and the occasional necessary
adjustment and the occasional necessary shrinkage. Was anything I just said
shrinkage. Was anything I just said true?
true? Really, I'm going to tell you sales from
Really, I'm going to tell you sales from my last four games, and you can see my
my last four games, and you can see my story and make your judgments from
story and make your judgments from there. I'm going to be talking about my
there. I'm going to be talking about my last four retro role playing games.
last four retro role playing games. There's Avdon and Avidon 2 which are new
There's Avdon and Avidon 2 which are new IP and A Vernum and a Vernum 2 which are
IP and A Vernum and a Vernum 2 which are remasters of older games. For comparing,
remasters of older games. For comparing, it's better to compare games from like
it's better to compare games from like serieses. You can see the years they
serieses. You can see the years they came out. Earlier was very much in when
came out. Earlier was very much in when indie games were go-go hoay and the last
indie games were go-go hoay and the last one came out last year when maybe not so
one came out last year when maybe not so much. Uh I to raise the price for the
much. Uh I to raise the price for the fourth game because I you know had to to
fourth game because I you know had to to so my business wouldn't explode.
so my business wouldn't explode. It's it's hard to do research on this
It's it's hard to do research on this topic because it's hard to compare two
topic because it's hard to compare two games because comparing sales of two
games because comparing sales of two games is really apples and oranges,
games is really apples and oranges, which is why I think I can be useful
which is why I think I can be useful because my games are really similar.
because my games are really similar. They all have the same style. They are
They all have the same style. They are all the same sort of game. They're all
all the same sort of game. They're all for the same platform. They all get most
for the same platform. They all get most of their sales from the same place. They
of their sales from the same place. They all do their PR in the usual word of
all do their PR in the usual word of mouth bargain basement kind of
mouth bargain basement kind of way. There's just a couple differences
way. There's just a couple differences I'll point out for the sake of
I'll point out for the sake of intellectual rigor. the earlier games
intellectual rigor. the earlier games got a lot more press and a lot more
got a lot more press and a lot more bundle coverage although I think that's
bundle coverage although I think that's more of a factor of it being early in
more of a factor of it being early in the indie indie boom before the glut
the indie indie boom before the glut happened and also obviously the earlier
happened and also obviously the earlier games have been out longer so they had
games have been out longer so they had more time to get sales but all of these
more time to get sales but all of these games are well past their initial sales
games are well past their initial sales surge all of these games are in longtail
surge all of these games are in longtail territory I'm going to tell you two
territory I'm going to tell you two things I'm going to tell you the number
things I'm going to tell you the number of copies sold on steam and the number
of copies sold on steam and the number of earn amount of earnings on steam the
of earn amount of earnings on steam the key difference here is that number of
key difference here is that number of sales on steam will include humb Humble
sales on steam will include humb Humble Bundle and other bundles, but it will
Bundle and other bundles, but it will not include the money from Humble Humble
not include the money from Humble Humble Bundle. Uh, so the sales numbers are
Bundle. Uh, so the sales numbers are going to be really high, but a lot of
going to be really high, but a lot of those sales were for a dime each cuz,
those sales were for a dime each cuz, you know, yay, yay, 2015. Uh, there is a
you know, yay, yay, 2015. Uh, there is a lot of in inexactness. It's hard to do
lot of in inexactness. It's hard to do economics research sometime. So, I'm
economics research sometime. So, I'm going to need to ask for a certain
going to need to ask for a certain amount of forgiveness. So, here are the
amount of forgiveness. So, here are the actual numbers. I'm going to draw your
actual numbers. I'm going to draw your attention to Avdon and Avdon 2 first. So
attention to Avdon and Avdon 2 first. So you can see that in between 2010 and
you can see that in between 2010 and 2013 there was a fair amount of drop in
2013 there was a fair amount of drop in numbers of sales
numbers of sales uh
because there was less interest uh there was still some still getting bundle but
was still some still getting bundle but interest in Avon 2 which is why the
interest in Avon 2 which is why the number is fairly high but you can see
number is fairly high but you can see that the actual amount of cash made was
that the actual amount of cash made was a lot lower because everyone was waiting
a lot lower because everyone was waiting at that point everyone had learned just
at that point everyone had learned just wait for the bundle a Vernum and Vernum
wait for the bundle a Vernum and Vernum 2 very much the same thing a Vernum got
2 very much the same thing a Vernum got a fair amount bundle interest. A Vernum
a fair amount bundle interest. A Vernum 2 has gotten basically no bundle
2 has gotten basically no bundle interest, but you know, maybe I'll offer
interest, but you know, maybe I'll offer one of the humble bundle guys a car or
one of the humble bundle guys a car or something. Uh the number of sales
something. Uh the number of sales therefore went way down. And of course,
therefore went way down. And of course, the earnings went went down quite a lot
the earnings went went down quite a lot as well. I'm going to have to ask you to
as well. I'm going to have to ask you to take my word for it that the quality of
take my word for it that the quality of these games is roughly similar. The user
these games is roughly similar. The user reception among the people who actually
reception among the people who actually bought it was roughly similar. You can
bought it was roughly similar. You can verify that somewhat by looking at Steam
verify that somewhat by looking at Steam reviews if you want. uh all of my other
reviews if you want. uh all of my other games on other platforms have um
games on other platforms have um followed the same pattern. I don't
followed the same pattern. I don't really have time to go into that and I
really have time to go into that and I also a lot of those figures I just don't
also a lot of those figures I just don't have access to it anymore. So this is
have access to it anymore. So this is again another take my word for it and
again another take my word for it and maybe sometime I'll do a longer
maybe sometime I'll do a longer talk. The big story, the big lesson from
talk. The big story, the big lesson from this this story is that the game
this this story is that the game business is hard and it's a tough
business is hard and it's a tough competitive miserable blood sport kind
competitive miserable blood sport kind of business. And there was a time when a
of business. And there was a time when a lot of people were making a lot of money
lot of people were making a lot of money and it became possible to forget that.
and it became possible to forget that. But now people have to remember in the
But now people have to remember in the games business success should always
games business success should always surprise you. Failure should never
surprise you. Failure should never surprise you. That's the cost you pay
surprise you. That's the cost you pay for living your
for living your dreams. That's my story. Uh
dreams. That's my story. Uh unfortunately there are a certain number
unfortunately there are a certain number of people going out of business and that
of people going out of business and that will continue until life becomes
will continue until life becomes tolerable for those few who
tolerable for those few who survive. Have a have a have a great day
survive. Have a have a have a great day kids.
[Music] That was
awesome. Thank you Jeff. Um, so please welcome to the podium Rebecca Saltzman,
welcome to the podium Rebecca Saltzman, CEO and co-founder of
Fini. Let's do
this. I have to push a start button for
you. I'm looking at a spinning pin wheel. Okay, cool.
Oh, we can do this. We got it because I Okay, you're on. Hey, my name is uh
Okay, you're on. Hey, my name is uh Becca Saltzman. I'm the CEO and
Becca Saltzman. I'm the CEO and co-founder of Fini. Um, I run the studio
co-founder of Fini. Um, I run the studio in Austin, Texas with Adam uh Atomic
in Austin, Texas with Adam uh Atomic Saltzman. Um, we've been doing this uh
Saltzman. Um, we've been doing this uh since like 2006. The that's about how
since like 2006. The that's about how long the studio's been around under
long the studio's been around under various names. Um, I handle the
various names. Um, I handle the business, legal, financial aspects of
business, legal, financial aspects of the entire studio. I also basically take
the entire studio. I also basically take care of our publishing branch. Um, I
care of our publishing branch. Um, I also do writing and design on our games,
also do writing and design on our games, which people don't know. Um, so yeah, I
which people don't know. Um, so yeah, I do a lot of things. I'm also a mom of
do a lot of things. I'm also a mom of two kids and uh they're crazy. So that's
two kids and uh they're crazy. So that's me, that's my youngest, and that's where
me, that's my youngest, and that's where you can find me.
So, I'm going to talk a little bit about first year revenue for our games. And
first year revenue for our games. And these are like actual legit numbers. Um,
these are like actual legit numbers. Um, and you're looking I'm thinking, "Holy
and you're looking I'm thinking, "Holy crap, that's really high." Um, but it's
crap, that's really high." Um, but it's not. Most people think Cannibal made us
not. Most people think Cannibal made us like millions of dollars. And like that
like millions of dollars. And like that is legit not the case. Um, right now
is legit not the case. Um, right now that number you're looking at is
that number you're looking at is 715,000. That's like our lifetime
715,000. That's like our lifetime revenue on Cannibal, which came out like
revenue on Cannibal, which came out like what, 6 years ago. The first year, that
what, 6 years ago. The first year, that 273, that's what we made in the first
273, that's what we made in the first year. These are some of our other titles
year. These are some of our other titles that we've had. Uh, Gravity Hook, uh,
that we've had. Uh, Gravity Hook, uh, first year 46,000, lifetime 54,
first year 46,000, lifetime 54, hundreds, 437 in the first year. It
hundreds, 437 in the first year. It seemed really awesome. Look at our
seemed really awesome. Look at our lifetime. Um, likewise, Capsule about
lifetime. Um, likewise, Capsule about six grand so far in the or 14 grand
six grand so far in the or 14 grand total. Um, and then our two most recent
total. Um, and then our two most recent titles that were released last year, um,
titles that were released last year, um, both of which are IGF nominated games,
both of which are IGF nominated games, Feist, uh, is currently at about 105.
Feist, uh, is currently at about 105. Uh, Panoramical is at 33. All of these
Uh, Panoramical is at 33. All of these numbers are pre-platform holder cuts.
numbers are pre-platform holder cuts. Um, so yeah, this next one's kind of
Um, so yeah, this next one's kind of interesting because you're like, that's
interesting because you're like, that's a lot of money. Nice
a lot of money. Nice job. How do we actually work in this
job. How do we actually work in this industry? We're all on Revshare. This
industry? We're all on Revshare. This says how many Revshare owners are on
says how many Revshare owners are on each of these projects and about the
each of these projects and about the average or the yearly average. But you
average or the yearly average. But you have to understand most of our income
have to understand most of our income has been made in the first year. I want
has been made in the first year. I want to point out specifically hundreds which
to point out specifically hundreds which looks like it's done great but it made
looks like it's done great but it made all of its money in the in in the first
all of its money in the in in the first year. Um it didn't actually pay itself
year. Um it didn't actually pay itself back.
back. Um so yeah, our highest revenue
Um so yeah, our highest revenue shareholder would have averaged like
shareholder would have averaged like 44,000 a year on Cannibal. Um we've had
44,000 a year on Cannibal. Um we've had three Rev shareholders. Panoramical has
three Rev shareholders. Panoramical has nine. Um and that's that's how it works.
nine. Um and that's that's how it works. It doesn't actually come out to be much
It doesn't actually come out to be much money when you start like cutting
money when you start like cutting everything away.
So just for numbers sake or whatever this is where the majority of our income
this is where the majority of our income actually comes from. Obviously u for
actually comes from. Obviously u for fist and panoramical the majority is
fist and panoramical the majority is from steam. Um we have an other category
from steam. Um we have an other category which would be um weird uh deals that
which would be um weird uh deals that we've made with various companies. Um
GG.io. So that's like our most recent PC release money. And then our mobile
release money. And then our mobile games. We've always done premium uh
games. We've always done premium uh games on uh iOS. We sell mostly on iOS.
games on uh iOS. We sell mostly on iOS. That's where we've been. We've had had a
That's where we've been. We've had had a really great partner with iOS. Um but
really great partner with iOS. Um but yeah, we've always done premium games.
yeah, we've always done premium games. We've never done premium. So, our
We've never done premium. So, our Android market is very
Android market is very little. Okay. Now, I'm going to talk a
little. Okay. Now, I'm going to talk a little bit about what our expectations
little bit about what our expectations were before we released a lot of our
were before we released a lot of our games. Cannibal. We didn't have any. No
games. Cannibal. We didn't have any. No expectations. Cannibal went viral as a
expectations. Cannibal went viral as a non-monetized flash game. We didn't even
non-monetized flash game. We didn't even have an ad on that. Hit like, you know,
have an ad on that. Hit like, you know, 10 million people in the first month. We
10 million people in the first month. We didn't even put an ad on it. Um, we
didn't even put an ad on it. Um, we ported the game to iOS in under 3 weeks.
ported the game to iOS in under 3 weeks. Um, what did it have though? It was it
Um, what did it have though? It was it was novelty. It was the first. It was an
was novelty. It was the first. It was an autorunner. It's like a whole genre now.
autorunner. It's like a whole genre now. Adam's Wikipedia page is hilarious. Um,
Adam's Wikipedia page is hilarious. Um, we had uh this weird media integration
we had uh this weird media integration on Twitter. Twitter was sort of a new
on Twitter. Twitter was sort of a new thing at that point. Um, we also used
thing at that point. Um, we also used the hardware properly. In 2009, people
the hardware properly. In 2009, people were still sticking like virtual
were still sticking like virtual D-pads. Just kills me that that was like
D-pads. Just kills me that that was like a thing. Um, our next game, Gravity
a thing. Um, our next game, Gravity Hook, like, why were the expectations
Hook, like, why were the expectations were so bad? Like, we we've only made
were so bad? Like, we we've only made like 55,000 on this particular game. And
like 55,000 on this particular game. And it took six months too long. And we
it took six months too long. And we totally had a clone. We were beat to
totally had a clone. We were beat to market. Um, and we were late to market.
market. Um, and we were late to market. And the game was actually broken. We
And the game was actually broken. We didn't figure that out for a year. There
didn't figure that out for a year. There weren't enough things to grapple. So,
weren't enough things to grapple. So, good job
good job us. Hundreds. Uh, took 18 months. It was
us. Hundreds. Uh, took 18 months. It was 12 months late. Uh, we thought it was
12 months late. Uh, we thought it was going to take six. It took 18. Um, we
going to take six. It took 18. Um, we expected because we were grown-ups at
expected because we were grown-ups at this point, 300,000 in the first year,
this point, 300,000 in the first year, which we totally hit with Apple backing.
which we totally hit with Apple backing. Um, but that was our worst case number.
Um, but that was our worst case number. Uh, this paid back development for four
Uh, this paid back development for four people. So, it did not pay for our next
people. So, it did not pay for our next project at all. Um, we only had about a
project at all. Um, we only had about a 100,000 maybe to go forward to space out
100,000 maybe to go forward to space out over four people. We expected a long
over four people. We expected a long tail after a high launch and it dropped
tail after a high launch and it dropped off significantly after the first 14
off significantly after the first 14 months. Um, and at the Apple store like
months. Um, and at the Apple store like the store started to change. There's a
the store started to change. There's a race to the bottom. people didn't want
race to the bottom. people didn't want to pay that much for a premium game. Um,
to pay that much for a premium game. Um, and they didn't want to pay money at all
and they didn't want to pay money at all on
on games. Uh,
games. Uh, Capsule, the game is about a fix aix a
Capsule, the game is about a fix aix a fixiation for heaven's sakes. Like it's
fixiation for heaven's sakes. Like it's slightly niche. Like like if you don't
slightly niche. Like like if you don't get PTSD from playing this game, like I
get PTSD from playing this game, like I don't know who you are. Like are you a
don't know who you are. Like are you a human? Are you a robot? Uh, we had no
human? Are you a robot? Uh, we had no expectations for this. Like it was a
expectations for this. Like it was a passion project. Adam like sort of dives
passion project. Adam like sort of dives in on these things. He's like, I got to
in on these things. He's like, I got to do
do this fee. We just missed the effing boat
this fee. We just missed the effing boat entirely. And I'm going to talk a little
entirely. And I'm going to talk a little bit more about this, but our worst case,
bit more about this, but our worst case, like mine and Adam's absolute worst case
like mine and Adam's absolute worst case number on Feist was 100,000. And we hit
number on Feist was 100,000. And we hit that. Like, so people are like only
that. Like, so people are like only 100,000 on Feist. I'm like, dude, like
100,000 on Feist. I'm like, dude, like we hit our worst case number. Like it's
we hit our worst case number. Like it's not a we it's not a failure when you hit
not a we it's not a failure when you hit the number you expect. And we hit that
the number you expect. And we hit that in 4 months. uh panoramical like what
in 4 months. uh panoramical like what the f like how do you market a numovo
the f like how do you market a numovo game? Um worst case in revenue was
game? Um worst case in revenue was 20,000 on that and we hit that in about
20,000 on that and we hit that in about 4 months. So why like why why did our
4 months. So why like why why did our why did we not make our Scrooge McDuck
why did we not make our Scrooge McDuck money? Um what went wrong? We have had
money? Um what went wrong? We have had cloning problems. Like that's a legit
cloning problems. Like that's a legit thing. Uh we made a game about
thing. Uh we made a game about asphyxiation. Not exactly like high
asphyxiation. Not exactly like high popular title. uh remember Limbo like
popular title. uh remember Limbo like that awesome beautiful game that like
that awesome beautiful game that like was in development at the same time as
was in development at the same time as Feice? Vice just took seven years too
Feice? Vice just took seven years too late and we underestimated the uh impact
late and we underestimated the uh impact that that would have on the market. Uh
that that would have on the market. Uh we don't watch streamers. We're like old
we don't watch streamers. We're like old people. Uh we didn't realize that that
people. Uh we didn't realize that that was like a legit thing and we
was like a legit thing and we undervalued that and uh we don't have we
undervalued that and uh we don't have we didn't have the vocabulary really to
didn't have the vocabulary really to explain what panoramical was. How do you
explain what panoramical was. How do you talk to people about this?
talk to people about this? Um, we also like have perceived like
Um, we also like have perceived like clone ripoff problems with Feist. Um,
clone ripoff problems with Feist. Um, short awareness buildup. It was priced
short awareness buildup. It was priced too high at $15. I mean, there's things
too high at $15. I mean, there's things that we just missed that we could have
that we just missed that we could have uh changed if we had had a little bit
uh changed if we had had a little bit more foresight, which now we have. Um,
more foresight, which now we have. Um, because we're doing two new things. We
because we're doing two new things. We have Overland and Night in the Woods
have Overland and Night in the Woods coming out this this year, and they're
coming out this this year, and they're like really really awesome things. So,
like really really awesome things. So, what are we doing now? Um, we are
what are we doing now? Um, we are streamer friendly. like it's been from
streamer friendly. like it's been from the ground up on Overland. Like this is
the ground up on Overland. Like this is a game for streamers. Um we're building
a game for streamers. Um we're building in features that are for streamers
in features that are for streamers specifically. We're talking to streamers
specifically. We're talking to streamers and asking what they want. Um we have
and asking what they want. Um we have replay value. Um Feist is an incredibly
replay value. Um Feist is an incredibly beautiful experience, but it's like a 2
beautiful experience, but it's like a 2 to three hour experience. And how much
to three hour experience. And how much replay value is actually there? Cuz we
replay value is actually there? Cuz we didn't even put in speedruns. Like that
didn't even put in speedruns. Like that wasn't even a thing. We didn't have like
wasn't even a thing. We didn't have like an achievement for that or anything.
an achievement for that or anything. Like you played Feist and you're like
Like you played Feist and you're like that was nice, but Why why would I ever
that was nice, but Why why would I ever play it again? Like it's so ludicrously
play it again? Like it's so ludicrously stupid looking back at it like that. We
stupid looking back at it like that. We miss that. Um so replay value it's
miss that. Um so replay value it's procedurally generated with Overland. Um
procedurally generated with Overland. Um it's basically infinite. Uh art tokenism
it's basically infinite. Uh art tokenism is just like people always say Fini your
is just like people always say Fini your games are so beautiful and it's we look
games are so beautiful and it's we look for things and design for iconic. We
for things and design for iconic. We don't want someone to go like uh oh your
don't want someone to go like uh oh your game looks like X Y and Z. So, we give a
game looks like X Y and Z. So, we give a lot of um like free
lot of um like free uh leeway for our art designers to like
uh leeway for our art designers to like do it, man. Like, own it. It's
do it, man. Like, own it. It's yours. Um we have multiple releases
yours. Um we have multiple releases scheduled, as many press bumps as
scheduled, as many press bumps as possible. Um we're providing the words
possible. Um we're providing the words for players to describe. We really hone
for players to describe. We really hone down on exactly how we want people to
down on exactly how we want people to talk about our game. We have a 100% team
talk about our game. We have a 100% team online presence and we push people. uh
online presence and we push people. uh our art designer for Overland has like,
our art designer for Overland has like, you know, a 100 thousand plus Tumblr
you know, a 100 thousand plus Tumblr followers and we sometimes end up on the
followers and we sometimes end up on the front page of Tumblr. And that's not
front page of Tumblr. And that's not because of us. It's because Heather's
because of us. It's because Heather's awesome and like we're utilizing Heather
awesome and like we're utilizing Heather to push the game forward. Like we're not
to push the game forward. Like we're not shy about that. Um we think Project
shy about that. Um we think Project Vulnerability is an asset. We talk about
Vulnerability is an asset. We talk about our funding problems. We talk about our
our funding problems. We talk about our crazy kids and our insane schedule and
crazy kids and our insane schedule and how we budget and like we're real people
how we budget and like we're real people with real problems and we're in this
with real problems and we're in this industry so we're humans and like that's
industry so we're humans and like that's a legit thing. We want to be that.
a legit thing. We want to be that. Um so people can talk about us in a lot
Um so people can talk about us in a lot of different ways. Um we also have cross
of different ways. Um we also have cross media appeal. Um and we have mailing
media appeal. Um and we have mailing lists. We talk to people outside of the
lists. We talk to people outside of the traditional gaming press like board game
traditional gaming press like board game press especially for Overland kind of
press especially for Overland kind of big deal. There's a lot of like
big deal. There's a lot of like crosspollination there. I can't believe
crosspollination there. I can't believe I just used that word. I'm
I just used that word. I'm sorry. with Night in the Woods. What are
sorry. with Night in the Woods. What are we doing for this? It's super styled
we doing for this? It's super styled driven. Nothing looks like Night in the
driven. Nothing looks like Night in the Woods. This is Scott Benson. This is
Woods. This is Scott Benson. This is what he looks like. Um Kickstarter, the
what he looks like. Um Kickstarter, the supplemental free stories, direct email
supplemental free stories, direct email marketing. I mean, I could go on
marketing. I mean, I could go on forever. Creative marketing, the game
forever. Creative marketing, the game size and team story. Like, these are
size and team story. Like, these are things that are directly correlated with
things that are directly correlated with this particular game when we talk about
this particular game when we talk about this. And conventions. Be not here. Be
this. And conventions. Be not here. Be at a convention. It shows really, really
at a convention. It shows really, really well. So, the pool's getting really,
well. So, the pool's getting really, really crowded. This isn't an
really crowded. This isn't an apocalypse. It's an overcrowded market.
apocalypse. It's an overcrowded market. I told you I got kids and dogs. Uh
I told you I got kids and dogs. Uh because the barrier to entry has been
because the barrier to entry has been democratized. This is basic economics.
democratized. This is basic economics. You have to step up your game. So don't
You have to step up your game. So don't go swimming without your flotation
go swimming without your flotation device. Hedge your bets and hedge those
device. Hedge your bets and hedge those bets and hedge those bets because that's
bets and hedge those bets because that's what we're doing and we have to um have
what we're doing and we have to um have a backup way to make money. You have to
a backup way to make money. You have to eat. Thanks. That's my thing. I'm going
eat. Thanks. That's my thing. I'm going to be in the wrap-up room afterwards.
Thank you, Rebecca. Okay. And please welcome to the stage
Okay. And please welcome to the stage Armen, whose last name I'll allow him to
pronounce. Thanks. Hi everyone. I'm Armen Imbraich. Uh I work as a game
Armen Imbraich. Uh I work as a game designer and PR manager at Coffee Stain
designer and PR manager at Coffee Stain Studios. Uh and I'm going to talk a bit
Studios. Uh and I'm going to talk a bit about our um our experience with the
about our um our experience with the so-called Indie Apocalypse. Uh we've
so-called Indie Apocalypse. Uh we've released um actually not only Ghost
released um actually not only Ghost Simulator, we released a couple of other
Simulator, we released a couple of other games on Steam as well. Uh I'm going to
games on Steam as well. Uh I'm going to talk about Ghost Simulator, but I'm also
talk about Ghost Simulator, but I'm also going to talk a lot about uh Sanctum
going to talk a lot about uh Sanctum Sanctum 1 and Sanctum 2. Uh cuz Sanctum
Sanctum 1 and Sanctum 2. Uh cuz Sanctum 1 came out, you know, in the golden days
1 came out, you know, in the golden days of indies. Uh Sanctum 2 came out a
of indies. Uh Sanctum 2 came out a little bit after that and 6 months after
little bit after that and 6 months after Sanctum 2 came out, people started
Sanctum 2 came out, people started whispering in the Apocalypse. Uh so I
whispering in the Apocalypse. Uh so I think they're really interesting um
think they're really interesting um games to look at. Um when we released
games to look at. Um when we released Sanctum 2, uh I noticed that uh it was a
Sanctum 2, uh I noticed that uh it was a little bit different than when we we
little bit different than when we we released Sanctum 1. Uh we there was some
released Sanctum 1. Uh we there was some loss in discoverability. Uh my gut
loss in discoverability. Uh my gut feeling was that people were a little
feeling was that people were a little bit more reserved uh in 2013. Uh and of
bit more reserved uh in 2013. Uh and of course uh Greenlight hit Steam sometime
course uh Greenlight hit Steam sometime after Sanctum 2 came out. Uh and that
after Sanctum 2 came out. Uh and that was quite a big deal. Um we've all been
was quite a big deal. Um we've all been to Steam Spy.
to Steam Spy. Um, we've all looked at the numbers. Uh,
Um, we've all looked at the numbers. Uh, but what what I think is really
but what what I think is really interesting is I did a quick um search
interesting is I did a quick um search at uh the words um steam steam sale,
at uh the words um steam steam sale, steam holiday sale, and as you can see
steam holiday sale, and as you can see um it's not very big in 2011, but
um it's not very big in 2011, but sometime around 2012 2013, uh it just
sometime around 2012 2013, uh it just goes crazy. Uh, and we've, if you've
goes crazy. Uh, and we've, if you've seen that meme
seen that meme with Gabin with the crown and freaking
with Gabin with the crown and freaking dollar signs behind him, it has like
dollar signs behind him, it has like couple million views on YouTube now. Um,
couple million views on YouTube now. Um, you know, that's when people started,
you know, that's when people started, uh, talking a lot about the Steam sales.
uh, talking a lot about the Steam sales. Uh, and so when we released Sanctum 2,
Uh, and so when we released Sanctum 2, uh, those early award-winning games
uh, those early award-winning games like, you know, Braid, Limbo, Fez, um,
like, you know, Braid, Limbo, Fez, um, if you've seen Indie Game, the movie,
if you've seen Indie Game, the movie, all those games from that movie, uh,
all those games from that movie, uh, started going on 75% off. So, what we
started going on 75% off. So, what we noticed was that we're not just
noticed was that we're not just competing with the games that are
competing with the games that are releasing right now. We're competing
releasing right now. We're competing with the games that had like 95 in
with the games that had like 95 in Metacritic score uh, and their own 75%
Metacritic score uh, and their own 75% off. Uh there was a quote uh that a
off. Uh there was a quote uh that a player said. He was like, "Oh, I was
player said. He was like, "Oh, I was such a huge fan of Sanctum 1. Can't wait
such a huge fan of Sanctum 1. Can't wait till Sanctum 2 is on 75% off." And as a
till Sanctum 2 is on 75% off." And as a developer, you know, you get pissed off.
developer, you know, you get pissed off. You're like, "What is there a
You're like, "What is there a competition that I know about that's all
competition that I know about that's all about giving as little money as possible
about giving as little money as possible to the developers that make games that
to the developers that make games that you love?" But of course, I mean, that's
you love?" But of course, I mean, that's how consumers work. That's how I work.
how consumers work. That's how I work. I'm not going to go and buy a shirt
I'm not going to go and buy a shirt that's really expensive just because I
that's really expensive just because I want to give as much money as possible
want to give as much money as possible to the guys that made the shirt. Um, so
to the guys that made the shirt. Um, so that's something that we need to get
that's something that we need to get used uh used to. Uh, when we made
used uh used to. Uh, when we made Sanctum 2, it had so much more content
Sanctum 2, it had so much more content than Sanctum 1. Uh, Sanctum 1 released
than Sanctum 1. Uh, Sanctum 1 released with like three levels. Sanctum 2 came
with like three levels. Sanctum 2 came out with like 16 levels. We had so many
out with like 16 levels. We had so many more enemies, uh, more weapon variation.
more enemies, uh, more weapon variation. It was just like bigger and better in
It was just like bigger and better in every single way. Uh but it still sold
every single way. Uh but it still sold roughly as well as Sanctum 2. Uh which
roughly as well as Sanctum 2. Uh which kind of it messed us up. Uh because you
kind of it messed us up. Uh because you realize that, you know, just because you
realize that, you know, just because you make twice as much content, that doesn't
make twice as much content, that doesn't mean that you're going to get twice as
mean that you're going to get twice as many sales. Uh and you know, maybe you
many sales. Uh and you know, maybe you don't think that's a big deal, but when
don't think that's a big deal, but when making twice as much content, it costs
making twice as much content, it costs you hundreds of thousands of dollars,
you hundreds of thousands of dollars, then that's uh you know, it's quite a
then that's uh you know, it's quite a big deal to think about.
big deal to think about. Um, and oh, 40% of the players never
Um, and oh, 40% of the players never finished the first level in Sanctum 2.
finished the first level in Sanctum 2. We had an achievement when you finished
We had an achievement when you finished the first level. Um, and mo a lot of our
the first level. Um, and mo a lot of our players didn't even have that. Uh,
players didn't even have that. Uh, probably because a lot of people bought
probably because a lot of people bought our game on a sale, never installed it.
our game on a sale, never installed it. A lot of people bought our game, started
A lot of people bought our game, started it, and they were like, "Ah, I'm going
it, and they were like, "Ah, I'm going to make some food instead. Do something
to make some food instead. Do something else. Can't be bothered." You know, it
else. Can't be bothered." You know, it was just
was just $2.74 either way. Um, so that kind of o
$2.74 either way. Um, so that kind of o opened up my eyes for that. Um, when we
opened up my eyes for that. Um, when we made Sanctum 2, the purpose was that,
made Sanctum 2, the purpose was that, you know, we're gonna make the coolest,
you know, we're gonna make the coolest, we're like 20 employees at Coffee Stain.
we're like 20 employees at Coffee Stain. So, we were like, we want to make the
So, we were like, we want to make the coolest indie game that you can make. We
coolest indie game that you can make. We want to set the bar for indie games. Uh,
want to set the bar for indie games. Uh, we joked around that we were like small
we joked around that we were like small AAA, uh, lowercase AAA. Um, and the
AAA, uh, lowercase AAA. Um, and the purpose of Goat Simulator was just just
purpose of Goat Simulator was just just to make the craziest thing we could
to make the craziest thing we could possibly conceive. And of course, Goat
possibly conceive. And of course, Goat Simulator was widely more successful
Simulator was widely more successful than Sega 2. Um, this is the revenue uh
than Sega 2. Um, this is the revenue uh on Steam for us uh our games. Uh, as you
on Steam for us uh our games. Uh, as you can see, Goat Simulator has one/ird of
can see, Goat Simulator has one/ird of Ghost Simulator has more than all our
Ghost Simulator has more than all our other games combined.
other games combined. Um, and as you can see, uh, Sanctum
Um, and as you can see, uh, Sanctum Sanctum 2 is sold a little bit better
Sanctum 2 is sold a little bit better than Sanctum 1, but I think that's
than Sanctum 1, but I think that's mainly because we discounted Sanctum 2
mainly because we discounted Sanctum 2 harder than we did with Sanctum 1.
harder than we did with Sanctum 1. Um, why is the market like this? I think
Um, why is the market like this? I think it's because money isn't the bottleneck
it's because money isn't the bottleneck for consumers anymore. It's time.
for consumers anymore. It's time. Especially with um Humble Bundles. You
Especially with um Humble Bundles. You know, you pay $1, you get like five
know, you pay $1, you get like five award-winning indie games and one AAA
award-winning indie games and one AAA game. Um, so it's not like you don't I
game. Um, so it's not like you don't I don't have the I don't have the $14 to
don't have the I don't have the $14 to buy this game. It's more like I have a
buy this game. It's more like I have a backlog of 100 games that I haven't
backlog of 100 games that I haven't played yet, so I don't want to buy any
played yet, so I don't want to buy any more games till I finish those. Uh Steam
more games till I finish those. Uh Steam doesn't have physical shelves. It's not
doesn't have physical shelves. It's not like when you're at GameStop, you have
like when you're at GameStop, you have um you know like 50 games on shelves and
um you know like 50 games on shelves and they have them for 6 months and then
they have them for 6 months and then they remove them and replace them with
they remove them and replace them with new ones. They have all the games that
new ones. They have all the games that ever released on Steam. Uh so you're not
ever released on Steam. Uh so you're not competing with other people on your
competing with other people on your shelf. You're competing with every
shelf. You're competing with every single game that's ever released on
single game that's ever released on Steam. Uh and they're also on
Steam. Uh and they're also on 75%. Uh so I'm going to get I've been
75%. Uh so I'm going to get I've been I've been very negative. I'm going to
I've been very negative. I'm going to get to my more positive slide. How do
get to my more positive slide. How do you release a game in today's market? I
you release a game in today's market? I think um making a radically different
think um making a radically different game just gives you a better chance of
game just gives you a better chance of success because it bypasses a lot of the
success because it bypasses a lot of the barriers that are on Steam right now
barriers that are on Steam right now such as people's huge backlogs. Uh why
such as people's huge backlogs. Uh why buy something that's similar? Like if
buy something that's similar? Like if you're going to make you love Braid and
you're going to make you love Braid and you're going to make something similar
you're going to make something similar to Braid, why would people buy that when
to Braid, why would people buy that when they maybe maybe they already own Braid
they maybe maybe they already own Braid and haven't played it? Maybe braid is
and haven't played it? Maybe braid is going to go on a sale soon anyway.
going to go on a sale soon anyway. Um, so I I I think basically uh what
Um, so I I I think basically uh what what it comes down to is that we're just
what it comes down to is that we're just going to get more variation on Steam.
going to get more variation on Steam. People are just going to try and, you
People are just going to try and, you know, make even more different things uh
know, make even more different things uh than they did previously. Uh it helps
than they did previously. Uh it helps with discovery. There's a game called
with discovery. There's a game called Cluster Truck made by genius Swedish
Cluster Truck made by genius Swedish people. Um uh it's about [ __ ] trucks.
people. Um uh it's about [ __ ] trucks. Uh, and uh, you know, a game like that
Uh, and uh, you know, a game like that is when you see cluster truck, you just
is when you see cluster truck, you just got to click on it. And I hope go home
got to click on it. And I hope go home and look up cluster truck. You're going
and look up cluster truck. You're going to remember the name anyway, right? Um,
to remember the name anyway, right? Um, and sharability. I think games that are
and sharability. I think games that are fundamentally different from what you've
fundamentally different from what you've you've played so far are better water
you've played so far are better water cooler conversation. Uh, it's more
cooler conversation. Uh, it's more interesting to talk about that insane
interesting to talk about that insane game that you played um yesterday than
game that you played um yesterday than uh, oh, I played this uh, very well
uh, oh, I played this uh, very well balanced game with good content and it
balanced game with good content and it had a good variation in enemies and
had a good variation in enemies and there were a lot of different weapons.
there were a lot of different weapons. It's just more fun to talk about
It's just more fun to talk about something that's totally crazy.
You did it. I did it. [Music]
Did you want presenter tools or not? Uh yeah, I forgot. Thank you so much,
yeah, I forgot. Thank you so much, Armen. And please welcome to the stage
Armen. And please welcome to the stage Jordan Thomas of
Jordan Thomas of [Applause]
Question. Thanks, Randy. Uh yeah, so hey, I'm Jordan. You're looking at a
hey, I'm Jordan. You're looking at a picture of The Magic Circle. It's the
picture of The Magic Circle. It's the indie game we released in July of 2015.
indie game we released in July of 2015. I'm going to talk to you a little bit
I'm going to talk to you a little bit about how it did on Steam. uh because as
about how it did on Steam. uh because as you pointed out it's all of it on Steam
you pointed out it's all of it on Steam Spy anyway so why not share? But to do
Spy anyway so why not share? But to do that uh I kind of need to find a
that uh I kind of need to find a metaphor that makes this a little bit
metaphor that makes this a little bit more fun because Randy we only have the
more fun because Randy we only have the one game and uh this is all still pretty
one game and uh this is all still pretty raw. So in that spirit I'm going to go
raw. So in that spirit I'm going to go with enhance enhance
with enhance enhance enhance a six-minute murder mystery. Uh
enhance a six-minute murder mystery. Uh the indie apocalypse if it exists is
the indie apocalypse if it exists is such a widespread phenomenon or cycle
such a widespread phenomenon or cycle that I can't wrap my head around it
that I can't wrap my head around it without sort of zooming in personalizing
without sort of zooming in personalizing it. thinking of it as a maybe a predator
it. thinking of it as a maybe a predator that has it out for games like ours. So
that has it out for games like ours. So before I can do that though, I need to
before I can do that though, I need to talk about the game from an objective
talk about the game from an objective point of view and then we'll get into
point of view and then we'll get into the subjective fun stuff that might have
the subjective fun stuff that might have doomed us. So the Magic Circle is the
doomed us. So the Magic Circle is the story of a legendarily unfinished game.
story of a legendarily unfinished game. You play the hero of that world and
You play the hero of that world and you're sick of waiting for your story to
you're sick of waiting for your story to start. So you steal the tools of game
start. So you steal the tools of game design and sort of fix the game from the
design and sort of fix the game from the inside. Retailed at 20 bucks. Uh our
inside. Retailed at 20 bucks. Uh our team comes from the Bioshock series,
team comes from the Bioshock series, Dishonored and so forth. In theory, we
Dishonored and so forth. In theory, we know how to close from many years in AAA
know how to close from many years in AAA shipping lots of titles. We spent
shipping lots of titles. We spent roughly 100k of real money, not counting
roughly 100k of real money, not counting crucially two years of opportunity cost.
crucially two years of opportunity cost. But that did lead to some strong
But that did lead to some strong mainstream media coverage for our game.
mainstream media coverage for our game. We had a lot of positive attention
We had a lot of positive attention leading up and a reasonable social reach
leading up and a reasonable social reach uh when our trailer came
uh when our trailer came out. So we sort of leveled off at about
out. So we sort of leveled off at about 80% on Metacritic, 90% uh on user review
80% on Metacritic, 90% uh on user review scores, and we were recently nominated
scores, and we were recently nominated by the IGF for excellence in narrative.
by the IGF for excellence in narrative. Thank you, by the way, if you're in
Thank you, by the way, if you're in here. Um, but the upshot is that we sold
here. Um, but the upshot is that we sold about 16 and a half thousand copies and
about 16 and a half thousand copies and we're on 44,000 wish lists. So, this is
we're on 44,000 wish lists. So, this is not sustainable for us to go on making
not sustainable for us to go on making games like The Magic Circle. We need to
games like The Magic Circle. We need to move on and
move on and fast. So, this chalk outline kind of
fast. So, this chalk outline kind of represents how The Magic Circle did on
represents how The Magic Circle did on Steam now that you know. Um, we are a
Steam now that you know. Um, we are a little bit like a teddy bear who
little bit like a teddy bear who wandered in the woods in search of gold
wandered in the woods in search of gold and got promptly sh. Uh, so the question
and got promptly sh. Uh, so the question is though, did we shiver ourselves?
is though, did we shiver ourselves? Right? Uh, did some of the some of the
Right? Uh, did some of the some of the decisions we make come more more subject
decisions we make come more more subject and more internal or are they things
and more internal or are they things that might affect games like yours?
that might affect games like yours? Well, let's start with the external
Well, let's start with the external stuff, the stuff that at the very least
stuff, the stuff that at the very least there are many parallels for in other
there are many parallels for in other short narrative games. So, first, that's
short narrative games. So, first, that's our big thing. 3 to 6 hours give or
our big thing. 3 to 6 hours give or take. And Steam players responded with
take. And Steam players responded with violent negativity to that. They of of
violent negativity to that. They of of our negative reviews, over 50% mentioned
our negative reviews, over 50% mentioned length as the dealbreaker. Even reviews
length as the dealbreaker. Even reviews that otherwise read like ads for us.
that otherwise read like ads for us. that surprised us. Um, but it dovetales
that surprised us. Um, but it dovetales in a pretty ugly way with the culture of
in a pretty ugly way with the culture of sales on Steam. As some of my colleagues
sales on Steam. As some of my colleagues have pointed out, uh, Steam players know
have pointed out, uh, Steam players know that on a long enough timeline, they can
that on a long enough timeline, they can have your game for next to nothing. And
have your game for next to nothing. And so, it's not about whether they can
so, it's not about whether they can afford you. It's about whether they it
afford you. It's about whether they it is love at first sight, whether there's
is love at first sight, whether there's a reason to buy your game right now,
a reason to buy your game right now, because otherwise they put you on a wish
because otherwise they put you on a wish list and promptly forget you. And then
list and promptly forget you. And then finally, Steam is very much like the App
finally, Steam is very much like the App Store, as my friends have mentioned
Store, as my friends have mentioned here. Uh the the truth is that a short
here. Uh the the truth is that a short narrative game that does not update as
narrative game that does not update as often is less commonly on the front page
often is less commonly on the front page of Steam. So keep that in mind. Now,
of Steam. So keep that in mind. Now, what about the more flattering stuff
what about the more flattering stuff that suggests that we screwed ourselves
that suggests that we screwed ourselves and we can do better in the future?
and we can do better in the future? Well, uh first we had no marketing
Well, uh first we had no marketing budget. Uh we kind of um ignored the
budget. Uh we kind of um ignored the potential for marketing through
potential for marketing through Kickstarter because we felt it was at
Kickstarter because we felt it was at odds with the tone of the game. Uh we
odds with the tone of the game. Uh we focused at first on making a great game
focused at first on making a great game and hope the rest would sort of
and hope the rest would sort of self-align. That was the wisdom of 2013
self-align. That was the wisdom of 2013 when we started the thing. But the big
when we started the thing. But the big one was that our game is pretty
one was that our game is pretty polarizing. Um, it has a very stark art
polarizing. Um, it has a very stark art style which people tend to love or hate.
style which people tend to love or hate. Uh, it was buil as a comedy, but it has
Uh, it was buil as a comedy, but it has some very serious parts. It sort of
some very serious parts. It sort of focuses on how games and game developers
focuses on how games and game developers can go wrong. And I remember the IGN
can go wrong. And I remember the IGN review is just like this game is angry.
review is just like this game is angry. And that kind of stuff uh leads to to
And that kind of stuff uh leads to to fairly polarized opinions in the user
fairly polarized opinions in the user base as well. So, but we had compromised
base as well. So, but we had compromised for so long that we really needed to
for so long that we really needed to make something that was radically unlike
make something that was radically unlike everything we had done before. And we're
everything we had done before. And we're still quite proud of that, but it has
still quite proud of that, but it has had some cost. And we on that note could
had some cost. And we on that note could have focused on something that had a
have focused on something that had a more clear genre for our debut title,
more clear genre for our debut title, which a lot of developers have done. Uh
which a lot of developers have done. Uh Steam players really do respond well to
Steam players really do respond well to your game being like anything some some
your game being like anything some some kind of touchstone. Uh so, you know,
kind of touchstone. Uh so, you know, what does that where does that really
what does that where does that really leave us? Uh question uh and and you
leave us? Uh question uh and and you guys if you are thinking of making
guys if you are thinking of making something like this. Well, first I would
something like this. Well, first I would say that if you are considering a short
say that if you are considering a short narrative game, maybe don't rely on
narrative game, maybe don't rely on Steam to make you piles and piles of
Steam to make you piles and piles of gold and fund the next projects
gold and fund the next projects exclusively. And if you do, certainly
exclusively. And if you do, certainly consider uh some expansion plan so that
consider uh some expansion plan so that it isn't just a fire and forget project.
it isn't just a fire and forget project. There is a happy ending here though,
There is a happy ending here though, which is that teddy bear chuck out line
which is that teddy bear chuck out line was pregnant and the paramedics made it
was pregnant and the paramedics made it to her baby. We we we were here. I may
to her baby. We we we were here. I may talk to you, but just look at him. He's
talk to you, but just look at him. He's kind of mean and he might turn out to be
kind of mean and he might turn out to be some sort of vengeance-driven vigilante.
some sort of vengeance-driven vigilante. Uh the the time that that we have spent
Uh the the time that that we have spent on the magic circle has sort of claimed
on the magic circle has sort of claimed our innocence. We are we are not the
our innocence. We are we are not the same as we were when we started out and
same as we were when we started out and that might be healthy, but it still
that might be healthy, but it still feels like a little bit of a loss right
feels like a little bit of a loss right now. Um but um curation is your friend.
now. Um but um curation is your friend. Uh curated bundles coupled with consoles
Uh curated bundles coupled with consoles which are harder to get onto have a very
which are harder to get onto have a very strong possibility of bringing your game
strong possibility of bringing your game to a somewhat sustainable overall loop.
to a somewhat sustainable overall loop. relying on Steam solely was was sort of
relying on Steam solely was was sort of our mistake. Uh Mike Rose's talk, which
our mistake. Uh Mike Rose's talk, which you can find at that link or just in the
you can find at that link or just in the GDC vault under Mike Rose, uh talks
GDC vault under Mike Rose, uh talks about how if you have reasonable support
about how if you have reasonable support from the platform holder and uh decent
from the platform holder and uh decent scores, you can see up to 30,000 sales
scores, you can see up to 30,000 sales on the PS4, 20,000 on the Xbox One. That
on the PS4, 20,000 on the Xbox One. That even somewhere in between would put us
even somewhere in between would put us in a position where we might recoup some
in a position where we might recoup some of that opportunity cost I mentioned
of that opportunity cost I mentioned earlier. Our next project is much safer.
earlier. Our next project is much safer. Uh it is multiplayer focused. uh has a
Uh it is multiplayer focused. uh has a very long tail and does actually have a
very long tail and does actually have a a solution in place as a primary design
a solution in place as a primary design goal to help players understand why they
goal to help players understand why they would want it now. But I can't go deep
would want it now. But I can't go deep on that. However, if you survive through
on that. However, if you survive through AAA, especially PC AAA, this might be
AAA, especially PC AAA, this might be something a little bit familiar to you.
something a little bit familiar to you. The the flight from PCs to consoles, the
The the flight from PCs to consoles, the focus on multiplayer and the receptivity
focus on multiplayer and the receptivity to publishers, all of which uh we kind
to publishers, all of which uh we kind of went through this once already. I'm
of went through this once already. I'm just hoping that if we go through
just hoping that if we go through another one of these boom buff cycles,
another one of these boom buff cycles, we can pick a better name than Indie
we can pick a better name than Indie Apocalypse.
Apocalypse. [Applause]
Thanks. Thank you, Jordan. All
Jordan. All right. Super cool animation. Okay. Uh
right. Super cool animation. Okay. Uh again, I'm Randy Smith of Tigerstyle and
again, I'm Randy Smith of Tigerstyle and um Tiger Style's first indication that
um Tiger Style's first indication that there might be such a thing as an indie
there might be such a thing as an indie apocalypse was when we released a game
apocalypse was when we released a game in 2015 and it was doing much less
in 2015 and it was doing much less business than games we released uh
business than games we released uh previously in 2009 and 2012. So what
previously in 2009 and 2012. So what we're looking at here is our first 6
we're looking at here is our first 6 months of revenue for a flat comparison.
months of revenue for a flat comparison. Uh but it gets a lot worse if you add in
Uh but it gets a lot worse if you add in lifetime revenue and development time.
lifetime revenue and development time. So Spider 2, our most recent game, took
So Spider 2, our most recent game, took us nine person years of effort, but it
us nine person years of effort, but it made significantly less money. So if you
made significantly less money. So if you look at that in terms of ROI,
look at that in terms of ROI, specifically net revenue per person
specifically net revenue per person year, um in 2009, uh Spider 1 was making
year, um in 2009, uh Spider 1 was making us close to half a million dollars, um
us close to half a million dollars, um per person year, but uh Spider 2 is
per person year, but uh Spider 2 is making us 13,000. So this is a very not
making us 13,000. So this is a very not sustainable, um indication. So we
sustainable, um indication. So we actually had every reason to believe
actually had every reason to believe that Spider 2 was going to be a better
that Spider 2 was going to be a better commercial product than Spider 1. I
commercial product than Spider 1. I mean, it's on more platforms. Um,
mean, it's on more platforms. Um, there's this hilarious story about how
there's this hilarious story about how we to promote Spider 1, we just released
we to promote Spider 1, we just released it into the app store one day with
it into the app store one day with absolutely no messaging or promotion
absolutely no messaging or promotion whatsoever. Um, compared to Spider 2
whatsoever. Um, compared to Spider 2 where we did like, you know, a bunch of
where we did like, you know, a bunch of the things indies do when they're
the things indies do when they're promoting a game. We had the social
promoting a game. We had the social media stuff and a website and a trailer
media stuff and a website and a trailer and we went to expose and all that kind
and we went to expose and all that kind of stuff. Um, they're both both games
of stuff. Um, they're both both games were covered pretty well by the mobile
were covered pretty well by the mobile press, but Spider 1 was absolutely
press, but Spider 1 was absolutely ignored by the core gamer press whereas
ignored by the core gamer press whereas Spider 2 was picked up very favorably by
Spider 2 was picked up very favorably by like, you know, a good smattering of the
like, you know, a good smattering of the who's who of the core gamer press. um
who's who of the core gamer press. um they're reviewed about the same way.
they're reviewed about the same way. They're both good games um by most
They're both good games um by most metrics, if not all metrics. Um Spider 1
metrics, if not all metrics. Um Spider 1 is this very minimal game. It's
is this very minimal game. It's extremely focused around this one core
extremely focused around this one core high concept. Um and Spider 2, you know,
high concept. Um and Spider 2, you know, you better believe we spent those nine
you better believe we spent those nine years like adding stuff. There's tons
years like adding stuff. There's tons more content. It features lots of
more content. It features lots of polish, depth, replayability. Uh we kept
polish, depth, replayability. Uh we kept the previous high concept and we
the previous high concept and we expanded it with some things including
expanded it with some things including this feature where it knows where you
this feature where it knows where you are in the real world and then it
are in the real world and then it matches the time of day and weather in
matches the time of day and weather in the game with the what where it is at
the game with the what where it is at your location. Um, so all kinds of
your location. Um, so all kinds of things for the press to talk about,
things for the press to talk about, right? Um, but despite that, like Spider
right? Um, but despite that, like Spider 2 did all the work. Spider 1 got all the
2 did all the work. Spider 1 got all the the glory. It was the one that got
the glory. It was the one that got editor's choice from Apple. Um, Spider 2
editor's choice from Apple. Um, Spider 2 got a less important banner from Apple.
got a less important banner from Apple. Uh, no coverage from Steam whatsoever.
Uh, no coverage from Steam whatsoever. Um, Spider 1 was game of the year on a
Um, Spider 1 was game of the year on a bunch of different websites and IGF and
bunch of different websites and IGF and some other stuff. And Spider 2 is, you
some other stuff. And Spider 2 is, you know, on on the year end of year list
know, on on the year end of year list for quite a few mobile websites, which
for quite a few mobile websites, which is very pleasant. So, obviously Spyder 2
is very pleasant. So, obviously Spyder 2 is a better product, right? But is it
is a better product, right? But is it three and a half times better if we look
three and a half times better if we look at the first 6 months of revenue? Or if
at the first 6 months of revenue? Or if you want to go ROI, is it a 40 times
you want to go ROI, is it a 40 times better product? Cuz if it's not, then
better product? Cuz if it's not, then maybe the market's to blame, right? So,
maybe the market's to blame, right? So, do we blame the Indie Apocalypse? Well,
do we blame the Indie Apocalypse? Well, the week we came out, you could buy
the week we came out, you could buy Batman Arkham City Game of the Year
Batman Arkham City Game of the Year Edition with all downloadable content
Edition with all downloadable content for less than $5 on Steam. And of
for less than $5 on Steam. And of course, Clash of Clans was still pulling
course, Clash of Clans was still pulling in $1.5 million every single day. And we
in $1.5 million every single day. And we cannot compete with these games,
cannot compete with these games, obviously. But, you know, at the same
obviously. But, you know, at the same time, there was a game with absolutely
time, there was a game with absolutely no graphics about programming in
no graphics about programming in assembly language that was kicking our
assembly language that was kicking our ass and making the kind of money that we
ass and making the kind of money that we were used to making. And there was a
were used to making. And there was a chooser an adventure game that was told
chooser an adventure game that was told with push notifications that was raking
with push notifications that was raking in lots more than that. And this kind of
in lots more than that. And this kind of illustrates a big games versus small
illustrates a big games versus small games concept that I'm going to come
games concept that I'm going to come back to later. So, was there something
back to later. So, was there something wrong with Spider 2? Was that the
wrong with Spider 2? Was that the problem? Well, it was a multiplatform
problem? Well, it was a multiplatform game and that among other things
game and that among other things probably meant that's why we got less
probably meant that's why we got less support from Apple. Uh, it's not a great
support from Apple. Uh, it's not a great match for Steam. like it was really hard
match for Steam. like it was really hard for us to shake our mobile legacy
for us to shake our mobile legacy despite working on that an awful lot.
despite working on that an awful lot. Um, and you know, we didn't really play
Um, and you know, we didn't really play the Steam PR game very
the Steam PR game very well. Um, is it because it's a sequel?
well. Um, is it because it's a sequel? Um, I think it might be. Um, we felt
Um, I think it might be. Um, we felt like this was a good decision because it
like this was a good decision because it was less risky. We had a fan base that
was less risky. We had a fan base that was clamoring for us to produce a
was clamoring for us to produce a sequel. We knew that we hadn't reached
sequel. We knew that we hadn't reached our full audience and so we could expand
our full audience and so we could expand into them. Um, and we did we did our
into them. Um, and we did we did our jobs correctly for sequels. Like all of
jobs correctly for sequels. Like all of the press quotes are like this is
the press quotes are like this is exactly how you're supposed to do
exactly how you're supposed to do sequels. you know, we retained
sequels. you know, we retained everything that was good about the old
everything that was good about the old and then we made a bunch of new stuff,
and then we made a bunch of new stuff, too. And but, you know, Armen and and
too. And but, you know, Armen and and Jordan have already alluded to this,
Jordan have already alluded to this, like this is an audience that's
like this is an audience that's interested in cool new things. And so,
interested in cool new things. And so, like, even if your design and art and
like, even if your design and art and everything about your game is like all
everything about your game is like all but objectively better than the prior
but objectively better than the prior game, which they gave a game of the year
game, which they gave a game of the year award to, like the, you know, those that
award to, like the, you know, those that type of attention is going to fresh new
type of attention is going to fresh new concepts in this market. The indie
concepts in this market. The indie market likes high concept stuff. And so,
market likes high concept stuff. And so, ironically, by adding lots more stuff,
ironically, by adding lots more stuff, we were sort of diluting our high
we were sort of diluting our high concept. like the audience had to spend
concept. like the audience had to spend more effort to get to the part that was
more effort to get to the part that was cool and unique and fresh about the game
cool and unique and fresh about the game this time around. We might have been
this time around. We might have been better off just focusing on one thing.
better off just focusing on one thing. Like this is just the game about our
Like this is just the game about our cool mystery concepts or this is just a
cool mystery concepts or this is just a game that focuses on that real world
game that focuses on that real world location time and weather type stuff.
location time and weather type stuff. Maybe a different way to think about it
Maybe a different way to think about it is to think about what Spider 1 did
is to think about what Spider 1 did correctly or benefited from why it was
correctly or benefited from why it was successful. And so, you know, uh it was
successful. And so, you know, uh it was released at the dawn of the app store.
released at the dawn of the app store. It was a much less crowded market. Free
It was a much less crowded market. Free to play didn't exist yet. The market was
to play didn't exist yet. The market was growing very rapidly. And um you know
growing very rapidly. And um you know our intention was to stand out by making
our intention was to stand out by making a very solid heartfelt game on a
a very solid heartfelt game on a platform where that wasn't the standard
platform where that wasn't the standard at the time. So among other things it
at the time. So among other things it made Apple's hardware look good and they
made Apple's hardware look good and they really you know supported and featured
really you know supported and featured us a lot. So coming back to this chart
us a lot. So coming back to this chart another way to consider this comparison
another way to consider this comparison is like you know Spider 2 uh hit a
is like you know Spider 2 uh hit a market upswing and it hit the right
market upswing and it hit the right notes to ride that upswing versus Spider
notes to ride that upswing versus Spider 2 which was released into a parallel
2 which was released into a parallel marketplace and it was not Indie
marketplace and it was not Indie Apocalypse retardant. So what do I mean
Apocalypse retardant. So what do I mean uh by an indie apocalypse retardant
uh by an indie apocalypse retardant game? Um, well, here's my thoughts on
game? Um, well, here's my thoughts on how to approach this. Uh, I like to
how to approach this. Uh, I like to think about games that are big, medium,
think about games that are big, medium, and small, and where big and small are
and small, and where big and small are good and medium is a bad idea, uh,
good and medium is a bad idea, uh, financially speaking. And this is kind
financially speaking. And this is kind of mostly in terms of production effort.
of mostly in terms of production effort. Like, you can see the big games are kind
Like, you can see the big games are kind of like the triple A games, if not AAA.
of like the triple A games, if not AAA. Um, and the problem is that medium games
Um, and the problem is that medium games can't compete in the arms race against
can't compete in the arms race against those big games, which are so expansive
those big games, which are so expansive and they have all this depth and
and they have all this depth and spectacle and gloriously long play
spectacle and gloriously long play times. And compared to small games,
times. And compared to small games, medium games are like really expensive
medium games are like really expensive and they're also diluted. you know,
and they're also diluted. you know, those small games get right to the
those small games get right to the crucial high concept more immediately.
crucial high concept more immediately. They're more self-evident. Um, you know,
They're more self-evident. Um, you know, but that said, there's a bunch of other
but that said, there's a bunch of other medium-sized games I could list here.
medium-sized games I could list here. You know, potent potentially you could
You know, potent potentially you could qualify them that way. And they've done
qualify them that way. And they've done very well. So, you can think about, hey,
very well. So, you can think about, hey, why did these games succeed whereas
why did these games succeed whereas Spider 2 did not. I think it's super
Spider 2 did not. I think it's super important to target your platform, you
important to target your platform, you know. So, um, if you're targeting the
know. So, um, if you're targeting the App Store, it's a really good idea to be
App Store, it's a really good idea to be Apple exclusive and to show off their
Apple exclusive and to show off their hardware features. um that audience
hardware features. um that audience really likes games that are very
really likes games that are very immediate, very beautiful, and your goal
immediate, very beautiful, and your goal is to get some featuring from Apple
is to get some featuring from Apple because if you don't, you can, you know,
because if you don't, you can, you know, just throw your game out the window. Um
just throw your game out the window. Um and you know on Steam there's a bunch of
and you know on Steam there's a bunch of design qualities that the Steam audience
design qualities that the Steam audience seems to like. They are looking for
seems to like. They are looking for deeper, more beefier, more involved
deeper, more beefier, more involved games. They think like things like
games. They think like things like systemic gameplay, replay, multiplayer,
systemic gameplay, replay, multiplayer, and so forth. You should uh I see games
and so forth. You should uh I see games successful when they like have this very
successful when they like have this very long PR campaign with multiple stages to
long PR campaign with multiple stages to build a big audience and awareness
build a big audience and awareness before the game comes out. And the goal
before the game comes out. And the goal is to launch strong and have those Steam
is to launch strong and have those Steam metrics put you on the front page with
metrics put you on the front page with featuring. And of course, there's
featuring. And of course, there's consoles as as Jordan mentioned last
consoles as as Jordan mentioned last year, Mike Rose spoke at the IGS about
year, Mike Rose spoke at the IGS about the console market in particular. It's
the console market in particular. It's still curated, so it does limit supply.
still curated, so it does limit supply. And uh you know, we're we're porting
And uh you know, we're we're porting Spyder um to the PS4 and VA. So, we're
Spyder um to the PS4 and VA. So, we're hoping that will work out for us. Um I
hoping that will work out for us. Um I actually don't think it's a wonderfully
actually don't think it's a wonderfully great idea to go multiplatform on launch
great idea to go multiplatform on launch day. Um especially if you're a smaller
day. Um especially if you're a smaller game on that side of the spectrum. You
game on that side of the spectrum. You know, I know there's this lever in Unity
know, I know there's this lever in Unity or whatever, and you can just pull it,
or whatever, and you can just pull it, and it pops out all these versions, and
and it pops out all these versions, and it's so free or whatever. Um, but
it's so free or whatever. Um, but actually, these things are a big
actually, these things are a big distraction. They take a lot of time and
distraction. They take a lot of time and attention. You really should be
attention. You really should be tailoring your PR campaigns and your
tailoring your PR campaigns and your game design around them. So, my approach
game design around them. So, my approach would be like, don't do it
would be like, don't do it simultaneously. If a game is taking off
simultaneously. If a game is taking off and is successful, think about where to
and is successful, think about where to port it. And if you're going to port
port it. And if you're going to port between App Store and Steam, definitely
between App Store and Steam, definitely start on Steam, not the other way
start on Steam, not the other way around.
around. I think indie teams of the future are
I think indie teams of the future are probably going to need dedicated PR
probably going to need dedicated PR people and dedicated business people,
people and dedicated business people, which is a little sad because if you're
which is a little sad because if you're like me, you sort of got into indies to
like me, you sort of got into indies to get away from this kind of stuff, but
get away from this kind of stuff, but there's a lot of really important work
there's a lot of really important work here and you have to treat your business
here and you have to treat your business like a business and have people who are
like a business and have people who are helping out with these important things.
helping out with these important things. Um, and I think it's, you know, we might
Um, and I think it's, you know, we might need to reconsider publishers because
need to reconsider publishers because they provide all of those things that I
they provide all of those things that I just mentioned and they also really help
just mentioned and they also really help with discoverability. They can provide
with discoverability. They can provide you with funding.
you with funding. Um, when I think about the future of
Um, when I think about the future of indie games, I wonder a little bit. Uh,
indie games, I wonder a little bit. Uh, you know, I like to compare to like
you know, I like to compare to like indie music or indie film. Uh, indie
indie music or indie film. Uh, indie music is just an enormously like
music is just an enormously like ridiculously crowded space. And
ridiculously crowded space. And basically, everyone's a hobbyist who
basically, everyone's a hobbyist who doesn't ever think they're ever going to
doesn't ever think they're ever going to make any money no matter how great, you
make any money no matter how great, you know, their their album is or whatever.
know, their their album is or whatever. Uh, indie film's not that far apart. The
Uh, indie film's not that far apart. The barrier to entry is a little higher, but
barrier to entry is a little higher, but it's still risky. Um, and I wonder a
it's still risky. Um, and I wonder a little bit about are we going to come up
little bit about are we going to come up with better discoverability tools? Like
with better discoverability tools? Like indie music's got a really strong
indie music's got a really strong emphasis on blogs and labels and so
emphasis on blogs and labels and so forth. Um, and just to end on a high
forth. Um, and just to end on a high note, I just want to point out like I'm
note, I just want to point out like I'm old enough to remember what it was like
old enough to remember what it was like to make games in the 90s and it was
to make games in the 90s and it was [ __ ] awful. Like the publishers had a
[ __ ] awful. Like the publishers had a strangle hold on creativity. Like unless
strangle hold on creativity. Like unless you were making a game where it was like
you were making a game where it was like your Edward's pistols hands killing
your Edward's pistols hands killing [ __ ] like it wasn't going to
[ __ ] like it wasn't going to get published. And so you had to kind of
get published. And so you had to kind of like try to squeeze in your expression
like try to squeeze in your expression and art on the side of that. And it was
and art on the side of that. And it was pretty awful. Um, and you know, I think
pretty awful. Um, and you know, I think indies proved like we got everything we
indies proved like we got everything we wanted. We have like this list of stuff
wanted. We have like this list of stuff that we're like we talked about in the
that we're like we talked about in the '90s like this is what it's going to
'90s like this is what it's going to take to bring games out of this ghetto.
take to bring games out of this ghetto. Um, and we got what we wanted and now we
Um, and we got what we wanted and now we just have a much bigger marketplace full
just have a much bigger marketplace full of more creative people and I think
of more creative people and I think that's a really good thing. I'm like
that's a really good thing. I'm like happy to have them here. So that is it
happy to have them here. So that is it for our
for our [Applause]
[Music] presentations. Okay.
presentations. Okay. This is
This is depressing. Do I do I have a business?
depressing. Do I do I have a business? Did I just go home and check my bank
Did I just go home and check my bank statement? Um, let me let me start with
statement? Um, let me let me start with one, then we'll review this together.
one, then we'll review this together. Um, so Armen and Jordan, I'm going to
Um, so Armen and Jordan, I'm going to give you the hard question that Jordan
give you the hard question that Jordan asked to dodge. So, do your best,
asked to dodge. So, do your best, Jordan. But you guys both mentioned this
Jordan. But you guys both mentioned this idea of games um that need to be bought
idea of games um that need to be bought now and you and as a customer, you can't
now and you and as a customer, you can't just wait for the sale. So, can you give
just wait for the sale. So, can you give us a little bit more thoughts about what
us a little bit more thoughts about what that means and what to look at? And I'll
that means and what to look at? And I'll let Armen go first so Jordan can dodge
let Armen go first so Jordan can dodge better. Yeah, definitely. Uh, I think
better. Yeah, definitely. Uh, I think it's um I think it's really important to
it's um I think it's really important to make something that you know you you can
make something that you know you you can wishlist things on Steam and then you
wishlist things on Steam and then you get an email when the game is on sale.
get an email when the game is on sale. How fun how fun isn't that for like if
How fun how fun isn't that for like if you're Valve that's a lot of fun. Uh I
you're Valve that's a lot of fun. Uh I absolutely I think it's absolutely
absolutely I think it's absolutely correct cuz uh we all have our Steam
correct cuz uh we all have our Steam backlogs and I think making something
backlogs and I think making something that people got to play right now.
that people got to play right now. You're like you just got to click it,
You're like you just got to click it, you got to buy it. Uh it it makes life
you got to buy it. Uh it it makes life so much easier.
so much easier. Um, yeah. Uh, I guess I would add to
Um, yeah. Uh, I guess I would add to that that in addition to the sort of
that that in addition to the sort of like that's a toy. It's not like any of
like that's a toy. It's not like any of my other toys and I must touch it
my other toys and I must touch it because there's not going to be another
because there's not going to be another goat that I can sort of molest and
goat that I can sort of molest and ragdoll. Um, I I think that there's also
ragdoll. Um, I I think that there's also some value in the idea of a
some value in the idea of a communitydriven game. Uh, that there is
communitydriven game. Uh, that there is a wave that streamers and other folks
a wave that streamers and other folks wish to ride. In other words, something
wish to ride. In other words, something about your game uh where there is some
about your game uh where there is some benefit to mining out the unknown for
benefit to mining out the unknown for kind of collective games culture around
kind of collective games culture around your title. Um there there's horror
your title. Um there there's horror games are very good at this where
games are very good at this where there's a lot of new scares and
there's a lot of new scares and eventually they do kind of get used up
eventually they do kind of get used up by the sheer aggregate of streamers, but
by the sheer aggregate of streamers, but early on they kind of want to be there
early on they kind of want to be there before anybody else can. So their
before anybody else can. So their reactions are novel. So the people who
reactions are novel. So the people who can who come to their stream to watch
can who come to their stream to watch your game exclusively um get something
your game exclusively um get something that uh everybody else hasn't already
that uh everybody else hasn't already kind of mined out. I just want to add
kind of mined out. I just want to add one final thing. It doesn't just have to
one final thing. It doesn't just have to be Farm Animal Simulators. Uh what what
be Farm Animal Simulators. Uh what what Jeff does is basically uh I think when
Jeff does is basically uh I think when your when your fans see your games,
your when your fans see your games, they're like, "Holy [ __ ] there's a new
they're like, "Holy [ __ ] there's a new Avernum out. I got to buy it right now."
Avernum out. I got to buy it right now." Nothing beats having a fan base. Yeah,
Nothing beats having a fan base. Yeah, exactly. So, I think it it it can be
exactly. So, I think it it it can be doing something totally crazy, but it
doing something totally crazy, but it can be having a niche and providing
can be having a niche and providing something that no one other provides.
something that no one other provides. Cool. Um, we're getting a lot of
Cool. Um, we're getting a lot of questions on the tweets, uh, to the tone
questions on the tweets, uh, to the tone of like, why do we think supply is going
of like, why do we think supply is going to go back down? If, you know, the the
to go back down? If, you know, the the tools to build games are so accessible
tools to build games are so accessible and so easy, doesn't that just suggest
and so easy, doesn't that just suggest more people are going to come in here
more people are going to come in here and want to build games? Again, kind of
and want to build games? Again, kind of to my indie music point, whether or not
to my indie music point, whether or not they're intending to ever make money.
they're intending to ever make money. Um, do either of you two want to answer
Um, do either of you two want to answer that, have thoughts? Go ahead. Well, the
that, have thoughts? Go ahead. Well, the beatings will continue until morale
beatings will continue until morale improves.
improves. Um, of course people are going to keep
Um, of course people are going to keep writing games. People are going to keep
writing games. People are going to keep writing games like crazy. But if people
writing games like crazy. But if people want to keep writing games to make
want to keep writing games to make money, there is only the the the money
money, there is only the the the money pool is still finite. And by the what
pool is still finite. And by the what I'm saying might not be true. I hope
I'm saying might not be true. I hope it's not true. But I I believe that, you
it's not true. But I I believe that, you know, if people while people are going
know, if people while people are going to keep writing games, if people keep
to keep writing games, if people keep writing lots and lots and lots of really
writing lots and lots and lots of really big budget, really intense games,
big budget, really intense games, they're going to they're they're they
they're going to they're they're they may run into to problems. Yeah. Just to
may run into to problems. Yeah. Just to add on that, this is actually something
add on that, this is actually something um Randy talked a little bit about, but
um Randy talked a little bit about, but the market's not going to get less
the market's not going to get less crowded. Like that's just not going to
crowded. Like that's just not going to happen. People are going to become
happen. People are going to become hobbyists. They're going to get like
hobbyists. They're going to get like real jobs. They're going to, you know,
real jobs. They're going to, you know, hedge their bets like a thousand times.
hedge their bets like a thousand times. But what's going to happen is people who
But what's going to happen is people who work for dis like do discoverability
work for dis like do discoverability like you know they'll start uh
like you know they'll start uh cross-pollinating their own audiences.
cross-pollinating their own audiences. It's something like that that it's half
It's something like that that it's half the reason why we entered the publishing
the reason why we entered the publishing market is like how can we grow a bigger
market is like how can we grow a bigger audience and it's we get a whole bunch
audience and it's we get a whole bunch of games under one umbrella and then we
of games under one umbrella and then we have access to a whole bunch of other
have access to a whole bunch of other people. Um, I think that's where it's
people. Um, I think that's where it's going to go is like it's going to
going to go is like it's going to constrict down and then you're going to
constrict down and then you're going to um like PR is just sorry, sorry Indies,
um like PR is just sorry, sorry Indies, we've been talking about this for years,
we've been talking about this for years, but PR is just going to be a [ __ ]
but PR is just going to be a [ __ ] thing you have to do. And like it sucks.
thing you have to do. And like it sucks. Like you have to find somebody that's
Like you have to find somebody that's like good at it and can like talk to
like good at it and can like talk to people and like get the message out, but
people and like get the message out, but like our audience is like a fraction of
like our audience is like a fraction of a fraction. like that's who plays indie
a fraction. like that's who plays indie games and like you gota you got to hold
games and like you gota you got to hold on to your customers and like get the
on to your customers and like get the message out.
message out. Cool. I mean this one this next question
Cool. I mean this one this next question kind of dubtales with that which is like
kind of dubtales with that which is like well what what are your thoughts on if
well what what are your thoughts on if you've done everything right in terms of
you've done everything right in terms of like your marketability your game you
like your marketability your game you have like it's good to stream you have
have like it's good to stream you have good talking points a distinct art style
good talking points a distinct art style and it's not catching on. Is there
and it's not catching on. Is there anything you can do to sort of salvage
anything you can do to sort of salvage your marketing campaign? What what are
your marketing campaign? What what are your thoughts on that? Well I can
your thoughts on that? Well I can actually pop in cuz like we're doing
actually pop in cuz like we're doing this right now. Uh we like we talk about
this right now. Uh we like we talk about this a lot. We take like legit
this a lot. We take like legit contracts. Like we when we release a
contracts. Like we when we release a game, we know exactly how much like our
game, we know exactly how much like our like this is how much we spent and this
like this is how much we spent and this is how much we need to make back. And if
is how much we need to make back. And if it doesn't make that back in sales, we
it doesn't make that back in sales, we have 300 other backup plans in place.
have 300 other backup plans in place. Like uh and like that's that's just what
Like uh and like that's that's just what we do. Like uh we have a family, we have
we do. Like uh we have a family, we have a house, we have like a life. And like I
a house, we have like a life. And like I can't destroy that because I work in a
can't destroy that because I work in a volatile market. So that's that's just
volatile market. So that's that's just the reality of like being a grown-up.
the reality of like being a grown-up. Like it kind of sucks. But like we have
Like it kind of sucks. But like we have backup plans on backup plans on backup
backup plans on backup plans on backup plans and like I could talk about that
plans and like I could talk about that all day. And uh I I would I would add to
all day. And uh I I would I would add to that. Um, sorry, just that uh the
that. Um, sorry, just that uh the curation thing is also potentially your
curation thing is also potentially your friend like I I mentioned during the
friend like I I mentioned during the talk that that there are bundles out
talk that that there are bundles out there which can sort of buy your game in
there which can sort of buy your game in lumpsum and create word of mouth that
lumpsum and create word of mouth that would otherwise not have existed at the
would otherwise not have existed at the moment of launch. Uh that stuff has at
moment of launch. Uh that stuff has at least created a nice little blip in the
least created a nice little blip in the curve uh of sales friends that I I know
curve uh of sales friends that I I know who have released games and then been
who have released games and then been approached a while after release.
approached a while after release. So, one of the most amazing advantages
So, one of the most amazing advantages of being an indie that people discuss
of being an indie that people discuss not often enough is that you get to own
not often enough is that you get to own your work. And that's incredible cuz if
your work. And that's incredible cuz if you release it and it kind of flops, you
you release it and it kind of flops, you still own it. You can release it for new
still own it. You can release it for new platforms. You can wait 3 years for a
platforms. You can wait 3 years for a better market and remaster it. You can
better market and remaster it. You can wait 10 years and remaster it and
wait 10 years and remaster it and re-release it. You You don't just have
re-release it. You You don't just have the cash. You have a thing that can be
the cash. You have a thing that can be generated for you to generate more cash
generated for you to generate more cash later on. It's true. We have cannibal.
later on. It's true. We have cannibal. Like maybe someday we'll do something
Like maybe someday we'll do something with that. Like it's there. It's just
with that. Like it's there. It's just sitting there waiting to be mined
sitting there waiting to be mined someday. Exploited.
someday. Exploited. Exploit that [ __ ] We're also getting
Exploit that [ __ ] We're also getting questions about sales and like this the
questions about sales and like this the sale the prominence of sales and how
sale the prominence of sales and how they drive um you know the customer's
they drive um you know the customer's behavior like is there any thoughts
behavior like is there any thoughts anyone has about like promising never to
anyone has about like promising never to put your game on sale for the six first
put your game on sale for the six first six months or anything like that? Dude,
six months or anything like that? Dude, don't make that public. No, don't do
don't make that public. No, don't do that. Don't don't think why not. Why
that. Don't don't think why not. Why isn't a good marketing strategy? No.
isn't a good marketing strategy? No. What are you going to do? Are you going
What are you going to do? Are you going to write it on Facebook like or like
to write it on Facebook like or like send your press release? People aren't
send your press release? People aren't like everyone doesn't know everything
like everyone doesn't know everything instantly about your dialogue window at
instantly about your dialogue window at the beginning of your game.
the beginning of your game. No, but why not do that? No, try it.
No, but why not do that? No, try it. Yeah, I don't know. Try it. Like the
Yeah, I don't know. Try it. Like the forums, like you're putting these games
forums, like you're putting these games out on places where like the forums are
out on places where like the forums are like cesspools of horror. Like they're
like cesspools of horror. Like they're looking for any reason to destroy you
looking for any reason to destroy you and they don't care if you've made
and they don't care if you've made something amazing. Like why give them
something amazing. Like why give them you may internally say I'm never putting
you may internally say I'm never putting this game on sale. That's fine. You
this game on sale. That's fine. You don't got to tell anybody that. Like and
don't got to tell anybody that. Like and you may launch this game and be like
you may launch this game and be like dude this was bad but I made this public
dude this was bad but I made this public statement and now now there's another
statement and now now there's another thing be like yeah if you like now you
thing be like yeah if you like now you put it on sale two weeks like there's
put it on sale two weeks like there's some stuff where it's like you don't
some stuff where it's like you don't need to talk about this stuff publicly
need to talk about this stuff publicly like tell your fan base like gaming like
like tell your fan base like gaming like there the forums are cesspools you guys.
there the forums are cesspools you guys. Like don't give them ammo to be mean.
Like don't give them ammo to be mean. Like make your games and like be a
Like make your games and like be a business person on the outside of that.
business person on the outside of that. Yeah. If if you're going to do it, get
Yeah. If if you're going to do it, get security cameras cuz someone's going to
security cameras cuz someone's going to pipe bomb your house.
pipe bomb your house. Don't let your mom read the
Don't let your mom read the forums. Okay, last question. Are we all
forums. Okay, last question. Are we all screwed by VR? Do we all need to Do we
screwed by VR? Do we all need to Do we all need to get VR jobs? I already have
one. bedroom. My answer is no. I hope every single one of you moves to VR cuz
every single one of you moves to VR cuz then more candy for you.
All right. Thank you very much everybody for coming. Uh we're all going to move
for coming. Uh we're all going to move to the wrap-up room. Yep. I'll be taking
to the wrap-up room. Yep. I'll be taking on all comers until free lunch is
on all comers until free lunch is available.
available. All right. Thank you.