Good morning, everyone.
Hello,
thank you so much for coming to my talk today.
Um Today,
I will be talking about building your profile as a game developer outside of the job.
Um
So some of you may be thinking, why, why do I need to know this? I got the job already.
I'm doing the tasks like what's up.
Um But just a few things building yourself outside
of your job is also beneficial to your job.
There are a lot
of um kind of blind spots while you're working at a company places that uh you know,
your other developers, your team, maybe even you don't know
that you don't know.
Um And so being able to continue building yourself outside of your job is going to
uh in turn help you and your project as well as your team.
Um But with that being said, also your company is not your identity.
I really wanna stress this today.
Um You know, you are all really,
you know, you're really talented people, you're game developers, you are not
company game developer.
Um and no amount of layoffs, studio closures,
project cancellations is going to be able to change that.
So I am trying to kind of instill this message on you and also make sure
that you kind of have a safety net for yourself for if these things happen.
Um And again,
with the recent layoffs and project cancellations and studio closures,
there are a lot of game developers feeling lost.
Um We're in a very particular place,
especially with our work because uh we as artists, you know,
kind of identify with our projects.
Uh but it's not necessarily ours.
Um It's the company's right.
And so that can quickly be stripped away from us and a
lot of people uh kind of feel stuck in those moments.
Um So
with that in mind, here are some tips, everybody have your, have your notebooks out,
right?
And uh
let's, let's get started.
Cool. So just a little bit about me, I am a video game writer at High Moon Studios.
Uh It is under Activision and I guess under Microsoft now the, you know,
the tears just keep going.
Um
I uh really like writing cinematics where one dude
puts his hand on the other dude's shoulder.
And
um even though I'm a video game writer, I just want to say that this is going to be
applicable, applicable to any discipline.
Um And especially for those who have probably been in the industry for a while.
Um I
would love for you to take some of these tips uh and keep them with you even you know,
later throughout your career, it's not just for new game developers.
Um Yeah, and I was previously at Hasbro Insomniac and Bonus XP.
Um Something that I kind of did notice,
especially while working with veteran game developers is they'll
be in a space for eight plus years.
They haven't updated their resume in that time.
They haven't needed a portfolio, they haven't gone to events like this.
Um And they do, they feel secure in their job. And even though that's super lovely
um in this current climate, it's not really a safe thing to do.
Um And so this is kind of providing a safety net for
you in case again that rug gets pulled out from under you.
So
here is the first tips
uh studying up. I have them in tears because we're all gamers, right?
Um
And they're sorted out between kind of like price and also time commitment.
So easy is going to be, you know, free,
you can kind of do it bits and pieces here and there. It doesn't take a lot of time
and then hard, of course,
is going to be things that are more expensive and more time extensive too,
uh so easy. Checking out youtube G DC has a lot of free talks. I watch so many of them.
Um and game makers toolkit, of course, a lot of you are familiar with these,
there are a lot of select Ted talks
um as somebody who's interested in pursuing leadership.
Um I,
you know,
it's really hard to
go through those trainings while you're actually doing your work.
There's not a lot of leadership training, support programs.
Uh So you kind of have to find the that training and those learnings outside.
And so uh one of the ways that you could do that is through TED talks
um outside of those talks, there are also game jams on itch dot IO.
Make sure if you are working for a company that
they allow you to do game jams,
there are some that are very particular or they require you to
file out or fill out a form before you do so.
Um But game jams are really,
really lovely because you're working on a project that isn't the
thing that you're having to do in your day to day.
Um You're working with different people often.
Um and you're able to kind of breed different creativity because again,
with the kind of current state of the industry and
there's people that are working on games for 68,
10 years, uh you can start, you know,
getting that tunnel vision and having time to
uh put yourself into a different project and kind
of pull away can actually give you a broader
perspective and in turn can help your project.
So medium books,
um of course, there's a lot that are on the process of game development,
but there are so many that are also about game DEV history,
which I find really useful.
Um And you could,
I understand where different identities come from outside of
just kind of your general team and uh environment.
And in turn, that would make you a better teammate.
Uh One of my, one of my favorite books, um just do
a shameless plug here is Gamer Girls by Mary Kenny.
Uh It is a history book, 25 female game Doves that have shaped the industry.
And it was uh really impactful for me because I just didn't really
know a lot about uh female game developers in the games industry.
And I was able to kind of use that perspective
and also apply it to what I'm doing today.
And then
the more expensive and more extensive things are taking classes.
So that would include things like master class, plural site.
And then a lot of industry uh professionals actually
have discipline specific classes that you could take.
Um And those are incredibly useful because you're kind of
getting mentorship from somebody who has been doing it.
They're not directly involved in your project.
So they're giving you um a more unbiased opinion.
Um And you're also going to be learning usually with a
bunch of classmates who are also working and doing things that
you know, you are interested in doing.
So you're kind of building your community in that way.
So study up, do your learning
also in the same vein. Stay curious.
So what projects are other developers in studios making, you know,
what are your competitors, what are
companies making that are completely different from your project?
What games are gaining popularity?
What games are kind of sitting on the back burner right now.
Um And also something to note is what companies are ramping up hiring.
You could usually tell when
uh
companies are ramping up hiring.
That means that they are uh going further into production for their project.
And so they're kind of needing to staff up for that.
Um And that's something that you should kind of check out
and take note of know what is happening around you,
uh aside from just your company, right?
Um And then once you do that, of course, teaching what you know,
so you're an expert at something and you should talk about it.
Um That could be through mentorship organizations.
Uh Two of my favorites are women in games, women in Games International.
Um They already kind of have people that
are interested and involved in working with them.
And so they kind of already have people that are looking for
that mentorship and you can give uh a talk through them,
mentorship, through them.
Um If you're not necessarily interested in um being with a specific organization,
want to do it more individually,
you can offer mentorship on linkedin or other socials.
Um or
for some places you could even mentor internally.
Um Some actually have uh internal mentorship programs, uh,
you could teach your coworkers.
There are things that, you know,
that they don't and there are things that they know that you don't.
And so you guys could kind of teach each other.
Um, something that I really appreciate is lunch and learns where, uh,
everybody kind of takes their lunch hour and they come together,
sometimes everybody will watch a G DC talk together.
Um,
some times people in different disciplines will give like kind of
a brief talk about what it is they do so that,
you know, teams outside know what they're doing in their day to day life.
Um that, you know,
we don't necessarily get to interact with on our actual like job basis.
Um And you,
you just kind of get a more uh rounded feel of what
it is that you're doing and the people that you're working with
and of course, building a reputation.
Uh yeah, get your name out there.
Um The cheapest and easiest is social media, but I also want to acknowledge the
current state of social media right now
with the increased harassment in game developers,
especially those marginalized game developers.
Um I really want to stress to just kind of keep yourself safe.
Um It is really unfortunate that
uh developers are being treated like this and they don't deserve it.
But uh we do have to kind of help look out for ourselves um when companies cannot.
And so making sure that you don't have, you know,
your personal information out there such as like your address,
if you have your phone number on your resume,
make sure your resume is not publicly available.
Um Even if you are not currently under fire right now,
things can very quickly change, people can make up a weird controversy about you.
Um,
who knows? Uh, and you want to make sure that
people aren't, you know, having access to you
in ways that you would not want them to have access to you.
Um Speaking at events, yes, like G DC,
we'll think about that.
Um And
those are kind of more external,
but you could also talk to your company
about representing them either internally or externally.
Um for people who have been going, you know,
looking at the talks that have been happening this week,
there are a lot that are associated with projects.
Those are usually going to be um kind of in association
with the company as opposed to just the individual game developer.
Um And one of the pluses about that is they will offer can help pay for your flight,
pay for your trip. Uh You know, get some company coin if you can, right?
Um
And representing them internally, there are a lot of um kind of programs,
especially in uh bigger companies where you can
give a talk about something. Uh just to like your studio wide people,
cool making friends. I know,
it's not networking though. Um That's not what I'm telling you to do.
You know, you don't need to be going and shaking hands with everybody.
Um, giving out all of your business cards.
I'm really talking about having like a
deeper personal connection with these people.
Um We devs need to come out and support each other, especially at this time.
Um And it kind of helps you feel that you are not going through this alone.
Um There are times that whether it's because of your
project or just because of the world in general,
things can feel really isolating.
Um and being able to talk and interact with
people who are going through the same thing as you
uh feels really validating and
is very good for your mental health.
Um
So just some suggestions for this, a lot of bigger cities have game dev hubs.
Um That could be, you know, like Los Angeles, Austin, Seattle, et cetera,
um where they will have kind of meet ups in person if that is something that you enjoy.
Um There are uh
a number of sites, one of my favorites is meet up to find these events near you.
Uh When I had moved to Los Angeles, I had felt really isolated and kind of alone
uh because I had grown up in a different state and it was like, oh, I have to,
I have to build an entirely new community now.
Um But I was able to check meet up and find some game dev
events and was able to meet people in my first couple of weeks and then
I felt like I was kind of building that community and it made me feel a lot safer.
Um So I would recommend that for you as well.
Um But of course, being in person isn't everybody's cup of tea,
uh in which I would recommend online organizations and discords.
There are so many, there are so many online organizations and discords.
Um Of course, there's IgD A there's games industry gathering.
Um You will find there's even uh discipline specific discords.
I feel like I'm in like four or five different
narrative specific discords.
Um And I hear it's, it's the same for a lot of uh disciplines as well.
So I would be on the lookout for those.
You could even ask your coworkers, your friends that are in the same discipline,
see what they're using to interact with people outside of their company.
Cool.
So, yeah, unfortunately, you do have to play video games. I know this is hard.
Um But you need to know kind of what,
what it is that people are digging and what people are not,
what are people frustrated with.
Um And in that same vein, please play more than just your comfort games.
Uh You are able to, there are so many awesome games that are out there
and if you're only playing just kind of your comfort games your comfort genre,
you're really uh kind of putting the blinders on and not able
to uh expand and see kind of what's working in other genres,
which you could even kind of start picking
uh different either like mechanics, cool story moments,
um different, you know,
tricks that these developers use for their games and you could start
applying it to kind of what you're doing in the future.
Um And of course, checking out older games, not just the latest releases.
Of course,
there are so many good games that are uh coming out just like I feel like every second
um but don't forget about the older games. Um Of course,
with the rapper two, I mean,
right.
Cool.
So in conclusion,
uh always be curious, always be learning. Don't, you know,
don't silo yourself off, you could always be learning something new.
Uh And in turn, teach what you know,
build and support your community. Again,
being a game developer is a part of you that cannot be taken away.
Um So make sure that you are supporting that side of yourself,
not just the company's part of you.
Thank you so much for coming to my talk.
Awesome. Uh If anybody has any questions, there are two microphones off on the side
also, I guess like,
please silence your cell phones and um
feel free to give me an evaluation.
I actually,
I do really value uh your feedback and I would love to know
what I could do better and what worked and didn't work for,
for you guys.
So, um whenever you get those evaluations, please give me your uh honest opinion.
Thank you.
Hello?
Yeah,
you tell, tell us about how you should like constantly update your, like
your profile. Like out outside of the job, usually when you have a job.
But what if you're like trying to get that dream job, like
that dream job, your ideal job in the game
in the either the game industry or maybe
entertainment and media industry. Like, how would you update your profile? Like
someone like, say someone's trying to
has ambition trying to break into the industry. Like how do you,
how do you update your profile? Like,
like,
like ensure that you'll get that,
get a,
get a in that ideal job in the, in the
industry or,
or at least get into the industry, industry and then,
then work your way up from there.
Yeah.
So uh the question is how can I update my profile to
get um a job that I would like in the industry?
Um The unfortunate thing is there's no guarantee either way,
but uh you could always be doing things to help.
Um
One of the things that I have actually on my website, if you go to uh Ashley
patrick.com/resources, uh it's not all uh video game writing resources,
there's a lot on how to get
a job in the games industry.
Because there are a lot of people that are interested in that.
Um And I wanted to provide all of the resources
that I use when I was personally getting in.
Um One of the things that I recommend of course is um
yeah, just making sure that your resume is up to date.
Having a game jam projects is really useful.
Uh Especially if you don't actually have a job in the games industry at the moment.
Uh You're showing that you're still passionate about it and
that it is something that you're actively wanting to do.
Um And
making sure that you're connecting with people in the industry, of course,
going to G DC is a really great way of doing that
um
And have a portfolio depending on what it is that you wanna do.
Um The things that are gonna be on there are going
to be different so I can't speak uh specifically to that.
Um But you want to show people your work and kind of
how you uh make games and how you perceive your art,
of course,
who
did I answer your question?
Yeah, but what about linkedin profile? Like, like is there like a template like,
like your about section? Like
how is how like your about section, your summary, how should you like
write it so that write in a way to show,
to show all the thing that you're really passionate
and to convince people to hire you
Yeah, I would say um there's not a specific template,
it's kind of what feels best for you.
Um But you just wanna make sure that
you are, of course, uh speaking professionally so a little bit more formally,
I guess, but
um that you're also being true to yourself.
Uh You wanna show who you really are in uh your work, even if it is like linkedin,
of course, that's a more professional thing than say
uh you know, Instagram.
But um
you still wanna show like little pieces of you
in that. So that would of course include like your profile picture, your bio
photo, stuff like that.
Awesome. Thank you.
Go ahead. OK.
I'm really glad that you decided to talk about this at G DC this year. So, thank you.
Um
How do I identify the things about myself that are
sort of helpful enough to make that step to try to like put it out into the industry?
Right? So, um
somebody had told me that, you know,
when people are looking for a job, oh, shoot, I should hold on,
let me restate the question.
Um How do you decide what things are important like
to you as a person to kind of showcase,
especially in the, in the industry?
Um OK. Now, going back,
um
you know, recruiters are reaching out because
the company needs that job.
Uh people need you and they are going to be getting,
of course a bunch of applications, right?
Um But the way that you could kind of look at it is they need help
and so what can you do to help them?
Um So it's thinking about things that a lot of companies are lacking.
So for me personally,
um
sh showcasing a lot of my identity showing that I can write for, you know,
uh women
and queer people, um and people with disabilities, that sort of thing.
Um Being able to show parts of my identity and things that really matter to me
so that they know when they are, you know,
when we're kind of getting through that, that uh
almost like hiring.
Ok, cool.
Um That, that's, that's something that's a part of you.
Um And I also think that just being again,
kind of like true to yourself and true to your own personal identity.
Um Other people that share kind of similar uh aspects will,
will find you and be able to connect with you too.
Thank you.
Can I take one more question?
Ok,
cool.
Ok, great. Awesome.
Hi.
First off, thank you so much for coming out here and giving such an incredible talk.
Um I had a question kind of relating to the social media.
Uh And I'm just wondering how is it,
how important is it for you to begin
posting personal projects such as uh games you've developed
on your own or a rgs uh when it comes to getting into an industry level job.
Yeah, I would say it's incredibly important, right?
Because, um, no matter, I mean, really, no matter where, uh you are kind of in,
uh in the industry,
whether you're a veteran or you're brand new or looking for your first job,
um,
you want to be showing off kind of the project that you're working on
and what it is that you're passionate about things that you are learning,
um,
you know,
and kind of in the same vein where like
you're staying curious and playing other people's games,
uh They're gonna wanna do the same for you, right?
Uh So you wanna show kind of what you have to offer. Um So I would recommend
uh and it doesn't really have to be on any certain platform in terms of social media,
but always be kind of sharing what you're doing.
Um If you like giving updates of, you know, kind of in progress,
what it is that you're doing and kind of working
on and focusing on that could be really useful too.
Um I find
there are times on linkedin where I'm able to ask for advice
and uh there are people who are there
to, you know,
offer their personal expertise uh and to give me answers on things that I don't know
uh off, you know, off the top of my head and, you know,
to be able to get a more diverse perspective.
Um So that is really,
really useful for when you're having your personal projects too.
If you have any questions trying to see how things are landing,
uh definitely use that as a resource.
OK. Thank you
again. Thank you for coming over here.
Uh uh I don't really have a question.
I just want to add on to what you were talking about with the building community.
I think it's important to also have hobbies just outside of games and technology.
I, I think that was just something that I was missing. Um
And
it would just be great to have those to kind of like round out your characters.
So people don't think you like just work on
-- games -- for sure. Yeah, absolutely.
I rock climb if anybody wants to do that with me. Uh I live in Los Angeles.
Yeah.
Awesome.
Uh
You,
-- I want to know your question. Hello, my -- name is Mel. Thank you for your talk today.
Uh Thank you
-- for coming informative and I really like all the images that you -- put there.
Thank you. Thank you.
Great. So say that just following up from like a couple of the previous questions.
have a resume belt? Do you have maybe like a couple game jumps on there your belt.
Uh So if you're building like a prototype or a proof of concept,
like how important is that for like potential employers
and like,
how do you show each of them without being like without
capitalizing their attention or without taking too much of their space.
-- Would you mind saying the last part of that question really -- quick? Sorry.
Yeah, like how do you show like a game pro
prototype to employers without being too
uh invasive of their attention, I guess?
OK.
So uh the question is when you are making a prototype or proof of concept,
uh how do you show that to potential employers without
um basically taking up too much of their time?
Um
I mean, I would say
reaching out to people who uh or um
employers who are kind of interested.
Um and especially looking at those, there are a lot of people, I mean, again,
if you say that you're offering mentorship on linkedin,
uh people will come to you uh asking for uh kind of those questions and
there are people that are on linkedin that say that they are interested in giving
uh portfolio reviews, uh kind of project reviews that you can reach out to.
I would say that are the first people that you should uh look to for feedback.
Um And then also just kind of posting in
a general sense is good.
I would say for um potential employers, especially because,
you know, there are a lot of people that are working in a company,
it's not just one person.
Um So if there is something specific that you are
kind of asking for review on um or feedback,
then you should at least try kind of
seeing if you could reach out in that sense.
Uh I personally recommend and this is kind of just for any talks.
Um Of course, be kind,
don't just kind of like come out right out of the blue and be like, hello,
I'm a stranger.
You need to
talk to me now.
But
um,
you know, have a conversation and then ask like, hey,
would you be uh available maybe for a, you know, 15 minute to 30 minute Zoom chat?
Um I have a couple of questions about some specific
stuff and uh a lot of times people will,
will say yes.
Um Just make sure that, you know, you're not
harassing them either.
Uh Of course, a lot of game developers are very busy but uh also very willing to help.
Thank you so much. Thank you.
Cool.
I,
you had mentioned it's important to
understand where different identities come from.
May you elaborate on this, please?
Um OK.
So the question was,
please elaborate on uh understanding where different identities are coming from.
So,
uh I'm guessing you're talking in regards to the, the books that I was mentioning.
Right. Right.
So,
um the people that you are working with it doesn't matter whether it's big or small.
Um
They, especially like the team,
you are going to be very accustomed to them and kind of their likes and their
um kind of personalities where they've come from,
that all consists of their identity.
Right.
Their, you know, their gender,
their race, their, you know, even like socio-economic status, like you're able to,
um
kind of feel that when you are in a group and that they affect each other,
um which is super important, you need to be aware of that.
But also, um when you're just kind of in one group all the time,
you're not getting the perspectives of people that are outside of it.
Um And that is something where uh books could come in handy, especially because
again, a lot of game developers are very busy, not all of them are going to be um
chronically online like some people.
Um And so it's really good to check out those books and get those perspectives.
Um And that's ways that you could kind of learn about their
identity and where they came from because they will be talking about,
you know, even more of their, their personal history and how that
affected them in the games industry.
And in turn,
it helps you uh understand your teammates whether that is present or future as well.
-- Thank -- you.
Thank you.
Hi. Thank you so much for your talk.
Um I'm Nathan and uh I,
one of the points that you mentioned that I really liked was about
um wanting to explore things outside of your comfort games or comfort media.
Um I want to ask,
do you have any advice when it comes to being able to explore lots of things outside of
your own wheelhouse without one breaking the bank because
of unfortunately how expensive this hobby can be.
Um, but also, um,
without breaking the amount of time you have
because there are lots of games that again,
that time requirement is so intense.
-- Um, so, yeah, on those two -- fronts. Ok, perfect. So, the question was,
um, on the topic of playing a bunch of games diversifying, uh,
what it is that you're actually playing, how can you do those things without
uh without breaking the bank?
Of course, because buying a whole bunch of games will add up over time. And also, um
you know, without losing a whole bunch of time because there are a, a
diverse amount of games that have different number of uh hours with them.
And with that,
I would say um two things that helped
me personally were actually game streaming services.
So game pass and uh PS Plus,
um there are so many different games and I was able to
play things that I had looked at thought were really cool,
but didn't necessarily, you know, purchase at the time.
Um And you're able to play
for however many hours.
Uh and a lot, there's a lot of indie games on there too that are only a few hours.
Um So that was something that was incredibly useful to me.
Um I would also recommend again, kind of checking out more indie games um in terms of,
you know, diversification, of course, that would include indie games.
There are so many uh different and really cool indie games that are not,
you know, 40 hours, hundreds of hours.
They also, in the terms of like the price point aren't going to be as expensive as say,
you know, more, more of those Blockbuster AAA games.
Um but I, I really do recommend checking out the the game streaming services.
Thank you so much.
Of course.
Hi. Thank you for your speech. Uh My name is Reggie and I do game localization.
So um
I also do some kind of writing but you know, like both our works are kind of invisible,
it's like behind the curtain.
So
um our works are not, doesn't look as fancy as those artists, tech artist.
So do you have any suggestions or how did you like showcase our works?
Yeah. So um are you talking in
-- terms of like specifically localization? Yeah, localization -- or writing?
Because it's,
it's not like visual art kind of, that's fancy.
Yeah, of course.
So the question was how do you showcase art,
especially if it's going to be in a localization, even writing sense.
Uh How are you showing that? Especially when it's not visual?
Um And for me, especially as a writer,
um and I would recommend this for localization as well.
Um Having particular writing samples is really important even
if they are not specific to your project.
Um In fact,
the, the ones that I have, if you um happen to look at my website are not
uh project specific because again,
a lot of those things are going to be uh locked under ND A.
So you can't really show them off.
So having kind of like your personal pieces is really important.
Um And for those, I would just kind of like giving, giving my own preference.
But also just the rules that I follow having uh each sample be less than five pages.
I usually try to aim for three pages because again, recruiters are getting
hundreds of these.
Um And so if it's short and sweet and can tell a story with a proper beginning
that will end with character wants and needs
and there being like a specific change that happens
um that
was be incredibly, uh incredibly useful and people are able to tell like, OK,
this is the kind of work that you do.
This is the way that you think about your, your art.
Um And yeah, it's, it's not visual.
So it's not necessarily an art station thing that you could do.
Um But people are able to still, you know, understand your craft.
OK. Thank you so much. Thank you. And that is
unfortunately all the time that we have for today. But thank you so much.
I will be outside if anybody else has any more questions.
Thank you.
Yeah.