May has been an absolutely 
stacked month for puzzle games.
We got the evocative Metroidvania Animal 
Well, the offbeat riddle-filled Lorelei  
and the Laser Eyes, and the retro 
survival-horror gem Crow Country.
Plus Paper Trail, Duck Detective, 
a Braid remake, and more.
Now these are all wonderful games, and I look 
forward to talking about them more in the future.
But there's one other game that I, 
actually, might have enjoyed the most.
And I'm a little worried that it could get lost 
in the shuffle of these high profile games.
So I'm here to right that wrong,  
with a new episode of my indie 
recommendation series: Weekender.
The game is called Isles of Sea and Sky.
And it starts off as a classic 
Sokoban-style, block-shunting puzzle game.
You know the drill by now.
You can push blocks in four directions 
on a tightly-controlled grid.
And you can't pull or pick up boxes, so if 
you push them into a wall or a corner...
you're probably screwed.
So you do that for a while until you step 
onto the back of a gigantic sea turtle who  
takes you out into the ocean, revealing a 
sprawling archipelago of different islands.
Like a stony mountain range with 
a network of underground tunnels.
Or a fiery volcano with red-hot floor tiles.
Or a tidal reef with running waterways.
Each island, of course, introduces 
new twists on the block-pushing idea.
So blocks can now ride down river rapids,  
and other blocks explode if 
they get too hot, and so on.
And the resulting puzzles are 
- on the whole - really good.
Each one has some clever central idea, and 
every mechanic is explored to its fullest.
Solving the puzzles involves working through  
a step-by-step solution that feels like 
you're in conversation with the designer.
But the most important aspect 
of this turtle-surfing system is  
that the game is now fully open for exploration.
Sea and Sky is a wildly non-linear game that lets  
the player tackle its puzzles 
in any order they see fit.
Or skip certain puzzles altogether.
The main way it does this is through collectibles.
For instance - each island is home to an 
elemental deity who is after six special stones.
And so you can go off and find these 
things in whatever order you fancy.
But, because you can always find more than six,  
you can just totally skip the 
puzzles that have you stumped.
And giving players the chance to pick and 
skip puzzles has some wonderful benefits.
If you get stuck you can just go off and 
explore somewhere else - and you may come  
back to that puzzle later with a fresh 
perspective and realise how to solve it.
It also means that easy and more difficult 
puzzles can live alongside each other,  
making the game fun for players 
of different skill levels.
And players get a feeling of agency as 
they pick their own path through the game.
But being truly open comes 
with its own challenges.
Like...
how do you teach new concepts in a structured way? 
Or ramp up the difficulty with a satisfying curve?
Well Sea and Sky uses collectibles for that, as well.
The game is never truly open because bits 
of the world are gated behind pick-ups.
There are locked blocks that ask you to find keys.
Special stone gates that require 
a certain number of stars.
And obstacles that can't be overcome until you get 
a new ability, or change the world in some way.
Plus, the hardest levels are hidden behind a big  
door that can't be opened until 
you finish all the other islands.
This allows the designer to carefully 
mete out content on their terms.
Now of course, this is not a 
brand new structure for a game.
Using stars to unlock doors is straight out 
of Super Mario 64, and other puzzle games have  
used a non-linear structure - including 
Snakebird and Stephen's Sausage Roll.
But the thing I love most about Isles of Sea and  
Sky is that you're not just picking 
between puzzles from a world map.
That’s because there's loads of other stuff 
to do in between the block-pushing bits.
And this is where the game feels less 
like Sokoban, and more like a Zelda game.
So you'll need to carefully explore each 
world and hunt for hidden paths.
Each island has a cryptic secret that can only  
be deciphered through careful 
investigation of the world map.
Plus, there's a Metroidvania-style unlock 
system with new abilities and backtracking.
And these side quests work 
as wonderful pace-changing  
palette cleansers between the puzzles.
Because, if I’m being honest, I normally 
get quite burned out on Sokoban games.
An endless string of brain-busting block-pushing  
puzzles can leave me feeling 
frazzled and needing a break.
But I actually couldn't stop playing 
Isles of Sea and Sky - and I think a  
big part of that was that I was constantly 
hopping between different modes of play.
But there is another challenge 
with this sort of open design.
And, with this one, Sea and Sky doesn't 
have a particularly great solution for it.
And that's the idea that you 
can stumble upon puzzles that  
you can't actually finish in your current state.
Maybe you need to come back with a new ability, 
or you need to cause a change in the world.
And so you can spend significant time just faffing  
around with a puzzle that is 
actually impossible to finish.
Which never feels great - and then it 
has the knock-on effect of making you  
distrust other puzzles and you end 
up skipping ones that you actually  
can solve! Agh! I talked more about this 
idea, and offered some potential solutions,  
in a video about Banjo Tooie - so check 
that out if you want to learn more.
Anyway - I really enjoyed Isles of Sea and Sky.
And it's also wonderfully accessible:  
the controls never get more complicated 
than pressing a direction on the d-pad.
And it has a super forgiving system of 
infinite undos and instant room restarts.
Now - I finished the game in about 12 hours.
Which is...
okay, the idea behind Weekender was to recommend  
indie games that you can 
finish in a single weekend.
And that's not really true of this game 
unless you absolutely binge it like a maniac.
But I've realised that the whole 'weekend' thing  
is a subjective and pretty arbitrary 
restriction that has stopped me from  
talking about cool games that are a bit 
longer or don’t have an exact ending.
So going forward I'm ditching that idea , and I'll 
just tell you how long the game is in the video.
And so "Weekender" can mean...
a game I recommend you start playing this 
weekend! Saves me from coming up with a new logo.
If you want another indie game recommendation, 
hit this end screen button to learn about Chants  
of Sennaar, a fantastic puzzle game 
about deciphering cryptic languages.
See you soon!
