Before you get to play Crash Bandicoot 
4, you have to make a big decision.
I'm not talking about whether or not 
to accept a 20 page software license.  
Or a 24 page privacy policy. I mean, there's 
nothing more bodacious than legalise.
Uh. No, I'm talking about whether you 
want to play in the Modern or the Retro  
play-style - which is all about whether or not 
you want the game to feature a lives system.
Now, putting aside the questionable 
practice of asking players to make  
fundamental game design decisions before 
they've even started playing… this does  
bring to mind an interesting design debate 
that has raged in games for the last decade  
or so. Particularly in platformers, but also 
side-scrolling brawlers, shoot 'em ups, and more.
And that's this - is a lives system still  
relevant game design - or just an 
antiquated relic of the arcade era?
Well, I'm Mark Brown, and 
this is Game Maker's Toolkit.
First, let's define what a lives system 
is, so we're all on the same page.
Lives dictate how many times you can retry a 
challenge, before you're forced back to some  
earlier part in the game. So there are points in 
the game where your progress is saved permanently.  
But between those, there might 
be several checkpoints where  
your progress is only saved temporarily.
If you die, you'll lose one of your lives and 
then return to the last temporary checkpoint.  
But, if you run out of lives, it's Game Over,  
the temporary checkpoints are lost - and it's all 
the way back to your last permanent save spot.
There might be some quirks like continues, 
or whatever - but that's the basic concept:  
it's all about permanent 
and temporary checkpoints.
Over time, the gap between 
the permanent save spots has  
shrunk - take the Donkey Kong series where 
it's gone from the very beginning of the game,  
to specific save points in the world, to the 
start of every level. And that's what you get  
in Crash 4's Retro mode - levels mark permanent 
progression, but checkpoint boxes are temporary.
Recently, however, the concept of lives 
has started to disappear entirely. Now,  
every checkpoint is a permanent mark of 
progress and while some games might still  
count the number of lives you lose, there's no 
penalty for wasting hundreds on a single bit.
So, Super Mario Odyssey is the first 
major Mario game without lives - which  
is probably sensible, as they carried 
almost no meaning in Super Mario 64.
Most indie platformers have ditched the concept 
entirely, with Super Meat Boy maker Edmund  
McMillen saying "removing lives altogether lets 
the designer base difficulty more on the actual  
level design and challenge and less around 
the penalty of losing lives and restarting".
And now Crash 4 recommends you play in 
Modern mode which gets rid of lives,  
and lets you infinitely return 
to those mid-level checkpoints.
Now, the argument against lives is 
pretty obvious. When you run out of  
them and get sent all the way back 
to some earlier point in the game,  
it's simply frustrating to have to 
re-do bits that you've already finished.
When Sonic Mania came out - which only has 
permanent checkpoints at the start of each  
zone - US Gamer published the written 
equivalent of an Alt-F4 rage quit,  
calling the lives system 
obnoxious and infuriating.
And just from anecdotal evidence, new and 
inexperienced players seem to find these penalties  
especially rough. 
Even if it's just back to the start of the level. 
Plus, lives systems are frequently unbalanced.  
You either end up with so many extra lives 
that the whole system becomes meaningless,  
or have so few that the game's difficulty 
curve spikes up into the stratosphere.
But there is also an argument 
for including a lives system.
So, for one, the fear of losing 
significant progress is one fine way  
to ramp up the stakes to nail-biting heights. 
Which can lead to precise and intentional play,  
rather than sloppy, brute-force 
attrition. And this also creates  
a greater sense of satisfaction when you 
finally find the next permanent save point.
Lives also create a very high-value reward 
for players to find. If a 1-UP mushroom or a  
Mega Man face is all that's between you 
and repeating half an hour of content,  
then that should really encourage players to 
hunt down 100 coins, play bonus mini-games,  
find secrets, and take risks to get extra lives.
And finally, lives can create an interesting 
meta challenge. It's not about finishing a  
single sequence at any cost - but instead 
it's about completing a string of sequences  
where your performance in each part can 
carry across into the rest. For example,  
finishing a Mega Man level usually involves 
perfecting the early parts - so you have  
enough health, lives, and ammo to 
face the robot master at the end.
Okay, so lives have pros and they have cons. But 
maybe it's not just a choice between having lives  
in the game, or not having them at all. Maybe 
designers can do something more interesting?
First, we can try to solve the problem of lives 
becoming unbalanced by tying them to levels,  
rather than the character. So in Furi, you'll 
always start each boss fight with exactly three  
lives, which means you never begin a stage with 
an overblown advantage or a crushing disadvantage.
Elsewhere, games find ways to reduce the sting 
of losing all of your lives. In Kero Blaster,  
you get to keep all your upgrades and cash, 
even when you run out of lives - which makes  
repeating those old areas less frustrating. And 
because you wake up in hospital, you get access  
to a special drug store where you can buy 
handy upgrades like extra lives and health.
And that's not the only game that makes 
it less annoying to repeat content after  
a Game Over - Sonic games let you try 
alternative routes on repeated visits,  
and roguelikes are entirely built 
around losing massive chunks of  
progress - because they make up for 
it with completely randomised content.
There are also games that ditch lives in favour 
of permanent checkpoints - but still find ways  
to add a sense of meta challenge. So in Shovel 
Knight, the checkpoints can be destroyed - which  
gives you handy gems, but also makes you go 
back further if you die. Are you willing to  
risk that? There's a similar idea in Panzer 
Paladin - you have to activate checkpoints by  
inserting a weapon, so it might be better to skip 
them altogether and keep your arsenal stuffed.
Meanwhile in Ori and the Blind Forest,  
you can make your own checkpoints by spending 
a certain type of currency. It's up to you  
to decide where to save your progress - 
and up to you whether you can afford it.
But perhaps the smartest approach of all, is to 
flip the entire concept of lives on its head.  
Instead of punishing players who 
run out of lives, games can instead  
reward the players who manage to complete a 
sequence without having to retry too often.
So while most bullet hell shooters let you 
play with infinite continues - there's a whole  
community around doing a 1CC (or one credit clear) 
where you try to finish the entire game without  
dying. And over in Sonic Forces - the number 
of retries players use in a level are counted  
against the final score. So to get the high ranks, 
you need to finish the stage in a single life.
And there's actually a really smart version of 
this in the game that kicked off the whole video:  
Crash Bandicoot 4. The game still 
tracks your lives in Modern mode,  
even if there's no penalty for losing them 
- and that's because every level has a gem  
that can only be unlocked if you manage to finish 
the entire level with fewer than three retries.
System like these mean that new players never 
need to worry about running out of lives - but  
advanced players can opt-in to the additional 
challenge and peril of a lives counter.
So, are lives outdated? Well, it's really down to 
how they are implemented. How they are balanced,  
how they are supported by the other systems in the 
game, and how they are presented to the player.
But more importantly, it's about why they are 
implemented. Lives are one of those things  
that can be added to a game simply because 
"that's what platformers have always done",  
or in some misguided attempt to capture 
the feeling of being a retro game.
But great games aren't made by thoughtlessly 
copying trends and tropes. The most amazing  
games come about when every single system 
is added with intention, thought, and care.
Hey, thanks for watching! I want to give a shout 
out to the GMTK Discord - I often talk about  
upcoming videos in there and ask people for ideas 
and suggestions. It's available to all Patrons on  
any tier, and it's a cozy, well-moderated place 
where you can talk about game design without,  
you know, The Gamers clogging everything up. 
It's a good place. So cheers, I'll see you there.
