Hey, it’s Mark here. For the past seven or 
eight years, I’ve made countless YouTube  
videos where I show you how design decisions 
can change the way games work, feel, and play.
But… what if I didn’t have to just show you? What 
if you could feel those changes for yourself?
Well - that’s the idea behind the Platformer 
Toolkit - a new, interactive video essay that  
lets you see, first hand, how subtle tweaks 
and adjustments can change how a game feels.
So, the game stars Kit - a platformer hero with, 
you’ll surely agree, bad controls. Her run is  
all slippery, her jump is super floaty, and the 
whole thing just feels pretty boring and lifeless.
So then I give you access to the toolkit - 
a powerful set of panels where you can tweak  
practically every variable that drives Kit’s 
movement. You can adjust her acceleration,  
or raise her jump height. You can change 
how the camera tracks her position  
or enable expert platformer tricks 
like coyote time and jump buffer.  
And there’s plenty of options for making it feel 
more juicy, like particles and squash and stretch.
In total, there’s more than 30 sliders, 
checkboxes, and handles to fiddle with.
These features are based on the research 
i did for my video on Celeste’s amazing  
movement - and, of course, my own 
foray into platformer development,  
where I completely overhauled the character 
controller for my upcoming magnet game.
Anyway, once I’ve introduced you 
to all the panels you can then play  
an entire platforming stage with 
bouncy pads and falling mushrooms  
and runaway sawblades - so you can see how your 
decisions feel in a typical video game level.  
And if you get to the end, I’ll unlock 
a few special goodies to play with.
Platformer Toolkit is available now over on 
itch.io. You can play it in your browser,  
or download Windows and 
Mac versions if you prefer.  
The whole thing is completely free 
- thanks to the generous support  
of GMTK patrons - but you can donate a few 
bucks on itch if you think it’s worth it.
I really hope you enjoy this, and find it 
interesting. I’m especially hopeful that  
it can be of use in education, 
so if you’re a teacher or tutor  
and think this might fit into your 
lesson plan i’d love to hear from you!
Thanks very much for watching, and i’ll 
see you next month for the GMTK game jam.
