Hey, it's Mark.
So the latest Zelda game is wonderfully inventive,  
loads of fun, and - I say this without a hint of 
hyperbole - a crime against user interface design.
Here's the deal.
Princess Zelda - she's the protagonist 
in this one - Zelda can essentially  
save a copy of any object 
or item she comes across.
Including bugs, bombfish, 
boarblins and bio deku babas.
And then she can spawn that thing into the 
world, perhaps using it to solve a puzzle,  
or traverse across a gap, or create a little 
team of monsters to fight on her behalf.
It's really creative and lots of fun.
But the problem comes... right here.
This menu.
So to pick an echo - that's 
what these things are called,  
echoes - you hold the left bumper to bring up a 
list of all your collected objects and monsters.
And you pick an echo from that list.
And at the beginning of the 
game it's absolutely fine.
Not a problem! But! As you go along 
and find more and more and more echoes,  
they are simply added to the end of this list.
This single, gigantic horizontal line.
*Clicking UI sound*
Yeah.
So by the end of the game - when you 
have more than 120 echoes - if you want  
to spawn in something new you'll 
have to go through a ridiculously  
long line of icons to find the one you want.
It's mad! It was already pretty 
painful in Tears of the Kingdom,  
but it's even worse in Echoes of Wisdom.
And okay, you've got a couple things to help you.
For one, the list wraps around on itself so if  
you're at the far right end you can 
instantly zip to the far left side.
And you've got a few options 
to sort the list by type,  
last used, most used, last learned, and cost.
But believe me - these things only help a little.
And, look, I'm not the only person to complain.
Almost every review called 
out the game's crummy UI.
And a few other people have already suggested 
ways to fix or redesign this menu - including  
a video by Gamexplain that I didn't see 
until I was almost done making this video.
Oops, sorry!
But anyway - I got so annoyed with this menu that 
I thought, you know, fine, I'll do it myself.
Could I make my own echoes menu that is more  
efficient and enjoyable to 
use? Well, let's find out.
Together.
I'm Mark Brown, and this is Game Maker's Toolkit.
A quick note before we begin - the title of 
this video is, let's just say, YouTube friendly.
Nintendo does not need me - a person with very 
limited game dev experience - to fix their game.
So please take this video as more of a fun design 
challenge, than an epic takedown of lazy devs.
It's not that type of video.
Okay? Cool.
Right, so, the first thing I needed 
to do was to replicate the current  
user interface in Unity so that 
I've got something to work with.
For that, I would need images 
of all the echoes in the game.
And the Zelda Wiki has the lot, and best of 
all, they're all transparent PNG files where  
the file name is the echo's in-game 
name, which will come in handy later.
So I could just save the page in Firefox and 
get a handy folder with all of the images,  
and then drag those into Unity.
Next I made one of the little echo menu 
items, with some basic UI components.
And then I could duplicate 
that and change the image.
And now, if I give these two objects the same 
parent and give that object the "horizontal layout  
group" component, Unity will neatly organise them 
onto a single line, with whatever padding I want.
Neat!
I also made the cursor by using an image to mask  
out the four corners of this 
rectangle and it took me...
way longer than it should have.
Okay, so it's time to code the movement.
The idea here is to simply shunt the entire 
horizontal row left and right when the player  
presses the d-pad, which will push an echo 
into the cursor at the centre of the screen.
And so if we move the row by the size  
of the echo plus the space in between, 
it will line up perfectly every time.
Of course, I'll need to account for 
the left and right limits of the list.
So I can just keep track of which echo we're 
pointing at and if it's the first or last in  
the list, and you try to move beyond 
that, it will snap to the other end.
Now, I don't like how it just jumps from one 
item to another in the space of a single frame.
That's ugly.
So I used my all-time favourite Unity 
plug-in, Dotween, to add a little animation.
Now it slides from one echo to 
the next, like butter in a pan.
And that's basically the movement code finished...
but let's tidy this thing up.
I captured some footage of the game so I could 
pinch some of the heads up display, like the  
heart counter, the XP bar, the controller icons, 
and the bar that goes underneath the echo name.
That allowed me to make a 
fake UI to slap on my scene,  
to make it look like this is 
actually part of the original game.
I could also put in the name of the echo.
So when there's a new selection, I 
just take the name of the currently  
selected game object and put it on that label.
That works! I just need to 
put in the rest of the echoes.
But you know what? I don't want to 
have to manually create every echo,  
add all the images, and type out their names.
So I turned that first echo into a prefab 
and then wrote a script that would take  
all of the echo images and, for each 
one, create a copy of the prefab and  
automatically give it the correct image 
and name - using the image's file name.
Now I can just click one button and, viola, I've 
got 100 or so echo game objects in my scene!
There were just a few other bits and bobs to fix.
Like finding a better font for the label,  
and recording some sound effects from 
the game and putting those into the code.
But with that, we're done.
We've got the Echoes of 
Wisdom UI working in Unity,  
and it's almost identical to the Switch version.
But that's only step one - the next step 
is to ask, what can we do to improve it?
Okay, so first things first, 
let's not do anything too radical.
Let's just try a quick quality of life 
hack - and that's to add some acceleration.
You see, right now, when you scroll 
through the list it shifts along  
at the same speed no matter how long 
you've been holding down that direction.
So how about we speed things up over time?
This was actually super easy to 
implement, thanks to Dotween.
You see, when I shift the grid over I set how long 
it takes to move from one position to another.
Which I set at about 0.1 
seconds for the recreation.
So what I can do is have an acceleration number  
that builds up the longer 
you hold down a direction.
And then if I take the animation's length 
and divide it by this acceleration number,  
you suddenly have a bar that moves faster 
the longer you hold the analogue stick down.
Whee!
In fact, it's a little too fast and so it's 
hard to know where you are in the list.
Especially when it automatically wraps 
around from one end to the other.
So I added an indicator at the top that shows  
where you are in relation 
to the full list of echoes.
And you know what? That's not too bad.
And it only took a tiny bit of extra code.
So let's call that option one... acceleration.
But okay, what else could we do?
Well, the first thing I thought 
of was the PlayStation 3.
You see, the console used something 
that Sony called the Cross Media Bar,  
or XMB, and it was actually pretty elegant.
Basically there's a horizontal bar for 
the top level categories like music,  
movies, games, and settings.
And then each one of those items has 
a vertical bar for the content within,  
like your individual songs, films, and so on.
Perhaps we could do something 
similar for Echoes of Wisdom?
Because many of the echoes 
can be grouped together.
Like the four animal statues 
from the Gerudo Sanctum dungeon.
Or the various monsters with 
level 2 or level 3 versions.
Or the monsters with elemental variants 
like the fire, ice, and electric keese.
So we could keep the horizontal bar,  
but have it splinter into vertical 
sections for certain echoes.
Setting this up was relatively easy because 
alongside the horizontal layout group,  
there's also the vertical layout group.
And after a little jiggery pokery,  
I was able to nest a vertical group 
inside of my original horizontal group.
Just like before, I'm going to shift the entire  
vertical object up and down when the 
player inputs a vertical direction.
And for this to work, I created holder 
objects for the vertical columns,  
and gave them a distinct tag called "vertical".
Now, when the player hits up or down,  
it will only try to shift the object 
if it has that "vertical" tag.
And there we go! That works surprisingly well.
I then had to spend ages putting all of the 
echoes into sensible categories, but in the  
end I managed to compress the horizontal 
line down from over 100 echoes to just 55.
That means you can scroll through 
the list in about half the time!
It's also nice because the list remembers 
the vertical positions of the columns,  
so your favourite, say, Lizalfos, will stay in the 
central spot and can be gotten to very quickly.
Now, it's a little overwhelming to see so many 
icons on screen at once so I added a dark shadow  
over the top to obscure the ones that are 
above and below the main horizontal line.
But with that done, we're finished.
And that's option 2 - the 
cross media bar variation!
Okay, so before we move on, I should come clean.
Zelda does actually have a 
second way to pick echoes.
You can open the notebook 
and pick them from this grid.
Now this isn't so convenient - you have to 
pause the game, and the game might be on a  
different tab like equipment or potions 
so you've got to switch to the notebook.
But it is at least faster to 
navigate by virtue of being  
a grid with five columns, rather than one single row.
But, you know what, I still want to improve it.
Because, for one thing, this 
is a vertically oriented list  
on a game you play exclusively in landscape mode.
So that's wasting some screen space.
Let's start by turning it on its side.
Luckily, this was very easy to implement - 
because alongside the horizontal and vertical  
layout groups, Unity also has a handy grid 
layout group which works on the same concept.
Any child objects will be 
neatly aligned to a grid,  
and you can even decide how many 
rows and columns there should be.
But we can do more than this, I reckon.
So I took some inspiration from another game 
with a big inventory of items to pick from...
Minecraft.
I mean, this game has a lot of stuff.
As of the latest updates there are more than 
1000 objects and when you're in creative mode...
you've got access to all of them.
So Minecraft offers lots of 
ways to sort through this  
stuff including nested lists and a search bar.
But the thing I'm interested in is the tabs...
it's a nice idea to sort the stuff into 
categories so there's only a limited  
pool of items to pick through at any one time.
So, back in Unity, I put the 
echoes into five different lists.
One for objects, one for birds and 
ghosts, one for water and ice monsters,  
one for creatures, and one 
for soldiers and the like.
Don't worry too much about the 
specifics - it just meant that  
a list can have 36 echoes on screen at one 
time, without the need for scrolling at all.
Then I wrote a script to keep 
track of which tab you are on,  
and to cycle through them when 
you press the right bumper.
Now, ideally you'd have two buttons,  
so you can choose whether to go to the tab 
to the left or right of your current option.
But remember that in Zelda you have to hold the 
left bumper down to keep this echo list open.
And so I thought it would be more comfortable to 
have just one button, to go the tab on the right.
And because there are only five pages, it's 
pretty easy to get to the tab you want,  
even if it's literally one tab to 
the left of where you currently are.
So that works.
But right now it doesn't look too nice to simply  
hide the current tab and then 
instantly show the next one.
So I used Dotween again in order to fade out,  
and slightly move the current 
tab before fading in the new one.
It's super subtle, but it's enough to suggest  
flipping through pages and I 
think it looks pretty polished.
Finally, we need a little bit of 
UI to show which page we're on,  
which I basically stole the 
game's sorting filter thingy.
But with that done, we've got option 3.
The grid with tabs, or pages.
I think it works nicely.
But there's one small problem with it.
So, the problem is... well, unless 
we shift our thumb down to the d-pad,  
then we're going to be navigating 
this thing with an analogue stick.
We're taking a grid - something 
that is very digital, you know,  
all right angles and straight lines.
And we're controlling it with something designed 
for, well, moving a chubby plumber in 3D space.
If you've ever tried to type 
on a virtual keyboard using an  
analogue stick, you'll know it's not a great fit.
So that's why many games on 
console opt to use a radial menu,  
with the idea that the menu is essentially 
on a ring around the outside of the analogue  
stick, and we can select different 
options by merely pointing at them.
It's very elegant, very functional.
And so... could we implement something like 
for Echoes of Wisdom? Let's give it a go.
Okay, so Unity sadly does not 
have a radial layout group.
So we'll have to make that one ourself  
with a bit of tricky maths that puts each 
echo on the correct spot around a circle.
And then we can translate the angle 
of the analogue stick to the angle of  
the circle to select and highlight 
the echo that is at that position.
Which all works remarkably well.
We'll just need to fiddle with the UI to put the 
name of the echo in the middle of the radial menu.
And change the cursor script to 
follow the currently selected object,  
rather than stay put in the centre of the screen.
But, with just a small amount of 
code that works really nicely.
It's just that there is, as I'm sure 
you've noticed, a slight problem.
And that is the fact that we've only 
got 16 echoes on screen right now.
And... it doesn't work quite 
so nicely with 116 echoes.
Yeah. Oops.
But, okay, you could potentially have 
this work as a sort of "favourites" bar.
Kind of like Animal Crossing where you have 
a whole grid for your current inventory...
but you can also set some tools as 
favourites and they'll show up in  
one of the 8 spots on the easy-access tool ring.
And I think that would totally work.
Let's call that option 4 - the favourites ring.
Except... it totally goes against 
the intended experience of the game.
You see, while I was working on 
this video, I tried to find out  
why Nintendo would implement a system 
that is, in my opinion, obviously bad.
And, you know what? They actually 
do have a pretty interesting reason.
In an interview with the BBC, 
co-director Satoshi Terada says
"One of the essences of this 
game is being able to figure  
out different ways of using each of these echoes.
And so in that sense we wanted players to 
fall upon and see the echoes that they may  
not have noticed or have been using while they're 
sorting through all the echoes that they have."
In other words, while you're slowly 
bumbling through this crappy UI,  
you might spot an interesting echo you hadn't 
thought of using for your current situation.
The UI is designed to make you 
less efficient, but more creative.
Now... that's kinda galaxy brain.
Though I'm not sure how well it worked - 
for me, the prospect of navigating that  
list was so off-putting that I actually 
did just stick to the same few creatures.
But fair enough.
If Nintendo doesn't want you to 
just use a few favourite echoes...
then having a literal "favourites" ring 
would fly in the face of that ideal.
So let's keep thinking.
But you know what? I think 
we can still have a radial menu,  
without reducing the number of echoes on it.
One solution could be Super Mario Maker 2's 
menu system, which operates on a series of  
different radial menus that you can jump 
between using the left and right bumpers.
And that could totally work.
But forget that.
I want something even better than that.
Something way more ambitious.
And way more goofy.
I want... the Beyond Good and Evil 
spiral staircase keyboard system!
Yes, this is a hilariously 
over-engineered solution  
but it is genuinely cool and legitimately 
quite fast to use with an analogue stick.
It basically has all the 
benefits of the radial menu,  
but can hold many more items than can 
be comfortably shown on screen at once.
So... how can we make this thing for ourselves?
Well, after a few false starts.
Okay, many false starts.
Plus some help from the GMTK Discord.
And at little maths help from my friend Cha...
Chad.
Chad G. Petey. Yeah, sure.
Yes, after all of that and plenty of trial 
and error, here's what I came up with.
So, we basically take that same code 
that puts the items onto a circle,  
but now we let the circle loop around 
on top of itself a bunch of times.
Like a coiled snake.
You know what? We can see this more clearly 
if we also increment each echo's Z position...
See? It creates a crazy spiral staircase.
But this is only a 2D game, so we need to crush 
it all down to only happen on a single flat plane.
Then, just like before, we use the analogue 
stick's angle to pick out an option on the circle.
But now... with so many echoes 
stacked on top of each other...
well, Unity has no idea which one 
to pick, resulting in this nonsense.
So, to fix this, we should only enable 
the echo we are currently selecting,  
and then a few echoes to the 
left and right of that one.
This way, only a few echoes exist at a time,  
and so Unity has no problem 
knowing which one to pick from.
We can even see this happening in the hierarchy,  
as only a small chunk of objects are 
enabled as we move up and down the stack.
To sell the spiral effect,  
we can also apply some transformation to 
the echoes near our current selection.
We can shift their position, and 
change their size, and transparency.
This creates that stepping effect, and makes it 
look like the echoes are rising out of the screen.
And with all that done we get this...
which is, wow, it's kinda fun! What I like is 
that it basically has the acceleration concept  
from option one, but we're controlling that 
ourselves, simply by how fast we spin the stick around.
Wheee! It's a little hard to 
know where you are in the spiral,  
but you could always add the scroll 
bar from the acceleration demo if you wanted.
But either way, this is option 5, the spiral menu.
And so those are the five 
options I wanted to explore.
We've got the menu as it 
exists in Echoes of Wisdom.
And a version where the list gets faster 
the longer you hold down the button.
We've got a menu with both 
horizontal and vertical bars,  
inspired by the PlayStation 3's cross media bar.
We've got a bunch of grids, split 
into separate tabs, akin to Minecraft.
We've got a radial menu to hold our 
favourite Echoes, like in Animal Crossing.
And we've got a crazy spiral staircase 
that spins in and out of the screen.
Each one has its pros and cons.
But which one should Nintendo 
have used, if any? Well...
you tell me! I've put them all together 
into a little interactive showcase on itch.io,  
which you can play, for free, in your browser.
You'll need a controller for the radial and spiral 
menus, but the others will work with a keyboard.
There's a link in the description - so let me  
know which one you like best 
in the comments down below.
And suggest any other ideas you might 
have for how to improve the menu.
Oh, and if you're a GMTK Patron,  
you can get the whole Unity project 
file with all the code I wrote.
A special shoutout to the 49 new Patrons who have 
already shown their support in 2025 - thank you!
And thanks to you for watching.
I'll see you in the next one.
Hey! Here's one more tidbit while we 
thank the amazing Patreon backers.
Thank you Patons!
So, how come Princess Zelda finally got to 
be the protagonist of the franchise that,  
well, has had her name on 
the box for 30 years? Well,  
like most things at Nintendo this was 
a case of form following function.
You see, for a long time during 
development it was assumed that  
Link would be the hero of the game, 
just like every other Zelda entry.
But as this was shaping up to be a game about 
spawning in monsters to fight on your behalf...
well, that wouldn't really work 
if you had a sword and shield.
Why not just kill the monsters yourself?
So Nintendo had to either come up with a 
reason why Link could no longer hold a sword,  
or just pick a different protagonist, 
someone who isn't known for wielding a blade.
Hence: Princess Zelda.
It was still tricky to figure out why Zelda 
would go on the adventure herself rather than  
just send some Hylian guards, but that was 
easier than justifying a sword-less Link.
And then... how come 2024 also gave us a game 
where you play as Princess Peach instead of Mario?  
Well that's just because the games industry 
has been infected by the woke mind virus...
sorry, I couldn't read that with a straight face.
