There's this great moment in the game 
Gone Home.
You're reading a note that you found in your
family's house - just like you've done dozens
of times already.
This one is from your sister, Sam.
And it’s about her girlfriend, Lonnie.
And just as you start to realise that this
one is very intimate - the note is forcibly
closed and it can't be read anymore.
You, the player, may want to to read it.
But the game's protagonist, Sam’s sister
Katie, definitely does not.
It's just a cute, funny, throwaway moment,
but I think it speaks to a larger
game design conundrum.
When it comes to the protagonist of a game,
who’s in charge?
The player, or the character?
And when it comes to role-playing games, that's
a hugely important question.
When the first Mass Effect game was released
in 2007, the heroes of western RPGs were typically
a nameless nobody.
A blank slate of your own design who will
be shaped in the character creation screen,
and then throughout the course of the adventure.
These characters didn't even have a voice,
outside of a few rare examples like JC Denton
in Deus Ex.
And that was all, mostly, by design.
The character is essentially an empty avatar
for the player to fill when inhabiting this world.
So, it's quite right that the player should
have complete control over how that character
acts, looks, and sounds.
But Commander Shepard is different.
As a famous, N7-rank special forces commander
with a distinguished service record, Shepard
is definitely not a nameless nobody.
So, sure, you still get to dictate many aspects
of your character.
You get to pick Shepard's first name, pre-military
background, psychological profile, facial
features, and even sex - which is why I’m
referring to Shepard as the gender-neutral
“they” in this video.
Plus, like any good RPG, you get to make dialogue
choices, moral decisions, and relationships throughout.
But as an established character, Shepard is
also very much their own person, with their
own identity and motivations.
And you never get to pick exactly what Shepard
says: you just choose the gist and the tone
using the now-famous dialogue ring, and the
character says the rest - with full, expressive
voice acting.
Shepard: "I'm a marine, not some tourist on
vacation."
So Shepard is neither a fully-authored character
like Nathan Drake, nor an empty shell like
we might see in The Elder Scrolls.
Instead, they are somewhere firmly in the
middle.
In the Mass Effect trilogy, the ownership
of the protagonist's personality is shared
between the player and the character itself.
And yes, that can be just as awkward as it
sounds.
♫ Music ♫
Council Member: "Commander Shepard.
Your heroic and selfless actions serve as
a symbol of everything humanity and the Alliance
stand for."
The Illusive Man: "That one woman. 
One very specific woman.
Might be all that stands between humanity
and the greatest threat of our brief existence."
Soldier: "What do we do?"
Shepard: "The only thing we can. 
We fight or we die."
♫ Music ♫
Part I - Shepard, Commander
So what’s the benefit of having a more defined
character, anyway?
Well, the game’s developer - renowned RPG
studio Bioware - described most of the advantages
in an interview with IGN, just before the
game was released.
Director Casey Hudson said “Mass Effect
is so much more cinematic and real than anything
we've ever done before that we really needed
that extra bit, those extra sensory aspects
to a story that you [don't] get if you just
start out with a completely blank character”.
And so, with a visible, voiced, and involved
protagonist, Mass Effect could easily compete
with the flashy, cinematic games that were
being released at the time, like Halo 3, Uncharted,
Gears of War, and Metal Gear Solid 4.
It also means that the story isn’t just
happening around Shepard or to Shepard - but
it can be about Shepard.
We can learn about their identity, explore
their personality, and see their character
change over time.
It allows them to have believable and textured
relationships with other characters.
And for it to feel credible when people say
they respect or like Shepard.
Because it’s not a stretch to say that in
a lot of RPGs - Western and Japanese - the
hero is often the least interesting character
around, and has to be propped up by their
party members.
Which is a hard sell, when you spend almost
100 percent of the game with the protagonist.
Also, the typical RPG experience is just inherently
a bit awkward.
The player must use their imagination to fill
in the main character’s voice, and forget
about the strange downtime that happens when
you’re reading through reams of dialogue choices.
By giving Shepard a voice, and mapping simple
responses to predictable slots on the dialogue
ring, the character can instantly reply to
people and feel like a fully-fledged member
of the Mass Effect cast.
Hudson also said "we wanted players to be
really empowered.
We wanted them to feel like they're somebody
special even from the beginning, which is
a challenge in a role-playing game”.
And so because Shepard is already a commander,
we can immediately start the game in the middle
of the action, and in a position of power
and authority.
We don’t need to be broken out of prison
or awoken from a 200 year snooze and then
have to spend the first few hours becoming
acquainted with the world.
Shepard can jump straight into the mission.
So there are all sorts of advantages for letting
the developer author a lot of things about
the character.
But defining Shepard’s personality so strongly,
can also have limitations.
Part II - Paragon of Humanity
Perhaps the most significantly defined aspect
of Shepard’s personality is that they are,
inarguably, a hero.
They fight for the peace-keeping Alliance
military, accept the authority of the Citadel
council, and will always heed the call to
save the galaxy.
So Shepard will never side with the antagonist
Saren, kill their boss Captain Anderson, or
turn against humanity.
This is very different to a typical RPG hero,
who can often be made as good or as evil as
the player likes.
For instance, in Bioware’s previous science
fiction RPG, Star Wars: Knights of the Old
Republic, the studio let the player bring
their character closer to the light or dark
side of the force - depending on the good
and evil choices they make throughout.
That wouldn’t work for Mass Effect, though.
Regardless of what the player wants to do,
Shepard simply isn’t interested in being evil.
So to address this, the game's still got a
morality system but it isn't coded as
good and evil.
Instead, it’s ”Paragon” and “Renegade”.
The idea is that Shepard always does the right
thing in the end - but their methods might
be law-abiding, sympathetic, and egalitarian
- or reckless, callous, and selfish.
*Gunshots*
In interviews, Bioware has pointed to Star
Trek's Captain Kirk and 24's Jack Bauer as
two very different types of hero, and the
conceptual touch-stones for Paragon and Renegade.
Though, maybe Picard would be better?
I don't know, I don't watch anime.
Having a character with an established moral
standing is actually closer to the genre’s
tabletop roots than games like Fable and Fallout.
In the rules for Dungeons & Dragons, the world’s
most influential RPG, you pick the character’s
alignment at the very beginning of the game
and then must make choices that will fit your morality.
Mikey: "We can't just leave those prisoners
there!"
Chloe: "They can escape on their own time,
when Duurgaron's dead"
In the Advanced D&D Dungeon Master’s Guide
it says “Changing of alignment is a serious
matter, although some players would have their
characters change alignment as often as they
change socks.
Not so!”
So, it’s a good idea, but in Mass Effect
1 it obviously presented a huge challenge
for Bioware.
Because when your spectrum of moral decisions
is greatly reduced from good and evil to good
and not-quite-so-good, that’s a much tougher
target to hit.
Especially when you’ve got to place two
opposing viewpoints on the same spectrum.
So, in many cases, Bioware played it way too
safe and ended up with many decisions that
are pretty insignificant - with Renegade choices
just being a slightly more snarky or brusque
version of the corresponding Paragon line.
And, in truth, sometimes the two responses
are actually exactly the same.
Shepard: "I tried to warn you about Saren,
and you refused to face the truth.
Don't make the same mistake again"
But at other times, Bioware completely missed
the mark and let a Renegade Shepard do things
that are pretty unbecoming of a galactic saviour
- if not downright reprehensible.
Shepard can randomly knock-out a delirious
man.
Sucker-punch a reporter for asking questions.
And even slaughter a colony of innocent civilians
- despite being given gas grenades which would
easily knock them out.
Shepard: "I'm not stopping to ask them to
breathe deeply."
Juliana: "How can it hurt to try?
Please commander, these are our friends"
Shepard: "I'm not doing it"
Juliana: "At least take the grenades, so you
have the option.
Lizabeth: "Do the right thing Commander, please"
The problem is: Mass Effect simply does not
posses the narrative bandwidth to credibly
support these actions.
The game must always maintain Shepard’s
heroic status.
And because this is not a game with branching
paths, the story cannot bend or adapt to fit
a Shepard who is, say, disgraced and hunted
by the Alliance.
So instead, the game simply chooses to wave
away, excuse, or forget about your indiscretions.
If you kill all the colonists, you’ll be
thanked for trying anyway.
If you punch the reporter, she’ll say your
career is over - but the Alliance simply gives
you a quick reprimand.
And here’s how long it takes someone to
forgive Shepard for punching out their friend.
Dr. Warren: "Oh my god! 
What did you do?"
Kaidan: "That might have been a little extreme,
Commander."
Dr. Warren: "You can't just go around whacking
people in the head!"
Shepard: "It was only a matter of time till
he did something crazy. And dangerous."
Dr. Warren: I suppose you're right.
By the time he wakes up the meds will have
kicked in."
Shepard: "Williams. Take us to the space port."
Dr. Warren: "Good luck, Commander."
One clever thing that the first Mass Effect
did was make Shepard a Spectre: a sort of
above-the-law secret agent who isn’t bound
by military rules of engagement.
This is a convenient way to let Shepard bend
the law without too many repercussions - and
expands that narrow spectrum of choices a
little wider than if Shepard was simply an
Alliance soldier.
Plus, by having the Citadel council be a bureaucratic,
obstructionist nuisance that regularly disbelieves
Shepard, we're given ample reason to rebel
against their authority.
But there’s still a weird rubber-banding
effect, of Shepard always being awkwardly
dragged back to the centre, no matter how
immoral the player tries to be.
This also means that there are almost no downsides
to playing as Renegade in Mass Effect.
But, crucially, there are no upsides, either.
The only example I can think of where a Renegade
player gets the advantage, is that a Renegade
response is needed to talk a quest-giver into
sleeping with Shepard as payment.
All of this ultimately means that Paragon
and Renegade end up
being treated as roughly equivalent.
When you’re faced with a pack of goons who
are itching for a fight, they will be equally
scared away by Renegade Shepard’s “intimidate”
line as they are by Paragon Shepard’s “charm” line.
Shepard: "This would be a good time to find
somewhere else to work."
Goon 1: "Yeah, yeah right. 
That's a good idea."
Goon 2: "Yeah, I never liked Fist anyway."
So your morality in the first Mass Effect
is almost as consequential as picking Shepard's sex.
A simple chance to role-play the type of Commander
you want to be, without affecting the overall
plot too much.
The same story, but with a slightly different
flavour.
But it's not like you can really pick and
choose, from moment to moment.
The game encourages dogged moral partisanship
- with all sorts of rewards like special dialogue,
easy outcomes to situations, better deals
in shops, and bonus side missions, for those
who pick almost exclusively the Paragon or
Renegade path.
And if you're going to pick one, it's probably
going to be Paragon.
Being nice fits the narrative better,
there's no awkward rubber-banding effect,
and you don't have to constantly listen to
your friends be disappointed in Shepard's actions.
Ashley: "I know those tests are important
Commander, but we could have found another way."
And so it really wasn't that surprising when
earlier this year, former Bioware writer John
Ebenger tweeted that a staggering 92% of players
picked a largely Paragon path through Mass Effect 1.
And so it does seem like Shepard’s strict
adherence to heroism really does limit the
player’s options when compared to a more
traditional RPG.
Even if those Renegade choices were there - hardly
anyone was actually picking them, and the
game might as well not have offered moral
choices at all.
But in the sequels, Mass Effect would do a
lot better.
For one, while Mass Effect 2 kept that silly
system of rewarding those who stick to one
path, it was finally fixed in Mass Effect
3 - by adding your Paragon and Renegade choices
together to calculate Shepard's overall Reputation.
Though it was replaced with a new problem.
In the third game
many dialogue options only have Paragon and
Renegade responses, and that neutral middle
ground has been taken away.
So if you’re mostly playing as Paragon,
your only option is to continue that way or
have a complete personality switch in the
middle of a conversation.
But more importantly, Bioware evolved the
idea of Paragon and Renegade - with the aim
of making Renegade choices more tempting to
players, while still respecting Shepard's heroism.
Half way through Mass Effect 3, Shepard is
given the chance to do something that’s
been talked about since the very first game…
Wrex: "A cure for the Genophage."
This is a biological weapon that was developed
by the lizard-like Salarian race, in order
to severely limit the reproductive power of
a rhino-like race called the Krogan.
Curing the virus is definitely a Paragon thing
to do.
But before Shepard heads down to the Krogan
planet of Tuchanka, the Salarian leader gives
Shepard the opposing Renegade choice: secretly
sabotage the cure and trick the Krogan into
thinking they’ve been saved.
Dalatrass: "We can provide you our very best
scientists to build the crucible, and the
full support of our fleets."
Shepard: "If I sabotage the cure."
Dalatras: "Think about it Commander, the choice
is yours."
The Renegade option is almost unthinkably
immoral and
shouldn’t really work for Shepard’s character.
But I think it actually does make sense. 
Here’s why.
One: Shepard - the character - has an overarching
goal that must be met: build an army that’s
big enough to save the Earth from an invasion
of Reapers, which are apocalyptic alien machines.
But the player gets to decide how that goal
is achieved: whether that’s in a perfectly
ethical fashion, or by using more under-handed
tactics.
Shepard will accept that the ends sometimes
justify the means.
Two: If Shepard wants both the Salarian and
Krogan armies to show up, they’ll have to
choose the Renegade option.
This forces Shepard to consider what it means
to be a hero, and realise that the lawful
approach isn’t always the best one.
And there are plenty of other examples in
the sequels of times where Shepard is forced
to make a Renegade choice to get the best
results.
Like sticking a cattle prod in a guard’s
back to get a competitive advantage in the
upcoming fight.
Plus, there are also moments where Paragon
Shepard’s cloying, kind-hearted naivety backfires.
When Kelly Chambers, former yeoman of Shepard’s
starship, is on the run from terrorists, Paragon
Shepard recommends she stay on the Citadel
and look after the refugees.
Meanwhile Renegade Shepard tells her to get
out and change her identity.
That will save her life - but telling her
to stay on the Citadel will get her
unceremoniously killed.
Three: There are significant consequences
to your decision.
Getting both the Salarians and the Krogan
on your side will improve your odds of saving
Earth at the end of the game.
But if your old Krogan buddy Urdnot Wrex is
still alive by this point he’ll sniff out
your betrayal, snatch back his support, and
fight Shepard to his death.
Wrex: "I know… what you… did"
*Gunshot*
And then four: the Genophage isn’t just
about being good or evil for the fun of it.
The Salarians argue that the Krogan could
rise up, seek retribution, and start another
galactic war.
This is a difficult problem with no easy answer,
and credible arguments on either side.
Both decisions seem valid and justified, though
one is definitely more kind-hearted than the other.
And the Mass Effect series is full of these
dilemmas.
We even get a few in the first game, like
when Shepard is asked how to deal with the
Rachni queen: the central processing unit
for a hive-mind species of ant-like aliens.
A Paragon-leaning player will spare the queen
and allow her race to flourish.
But the Rachni used to be a war-mongering
race in the past, and could be a threat once
again - so perhaps it’s better to follow
the Renegade path, drown the queen in acid,
and end the entire species in an instant.
You’ll see the consequences play out in Mass Effect 3.
But there are difficult choices all throughout
the sequels.
For instance, in the Mass Effect 2 side-quest
A House Divided, you're given the choice between
destroying a bunch of heretic Geth robots,
or rewriting their AI directive so they are
on your side.
That's a meaty, tangled, sci-fi quandary:
is there even a difference between brainwashing
your enemies to help you, or just killing
them?
And in a world of synthetics and artificial
intelligence, what constitutes life?
Now, okay, if we go by stats - 92% of people
cured the Genophage - according to an infographic
released by Bioware in 2013.
That's the same number that played Paragon
in Mass Effect 1.
And that's pretty fair.
Sabotaging the cure is reprehensible, you
may have to kill two of your friends to do
it, and in general Mass Effect 3 makes it
pretty easy to get War Assets without having
to resort to underhanded tactics.
Overall, though, the outlook is much better.
In that same infographic, we learn that only
64.5% of players picked Paragon in Mass Effect 3
- proving that it’s very possible to create
nuanced decisions for Shepard to make - with
significant choices and meaningful consequences
- while still respecting the character’s
heroic personality.
And in fact, by chucking out the cartoonishly
simplistic depictions of good and evil that
we see in other RPGs, we end up exploring
a more interesting area of true moral ambiguity.
And there's another stat in that infographic
which is even more encouraging.
After successfully fighting off a Reaper on
the Quarian home-world of Rannoch, you'll
find that Tali is in conflict with Legion
- a friendly Geth who becomes a squad-mate
in Mass Effect 2.
Legion wants to upload the Reaper code to
the Geth collective, which would boost its
people's processing power to the point of
achieving true intelligence.
But this would surely lead to the Quarian
fleet being overwhelmed by Geth ships - so
Tali doesn't want the upload to go ahead.
Naturally, Shepard has to choose.
And it's one of the most difficult choices
in the entire Mass Effect trilogy.
Shepard: "I'm sorry Legion, I can't let the
Quarians die."
What makes this decision absolutely agonising
is that the player probably likes and respects
both of these characters, and has built up
separate relationships across dozens of hours
of gameplay.
And choosing one over the other won't just
leave the losing character pissed off and
sulking in the engineering deck.
It will lead to their death.
According to the infographic, the choice to
save the Quarians and the Geth was split almost
evenly amongst the player-base - disregarding
the bonus option that lets you save both.
It’s clearly the hardest choice in Mass
Effect and that’s because it’s not about
whether Shepard is good or evil - it’s about
Tali and Legion.
It’s about picking the best choice in a
bad situation.
In that moment, the idea of Paragon and Renegade
is rendered irrelevant.
And so, since Mass Effect came out many games
have just chosen to ditch these silly, binary
morality systems altogether in favour of choices
that are just… choices.
The only thing that matters is the actual
consequences of your decision - not what it
means for some abstract point-scoring system.
Telltale’s The Walking Dead, which was released
the same year as Mass Effect 3 and was partly
inspired by the franchise, manages to provides
difficult decisions without the need for good
and evil.
They just explore the tasty grey zone of moral
ambiguity.
Part III - Company Man
In Mass Effect 1, the player gets to choose
the very first thing that comes out of Commander
Shepard’s mouth.
Shepard: "That's enough. You're soldiers. Act like it."
It’s a bold statement that says while Shepard
is not your typical RPG protagonist, the player
is ultimately still in charge.
In Mass Effect 3, however, Shepard can forget
that the player even exists.
Take this early-game cutscene which occurs
after coming back from Mars.
Here, the game goes a full three minutes without
offering the player any input.
Commander Shepard has a full conversation
with their Asari squad-mate Liara T’Soni,
and another full conversation with the Alliance’s
Admiral Hackett, without that famous dialogue
ring ever showing up.
And a final conversation with Liara with just
one dialogue choice before the scene ends.
Shepard: "You didn't see what they did to
Earth.
How is one weapon supposed to stop them?"
And I mean, it's not like every decision we
make in a Mass Effect game is some hugely
significant choice that will have galaxy-wide
ramifications.
Often times, we're just picking the tone we
want to take in an otherwise prescribed conversation.
But it's important to maintain that control
over Shepard, and decide what sort of commander
they are.
Snarky? Confident? Brusque? Funny?
That should be up to you.
But when the character has their own personality
and motivations, they have the propensity
to ignore player control and act without input
or consent.
Sometimes it’s a simple misunderstanding
about what Shepard will say when a vague dialogue
prompt is picked.
Shepard: "Hey everyone!
This store discriminates against the poor!"
Asari Clerk: "Please, calm down!"
But there are also some much bigger gaps between
player and character.
Mass Effect 2 begins with a bang.
*Explosion*
Shepard’s ship, the Normandy, is obliterated
by a laser beam.
And in the resulting blast, Shepard is thrown
into space, deprived of oxygen, and killed.
But this isn't some Sons of Liberty-style
switch in protagonist: instead, a group called
Cerberus has spent billions of credits to
do a Deus Ex and bring Shepard back to life
- even if it means stuffing them full of synthetic
material which pokes out of their face.
Shepard: "I never asked for this."
Cerberus, I should say, is a notorious pro-human
terrorist cell with a laundry list of crimes
to its name.
And in Mass Effect 2, Shepard's working for
them.
Now that's a bold move, but it actually has
some huge benefits.
For one, it expands Shepard's character to
support a much wider range of moral choices
than the first game.
Shepard is back from the dead, is no longer
directly associated with the Alliance, and
is now essentially working for the bad guys.
And while the top brass had to admonish your
bad deeds, Cerberus boss The Illusive Man
isn't fussed either way - and actually encourages
more Renegade choices than Paragon ones.
It also leads to strong moments in the narrative.
When you meet up with your old Mass Effect
1 squad-mate Ashley Williams on Horizon, she’s
massively disappointed in Shepard for throwing
in with Cerberus.
Ashley: "How could you just turn your back
on all of us?
You betrayed the Alliance. Anderson. You betrayed me".
There's serious drama to be had from seeing
Shepard, saviour of the galaxy, suddenly choosing
to side with the bad guys.
And losing the trust of former squad-mates
in the process.
Plus, if you were in a relationship with Ashley
in Mass Effect 1, this marks a painful low
point that will be resolved in Mass Effect
3 - emulating the basic three act structure
of a romantic comedy.
The problem is: joining Cerberus is among
the biggest decisions that Shepard will make
in the trilogy.
And yet it's also one that the player doesn’t
have a say in.
If commanding Shepard is a matter of joint
ownership between player and character, this
is one of the times where the character takes
full control.
And so this moment with Ashley actually doesn’t
have the same impact as Bioware might have hoped.
Because, if a friend brings up a controversial
action that I chose, like sabotaging the Genophage
cure, that feels like fair game because I
picked that path.
In fact, that's often a great, emotive moment
that only video games can produce.
We can certainly empathise with a character’s
guilt in a movie, but we can actually, personally
feel that guilt, when we're playing a game.
When Clementine flashes her puppy dog eyes
at me and asks why Ben hasn't come home, you
better believe that I feel like an absolute
monster for leaving him to die in a previous scene.
Ben: *Screams*
But because you don’t have a choice about
whether to sign up with Cerberus, moments
like this aren’t earned and they don’t
feel fair.
Vasir: "Besides, you're with Cerberus.
Do you have any idea what your terrorist friends
have done?"
Still, there have to be moments where the
player doesn’t have a say in matters.
If, in Mass Effect 1, the player could decide
to not chase Saren across the galaxy then
the game would be a very short one indeed.
And if the player could refuse to work for
Cerberus, Bioware would have to make an entirely
separate storyline: that’s not impossible,
but it probably wasn’t within budget for
this game.
So it’s all about being tactful with these
moments.
The first step is adequately justifying why
Shepard has to make this choice.
So The Collectors - who are Mass Effect 2's
big baddy - are a significant threat to humanity
and yet the council and the Alliance are ignoring
it.
And no one else in the galaxy but Cerberus
has the budget to put together a mission to
track them down to their home base.
Shepard is convinced that this is the only
viable move - and hopefully the player is too.
Another solution is to let the player bemoan
their lack of choice in dialogue responses.
In the Arrival DLC, Shepard literally kills
300,000 members of the Batarian race without
asking the player’s permission.
But it’s for a good reason - doing so delays
the arrival of the Reapers, until - well,
until Mass Effect 3 comes out.
It’s a crazy decision but it clearly has
to be done, and the opposite simply couldn’t
be justified under Shepard’s heroic identity.
But when this is brought up in conversations,
Shepard gets to argue their case and explain
that the decision was out of their hands.
This lets both the player and Shepard jointly
complain about their lack of choice.
Shepard: "The Reapers were coming.
And destroying that relay was the only way
to stop them."
The game can also provide a false choice.
The ability to say no, but then have it overridden
by other factors.
When Shepard lands on Noveria in Mass Effect
1, they are required to hand over their weapons.
They can comply or they can refuse…
Shepard: "Nobody takes my weapon".
Either way, the decision is made for them
by another character.
Matsuo: "One… two… three-"
Parasini on Loudspeaker: "Captain Matsuo, stand down."
This at least gives the player the sense of
agency, even if it’s not real.
Shepard: "Is this a volunteer job
or am I being volunteered?"
And then, the player should be given the opportunity
to rebel against this forced choice.
So we can refuse many of Cerberus's orders.
We can throw all kinds of snark at The Illusive
Man.
And Shepard can repeatedly tell people that
they don’t work for Cerberus, they're just
working with Cerberus.
Bioware could have perhaps gone even further
with this, and let Shepard secretly sabotage
Cerberus from the inside - similar to the
Genophage option in the following game.
That would give the player some more control
in a situation that is otherwise decided for them.
In a talk in 2010, Bioware's Armando Troisi
explained The Agreement: four rules that the
studio tried to abide by in Mass Effect, to
ensure that the trilogy still felt like an
RPG, even though the main character has an
authored personality.
Those are:
The interface for choice is predictable.
Choices produce results the player expects.
Give the player the choices they want.
It's the player's story.
For the most part, Bioware succeeds.
But doing so takes very thoughtful design
and so it’s not surprising that, sometimes,
the studio missed the mark on those last two.
Part IV - Shepard's Flock
Shepard’s predefined role provides the player
with a number of handy conveniences.
As an officer, they have instant access to
a starship.
As a soldier, they’re already proficient
in combat.
As a Spectre, they can get away with certain
crimes.
And as a commander, other characters will
quickly join Shepard’s mission - no matter
how crazy it sounds.
Shepard: "They tell me it's a suicide mission. 
I intend to prove them wrong."
So over the course of the three games, Shepard
will be able to command around 20 different
squad-mates: from the strict Asari Justicar
Samara, to the spiritual Drell assassin Thane,
to the biotic superweapon Jack.
These characters can be combat squad-mates,
quest-givers, romantic partners, and a moral
compass to Shepard’s decision-making.
That’s certainly not unique to Mass Effect:
most RPGs have squad-mates and party members.
But Shepard’s advanced military rank provides
the commander with certain benefits.
And not all of them good.
Shepard: "You always second guess 
your superiors?"
Ashley: "Ma'am! No ma'am… 
I'm sorry I was out of line.
I'll get back to my duties, Commander."
In Mass Effect 1, characters show infinite
deference to Shepard.
And while they certainly have firmly-held
beliefs, preferences, and opinions, they will
harbour no long-lasting ill-will towards the
commander for acting in a way they don’t
agree with.
Compare that to Bioware’s other RPG of the
time, Dragon Age.
*Sword swipes*
In this series, we’ll find systems where
companion characters take very keen notice
of the player's choices.
Each character has a visible meter to show
their opinion of the main character - and
a moral decision may be judged favourably
by one party member, and unfavourably by another
- depending entirely on that character's unique
views on the matter at hand.
Or compare it to something like Fallout: New
Vegas, where characters will stop following
you altogether if you stray too far from their
ideals.
The character Cass will leave your party if
your karma drops too low.
Cass: "Look, maybe you were like this before
I signed up with you.
But if you keep acting this way, I'm not gonna
stick around much longer."
And NCR-supporting Boone can no longer support
you if you join up with the Legion faction.
In Mass Effect, characters stick with you,
regardless of your decisions.
While moralistic Alliance soldier Kaidan Alenko
might think many of your choices are distasteful,
he’ll always stick with Shepard.
Ashley: "But what about those nerve grenades
we jury-rigged with Baynham?"
Shepard: "We don't have time to waste on these
people.
There's a galaxy at stake."
Kaidan: "Very well, Commander. 
If that's what you want."
And he’ll still sleep with you, for that
matter.
In this series, the only way a character's
leaving your squad is in a body bag.
This unstoppable hero worship of Shepard makes
it seem like these characters have no motivations
of their own - and the player will eventually
stop worrying about the consequences of letting
down their friends.
This is taken further in Mass Effect 2.
In this game, every single one of your squad-mates
will ask for your help on a unique and personal
“loyalty mission”.
So Cerberus agent Jacob has detected the distress
signal from his father's ship, after it went
missing 10 years ago.
Jack wants to plant a bomb at the Cerberus
facility where she was raised and tortured.
And mercenary leader Zaeed wants to enact
revenge on his back-stabbing former partner.
Finish the mission and that character will
get special bonuses, including a new power
in combat and improved plot armour in the
game’s bloodbath ending.
These missions are fun, diverse, and really
focus on each character, giving you considerable
insight into that person's back story and
personality.
But what's important is that nearly every
mission ends with a big moral choice for the
character in question.
Salarian scientist Mordin has to decide what
to do with unfinished data on the Genophage.
Jacob's father has become a savage cult leader
and needs to be dealt with.
And Jack finds a man called Aresh who wants
to re-open the prison - and so she puts a
gun to his head.
But what's surprising is that Shepard is always
the one to make the final call.
Thane: "They'll have snipers outside."
Kolyat: "I don't need-" *Gunshot*
Kolyat: "What the hell-" *Punch*
Sure, in some cases the character is conflicted
and simply asks for Shepard's help without
a preference for any option.
Jacob isn't sure how to deal with his father.
Mordin is overwhelmed by the number of variables
that would drive his decision.
And Legion can't come to a consensus on what
to do with those heretic Geth.
But other characters do want a very specific
outcome - and yet Shepard still gets the final say.
So when Jack has her gun to Aresh’s head,
Shepard can tell Jack what do, but Jack isn't
interested in Shepard's orders.
Shepard: "He deserves it."
Jack: "I decide how to deal with my past. 
Not you."
Shepard: "I gave you an order."
Jack: "Killing him isn't gonna fix my head. 
Get outta here. Go!"
But Shepard can override this.
By using a Paragon or Renegade interrupt,
Shepard can force Jack to do whatever the
player decides is best.
Jack: "Killing him isn't-"
Shepard: "Jack. 
If you can't, I will."
*Gunshot*
Now, in theory, this is not a bad idea.
This showdown is ultimately not about the
fate of Aresh - but the fate of Jack’s soul.
The player needs to decide whether Jack should
get revenge, or needs to let this go.
Which is the right thing for this character,
and what will the fallout be either way?
But actually - it doesn’t matter.
The character will agree with Shepard’s
choice and consider it the right move - whatever
Shepard decides for her.
Jack: "He's not worth chasing. 
None of it is."
Jack: "That felt… good."
Shepard: "A bullet in the head solves everything."
Jack: "I know that now."
And then, this has no further consequences
for Jack.
A Jack who is told to kill a man is no different
to a Jack who is told to let him go.
You'll get her loyalty regardless.
You can enter a relationship with her after
either outcome.
And Jack's personality remains unaffected.
So even if Shepard forces Jack to execute
a defenceless man against her will, by Mass
Effect 3 she'll still call Shepard…
Jack: "Kayleigh said she was putting out an
SOS.
I had no idea the king of the boyscouts would
show up."
And so by boosting Shepard’s agency in the
story, we actually reduce Jack’s - turning
her from an interesting, independent, and
credible human being into a paper-thin pawn
designed merely to prop up the heroic leader
identity of Commander Shepard.
And I mean, Mass Effect has a nasty of habit
of lionising Shepard’s decision-making…
Luckily, not every character is like this.
So in Tali's loyalty mission, the absurdity
of Shepard basically being their squad-mate's
power of attorney is made real, as Shepard
actually becomes Tali's attorney.
Basically, the Quorian has been charged with
treason and you've got to defend her honour
in a courtroom setting.
Shepard: "Does Tali have a defence counsellor? 
Someone who speaks for her side?"
Shala'Raan: "Indeed she does, Captain Shepard.
An accused is always represented by his or
her ship's captain."
Later in the mission you find evidence from
her deceased father that would certainly exonerate
Tali - but also disgrace her father.
So your friend asks you not to use this in
court.
The choice is then very much yours: do you
present the evidence or not?
Shepard: "Tali'Zorah is innocent."
Tali: "Shepard, please…"
Unlike Jack, Tali will be furious with Shepard
if you go against her wishes.
You will not receive her loyalty.
Any relationship with her is cancelled.
And this is also flagged for import on your
save game, and will have ramifications in
the events of Mass Effect 3.
Tali: "I'll fight at your side.
Just don't… 
Don't talk to me unless you need something."
This is a much more nuanced approach to the
idea of character loyalty.
Tali does not feel like a pawn to the player’s
experience, but an independent character who
has her own opinions and beliefs, and won’t
be easily controlled by the player.
If you don’t listen to her, she won’t
be happy.
There's a few others like this - you can lose
Zaeed's loyalty if you're not ruthless enough
to leave some civilians to die, for instance
- but I wish every character was explored
to this extent.
For the vast majority of the cast, simply
completing their side-mission will guarantee
that character's loyalty - regardless of the
outcome.
And that's a shame: losing loyalty is a nice
way to show that a character disagrees with
the player's decisions - without going so
far as to remove them as a party member entirely.
Tali is not the only headstrong character
in the series, though.
In Mass Effect 3, Shepard is rushing to stop
a coup that’s being planned by the human
councillor Donnel Udina.
But when they get to him, the commander finds
that the councillor is being protected by Ashley.
Ashley: Shepard?
At this moment, Ashley will lay down her arms
and let Shepard fire on Udina.
And then become an asset for the upcoming
war, or even another squad-mate.
But she might also stand defiantly in between
the two characters, be shot in the stomach…
*Gunshot*
…and bleed out on the Presidium floor.
What gives?
Well, in this moment, the game actually checks
your relationship with Ashley by considering
a number of decisions you’ve made throughout
the entire Mass Effect trilogy.
Under the hood, secret points are awarded
if you started a relationship with Ashley
in the first game, didn’t cheat on her in
the second game - whoops - and saw her in
the hospital in the third.
If you score enough points, Ashley will step
out of the way.
If not, she’ll die.
It almost sounds like a cold calculation of
data but in the game itself it comes across
as Ashley organically and naturally weighing
up her relationship with Shepard.
And deciding whether she needs to side with
her boss, or side with her friend.
Ashley: "I'm gonna regret this."
Shepard: "No.
You're not."
Ashley "Alright skipper…"
Just like with Tali in Mass Effect 2, it shows
this character as an independent person who
will not be easily controlled by the player - but
will make her own decisions based on her values
and experience.
And so I think that’s another reason why
this scene on Horizon doesn’t quite work.
The player’s choice is disregarded, as they
have no option to not join up with Cerberus.
But also, the player’s past choices are
disregarded, as it completely ignores any
relationship and trust that Shepard built
with Ashley in Mass Effect 1.
There’s one more way that Shepard can impact
upon their squad-mates.
And so I've got to talk about the fan’s
favourite character, Garrus Vakarian.
Garrus: "I'm Garrus Vakarian and this is now
my favourite spot on the Citadel!"
Garrus is arguably the most important character
in the first Mass Effect, because he is the
living embodiment of the Paragon and Renegade
divide that the player must wrestle with.
Throughout Mass Effect, Garrus talks about
how he didn't like working for Citadel security,
or C-Sec, because he was restricted by regulations
and bureaucracy.
Garrus: "If i'm trying to take down a suspect,
it shouldn't matter how I do it as long as
I do it."
He's someone who is very much dabbling in
the Renegade side of being a good guy.
Aboard the Normandy, you'll get to talk to
Garrus about this stuff and can either confirm
or confront his beliefs.
And later, he'll tell you a story about a
depraved Salarian geneticist that C-Sec had
to let go, because killing him was against
regulations.
You can then track the Salarian down, and
choose whether to turn him over to the military,
or enact some space justice yourself.
Shepard: "Put him out of his misery so we
can get going."
Garrus: "Gladly"
And here's the thing: throughout Mass Effect,
the game isn't just tracking Shepard's morality,
but it’s also secretly tracking the morality
of Garrus.
Depending on how you talk to him, and the
outcome of that Salarian side quest, you can
either harden Garrus's resolve to become a
Renegade, or encourage him to instead follow
the way of the Paragon.
Actually, it's possible to influence the behaviour
of every squad-mate in the first Mass Effect.
Under the hood, the game ranks each squad-mate
on a moral spectrum, with goody two shoes
Kaidan on one end, and the absolute maverick
Wrex on the other.
And this will determine what sort of view
they will take on certain choices.
Now, the execution is a bit silly.
Because Mass Effect wants there to always
be a good and evil opinion before you make
any major choices - like an angel and a devil
are appearing on Shepard's shoulders - one
character, the most Paragon in your party,
will assume the lawful position While another,
the most Renegade, will offer a more pragmatic
opinion.
And this leads to weirdness like noted space
racist Ashley changing her opinion from wanting
to wipe out the Rachni…
Ashley: "Commander, I don't trust this thing.
We know its kind are killers.
The tank is rigged with acid - I recommend
using it.
To wanting to save their life…
Ashley: "We'd be making our whole race extinct.
I don't want that on my conscience when I
go to the final judgement"…
Simply based on who else is in the party at
that moment.
Or the kind hearted Liara advocating for you
to let the Council die, just because she’s
slightly less moralistic than Kaidan.
Liara: "The council must be sacrificed for
the greater good.
Do not waste your reinforcements - hold them
back until the citadel arms open up."
But what’s interesting is that it’s actually
possible to rearrange this balance.
For example, you can temper Ashley's extremist
views over the course of the game by having
conversations with her and challenging her
bigotry, making her more likely to provide
a Paragon viewpoint on things in later scenes.
Garrus is more important though because he's
the only character whose final moral leaning
is one of the many variables that gets flagged
on your Mass Effect save data and carried
over into the sequel.
So if the player pushed Garrus towards Paragon
in the first Mass Effect, then in the sequel
he’ll say that he rejoined C-Sec.
But if you encouraged Garrus to become a Renegade
he will say that tried to join the Spectres
- and also comments that he learned the need
for revenge from Shepard.
Shepard: "I'd do the same if I were you."
Garrus: "I learned from the best."
It’s interesting that the player doesn’t
have complete control over Garrus.
No matter which way Shepard lead Garrus in
Mass Effect 1, Garrus has become the violent
vigilante, Archangel - and now enacts his
own street justice on Omega's mercenary groups.
*Gunshot*
No matter if he tried to join the Spectres
or rejoined C-Sec, he’s still picking people
off with a sniper rifle by the time you see
him.
Garrus has resolutely chosen the Renegade
path.
I mean, it's absolutely no coincidence that
Garrus gets a facial scar in this game, to
match the facial scarring that Shepard gets
if they act Renegade.
But I think that’s actually a beautifully
nuanced give-and-take, where Garrus is both
an independent character who can make his
own decisions - but also open to influence
and mentorship from Shepard.
It’s almost like the opposite of Dragon
Age, where the Commander's advanced military
rank means their squad-mates learn from them
- not judge them.
Garrus: "Thanks, Shepard.
For everything."
Unfortunately, it’s also incredibly subtle
- and many players won’t even know that
it’s happening.
And it’s something that’s dropped entirely
in Mass Effect 2 and 3.
The squad-members are no longer ranked from
good to evil, and they no longer learn from
Shepard’s leadership in any systemic sense.
That is a shame.
Part V - Create a Commander
For marketing purposes, there is an almost
canonical Commander Shepard.
This buzz-cut white guy who features in all
the trailers and shows up on the box.
And it would have been very easy for Bioware
to simply say:
This is Shepard. Deal with it.
But that’s not what happened.
In deference to player choice, Shepard can
be a man or a woman.
They can have pretty much whatever face you
can put together in this creation screen.
They can have dark skin, red hair, or blue
eyes.
There are certain things that are dictated
by the story: Shepard must be human and has
to have a soldier’s physique.
But if it doesn’t impact the narrative,
then Bioware lets you craft Shepard’s identity
in pretty much whatever way you see fit.
Except in one, key way.
Throughout the whole trilogy, Shepard can
enter relationships with their squad-mates
and other members of the Normandy crew.
If you answer questions favourably and act
flirty, a hidden relationship value ticks
up by one.
When it hits a threshold, the characters fall
in love and will consummate their relationship
before each game’s final battle.
It’s simple, but thanks to good writing
it’s surprisingly effective.
In the first two games, Bioware let a female
Shepard hook up with other women, including
Liara and Kelly.
But a male Shepard could never go to bed with
a man.
And it's not like Bioware was scared of catching
the attention of Fox News by portraying a
homosexual relationship between men, as it
supported a gay romance with the character
Sky in Jade Empire.
And with Zevran Arainai in Dragon Age: Origins,
which released in between the first two Mass
Effect games.
Zevran: "I fancy things that are dangerous,
and exciting!
Would you be offended if I said I fancied
you?"
Now the studio never really explained its
position on this.
But I think we get a telling answer when,
in 2010, 1UP's Tracey John asked Bioware why
her female Shepard couldn't get with Tali
in Mass Effect 2.
Studio co-founder Ray Muzyka said "We love
giving players choice, and we are going to
continue to enable that for future games.
That’s a commitment for some of our franchises.
For some other franchises we’ve had more
defined characters.
They’ve had a more defined personality and
a more defined approach to the way they’ve
proceeded through the game and the world.”
I think Muzyka is pointing to the fact that
Commander Shepard is far more defined than
another RPG protagonist like Dragon Age's
blank-slate The Warden, and so Shepard's authored
personality will determine the people they
can sleep with.
And while Bioware never out-right said that
they didn’t feel that male Commander Shepard
could be gay, that’s certainly the vibe
I get.
But, whatever the case, Mass Effect 3 changes
that.
Now, a male Shepard can enter a romantic relationship
with one of two men: long-time squad-mate
Kaidan, and Alliance pilot Steve Cortez.
This is a good example of the player and the
game co-authoring the character together.
If something has no bearing on the story - like
Shepard’s skin colour or sexuality - then
by letting the player change it, they get
to have a character that suits their own idea
of who Shepard is.
And I think other franchises have taken Mass
Effect’s lead on this.
Assassin’s Creed has historically had a
cast of male heroes who often have relationships
with women.
But starting with Assassin’s Creed: Odyssey
- which is more of an RPG than others in the
series - Ubisoft now lets players pick the
sex of the game’s hero.
And enter relationships with characters of
either sex.
As long as the hero is an assassin, the rest
doesn’t really matter.
And this is also why it's important to look
to the challenges and successes of Mass Effect.
Because Ubisoft ran into Cerberus-like problems
when an Odyssey DLC pack forced the character
into a heterosexual relationship - potentially
reversing an existing romance with a character
of the same sex.
Ubisoft had to apologise and issue an update
to the DLC.
Now that's not to say that every video game
should let you play as whatever character
you desire.
There can be incredible value in specificity 
when it comes to depicting a character's identity.
And video games give us a unique insight in
what it's like to be someone we're not.
Meanwhile in Mass Effect, Shepard's male and
female voice actors read from almost the exact
same script - and both versions of the character
share a lot of the same animations - with
absolutely ridiculous results.
The only difference is that female Shepard
is subjected to lecherous comments from some
male characters.
Batarian: "Well, aren't you sweet?
You're in the wrong place honey, strippers'
quarters are that way."
Of course, one could argue that Mass Effect
is set in the 22nd century, and so perhaps
it shows a bright future where a commander's
sex, ethnicity, or sexual preference is
practically a non-issue.
I could go for that.
So Mass Effect does lose something in trying
to paint so many different types of Shepard
with the same broad brush - but I think it
gains something just as huge, in letting so
many people insert themselves into this power
fantasy.
Part VI - Commanding Shepard
There are amazing RPGs where the hero is purposefully
left vacant, so we may slip into their clothes
as if we were in the game world ourselves.
Games like Skyrim and Fallout New Vegas allow
us to create whatever character we like - and
explore these massive worlds in a completely
unique way.
Other RPGs excel by having a hero with a far
more authored identity, that we don’t have
as much say in.
That’s how a lot of RPGs from Japan work:
the Yakuza games wouldn’t be what they are
without the stoic, soulful menace of Kazuma
Kiryu at the helm.
Kazuma (in Japanese): "Trust me.
I know what I'm doing."
But what about that great expanse in the middle?
What experiences can be produced by having
a character whose identity shared between
the player and the game?
Well, sometimes it doesn't really work.
In Fallout 4, the main character is finally
given a voice - but that just seem to limit
the complexity of conversations.
And the character is given a definitive back
story involving your son being kidnapped - but
that just makes it super weird if you don't 
immediately chase down your child.
These just feel like unnecessary impositions
on an otherwise completely open-ended RPG.
But other games definitely have made this
work.
And you can’t really talk about Mass Effect
without mentioning another RPG character…
No, not you.
I’m talking about…
Geralt: "Geralt of Rivia. 
Pleasure."
The Witcher came out one month before Mass
Effect and similarly features a shared protagonist.
Though, Geralt is way more defined than Shepard
with a set name, face, sex, fiercely heterosexual
orientation, and a code of ethics.
Like Shepard, Geralt had a rocky development.
Originally, CD Projekt Red was going to let
players make a custom character in The Witcher
- thinking it was impossible to respect both
the player’s agency and a character who
has had their personality defined in a set
of authored novels.
They ended up with a compromise - Geralt has
amnesia in the Witcher 1, which only starts
to wear off in Witcher 2.
But by The Witcher 3, Geralt is, well, Geralt.
He’s incredibly defined.
But The Witcher 3 is still one of the best
RPGs ever made.
It’s truly fun to explore the scope of this
character’s morally ambiguous personality,
see how your choices ripple out into the world,
and get to be in joint control of one of the
coolest characters imaginable.
But if you want to define a middle point between
blank slate and authored hero - Commander
Shepard would be the perfect candidate.
Though, it certainly wasn’t always easy to get there.
Throughout this trilogy, Bioware faced significant
challenges and made critical missteps.
The studio struggled to find the right tone
for the morality system.
Struggled to always honour the player’s
input.
Struggled to define Shepard’s relationships
with their squad.
And struggled to give players the options
they wanted.
But in a lot of other ways, Bioware really
did succeed.
Shepard is a recognisable video game icon
and a credible protagonist.
But players also got the opportunity to craft
their very own version of the character.
Male or female.
Gay, straight, or bisexual.
A heroic saviour, an opportunistic rogue,
or somewhere in between.
When Bioware gets it right, the ownership
of Shepard really is shared equally and fairly
between the player and the character.
Shepard gets to be to a commanding presence,
but the player is the one commanding Shepard.
Hey, thanks for watching!
I really appreciate you taking the time to
watch such a long video.
Don’t worry, this won’t be a habit for
the channel - I’ve just had... a lot
of time on my hands lately.
As a treat for making it all the way to the
end, I have a special gift for you: a quiz!
In this video, there are 28 fictional characters
- who are portrayed by 14 different actors.
Which is to say, each actor portrays a pair
of characters.
Here’s a freebie to explain: Troy Baker
voices both Joel from The Last of Us and Kei
Leng from Mass Effect 3.
Can you name the other 13 pairs? And to be
clear, it doesn't count if an actor
voices two different characters in the
same game.
First person to name them all will get a shout
out in a future video.
Cheers, bye!
