Hi, I’m Mark Brown, this is Game Maker’s
Toolkit, and this is not Dark Souls.
It’s actually a game called Lords of the
Fallen, but you’d be forgiven for thinking
that it’s one of the Souls games.
It looks like Dark Souls, feels like Dark
Souls, and borrows most of its ideas from
Dark Souls - like stamina management, dropping
your experience points when you die, and rolling.
Lots, and lots, of rolling.
In fact, we’ve seen a whole bunch of games
recently that are, to put it charitably, inspired
by the Souls series.
The Surge, by the same developer as Lords
of the Fallen, is Dark Souls done sci-fi.
Nioh is Bloodborne with a samurai twist.
Salt and Sanctuary is a Souls game in 2D,
and so is the upcoming Death’s Gambit.
They all have their own ideas, like stance-based
combat and special finishing moves.
But they also stick rigidly to the Dark Souls
formula, with renamed versions of estus flasks,
bonfires, souls, and even something as specific
as the homeward bone.
Some might call these games clones. Others, including Patrick Klepek over at Waypoint,
have argued that these games should be part
of an entirely new genre.
Call them Soulslikes.
Or Soulsborne games.
Or something along those lines.
And... okay!
Let’s investigate that idea, by asking what
happens when we turn a game into a genre.
First, we need to understand how new genres
get made.
So, check it - here’s a super-quick, four
step guide to making a new genre.
Step 1 - someone makes a game that is both
innovative, and wildly successful.
Step 2 - It gets cloned.
We give these games a nickname.
They copy pretty much everything about that
successful game, just with a different theme
- and some minor tweaks.
DUKE NUKEM: I'm Duke Nukem
Step 3 - The clones keep coming, but they
start to make radical changes to the formula
- adding new stuff and tossing out most of
the features from the original game.
By this point, the clones don’t really feel
like clones at all.
Step 4 - With just a couple immutable factors
linking all of these games, we realise that
it’s not just a bunch of clones, but an
entire genre.
So we change the name.
So, I wonder what would happen, then, if a
genre never went past step two.
Like, if games kept closely following one
specific game, and we were still naming the
genre after that landmark game, years and
years later.
What would THAT be like?
Oh.
Yeah.
It’s easy to forget that Roguelikes are
called Roguelikes, because the games are literally
like Rogue, which was a randomly-generated
dungeon-crawler from 1980.
That game was super popular, and - like Doom
- led to a bunch of similar games such as
NetHack, Moria, and Angband, which all made
small tweaks and additions to the formula
But, for the longest time, Roguelikes never
really went beyond that.
In fact, in 2008, a bunch of developers got
together to define the Berlin Interpretation
of Roguelikes, and listed a whopping 14 high
and low value factors that can be used to
define a roguelike.
It lists everything from permadeath and turn-based
gameplay, to ASCII graphics, complexity, and
numbers.
So where first-person shooters can allow for
military games, abstract puzzle shooters,
open world RPGs, underwater dystopias, and
more.
Most classic roguelike games felt very similar,
with minor tweaks to an established template.
More like sequels than entirely new games.
Thankfully, Roguelikes got a whole lot more
interesting when developers stopped caring
about ticking those boxes, and started mashing
up Rogue’s best ideas with other types of game.
One of the first was Spelunky.
And in his book about the game, creator Derek
Yu says he liked playing games like NetHack
for “the variety that the randomly-generated
levels offer and how meaningful death is in
them”, and so picked those elements - but
not the turn-based gameplay, grids, or ASCII art.
Instead, he took those systems and paired
them with another genre he loves: the platformer.
Rogue’s random levels solved Yu’s platformer
bugbear of needing to memorise level layouts,
and expressive platformer gameplay helped
bring Rogue’s ideas to an entirely new audience.
Reducing Roguelikes from a whole bunch
of factors to just permadeath and procedural
generation has given the genre an entirely
new lease on life, and opened it up to a new
generation of both players and developers.
These games don’t exactly play like Rogue,
but I think they capture the same feelings
of surprise and peril.
And, you see, when we reduce a game down to
its constituent elements, devs can copy them
and end up with pretty much the same game
as the original developer.
But if we consider why those features were
designed they way they were, and what sort
of experience they led to, devs can find different
ways to give players that same feeling.
Go look at the many games that are inspired
by The Legend of Zelda, for example.
There’s no Zelda-like genre, and, I think
because there’s no easy template to follow,
each game ends up very different.
Every developer gets to make their own interpretation
of what makes a Zelda game special, and use
that to influence their own creations.
These games all work very differently, but
they capture the spirit of the Zelda series.
Or, at least, how that developer sees the
Zelda series.
Anyway.
Die hard fans of classic Roguelikes haven’t
been too happy about their genre being expanded
to incorporate platformers and shooters, and
they have some, creative names for these new games.
And I have some sympathy for them.
As players, we use genres to find new games
that are similar to the ones we love.
And if you like playing Roguelikes for their
turn-based, grid-based gameplay, you won’t
be too impressed by the twitchy arcade thrills
of Downwell.
If you ask me, the best way to handle it is
to just put roguelike on the front of other genres.
Easy.
But then again, maybe naming a genre after
a specific game is not the best idea in the
world - because it can effectively canonise
that game as some holy text to be forever
referred to.
In his Medium post Picture in a Frame, which
is partly about this type of genre, Amr Al-Aaser
says “Often the quality of a game in the
genre is judged by its adherence to, or ability
to emulate, aspects of the entries considered
to be the series landmarks”.
Metroidvania - which was once a catty nickname
for Castlevania games that played like Metroid,
but is now an entire genre of games that...
play like Metroid - has effectively mythologised
Super Metroid as the perfect exploratory game.
And so while the genre should be about any
game that has you exploring an interconnected
world, most developers just copy Nintendo’s
approach and use very similar locks, abilities,
progression, secrets, and world design.
Thankfully, some games do take a different
approach, like Toki Tori 2 which has a similar
world structure to Metroid but has no items,
abilities, or even combat.
Instead, it’s a puzzle game and you open
new areas by gathering knowledge of the game’s
mechanics, not through upgrades.
But it’s telling that Two Tribes said it
didn’t set out to make a Metroidvania - it
just stumbled into it when it made a world
with “alternative paths, a worldmap that
marks where you’ve been, and a story that
encourages backtracking and revisiting of
previous areas”.
Holding up one game as the blueprint, can
also push aside other games that are doing
similar work.
Before Metroidvania became a thing, there
were other games with interconnected worlds
that could equally serve as inspiration.
And I think a similar thing has happened with
immersive sims.
Because while it’s not name-checked in the
name of the genre, it feels like Deus Ex has
become the defacto formula - and so we end
up with a bunch of first-person shooters where
you have magic or bionic powers and can play
as a stealthy ninja or a mass murderer.
Up to you.
DAVID SARIF: Lethal it is! But remember, they do have hostages!
But this pushes aside games like Thief.
For that game, the Looking Glass design philosophy,
which would one day be rebranded as immersive
sim, was about embodying a character in a
realistic world - and being able to tackle
problems in ways that made sense for that
character.
Garrett is a thief, and so solves problems
largely through stealth and burglary, while
direct attacks are discouraged.
Oh, and he doesn’t have super powers, either.
Thief is worthy of study and influence, but
the genre almost treats it like a failed experiment,
on the path to the perfect immersive sim.
The same thing often happens to Demon’s
Souls, which gets routinely ignored as just
some flawed prototype that led to Dark Souls
1.
I’ve never played it, but watch this video
by Matthewmatosis to hear more about what
Demon’s can teach us.
The other effect of this mythologising, is
that the genres don’t easily allow for games
that go beyond thsee landmark titles.
In the early days of the Looking Glass design
philosophy we saw it evolve and mutate.
But once it became codified as more of a named
genre, with a set of expected mechanics, in
some ways it feels like the evolution of the
idea has stalled.
I certainly felt this when playing through
Prey.
As much as I enjoyed the game - I also felt
like I had played the same thing many times
before - right down to the audio diaries, upgrade trees, hacking mini-games, and stealth pathways.
It’s perhaps best to take immersive sim
as less of a formula and more of a general ethos.
As a way of thinking about systemic gameplay
and player agency and world reactivity.
That can then be applied to everything from
Hitman to The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the
Wild, to immersive games we haven’t even
thought of yet.
Because a genre like this can make us satisfied
with what already exists - when we should
be pushing against the boundaries and asking
“what’s next”?
Don’t get me wrong - it’s absolutely
fine to take influence from a specific game.
The truth is, every game is built on the titles
that came before it.
But when we turn a game into a genre, that
game can become a formula, that all developers
end up following in pretty much the same way.
We judge new games by their ability to emulate
the original.
We erase the contributions of other important
games that were exploring the same territory.
And because we keep going back to the same
game over and over again, the pace of innovation
can grind to a halt.
It’s the difference between someone
saying “hey, I’m gonna use Metroid as
a base and build something new!”, and a
cottage industry of developers all doing the
same thing for years and years and years.
So while genres can be very useful - I mean,
they help players find stuff that is similar
to the games they like, and they give developers
more structure than a completely blank page
- I’d argue that we want them to be as broad
as possible, and not narrowly defined by many
of the mechanics of a single landmark game.
Which brings us back to Dark Souls.
Look, if we are going to make a Soulslike
genre, let’s try not to make it quite so
restrictive, yeah?
Let’s fast-forward the whole roguelike thing
and try and make the genre about just one
or two elements.
I’d personally recommend the game’s deliberate
combat that comes from action warm-ups, animation
priority, and stamina management.
I think that could lend itself to a whole
bunch of interesting games.
We’ve already seen it in Grasshopper’s
Let it Die, which is a free to play game with
a roguelike structure, and Dead Cells, which
is a "Roguevania"
God, that’s a whole ‘nother thing. Don’t get me started on that.
Uh, anyway. Also: maybe don’t call the genre Soulslike.
That’s only going to hamper its growth as
every game will be compared to Dark Souls
1, and we’ll run the risk of it taking years
before we get games that radically depart
from Dark Souls.
But a genre isn’t the only way to pay homage.
If you love Dark Souls and want to take influence
from the game - there are perhaps better ways
to do it than by just reducing the game down
an ingredients list and then copying that.
Instead, find new ways to capture the spirit
of Dark Souls.
And like with Zelda, the spirit will mean
different things to different people, leading
to a wider variety of games than if we define
a specific formula.
Some might admire the punishing nature of
the Souls games, or that feeling of surprise
and relief when you open up a shortcut,
or the joy of untangling a complex backstory
told through item descriptions and statues.
For me, the soul, of Dark Souls, was that
it was unknowable and obtuse.
People talk in riddles, mysterious voices
help you spot ambushes, and traps lay behind
every corner.
Ironically, none of these Soulslike games
can capture that feeling, because - at
this point - they’re completely familiar.
But games like Hyper Light Drifter, can.
So I guess my point is - take influence and
inspiration from your favourite games.
But be wary about turning those games into
genres.
That can stifle innovation, and stop developers
from coming up with the next game that’s
as important, and influential, as Dark Souls.
Hey! Thanks for watching.
GMTK is made possible thanks to the generous
backing of my Patrons.
The names on screen are my top tier supporters.
Because I hit 2000 backers, everyone now pays
per month instead of per video, which should
effectively halves
your contribution.
Backers get access to a Discord, a book club-style
GameClub, early access to videos, developer
Q&A sessions and more.
Doing this video gave me so much more to talk
about than could ever fit into a single episode.
I mean, we can find examples of genres leading
to very similar experiences outside of these
hyper specific ones.
And there are genres that are more about capturing
a feeling than copying a bunch of mechanics.
And so, there’ll be plenty more on this
subject down the line.
Though, I do need to stop promising future
topics at the end of videos and then... never
making them.
I’m a bad person. I'm sorry.
