This is a Karakuri puppet.
It's a Japanese marionette that uses a complex 
system of gears and mechanisms to create movement.
And they're particularly important to one 
Eiji Aonuma, producer of the Zelda franchise.
Aonuma studied and made automatons like this  
while at university in Tokyo - and that's 
what lead to him being hired at Nintendo.
In fact, they so impressed 
the firm's chief designer,  
Shigeru Miyamoto, that Aonuma was 
put in charge of constructing the  
dungeons for the next big Zelda game: 
The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time.
And, I think you can see the relation - 
because there's an almost eery similarity  
between these mechanised marionettes 
and some of the dungeons in the Zelda  
games - which move and shift and flip and 
turn with whirring clockwork precision.
There's the Water Temple, where the player can 
set the depth of the dungeon's water level.
There are the mechanised Divine Beasts, 
like a robot elephant with a moving trunk.
And there's the Stone Tower Temple, 
which literally flips upside down,  
changing the floor into 
the ceiling and vice versa.
I, unequivocally, love these things.
I mean, I adore Zelda dungeons in general 
- they're just such fascinating spaces,  
with incredible atmosphere and clever lock 
& key structures and titanic boss fights.
But there's something particularly special 
about the dungeons that are built around  
shifting architecture and changing 
water currents and even time travel.
These dungeons are mysterious and otherworldly 
and utterly bonkers - but more than that,  
they promote a sort of puzzle design 
that we just don't see in a lot of games.
A wild mix of navigation and spatial reasoning 
- in a complex, three dimensional setting.
Because, sure - there are plenty 
of puzzles in Zelda dungeons.
You know, single room stumpers about 
pushing blocks or twisting mirrors.
But these dungeons go further - they're 
not just a container for puzzles,  
but the container itself is a puzzle.
Ah, my brain!
So, how, exactly, do these 
puzzle box dungeons work?
Pretty much every dungeon of 
this style, works like this:  
there's a switch - like a lever 
or a button or a crystal orb.
Link can flip the switch to change the layout 
of the dungeon in some way: it might reverse the  
water direction, or spin a staircase, or just 
flip the positions of these coloured blocks.
Importantly, the switch has an effect  
somewhere else in the dungeon - not 
just the room you're currently stood in.
So you can pull on this lever, and that lets 
water shoot out from beneath your feet - but  
it also causes the water level to rise in a 
room on the complete other side of the dungeon.
It's this set-up which leads 
to the dungeon's puzzles.
Which, if you break them down into their 
most simple form - are about changing the  
dungeon so its in a position or state 
the lets you get where you need to go.
Let me give you an example.
You're in the Water Temple, you're swimming up 
this passageway, and you notice this cracked wall.
You can't bomb through it because 
bombs don't work underwater.
So, you need to go to a different room,  
set the water level to rest at 
floor two, and then come back.
You can now swim up and blow 
through the wall. Smashing!
Now, when I put it like this, it's not 
the most complex puzzle in the world.
But here's why it works.
Imagine if you could change the water level at any 
time, by pressing a button on the controller, say.
You could just set it to floor two from 
within this room, and go straight on through.
But no - you need to go to a different room,  
change the dungeon to suit 
your needs, and then come back.
This first principle requires you 
to make a mental map of the dungeon,  
so you can remember to return to this area 
when you've changed the dungeon elsewhere.
Okay. Imagine this puzzle if you saw the dungeon 
from this zoomed-out, isometric perspective.
You'd easily see how the water level 
affected every area in the temple,  
and immediately identify all 
the rooms you need to visit.
But no - you have a really limited perspective,  
where you can only see what's 
happening in your immediate area.
That's why I've often likened a puzzle box dungeon 
to solving a Rubik's cube - from the inside.
This second principle means you 
need to actually understand how  
changing the dungeon will impact rooms 
beyond your current vantage point.
Or, finally, imagine if you changed 
the water level and it had a permanent,  
irreversible effect on the dungeon.
You'd know that the dungeon was now 
in the right position and you wouldn't  
need to think about the mechanism any further.
But no, in Zelda dungeons you 
can almost always switch back  
and forth between the different dungeon positions.
And that's assuming there's only two states 
- the water in the Water Temple can be set to  
three different levels, the staircase in 
Lakebed Temple can be in four positions,  
and the rotating belly of Vah Naboris 
can be set in 64 different combinations.
This third principle means that 
you have to set the dungeon's  
current layout with intention - 
not permanently, and not randomly.
So, these three principles drive 
the puzzles in this sort of dungeon.
They force you to think about 
the dungeon as a single space  
where choices in one room 
can affect things in another.
Which means the only way to get where you 
need to go is to construct a mental map  
of places you need to revisit, figure out 
how the mechanism will impact the space, make  
intentional choices about how the dungeon should 
be set, and then navigate your way to the goal.
You can't brute force the 
puzzle through trial and error.  
Or just get to the exit by 
randomly wandering around.
You have to show a real understanding of 
the dungeon's design if you want to succeed.
Now, most dungeons have more 
than one of these situations.
Like, in the Sandship you'll need to be 
in the present in order to open this door,  
but then travel into the past 
to power up the machine inside.
That means you'll need to jump between 
the different set-ups depending on your  
current goal - sending you zig-zagging 
back and forth around the dungeon.
And this only happens because 
changing the dungeon will open  
some pathways to the player 
- but also shut some others.
Like, in the Great Bay Temple, changing the 
water direction will open access to some tunnels,  
but close off access to others.
And this can lead to a clever puzzle in of itself.
So, in the Ancient Cistern, moving the 
elevator down gives us access to the  
underworld - but simultaneously 
cuts off access to this chest.
So the solution is to put the mechanism 
in a specific position - in this case,  
have the elevator raised.
And then navigate in a roundabout way  
to access the same area from a different 
route - in this case, climbing down a rope.
And speaking of roundabouts, 
we see this sort of gameplay  
in the Oracle games, due to 
these spinning platforms.
Step on them and the whole thing will rotate 
90 degrees - but also flip its direction.
So if you go back on the roundabout, you'll 
just be sent back to where you started.
So in this dungeon, we see a treasure 
chest we want to get to on the right.
We need to start by setting the roundabout 
to a specific position - and then navigate  
around the whole dungeon on foot 
in order to reach this top path.
Now when we ride the spinning disc, we 
get to where we want to go. Terrific.
Just like before, this sort of puzzle 
promotes a global way of thinking.
These dungeons are not a collection of unrelated 
rooms, or a linear sequence of chambers - but a  
contiguous, interconnected space with different 
routes - in both two and three dimensions.
While these principles are used in most 
of the franchise’s puzzle box dungeons,  
there are a few that don't follow this path.
Eagle's Tower in Link's Awakening 
is built around a single,  
irreversible change - as the top of the 
temple crashes down into the floor below.
Instead, it's about knocking down 
these four pillars with a giant ball.
And, importantly, the ball cannot 
be carried between floors - which  
is inconvenient because that's how Link 
gets access to the different pillars.
So, the solution goes back to 
that global way of thinking:  
we need to throw the ball over gaps - and then 
walk around to collect the ball and move on.
We need to juggle the position of 
Link and the ball at all times.
Also, the Divine Beasts in Breath of 
the Wild break principle one by having  
the option to control the dungeon's layout be 
available at any time, right there on the menu.
This time-saving feature does make 
many of the puzzles a bit trivial to  
solve - but the dungeons' designers still 
find ways to create clever conundrums.
For example, the belly of the camel dungeon Vah 
Naboris can create a powered electrical circuit,  
which causes the camel’s tail to rise up.
There’s a nice puzzle where you need to 
intentionally break the circuit to lower the tail,  
then position Link on the tail, and finally 
fix the circuit to make the tail lift up.
The only problem with this sort of dungeon… is 
that some people just really struggle with them.
For all the praise I give the Water Temple,  
it's impossible to ignore that its 
deeply polarising among Zelda players.
And look, it doesn't help that you had 
to go into the menu every five minutes  
to change Link's shoes - that is absolutely 
tedious, Aonuma has personally apologised  
for the transgression, and it was 
thankfully fixed in the 3DS remake.
But the dungeon is also complex, 
convoluted, and maze-like.
People saw their progress through the game stall,  
it sent them running to a walkthrough, and it 
made second playthroughs rather unappetising.
The tricky temples of Majora's 
Mask had much the same effect.
And I think that shook the confidence of 
Nintendo - a company that goes to great  
pains to make its games easy and accessible 
to all, *ahem* able-bodied *ahem* players.
So, we saw much more simple and straightforward  
layouts in games like The Wind 
Waker and Twilight Princess.
And while brilliant puzzle box 
dungeons returned in Skyward Sword,  
most of the conundrums were spoiled by 
overzealous hints and an aggravating sidekick.
Meanwhile in Breath of the Wild, changes to the 
system like having the dungeon's controls be  
readily accessible from any location made those 
Divine Beasts a little too easy for my liking.
But I think there are ways to keep the challenge 
of these dungeons without alienating people.
So, it's important to teach the player how the 
dungeon will change when the effect is made.
In Skyward Sword, the tricky 
Sandship dungeon comes after  
two other whole areas that effectively 
explain how the timeshift stones work.
By the time you get to the ship,  
you'll know exactly what will happen 
in the past and present timelines.
The dungeons can also be built around  
simple and ordered level design 
that aids the player in navigation.
A good strategy we've seen in many Zelda 
dungeons is the hub and spoke system,  
where a central room forks 
off into lots of different  
corridors - providing a handy base 
for players to always return to.
This can help the player 
structure their mental map.
Also, Nintendo can reward mastery by having 
the most tricky puzzles grant the player  
optional goodies that are irrelevant 
to the dungeon's critical path.
For example, in Lakebed Temple, it's 
possible to reverse the entire dungeon  
in order to access a treasure 
chest on the opposite side of the  
temple - which rewards inquisitive 
players with a handy, but optional, heart piece.
And finally, hints are... fine! No 
one likes getting completely stuck.
But just make them completely optional, 
rather than springing them on a player  
before they've even had a chance to 
try and solve the conundrum at hand.
Ultimately, I hope we see Nintendo revisit this 
sort of level design in future Zelda games.
I'm not saying it's the only way to make a good 
Zelda dungeon - there are plenty of good temples  
that are all about atmosphere, or incredible set 
pieces, or storytelling, or action-packed pacing.
And I think the best games 
have a real mix of dungeons.
But no Zelda game is complete 
without a dungeon that moves  
and shift and rotates. One built 
around ambitious structures  
and brain-busting rules. One that will have 
you tearing your hair out in frustration.
But, like, in a good way.
And it's vitally important because these 
dungeons are truly unique in gaming.
It's so rare to find puzzles 
that test your navigation and  
spatial reasoning in such a 
rich and involving manner.
I mean, sure, plenty of games try to mimic Zelda 
- and some do it quite successfully - but to  
my knowledge, no game has anything remotely 
similar to these amazing puzzle box dungeons.
It's end screen recommendation time! And 
I'm going for the very appropriate Carto.
This is a puzzle adventure where 
you can move the tiles on the map  
screen - to make the world shift 
and rotate beneath your feet.
This leads to lots of clever puzzles 
about creating specific landmarks like  
winding roads or massive forests.
It's backed up by adorable art, 
and a great adaptive soundtrack.
It's out now on all major platforms.
