Every year, I like to dedicate my last video 
to one game, released in the last 12 months,  
that I think deserves a much closer 
look. A game that’s, perhaps, innovative,  
or bold, or just absurdly smart.
For 2021, there were plenty of games I could 
have picked - honourable mentions later on - but  
there was one game that I really wanted to 
dive into. It’s called… The Forgotten City.
Now, as usual, I’ll give you the elevator pitch, 
and then give you a chance to ditch this video  
and go play the game for yourself before 
I spoil the whole thing. Sound good?
Right, so The Forgotten City is 
a time-travelling detective game,  
set in a teeny Roman city at the 
bottom of an impossibly deep chasm.
GALERIUS: “Uh… Salve friend. I’m Galerius”
The 20-odd residents of this place all live 
under “The Golden Rule”, which basically says:  
if one person commits a sin, then the entire 
population will be punished. By death.
Your job is to figure out who is about to break 
the golden rule - and stop them before they do it.
You’re given free rein to crack the 
case: so you can wander the streets,  
talk to citizens, find leads and rumours and 
clues, and piece together the answer by yourself.
But if you fail to find the culprit, you’ll 
have to rewind the clock and start from scratch.
GALERIUS: “Uh… Salve friend”.
Though, now with new items and information 
that might help you out on the next loop…
Now, you might be thinking that this 
whole thing sounds a tad familiar.  
Going back in time to solve crimes? That’s 
a bit Return of the Obra Dinn, isn’t it?  
And how about piecing together information while 
trapped in a time loop? That’s very Outer Wilds.  
And what about interviewing the citizens of a 
small city to find a culprit? A bit Disco Elysium,  
and it also strongly reminds me 
of last year’s Paradise Killer.
And, yeah, you’d be right to think 
that. Except, The Forgotten City  
actually predates all of those games. 
You see, this is actually a shiny remake  
of an uber popular Skyrim mod - of all 
things - from way back in 2015. It’s just  
been completely overhauled and turned into a 
standalone game, courtesy of Unreal Engine.
But what came first is not actually all 
that important - because what impresses  
me the most about The Forgotten City isn’t so 
much what it’s doing - but how it’s doing it.
This is a game that instantly grabbed 
my attention. It’s a game where I felt  
a really strong sense of freedom - but 
without feeling overwhelmed by options.  
It’s a game where I was always making forward 
progress, without dead ends or missed clues.  
And a game that kept giving me surprises and 
revelations… up until its satisfying ending.
With one notable exception - did we really 
need to bring wonky Bethesda combat over  
from the mod? - uh, with that exception, 
this is a fantastic piece of interactive  
storytelling. And it was swirling around my 
head for days and days after I finished it,  
as I tried to figure out how 
the designers pulled it all off.
So, if that sounds interesting to you - this is 
your chance to go get the game and play it. It’s  
on Steam, and all the major consoles, and its 
also on Game Pass as of this video’s release.  
If you haven’t finished it and want to 
check it - now is your time to leave.
After the break, we’ll dive 
deep into the game’s design.
Okay, welcome back!
So, as I said in the intro, The Forgotten 
City held me rapt and engaged in five  
key ways: an instantly engaging intro. A high 
degree of agency - without being overwhelming.  
Constant forward progression. Surprises 
and revelations. And a satisfying ending.
I wanted to know how it pulled all of 
these things off - so I played it again.  
And I watched some Let’s Players tackle the game on YouTube. 
And I also reached out to the game’s designer and  
writer, Nick Pearce, to find out more. So 
I’ll be quoting him throughout the video.
Let’s start with the game’s opening moments. 
A high concept game like this one has a lot  
to accomplish in its opening hour-or-so. It 
needs to ensure that the player understands  
where they are, what they’re doing, and 
- importantly - why they’re doing it.
A strong introduction will leave 
players informed - but intrigued  
to learn more. And clear on their goal - 
while being motivated to accomplish it.
So, Nick says “I carefully designed 
the introductory sequence - which is  
fairly linear - to include just the right 
amount of world-building and story set-up  
that [the player’s] purpose is clear, 
before handing over the story's reins”.
As such, as soon as we set foot in the city, we’re 
given a guided tour of the game’s world, events,  
and key characters. We meet Galerius, 
who tells us about the time period,  
the city, and teases some important gossip about 
an upcoming election. Then, we meet Sentius,  
who explains the golden rule, gives us our 
mission, and explains why we should care.
SENTIUS: “If you manage to prevent the sin 
that breaks The Golden Rule, I won’t need to  
bring you here, I won’t create the portal, and 
you will never have been able to come here”.
At this point, says Nick, “I've given [players] 
the minimum amount of information to get them to  
the point where they're intrigued to find out 
more, they're motivated to want to help these  
people, they understand that helping these 
people is the only way to help themselves,  
and [that] talking to each of these 
people is going to be enjoyable”.
So this is a great example of efficiency in 
introducing a game. In a very short period of time  
you have everything you need to start playing.
Okay,  
let’s talk about how The Forgotten City gives 
you freedom - without overwhelming the player.
So, now it’s up to you to solve the 
mystery at the heart of the game.  
And how you go about it, is really up to 
you - this is a remarkably non-linear game,  
where you are free to work through the tangled 
web of leads and rumours however you like. It’s  
your choice who you speak to, where you 
explore, and what threads you pull on.
And while the game was still early in development, 
this is exactly what would happen after the  
introduction. Sentius would give you your 
mission - and then completely leave you to it,  
signalling that the guided tour was now over 
and it’s up to you to pick the next path.
But, Nick understood that some players might 
need a helping hand. It can be overwhelming  
and immobilising to suddenly give 
players such a large amount of freedom.
Like - I adore Outer Wilds, but I have to admit 
that I totally bounced off the game at first  
because I was just overloaded with planets 
and people and dead ends and clues! Argh!
So, Nick had Sentius give the player a lead:
SENTIUS: “Oh, and one last thing. If I were you 
I’d start my investigation by visiting Lucretia  
at the shrine of Apollo, in the Forum".
And this is a very smart way to 
start the player’s investigation.
You see, if you head towards the shrine, 
you’ll actually stumble upon a couple  
key bits of info along the way. 
These bickering palace guards  
talk about Sentilla going missing. And on the 
steps up to the shrine, we may be inclined  
to talk to Equitia, who gives us another 
hugely important goal - “The Common Thread”.
But let’s keep going to the Shrine of Apollo. 
There, Lucretia will tell you that her patient  
has died - but could have been saved with resin. 
Which is being withheld by a chap called Desius.
Because we can’t afford the resin, the 
game gives you a different goal: steal it.
Which, naturally, breaks The Golden 
Rule, forcing you to restart the loop.  
But, hey, you’ve still got the resin in your 
pocket. Maybe you should give that to the doctor?
Now, at any point along this entire path we can 
leave and investigate for ourselves. We can ignore  
Sentius’s lead and head in another direction. We 
can, maybe, forget the Shrine of Apollo and do  
Equitia’s task instead. In fact, we can even tell 
Galerius to jog on right at the very beginning.  
The point is - if we prefer to explore 
for ourselves, the game gives us  
really obvious off-ramps where we can ditch 
the guided tour and play however we want.
But if we’re feeling overwhelmed, the game 
puts us on a rollercoaster tour that presents  
us with some key information that will help us 
out. We get given a bunch of different quests,  
including the two that essentially lead to all of 
the game’s different endings. And we get to see  
first hand how the Golden Rule 
and time loop systems work.
So it’s a good reminder that some players 
want to investigate and think for themselves,  
and the game supports that entirely. But 
others may find this level of freedom  
overwhelming and confusing, so 
the game provides a helping hand.  
It’s up to the player how much they 
want to follow orders… or rebel.
Next up - I talked about how I made constant 
forward progression in The Forgotten  
City - without repeatedly stumbling into dead 
ends and missed clues. So how does that work?
Well, it’s important to look at the underlying 
structure of The Forgotten City, which is  
20-or-so… well, in Skyrim parlance they’d 
be side quests. But the game calls them  
leads. They’re rumours and requests 
that may advance your investigation.
For starters, there are often multiple 
ways to hear about these leads.  
Two or more characters may give you 
the same clue to get you started.  
And, likewise, there are often multiple 
ways to advance these quests - like,  
to get into Malleolus’s villa, you can jump into 
the pool, climb these vines, or bribe the guard.
It’s harder to miss a vital clue or hit a 
dead end when there are multiple opportunities  
to start and finish these quests.
But I think the really smart thing is how all of 
these leads are actually completely intertwined.
Let me give you an example. The assassin 
in the bathhouse. When you first meet him,  
Fabia is crushed by rocks, and the assassin 
tells you about a traitor with mismatched eyes…  
before shooting you with an 
arrow and triggering a new loop.  
Now you can go back, save Fabia, lead the 
assassin into the trap, and steal his bow.
So working though this one lead, Intruder, 
actually helps you with a bunch of other  
leads - the clue about the traitor helps 
you unseat Malleolus in Democracy in Action.  
Fabia helps you find Vergil’s bully in The Sinner. 
Saving Fabia will convince Georgius to change his  
vote in A Virtuous Man. And the assassin’s 
bow completes the lead Straight as an Arrow.
One lead contributes to four other leads. And 
this is not the only time it happens - in fact,  
I plotted out all the quests in the 
game and discovered that almost every  
single lead is linked to at least 
one other lead, in some fashion.
And so the upshot of all this is that 
whenever you make progress in the game,  
it naturally and organically helps you somewhere 
else - either by starting, progressing,  
or finishing another lead. It’s not like you 
finish a self-contained quest in an RPG and then  
don’t know what to do next - that quest just 
gave you a whole bunch of new paths to follow.
There’s another benefit to 
this, also: a sense of immersion  
and believability. Nick says “In real 
communities, especially small ones like this,  
everyone knows everyone, and they're all up in 
each other's business. So in The Forgotten City,  
I made sure that each character refers to 
their neighbours as often as is natural”.
“The alternative - and this is something you 
commonly see in big open world games - is  
characters just exist side by side as 
a series of disconnected individuals.  
It makes the world feel shallow”.
The Forgotten City, by comparison,  
is that age-old dream of a game that’s as 
narrow as a puddle but deep as an ocean.
Okay. Next. I talked about how the game kept 
giving me a steady stream of revelations  
and surprises. And this is impressive, 
because of the game’s non-linear design.
As Nick says, “Generally, players are very good 
at piecing together elements of a story to build  
an understanding of the bigger picture. However, 
there are certain story building blocks, or beats,  
which - if found in the wrong order - would 
make even the most intelligent players confused  
or disappointed. For example, where they 
ruined the setup for certain revelations,  
or made the pacing feel abrupt.”
So while the game does offer a huge amount 
of freedom, the designer smartly introduced  
“gates” to withhold certain things until 
the player has met some preconditions.
Like, you can’t tell Sentius who you think the 
culprit is without first identifying a handful  
of suspects. And Equitia won’t reveal the city’s 
true nature until you’ve gathered the backstories  
from a number of characters. And the Philosopher 
in the underground tunnels won’t let you pass  
until you know that true nature. And so on.
Now, Nick says that “I was always 
conscious that gates run at cross-purposes  
to the game's open-world design 
philosophy,” so decided to use them  
sparingly and carefully 
justified them in the narrative.
But the benefit of these gates is that the 
game doesn’t show all its cards at once.
Instead, it gives you a steady stream of 
surprises: the true nature of the city,  
the history of the city, the 
culprit behind The Golden Rule,  
and so on. And, like a good page-turner 
of a novel, these frequent mysteries and  
revelations keep you engaged in the story 
and wanting to find out what happens next.
All the way up… to the game’s 
ending. Or endings - there are  
actually multiple ways to finish the game.
For this, Nick says “the player 
should get the ending they deserve.  
In other words, whichever ending they 
get should be an emotional reward which  
is proportionate to the thought and 
effort they invested in the game.”
So you can get an ending pretty 
quickly if you’re selfish,  
but it’s not gonna feel great. To 
get the most satisfying ending, then,  
you’ll need to have become truly invested in the 
game and helped out almost all of its characters.
And that’s where Nick employed another gate: you 
need the four plaques to open up the main temple,  
and getting them all means solving 
pretty much every mystery in the city.
You’ll need to track down 
Khabash, unseat Malleolus,  
and figure out how to help 
pretty much every citizen.
And then, on a later loop, you’ve got 
to make Galerius help out pretty much  
everyone citizen. Which is pretty enjoyable 
to mastermind. Time loop movies are often about  
exploiting the loop, becoming empowered, and  
having fun with it - and The Forgotten 
City captures that sensation really well.
As Nick says, piecing together this whole thing  
“feels satisfying because you're 
helping characters you really feel for,  
and it's a fun surprise when everything 
falls into place, and you realise that  
all the good deeds you've done up until now 
- which initially seemed like disconnected  
"side quests" - suddenly come together to 
help you pull off this elaborate coup.”
So, there we have it.
The Forgotten City instantly piques our 
interest with an efficiently designed intro.  
It provides a huge amount of freedom, but gives 
some optional help if that’s too overwhelming.  
By tightly entangling its many sidequests, 
it means there’s always something to do. By  
gating off key information, you’re not going 
to spoil the story in the first five seconds.  
And because the true ending is dependent 
on you helping out most of the town-folk,  
the finale is - if not a little 
schmaltzy - very satisfying.
This is the mark of a very smart storyteller, 
who understands how narrative and gameplay  
must be shaped by one another 
to create a strong story.  
Which is why The Forgotten City is easily 
one of the best games I played in 2021.
Okay, so here’s some honourable 
mentions. Lightning round, let’s go!
Toodee and Topdee is a dimension-flipping 
genre mash-up where you swap between  
a 2D platformer and a top-down 
puzzler to overcome challenges.
Unpacking is a house moving simulator where 
the satisfying Tetris-like gameplay of  
plopping down blouses and bog roll 
slowly unveils subtle story cues.
Before Your Eyes is a heartbreaking narrative 
adventure where you can’t stick around for long  
because time advances every 
time you blink into your webcam.
Wildermyth is a tactical board 
game where your party of characters  
are slotted into a big bucket 
of randomised narrative moments.
Unsighted is an all-round excellent 
Zelda-like adventure game,  
with a nasty ticking clock system that forces 
you to spend your time - and currency - wisely.
And Silicon Dreams is that bit from Blade 
Runner where you interview someone and look  
for subtle clues in their demeanour to 
figure out if they’re a robot or not.
It’s been a good year for inventive games! 
I haven’t even talked about Inscryption  
and Slipways and all the others worth mentioning. 
And I think that’s the fun thing about covering  
games - it’s such a fast-moving industry, 
with so much innovation and creativity  
every single year. I can’t wait to see 
what incredible treats we’ll get in 2022.
See you in January.
