Hi, I'm Mark Brown from Game Maker's Toolkit,  
and I am chuffed to bits to let you know that 
my new game, Word Play, is out now on Steam.
It's a game where you spell words to score points,  
so you can unlock powerful perks 
that let you score even more points.
It's a game about spelling, and strategy, 
and synergies, and special powers.
It's got a classy art style, a boppin' soundtrack,  
it's got accessibility settings, and 
difficulty modes, and loads more.
I hope you'll check it out.
Now for my first game, Mind Over Magnet, 
I shared the entire process of making  
it across 15 or so episodes of 
my YouTube series, Developing.
But for Word Play?
Well, there just hasn't been time.
The game has come together so quickly 
that I've barely had a chance to tell  
you how I made it! But better late 
than never, right? So here it is.
Here's how I made Word Play in just seven months.
Okay, so the idea for Word Play - which was 
essentially to combine the poker roguelike  
Balatro with a spelling game like Scrabble 
or Bookworm Adventures - the idea has been  
rattling around my head ever since I 
played Balatro at the start of 2024.
But in December, I finally had a reason to try  
and make it for our secret, 
Patreon-only GMTK Game Jam.
So I bashed together a game about 
spelling words, scoring points,  
and unlocking rule-bending modifiers.
It was called Wordy, and it 
was actually pretty dang fun.
The response was great, I had a 
really good time working on it,  
it clearly had a lot of potential, and if I had 
any intention of turning this into a real game,  
well I had better get on with it 
before someone else has the same idea.
And so, shortly after the jam was completed,  
I opened up a fresh Unity project and started 
working on a more fleshed out version.
Now I decided that the best thing to do at 
this early stage was to not worry about things  
like perks, or rounds, or rogue-like elements - 
but to just build a really good spelling game.
Something where it was nice 
and juicy to spell words.
Something that would work seamlessly across mouse 
and controller, and keyboards, and touchscreens.
At the beginning of January, I continued 
to build that basic word game - adding  
in features like a shuffle button to 
mix up your tiles, and a letter bag.
But then, with the spelling game mostly done,  
I started adding on the rogue-like 
features like the shop, and the perks.
I added the basic architecture for 
special tiles, and started making  
modifiers which are your passive perks - 
think jokers in Balatro, or boons in Hades.
By this point the game had 11 perks, though they 
were mostly just there to test different functions  
like having a modifier that can boost a 
tile's score, or the whole word's score.
In February, work started to slow down - mostly  
because I was just focusing a lot 
of time on making videos for GMTK.
I added a few features, like the ability 
to sell modifiers, but that was it.
Then midway into February, disaster struck.
I was scrolling through my YouTube subscriptions  
and saw a video on Second Wind with 
Yahtzee playing a game called Wordatro.
Which I didn't even need to click on 
it to know what that one was all about.
YAHTZEE CROSHAW: Ah ha ha ha ha!
JESS HOOPS: Oh, beautiful!
It was another game that 
mixed Balatro with Scrabble.
Damn.
Now, I briefly considered cancelling the 
game, and I definitely regretted not showing  
this thing earlier, but ultimately I decided 
that I can't control what anyone else makes.
The only thing I can control 
is how good my game is.
So I decided to keep working on it, and just 
make the game as awesome as I could make it.
Oh, and then later that same month, 
I listened to a completely random  
podcast about screenwriting, 
and one of the hosts said...
JOHN AUGUST: We have a game 
for you to try out right now.
So it's called Birdigo.
Birdigo, like the thing that flies.
It is a roguelike deck builder 
where you're trying to make words.
Which you might think would 
give me a heart attack.
Another one!
But actually, this made me feel better.
Because between Birdigo and Wordatro, and over the 
next few months, many more word-based roguelikes  
all having the same basic idea of Balatro plus 
words but going in different directions....
well it feels less like I'm competing 
with and, in some people's eyes,  
copying a single game, and more 
like I'm part of a growing genre.
So crisis averted, and I even ended up chatting 
with the devs of both Wordatro and Birdigo and,  
well, I'll have more to 
share on that down the line.
Suffice to say, we're all good.
In March, I finally gave the game a proper name.
Here's how that happened.
You see, the game has, essentially, lives.
But you use a life every time you spell a word.
So it's a bit weird to lose a life 
when you do something correctly.
That just feels weird.
So I asked my Discord users for alternative 
words to "lives", and user Fly suggested "plays".
Which sparked the idea for Word Play.
Now, when you're making a 
word game, as it turns out,  
every single possible name has already 
been taken by some other game or toy.
But Word Play? Well, Word 
Play doesn't exist on Steam.
So you know what? I'll take it.
I'll snap up Word Play.
Anyway, I started March by continuing 
to add more roguelike elements.
So I added upgrades.
They're your active perks which can change, 
improve, duplicate, or discard tiles.
I added in all the special tiles - 
golden, diamond, emerald, potion,  
and dot tiles - which all have unique gameplay.
I added in the special rounds, which are, well,  
special rounds with unique requirements 
like "your word must have six tiles".
I added modifiers that can multiply the score.
And I added reroll to the shop.
So now that I had made the spelling game,  
and coded in all the roguelike stuff, I 
could tie all of those elements together  
into a full gameplay loop - so that 
it could be played as an actual game.
Which was especially important with the Game  
Developers Conference coming 
up at the end of the month.
So now I could start getting proper playtesting 
feedback on this new version of the game.
I distributed it on the GMTK Discord,  
and took it on an iPad when I did 
talks at schools and colleges.
That led to lots of changes based 
on user feedback and requests.
I made it so you could rearrange 
the tiles on the board.
And I made it so you get extra bonus 
points if you spell especially long  
words - because otherwise you barely get 
any points for dropping a single mega word.
And then I took it to GDC, where 
I spent the entire week playing  
it with other developers and got 
fantastic feedback from the devs  
behind games like Patrick's Parabox, 
Spell Tower, and Alto's Adventure.
Which led to even more changes.
Also I rode in a driverless taxi, and 
had my breakfast delivered by a robot.
San Francisco!
Also in March, I started reaching out 
to my collaborators on the project.
I emailed Zach, who did the 
music for Mind Over Magnet,  
and offered him first dibs 
for the music on this game.
And I DMed Jay on Discord.
He made a spec video of the game 
with different sound effects,  
and they were so good I hired him 
to do the whole game's sound design.
I also added in Unity Analytics 
to help with future balancing.
I created the Steam store 
page, though kept it private.
And I brought the total number of perks up to 52.
Basically, I went into hyperdrive.
Looking back on my notes, I can't believe 
how much I accomplished in one month.
I was racing through this game.
Development was coming along so well.
And then I broke my arm.
Yeah.
April was a bit slow.
I had to stop development for several 
weeks as I waited for my elbow to heal.
Jay finished the sound effects, but it would be 
a while before I could put them into the game.
But I was able to slowly get back to work.
I added in a new special round where you have to 
play a mandatory tile, or else lose two plays.
I added compound tiles, letting you play 
the letters I N G with a single tile.
And I added in the first modifier that was based 
around the specifics of the word you spelled.
It's this one, which gives you a boost if 
the first and last letters are the same.
These would prove to be very important in the 
game's overall sense of strategy and balance.
But I think I'll talk more in 
depth about that in a future video.
Oh, and this also brought the 
total number of perks up to 74.
May started out with disappointment.
I managed to get in touch with the 
chap in charge of Apple Arcade,  
which is the iPhone maker's Game 
Pass-like subscription service.
And so at his request, I sent over 
a build of Word Play on TestFlight.
Ten agonising days later, Apple 
Arcade wrote back to pass on the game.
Which was a huge shame, but hey, it was 
cool for them to play it at the very least.
But okay, with that out of the way,  
my goal throughout the rest of May was to 
get a demo ready for Steam Next Fest in June.
Which meant fixing lots of bugs, adding 
lots of polish, and chucking in a lot more  
cool features - like the glass tile, which can be 
used to have a one-time copy of any other letter.
And so towards the end of May, I was finally 
ready to reveal the game to GMTK viewers like  
you - with a demo, an announcement 
video, and a let's play of the game.
Which was amazing.
The response was overwhelming.
20,000 players in a week! The game got picked 
up by various YouTubers and streamers, including  
Yahtzee on Second Wind, him again, and the 
world's biggest Balatro streamer, Northernlion.
NORTHERNLION: I bet there's like some sick Italian 
wines you can spell with these letters, man.
I also got an email from… uh, Apple.
Yeah, not their Apple Arcade team this 
time, but a different group at the company,  
who reached out to offer some help, 
listing it on the main App Store.
More on that in the future, because right now 
I'm focused entirely on today's Steam release.
Plus, all of those demo players sent 
me so much great feedback and ideas,  
which led to all sorts of cool stuff - like 
being able to submit words over 10 letters,  
and being able to petition for more 
words to be added to the dictionary.
And so at the end of May, the 
game was in a very good state.
And the game now has 90 perks.
By June, the basic underlying 
game was essentially done.
It was absolutely a minimum 
viable product, or MVP.
It had a fully functioning game loop, it had 
saving and loading, options, and difficulty modes.
Still, I added a few more 
quality of life adjustments,  
like the ability to peek into your bag 
or at the board during the perk screen.
Some accessibility features, 
like alternative controls,  
dyslexia-friendly fonts, and spelling suggestions.
And I even added the groundwork for people to mod  
in custom dictionaries and letter bags if 
they want to play with non-English words.
But, with all of that done, and 
with Steam Next Fest taken care of,  
my job now was to simply make stuff.
So I added new tiles.
The mirror tile.
The exclamation mark tile.
The locked tile.
I added new special rounds, like one where 
the maximum word length starts at four,  
and increases with each word you submit.
And I added perks.
So many perks.
I started by bringing the game up to 100, but 
then I thought of some more and took it to 120.
Then I had a few more ideas, and it was like,  
why stop at 143? I might as well take 
it to 150, that's a nice round number.
And over the rest of the month, I 
slowly added a few more until I really,  
really had to stop at a whopping 160 perks.
And look, I've got even more ideas, but 
let's save those for future updates.
But at this point it was time to start 
doing the final quality assurance, or QA.
I brought in a group of helpers - a 
mix of GMTK patrons and people who gave  
particularly insightful feedback about the demo,  
and had them run through the game over and 
over and over again, looking for problems.
They found bugs.
They found typos.
They found perks that were overpowered, 
and perks that were pointlessly weak.
They helped me balance the difficulty 
curve, suggested Steam achievements,  
and pushed me to add in features that I 
had been way too lazy to make previously.
To be honest, this lot were the real 
MVPs - the most valuable players.
Without their help and guidance, the 
game that just launched would be buggy,  
unbalanced, and just significantly less fun.
So a huge, heartfelt thanks to all of them.
Cheers.
And then finally, it was July.
It is July! And the game is out now.
And so that is the story of how 
I made Word Play in seven months.
And if you compare that to the development 
of my first game, Mind Over Magnet,  
which took me well over three years to produce, 
well obviously things went a lot more quickly.
Now, of course, they're very different games.
And I was also a very 
different developer back then.
I literally had to learn how to 
use Unity while I made the game.
But it's not just that.
I also thought carefully about how to 
develop Word Play while I was making it.
To make sure the process was streamlined,  
and to ensure that this game didn't devour years 
of my life in the way that Mind Over Magnet did.
Now I'll talk more about this in 
future episodes of Game Dev 101,  
which I'm looking forward to getting back to soon.
But as the Cliffs Notes version, 
it really came down to two things.
Number one.
I was ruthless about the game's scope.
I would routinely make decisions 
through the lens of which choice  
is going to take the least amount of time.
For instance, I could have made unique art 
for all 160 perks, like the jokers in Balatro.
And I would totally accept the criticism that 
the game is worse off for not having that.
But ultimately, using a more simple 
set of icons saved weeks of time.
And it was the difference between the game coming 
out while I still had some fuel in the tank,  
versus causing the development 
to drag on for many more months.
And number two.
I would develop the game in 
a kind of layered approach,  
where I would focus on one part at a time.
For instance, in December, I focused 
exclusively on just making a good spelling game.
Then when that was done, I focused on 
getting the roguelike game loop complete.
Then I just made perks all day, every day.
And then I just did bug fixing and balancing.
Now of course, none of that is really true - 
I was still adding in features from previous  
layers as development went along.
But for the most part, I did just 
focus on making the bones of the  
game before turning my attention to the content.
Which made development faster and more agile,  
as I was always building on the really 
strong foundation of the previous layer.
And so ultimately, while I'm really 
proud of this game - and I think it  
is genuinely a lot of fun and I hope you 
dig it - I think I'm even more proud of  
the fact that I made a video 
game without losing my mind.
By taking everything I learned from Mind 
Over Magnet, and really planning out the  
development instead of just making stuff willy 
nilly, I was able to take this game from idea,  
to prototype, to playtesting, to QA, 
and to release in just seven months.
So I'm going to leave it there, so you 
can actually go and play the dang game.
It's out now on Steam for PC, Mac, and Steam Deck.
There's a 10% discount for the first week,  
and there's still a free demo 
if you haven't tried it yet.
And now, well, give me a sec to 
fix all of the inevitable bugs,  
and then I'll see you later this 
month for GMTK Game Jam 2025.
I will not be taking part.
Do not let me.
I cannot be trusted.
Bye bye!
