The coolest feature in Gears of War is, 
definitely, the active reload. Here's how  
it works: every time you reload your gun, 
you're invited to play a tiny mini-game.  
A cursor swipes along a line and you can hit 
reload again to try and win a prize. Land here,  
and you'll reload super fast. Land here, 
and you'll also get a weapon boost - like,  
more powerful bullets. But land 
anywhere else and your gun will jam.
It's a great feature - adding tension, 
skill, and flourish to one of the most  
basic actions in shooters. But, it also left 
Epic with a problem. You see, in playtesting,  
the devs found that advanced players 
were nailing that perfect reload,  
constantly giving them better 
bullets and, thus, an advantage  
over the enemies. So they had to rebalance 
all the foes, making them more resistant.
But, beginner players often ignored the 
active reload entirely. So they didn't get  
that weapon buff - and were now fighting these 
overpowered bad guys with weak bullets. Agh!
So much of game design is about solving problems 
like this. You come up with an idea - and then  
find out that it's flawed in some way. It's 
unbalanced. It's confusing. It's not leading to  
the gameplay you intended. Or it's clashing 
with some other feature in the game. And,  
as a designer, you can often find yourself going 
around in circles to find the right solution.
Surely there's a better way?
Well, in this episode, let's look at how the 
best game creators go about solving problems  
in their design - to give us some take 
home tips for fixing future issues. Oh,  
and I'll also let you know how Epic fixed 
the active reload. The solution is...  
pretty ingenious. I'm Mark Brown, 
and this is Game Maker's Toolkit.
So, before we start coming up with 
solutions... we need to make sure  
that we've accurately identified the problem.
During the development of Dying Light, the game's 
director had an issue: weapons break too fast,  
and so he told the designers to increase their 
durability. But, lead designer Maciej 'Matt'  
Binkowski didn't want to fiddle with that stat 
because it might mess up the game's economy.
So, instead, he dug deeper, asked more questions,  
and got to the real problem - players could only 
kill a few zombies before their weapon broke. So,  
to fix this, the designer didn't touch weapon 
durability at all, but instead lowered the  
health points of the enemies. It solved the 
problem, and basic combat felt better too.
Binkowski suggests designers step back and 
figure out the root cause of the problem,  
before trying to solve the 
issue that's been reported.
We also need to make sure that everyone 
is on the same page about the problem.  
Just before Astroneer left Early Access, the 
designers wanted to improve the game's crafting  
system - but had very different ideas about the 
issue. One designer thought it was too simple,  
and so wanted to add more machines 
and resource chains. Another actually  
thought it was already too complicated, 
with fiddly, unintuitive processes.
This, naturally, led to disagreements - but it 
was only when they stepped back and really broke  
the problem down, that they realised they were 
talking about two completely different issues.  
One was looking at the shallow gameplay loop, 
from a wide-angle systems perspective. The other  
was looking at the operation of complex machines, 
through the lens of moment-to-moment interactions.
Now, seeing eye-to-eye, they could 
solve the underlying problem,  
and fix both issues at once. Those 
fiddly machines could be overhauled,  
and then used to expand the simple crafting 
loop to create a more interesting economy.
Okay, so hopefully we now know what the 
real problem is. So how do we fix it? Well,  
here are some best practices 
from across the industry.
Approach one - quickly iterate 
through possible solutions.
When Blizzard was making Diablo 3, they wanted 
to fix a problem from the previous game:  
potion spamming. Players would often 
just guzzle endless potions during  
combat - and so enemies needed to 
do massive one-shot hits to have any  
chance of actually killing the player. 
Unfortunately, Blizzard didn't really  
know how to solve this thorny issue - 
so, they just tried a bunch of ideas.
How about - potions become less effective 
if you drink them in quick succession?  
Slap a build together and... that didn't 
work - if a potion only heals for 25%,  
players would just chug four of them.
Okay, how about you automatically heal - but only 
if enemies are unaware of your presence. Make a  
build and... no good. Enemy awareness just wasn't 
obvious enough. Alright, let's simplify the rule:  
if three seconds pass without you taking 
damage, you start to heal. Build the game  
and... didn't work. Players would run away 
from fights, acting passive and defensive.
That's the opposite of what Blizzard 
wanted - players should be aggressive.
Ah! But, that did point to the solution: 
make enemies randomly drop crystal balls  
filled with health, when you kill 
them. This removes potion spamming,  
it's simple to understand, and it makes 
players act aggressively. Job done.
This approach is all about trying stuff and 
using the results to guide your way to the  
solution. Like, that first solution with 
the diluted potions, designer Wyatt Cheng  
says "we weren't totally thrilled with 
this solution as we were putting it in,  
but we did it anyway. We knew that even though 
this might not be a solution that we're willing  
to ship with, it was something that was going 
to teach us a lot more about the problem".
Approach two - identify the levers
In a fascinating GDC talk about game 
balance, Bungie's Jaime Griesemer  
explains how his team fixed the sniper rifle 
in Halo 3. You see, the rifle was broken:  
players were able to acquire long-range 
targets too quickly between shots - and,  
they could also use the sniper rifle in close 
quarters for massive damage. It was overpowered.
Fixing an issue like this means first identifying 
which levers can be pulled - and which ones can't.  
For Griesemer, you can't shorten the range of 
a sniper rifle. And you can't nerf its damage,  
reduce its accuracy, or stop it doing insta-kill 
headshots, either. Those factors all define  
the sniper rifle - you can't change those stats 
without breaking the very identity of the weapon.
So by removing those options, it became clear 
what can be changed. Stats like the number of  
shots in the clip. The length of the reload. The 
time it takes to zoom in. The time between shots.  
Whether you can do insta-kill headshots outside 
of the scope. And the maximum ammo you can carry.
The right call was changing the 
time between shots. It stopped  
players from instantly acquiring and 
shooting a target after each bullet,  
and it made it much less effective in close 
quarters now you can't spam the trigger. In  
the end, it was enough to increase the 
time from 0.5 seconds, to 0.7 seconds.
By figuring out what can and can't be changed, 
you can better focus your attention on potential  
solutions. However - this must be done carefully. 
Sometimes the target really is that thing you've  
convinced yourself cannot be changed. As 
always, be prepared to kill your darlings.
Approach three - make big changes
Okay, so I just talked about a change of 0.2 
seconds - a pretty small change that had a  
big impact on the game. But sometimes, 
you want to swing for the fences. Less  
than a month before the first Civilization was 
released, Sid Meier realised that the game had  
pacing issues. So he decided to solve the 
problem by reducing the size of the map.
Not by a few tiles. Or a few 
percentage points. He cut that  
sucker in half. And this worked wonders 
- the game moved faster, felt snappier,  
and it better captured that true Civ 
feeling of relentless forward progress.
We've already talked about iterating on a problem 
- but development time is limited, so if you're  
only ever changing things by tiny amounts - a 
5% nerf here, a 6% buff there - you may never  
get to the right answer. Or you'll find out too 
late that your solution would never have worked.
Meier's advice is to "double it, or cut it in 
half". With such dramatic changes, you'll very  
quickly see if the change has an effect - and if 
you go too far, you can always drop back down to  
readjust. Talking about that Civ map, Meier says 
"if I’d been afraid to deviate too severely from  
what we already had, I never would have gotten to 
the right size in time before the game shipped".
Approach four - flip it on its head
In Shovel Knight, Yacht Club wanted to 
put an interesting twist on saving your  
progress. They wanted a system where players 
could risk skipping a checkpoint, in order  
to get a reward. So they made a checkpoint 
that you have to pay to use. If you want,  
you can skip it and save the cash - but at 
the risk of losing more progress when you die.
But this system didn't really work. It was 
complicated to use and visually unintuitive. And,  
worse still, it had a big balance problem: novice 
players, who needed the checkpoints the most,  
were also least likely to have the 
funds to save their game. No good.
So the solution was to flip 
the concept upside down.
Instead of paying money to save your game... 
what if you get paid if you don't save? So now,  
saving is automatic - removing that 
complexity. And it's free - so novice  
players never lose out. But it also has 
that spicy twist of risk and reward - cocky  
platforming experts can intentionally 
break the checkpoint to make more money.
Sometimes you're close to the right solution, 
but you just need to reverse the formula.
Approach five - find the solution elsewhere
So when Naughty Dog was working 
on the UI for The Last of Us,  
they initially let Joel upgrade his weapons at 
any point, from a tab in the inventory UI. But  
that created problems - it added complexity 
to the minimalist interface, some players  
missed the option entirely, and because 
players could upgrade whenever they wanted,  
they'd typically just upgrade as soon as they 
could afford something. Whatever was cheapest.
Now the developers could have iterated 
on this UI design for ages, moving the  
upgrade button to different screens or 
changing how it was communicated to the  
player. But the ultimate solution was to 
pull upgrading out of the UI entirely.
Now, the game has upgrade benches. These are 
specific points in the world where you can  
modify your weapon, meaning you might not have a 
chance to upgrade for an hour or two. This ensured  
that players actually engaged with the system. 
And because they had more resources saved up,  
they were able to boost the weapons they enjoyed 
using the most - not just the cheapest. They also  
spent more time assessing all the options, 
and made plans for the next upgrade bench.
Remember that games are a massive 
web of interconnected systems - so  
sometimes you can fix a problem in one area, 
by actually making a change somewhere else.
Approach six - solve multiple issues at once
During the madcap multiplayer 
sessions of New Super Mario Bros. Wii,  
the designers found it annoying to die - and 
then have to wait until the end of the level,  
or a checkpoint, to come back 
to life. So they needed a fix.
The first idea was that knocked-out players 
could randomly spawn inside question mark  
blocks. Which is pretty cute. But they kept going 
until they found a better solution: players would  
come back in a bubble, and their team mates 
have to pop it to get them back into the game.
This didn't just solve the original problem. 
It also helped fix another one - sometimes,  
novice players get to a tricky bit that they 
can’t tackle. So, now, they can intentionally put  
themselves in a bubble, let the better players 
make progress, and then pop back out when it's  
safe. This one feature made dying more fun, and 
also let players dictate their own difficulty.
Mario's daddy, Shigeru Miyamoto, has that 
classic quote - "A good idea is something  
that does not solve just one single problem, but 
rather can solve multiple problems at once." So,  
sometimes, it's best to wait for a solution 
that also has other benefits for the game.
Approach seven - study player behaviour
Okay, let's finally get back 
to that Gears of War story. So,  
remember - Epic had to boost the health 
points of enemies, because advanced players  
kept doing perfect reloads and getting a damage 
boost. But this screwed over beginner players  
who ignored the system entirely and were now 
getting wiped out by these amped up bad guys.
But Epic noticed another difference between 
these two player types. Top shooter players  
rarely finish a clip - they reload before they're 
out. But novices would typically shoot until the  
clip is empty, and let the game automatically 
reload. So this offered up a solution.
The devs secretly boosted the power of 
the last few bullets in a clip. Dubbed  
them "magic bullets". And so - on the whole 
- only novice players would get this buff,  
giving them a similar advantage to the 
expert players with their perfect reloads.
Most of the problems in game design are 
derived from watching how players interact  
with the game. So why not that use that 
same approach in order to find the solution?
Okay, so now we have a solution, we can implement 
it. But there's still a few more challenges ahead.
The first is second-order effects. In Rainbow 
Six Siege, Ubisoft knew that it needed to fix  
its overpowered shotgun. So they nerfed 
it - and it had the intended effect. The  
shotgun was no longer outperforming the other 
weapons. But it also had a knock-on effect:  
because the shotgun is a great defensive 
weapon, this nerf made it much harder for  
defenders to win against attackers. 
They just couldn't hold them back.
Fixing a problem in one place can create another 
problem elsewhere. Designers should be aware of  
how different systems might interlink, and 
be smart about avoiding these issues. Or,  
perhaps, figure out how to solve these 
new problems. The solution for Siege was  
to reduce the time limit on rounds. Because 
defenders automatically win if time runs out,  
this made that side more likely to 
succeed, bringing the balance back in line.
Another challenge is finding the resources to 
implement those changes. Late in development  
of Prey, Arkane's designers realised they 
needed more monster variety on the space  
station - but they didn't really have the time, 
artists, or AI programmers to make anything new.
So the designers found a creative solution:  
the poltergeist. This enemy is invisible 
and attacks by throwing nearby physics  
objects. It needed dramatically fewer 
resources than the other foes in the game.
Prey's designer Ricardo Bare says "good designers 
understand how to solve problems within the  
constraints that they have", and adds 
that the poltergeist actually ended up  
being one of his favourite enemies in the 
game. A lot of game design issues crop up  
late in development - or even after the 
game has gone live. So sometimes the best  
solution is just the one that you can actually 
achieve with the time and resources available.
And finally, you need to test if the 
solution actually has the desired effect,  
by going back to those playtesters, 
or getting fresh eyes. Halo's Jaime  
Griesemer recommends that you don't tell 
your playtesters how you fixed the issue  
as that can bias their experience. Just 
see if the problem has been resolved.
If not - well, hopefully, like in the case 
of Diablo 3's rapid iteration, this helped  
you figure out what the actual problem is, and 
you can reframe the question and start again.
As I've been discovering myself, game design 
is all about solving problems. Very few ideas  
survive first contact with players. And so 
the best game designers aren't those who can  
come up with good ideas - they're the ones who 
can also figure out good solutions to problems.
This video was absolutely packed with stories of 
clever developers solving game design problems.  
It's like, my favourite genre. There were loads 
more that I couldn't fit in, so if you're a GMTK  
Patron on the Bonus Video tier, you can now check 
out a special tie-in video with even more stories.
Oh, and what about if your game has already been 
released and then you start getting criticism?  
Well, then you should check out this video to 
find out how to handle negative player feedback.
See you soon.
