Hey. Mark here.
Over the past few weeks, I’ve been obsessed
with a card-battling roguelike called
Slay the Spire.
Here’s how it works.
You start the game with a tiny deck of super
simple cards.
There’s a few that do damage to enemies,
and a few that protect you from incoming attacks.
But whenever you beat an enemy, you get to
pick from one of three random cards to insert
into your deck.
You can also gain cards during random events,
and buy them from a shop.
And soon enough, you’ll start finding cards
that are a bit more involved than simply attacking
or defending.
There are cards about status effects like
poison, strength, and weakness.
Cards that have both advantages and drawbacks. And cards that indicate more in-depth strategies.
And soon after that, you’ll start to discover
cards that suggest using them in tandem with others.
This is a synergy, which is when two or more
elements combine to produce a more powerful
effect than the sum of the individual elements.
And I think this is the secret that makes
Slay the Spire so darn good.
Lemme give you an example.
This is Body Slam, which is a card that deals
damage equal to your current level of block.
Immediately, an idea starts to form.
Other cards, like Entrench (which doubles
your block), and Barricade (which stops your
block from resetting to zero at the end of
your turn), feel like natural partners to
Body Slam.
If only you could build up huge amounts of
block, you could then also deal huge amounts
of damage.
Here’s another one.
You can increase your strength in Slay the
Spire, and this boosts the damage of your
attacks.
And then there’s this card: Heavy Blade.
This one takes the value of strength three
times - or five times if the card is upgraded.
Pair that up with cards like Inflame (which
gives you strength), and Limit Break, (which
doubles your strength), and that’s going
to turn Heavy Blade into an unstoppable super
weapon.
Cards get even more powerful when paired with
Relics, which are passive items that constantly
give you additional boosts and bonuses.
Anchor starts each combat with 10 block, and
Red Skull gives you three strength if your
health drops below 50% - handy additions to
those synergies.
And that’s just the basic bloke: the Ironclad.
Even more synergies can be found with The
Silent, who poisons her enemies.
Or the Defect, who juggles powerful orbs that
cast spells.
So check out this Silent Deck I made, which
is built around these shiv cards that cost
no energy to unleash, but exhaust (or disappear
forever) when they’re played.
So I had one relic that made zero-cost cards
do more damage.
Another that added a random card into my hand,
whenever a card was exhausted.
And another that meant I didn’t discard
my hand at the end of a turn, so after a few
turns I’d have the maximum 10 cards to play
with.
Then I had a card called Storm of Steel that
replaces every card in my hand with an upgraded
shiv.
This meant that I could turn my entire deck
into nine cards that dealt nine damage each,
dealing 81 damage in one fell swoop.
But each time a shiv was exhausted, a random
card would appear, giving me even more options
like defence, more attacks, and so on.
This made even the biggest enemies an absolute
pushover.
And that’s the first, and most obvious reason
why synergies are so cool: they make you feel
immensely powerful.
In a game where you’re usually just doing
small amounts of damage to an enemy, it feels
utterly thrilling to do a massive combinatorial
attack.
But the second reason is that synergies make
you feel smart - precisely because you find
these combinations yourself.
You weren’t simply given the tools to be
powerful - you found them.
You noticed some link between two cards and
put them together in your deck.
This way, you can almost feel like you got
one over on the developer.
Like you found some illicit combination that
gave you way too much power and broke the
game.
And maybe… sometimes that’s true!
But for the most part, the devs planned this
all along.
They just want you to feel like you figured
this out for yourself - to give you that feeling
of being a master tactician.
And reason three is that synergies are great
at adding depth and complexity to a game,
but with fewer moving parts.
Because look: if a game has 20 unique cards
that only work by themselves, that’s 20
cards for the player to wrap their head around
- for only 20 different strategies.
But if a game has 10 cards and they can work
together, that’s half as many cards to learn,
but 100 different strategies!
And this allows for what Magic the Gathering
designer Mark Rosewater calls “lenticular design”.
On the surface, these cards seem very simple
and easy-to-use.
Perfect for new players.
But these cards also hide untold complexity,
that is only seen by advanced players, because
the only way to really get the most out of
them is to use them in combination with other cards.
So synergies make players feel powerful, let
them feel smart, and sneakily increase the
depth of a game.
Sounds like they’re worth putting in more
games, right?
But they’re tricky to do well.
So we have to look at Slay the Spire more
closely to see exactly what makes those synergies
work.
And the main thing, I think, is that using
synergies requires a certain amount of planning.
A synergy that comes together too easily isn’t
quite as fun as one that requires a bit of
set-up.
A sort of “oh you’re gonna die sucker
- just as soon as I set-up an absurdly complex
and unlikely sequence of events!”
And this planning happens on multiple fronts:
per turn, per combat, and run.
Per turn is easiest and most common - it happens
every couple minutes.
It’s simply about playing cards in the right
order - maybe making an enemy vulnerable before
dealing damage.
Per combat is a bit more tricky.
This is often about taking a few turns to
set up a perfect play.
Maybe you need to boost an enemy’s poison
for a few turns, before hitting them with
the card that triples their poison level.
Maybe you need to use a card that gives you
more energy to spend in a future turn.
Or perhaps you need to get two or more combinatorial
cards into your hand at the same time, using
strategic cards like Setup and Thinking Ahead.
And then there’s per run.
That’s all about picking the right cards,
making smart choices in the shop, and choosing
the best relics.
And that’s not to mention that synergies
encourage a smaller deck.
You don’t want loads of junk cards and curses
in your hand - just the cards that feed into
your synergistic strategies.
So part of the game is about getting rid of
cards - either at the shop, or during certain
special events.
Slay the Spire makes skipping cards, or outright
getting rid of them, just as important as
adding them to your deck.
That’s so clever.
But it’s really important to note that Slay
the Spire’s synergies work so well, because
of the fact that it’s a roguelike - a genre,
like I’ve mentioned before, which comes
with a couple important criteria: permadeath
and random generation.
Random generation means you can’t just pick
the perfect synergies from a list - you’ve
got to respond to what the game gives you.
In Slay the Spire, you’ll often find yourself
building a deck around whatever cards and
relics appear early on.
You’ve got to think on your feet, and find
connections where you can.
This also adds to the compulsive nature of
the game.
There’s this feeling that maybe this run,
you’ll stumble onto a perfect synergy.
Whether this is addiction or engagement…
I’m not sure.
Permadeath is also important because synergies
can easily turn into optimal strategies - which
are tactics that are so much more effective
than anything else, that you might as well
just do them over and over again.
And after a while, this starts to get a bit
boring.
But the fact that you’re constantly starting
from scratch in Slay the Spire - either because
you died, or because you won and you’re
now trying a new character or a higher difficulty
level - this doesn’t ruin the balance forever.
Even my awesome shiv deck was toppled by the
Time Eater boss, and I’ve never run into
the same combination of cards and relics since.
So I think that’s why we often see synergies
in roguelikes, like Dead Cells.
In this game weapons, traps, and grenades
can cause status effects like freezing, burning,
or poison.
And then, other weapons can cause increased
damage against enemies who are frozen, burnt,
or poisoned.
The result is attacks that do ridiculous damage.
Elite enemies and hordes of foes defeated
in a delicious one-two punch where you throw
an icy grenade to freeze everyone in proximity,
and then slash them to bits with your sword
that deals double damage to frozen enemies.
And Into the Breach has great synergies as
well.
Here, one unit can chain electric shock damage
through adjacent targets.
That pairs wonderfully with a character that
can grapple enemies to move them about the
map.
But synergies can appear in other types of
games too - the combination between the Medic
and the Heavy in Team Fortress 2.
Clever set-ups in an RPG.
And, of course, I probably would have discovered
the addictive thrill of synergies much sooner
if I was more of a card game player.
They’re at the beating heart of what makes
deck-building collectable card games like
Magic and Hearthstone feel so fun.
But I never normally play these games because
I find the deck building aspect so overwhelming.
I’ve got to pick from hundreds of cards
to make a deck that’s powerful, balanced,
and energy efficient?
Yeesh, too much for me.
But that’s the joy of Slay the Spire - you
piece together your arsenal of cards over
the course of the game, one at a time.
Making it way less daunting to build a deck,
and effortless to stumble upon the compulsive
thrill of synergies.
Hey, thanks for watching.
I had to make a video on this game I've been playing it obsessively and I just had to make a video
to get some closure on it and move on with my life.
Have you ever played a game that gave you that thrill of finding and exploiting synergies?
Lemme know in the comments below.
