Hi, my name is Mark, and I am 
making a video game about magnets.
So, in pretty much every episode of 
Developing, I make some embarrassing  
mistake or have to throw out tons of work 
or just generally have a bit of a breakdown.
But not this time.
No, this month things just went really well, 
and so I get to be like a real-life Game Dev  
YouTuber and just show off a bunch of 
cool stuff I made in the last month.
It's a Christmas miracle! Let's go!
I feel like you're now anticipating a late 
video twist where I reveal that I deleted  
the entire game or something, 
but no, this is not that video.
This is a good one, promise.
Let's get on with it.
♫ Music ♫
Okay, so last month went well.
Like, really well.
I talked about how I created a plan for how 
to finish the game, which was essentially a  
complete overview of the game—the worlds, the 
levels, the mechanics, the story, and so on.
Basically, like a bullet point 
layout of the entire game.
And then from those bullet points,  
I was able to make a sort of rough 
draft version of almost the entire game.
Now, like I say, it's super rough.
All of the levels look like blueprints, a lot 
of the stuff is using placeholder graphics,  
the story isn't implemented at all, and most of 
the levels still need some tweaks and adjustments.
But it did at least allow me to see the 
game as an entire finished product and  
made me realise that, yeah, I'm 
actually pretty happy with this.
And so now my job is to take that rough 
draft and make it into the real deal.
That is, of course, a huge job.
But here's one of the benefits of working on a  
game that's split up into 
nice evenly sized worlds.
I can break the job up into chunks.
So, my job for November was to take just 
world one of the rough draft and make it real.
Here's how I got on.
Step one was to finalise the level designs.
The rough draft had most of the levels done,  
but they still needed some tweaking 
based on playtester feedback.
Sometimes the solution was to 
just move some objects around  
to make things more clear or simple, 
but that wasn't always the solution.
Like, take this level.
You've just got the first magnet in 
the game, and you're introduced to  
one of the game's central mechanics—using 
a magnet to ride up to a higher platform.
So, you grab Magnus and ride up the 
magnetic field to grab the key on the left.
But how do you get to the door on the right?
It's too far to travel across.
Maybe pause the video for a second 
to see if you can figure it out.
Because here's the thing, every single 
playtester I gave this to couldn't figure it out.
That includes two professional puzzle game 
designers who both skipped this puzzle.
ADAM: "I'm going to have to skip because I don't 
want to spend forever on one puzzle."
And this was baffling because 
to me, the solution was simple.
I never even thought of it as a tricky puzzle.
It was more of a tutorial than 
anything, but people were stumped.
Here's all you have to do:
turn the magnetic field off, take 
the magnet to the right, leave it,  
turn the field back on, and then go 
get the magnet and ride up to the door.
Huh, talk about challenging your 
assumptions about your players, right?
But okay, there's obviously some 
conceptual block that needs to be cleared.
I thought I could fix it by putting 
a suspicious lump on the right side  
of the screen to suggest where to put the 
magnet, but alas, no, that didn't work.
GONEN: "I'm gonna give up on this level."
But then I thought about the next level.
In this one, the magnet is too 
big to get through this gap.
But if you leave the magnet behind, it gets pulled 
up by the magnetic field before you can grab it.
So after a little confusion, players realize 
that they need to make sure the magnet is  
safely stashed somewhere else and then 
correctly place it on top of the slope,  
then they go get it after the field is turned on.
That they get.
So I changed the level order.
I made a new level where you 
simply ride the magnet up twice,  
then there's the level with the too-small gap, 
and then I bring back the perplexing stage.
I gave it to some playtesters, 
and hooray, they got it! 
Thanks to the new knowledge 
gained in the previous level,
they realised that they can leave the magnet in 
other places and use that to solve the stage.
Perfect.
Now it's obvious that players need to be taught a  
mechanic before giving them 
a puzzle on that mechanic.
But it was only through playtesting 
that I realised that leaving the  
magnet behind is a mechanic and 
that this level is a puzzle.
But anyway, after a bit more back-and-forth 
argy-bargy with my playtesters,  
I had my finished collection of level layouts.
Now, as you might have noticed, 
all of the levels look rather dull.
They all use the same simple 
blue tile set with a basic grid  
background and absolutely no decorations or flair.
Now, this is actually really useful because it  
meant I could focus exclusively on 
puzzle design rather than visuals.
And it meant I could easily change things based 
on feedback—maybe move elements around or start  
a level from scratch or move a level into 
a completely different world, no problem.
But now that I'm happy with the layouts 
in world one, it's time to dress them up,  
to take these boring blue levels and essentially 
paint over them to make them look more exciting.
So world one takes place in a sewer.
I mean, is it really a video 
game without a sewer level?
I've always envisioned the game to be 
about escaping a factory by going from  
the bottom floor to the top, and there 
doesn't get any lower than the sewers.
So here's the step-by-step guide to 
taking a level from this to this.
The first step was to replace the tiles.
Now, this was actually really easy.
The tile set for the sewer is laid out in 
the exact same way as the blueprint tile set.
So I can actually just use the paint 
bucket tool to replace all the tiles  
with a single click and then use some 
other tiles to add extra details.
In this case, I'm making it so the brickwork  
tapers off into plain blue 
to better frame the image.
Then I bring in the background.
I talked about this before in a previous 
episode, but it's essentially a bunch  
of overlapping plates with different 
brightness levels to give a sense of depth.
So we've got the back wall, then an 
aqueduct, then the front walls with  
details hanging stuff like chains and lights 
and nearby elements like these barrels.
I then throw on a gradient 
overlay to wash everything out.
That's actually really important.
These backgrounds are just for visual interest,  
and so they should never compete with 
the actual important puzzle elements.
You can definitely go too far with this.
Take the recently released 
puzzle platformer "Ugly."
It's a good game, and the backgrounds are 
wonderfully detailed, but almost too detailed.
It's hard to tell what's important 
and what's just set dressing.
So I try to keep my backgrounds unobtrusive.
And just as an additional accessibility measure,  
if you find these things too distracting, 
then you can toggle simple backgrounds,  
which replaces the whole thing with the 
same grid I was using in the rough draft.
Okay, anyway, another way to add some 
visual interest is to add some particles.
These are just basic circles that 
appear, float up, and disappear,  
but they look like little dust motes 
and make the game feel more alive.
And then for this sewer world, I added a bobbing 
body of water at the bottom of the screen.
This is made using a very simple and 
small texture and then a shader which  
displaces the pixels using 
some sine wave or something.
I don't know much about shaders.
I just fiddle around with 
nodes until it looks right.
The next step is to add these brick 
walls, which can be used to break  
up the background and also highlight 
certain elements like the exit door.
Now, I could have made this 
with a single tile—repeat this,  
and you get a perfect brick wall.
But that obviously looks a bit rubbish.
So I use Unity's rule tile to detect the edges 
and apply a special pillar on the left or right,  
a cement lip on the bottom, and a 
shadow from the wall above at the top.
And then to make it look even more 
interesting, I use random tiles.
So if I take that same brick pattern and have 
a few variations and then let Unity pick which  
tile it uses at random, you get a really 
nice and visually interesting brick wall.
Oh, and here's an extra cool trick.
The bricks all have a semi-transparent black 
overlay which is set to only show through a mask.
Then I take my character and the magnet 
and add masks which are offset to one side.
Now when you run past the brick 
wall, the characters cast shadows.
Neat.
Finally, one last step.
I add in a few decorations.
They're just random bits and bobs—cones, 
barrels, chains, crates, and so on.
They're grayscale and then tinted to a different 
colour depending on what world they appear in. 
Phew! I then repeated the same process 
for all the levels in this world,  
sometimes adding in unique touches like 
these pipes, a ladder, and this waterfall.
It uses a simple shader to constantly 
offset this texture's vertical position.
And then I use the particle system 
for the suds at the top and bottom.
And in a few levels, I added these 
nuts and bolts which lay on the floor.
They kick up when you run through them 
and also get yanked up by magnetic fields.
Okay, so that's visuals done.
Time for sound effects.
Thankfully, I have added in a lot of 
the sound effects as I've gone along.
When I make a new game mechanic, I 
don't just do the art and the code,  
but I try to remember to wire 
up some sounds to go with it.
But there are a few sounds 
that do still need making.
Now, I kind of hate doing sound effects because 
you have to make the sound, put it in Unity,  
test it in the game, hate it, and then 
repeat the process over and over again.
Surely there's got to be a better way.
Well, this month I found a better way.
I record a short video of the game.
In this case, it's this 
animation of a door being opened.
Then I throw it in Adobe Premiere, 
the video editor I use for GMTK,  
and basically become a Foley artist 
as I add sound effects to the video.
Now I can layer sounds on top of each other,  
throw on effects, and change 
the EQ, fade things in and out.
These sounds are all coming 
from Epidemic Sound, by the way.
Affiliate link in the description 
if you want to support GMTK.
Then once I'm happy, I can export 
the sound out and pop it in Unity,  
totally assured that the sound will 
work nicely with the animation.
We are on a roll here.
Okay, so the rough draft version just immediately 
drops you into the first puzzle in the game.
That's no good.
So I made a fancy introductory 
cutscene to start off the adventure.
And then the rough draft version also introduces 
you to the magnet in a very unceremonious fashion.
So that also needed a cutscene.
I think I'll talk more about 
story stuff in a later episode,  
but making this cutscene did lead to 
a couple neat additions to the game.
For starters, it was weird for Magnus to 
look directly at the camera while talking.
He should look at the character, right?
And once I got that working after a lot of faff, 
I get so lost in these animation state machines.
But once it was working, I realised I 
could just have it happen at all times.
So now Magnus's eyes will follow the character 
around the room, which is super cute.
And also, I have these speech bubbles 
that show up during cutscenes.
But I wondered with a few tweaks, could I have 
the bubbles just show up in normal gameplay?
I was definitely inspired by the 
talking flowers in Super Mario Wonder.
But anyway, the answer is yes.
So I now have a bark system where Magnus can shout  
out little phrases and quips 
when you do certain things.
It's definitely something 
that needs to be restrained.
It could easily become too annoying.
But when you subtly man it, adds a lot 
of polish and character to the game.
And this is a good lesson for polish, I think.
There's basically like two types of polish.
There's additive.
Like, I could draw some super unique background 
art that only appears in a single level.
And then there's multiplicative.
If I spend some time making Magnus's 
eyes follow you around the level,  
that's going to improve every 
single stage in the game.
And so, if you're a solo dev or in a small team,  
focus your time and effort on the polish that's 
going to get the most bang for your buck.
With all of that done, I had finished world one.
I'm happy with all of the level designs.
The art is nice, the sound effects 
are done, and the cutscenes are in.
The only thing I'm missing is the music.
Right now, there's just some 
annoying placeholder track,  
but I'm finally ready to put 
in the game's final soundtrack.
But I don't know how to make 
music, so that's where you come in.
If you are a video game music composer and would 
like to work on this game, then there's a form  
in the description for this video where you can 
fill in your details and get in touch with me.
This is a paid gig.
You're not working for exposure, but we'll 
work out all the details when I get in touch.
I look forward to hearing from you.
So now I have a full world in the 
game that is pretty much complete.
And I realised that this would actually make for  
a nice demo or something to show off to 
potential publishers or console makers.
The only problem is there's still 
loads of stuff on the meta level  
that's still unfinished or 
placeholder or unpolished.
Like the game still doesn't save your 
progress, and the options menu looks like this.
So I spent a whole week making 
the options menu look nice.
I will spare you the details.
It wasn't fun to do.
It's not fun to talk about, though 
Patrons are getting more in-depth  
devlogs if you do want the nitty-gritty details.
I made the game save and load your progress.
Also, just incredibly boring.
A  little bit more interesting, though, 
is my hint system.
Instead of just giving you a bit of text,  
I try to show the hint visually 
using these dotted lines.
I think it's more interesting; 
it's easier to understand,  
and you don't need to speak English to get it.
So, I've still got a bit more 
to do, but it's pretty close.
As always, if you're a GMTK Patron, you can 
access the World One demo right now on PC and Mac.
You can also pop in the Discord and help me 
bug test it if you think that would be fun.
If you're not a Patron, well,  
then the next best thing you can do is go 
to Steam and add the game to your wishlist.
You'll get an email as soon as 
the game goes live next year,  
and it also tells Valve to promote my 
game to as many people as possible.
And so, that is it for this month, 
except for when I deleted the
No, I'm joking; this is a good episode.
Just let me have one.
Thank you so much for 
watching Developing this year.
Sorry again for the 6-month break, 
but we're on Easy Street now.
That is definitely not true.
We're heading towards the finish 
line now. That much I can say.
2024 is the year: the Year of the Magnet.
So I hope you will join me to celebrate a 
well-known and totally real festive celebration.
Thanks for watching, and I'll, 
uh, I'll see you soon. Bye.
I never know how to get out of frame for 
the, uh, for the Patreon credits and stuff,  
so I'm just going to... I'm 
just going to sort of fall down.
