Hey! It’s Mark
So, this week is Steam Next Fest, which 
is an online festival for upcoming games,  
where everyone gets to show off 
the demo for their next project.
And my new game – the roguelike spell 
’em up Word Play – is in the showcase.
Now I’m actually really happy with how 
things have gone in the lead-up to Next Fest,  
and I’m confident that the demo will have the best  
possible chance of standing out and 
getting those all-important wishlists.
So I wanted to share 7 tips 
for how to make a demo,  
and how to get the most out of Steam Next Fest.
Sound good?
Okay, then let’s start with Tip Number 1 –
Launch your demo before Next Fest begins
So, there’s nothing in the rules that says your 
demo has to debut at the start of Next Fest.
So I actually released the demo for Word 
Play about 2 weeks before Next Fest began.
And that turned out to be a great decision.
For one thing, it helped the game gain a bunch  
of wishlists – about 25,000 
before Next Fest even started.
But I also got an enormous amount 
of feedback from players – and could  
use this to improve and fix the 
demo before the event kicked off.
So, for instance, in the 
first version of the demo,  
you could only spell a word up to 10 tiles long.
But players told me that it felt bad to find a 
word that’s longer – and not be able to play it.
So, okay, I changed it – and now if you 
keep adding letters then a secret second  
row of tile holders appears.
Players also found it annoying to 
get into the shop screen – and not  
be able to see the letter bag or the letter grid.
So I added buttons that let you open the bag 
or peek behind the cards to see the game board.
I also added the ability to break 
glass tiles after making them,  
and a way to sort the letter 
grid into alphabetical order.
Plus – I fixed loads of bugs.
So, so many bugs.
So, remember – you only get one 
chance with Steam Next Fest.
And if you want to put your best foot 
forward, release your demo in advance  
in order to find and fix the biggest 
issues before the event goes live.
Tip Number 2 is to show enough, but not too much
This is a tricky one to get right, 
and will change for every game.
But the basic premise is sound.
So for instance – my demo for Mind 
Over Magnet was way too short.
The demo only contained the first world and that 
clocked in at a measly 15 minutes of gameplay.
Which wasn’t very satisfying, didn’t stick 
around long enough to get people excited,  
and probably didn’t help the 
game with the Steam algorithm.
But, on the other hand, you’ve probably played 
a demo that was so good, and so full of content,  
that you got your fill with the freebie 
and never actually bought the full thing.
So you want to aim for something that will show 
off why the game is fun, and even give players  
a reason to play multiple times – but you also 
want to leave a lot out for the full release.
So in Word Play I found a pretty good balance 
– the demo has about 25 perks, which is enough  
for strategies and synergies and replayability, 
but is a long way off the full game’s 120 perks.
And it has just one mode, whereas the full game 
will have a bunch of different ways to play.
You can then test whether your demo is long enough  
by checking the “median time 
played” stat in Steamworks.
You should aim for somewhere 
between 30 and 90 minutes.
Word Play is bang in the middle with 
almost exactly 1 hour of median playtime.
But if you’re not happy with the number 
you see? Well, good job you launched  
your game before Next Fest and can add or 
remove content before the event kicks off.
Another good tip is to look at 
other demos in your game’s genre.
How much are they giving away?
Tip Number 3 is to give a great first impression
A demo is free.
Which means that players have invested 
nothing – and so will happily quit out  
and delete your demo if they are bored, 
frustrated, or generally unimpressed.
There are a few ways to avoid this.
Make sure the presentation is solid.
I waited until Zach had composed 
some music before launching the  
demo because a completely silent 
game does not scream high quality.
In terms of difficulty, I would err on 
the side of easier rather than harder.
You generally don’t want players to 
rage quit your demo in frustration.
An easy demo is better – especially because 
players know the full game will get harder.
And you should find ways to give 
players a good initial experience,  
even if it’s a little constructed.
So in the demo for Word Play I 
made sure to include two perks  
that pair really well – an upgrade 
that lets you make golden tiles,  
and a modifier where if you submit a golden 
tile, the tile to the right becomes golden.
This creates a silly synergistic strategy 
of endlessly getting golden tiles,  
which just feels great and will leave 
players with a strong impression.
And with only 25 perks in the demo,  
this situation is pretty likely to come 
up, almost guaranteeing a good time.
Remember that a demo is not a playtest build.
It’s not a way to get feedback and bug reports.
It’s marketing – so do whatever it takes to 
cast your game in the best possible light.
Tip Number 4 is to tease 
content that isn’t in the demo
So, as discussed, you want to leave a 
lot out for the actual paid release.
But don’t leave players guessing about how 
much more content there is left to discover.
So you can do this inside the game itself.
Like I said – the Word Play 
demo has only one mode.
But I made sure to leave in the 
buttons for all the other modes,  
just with a lock icon and a tag that 
says “available in the full release.”  
Also, the game has just one type 
of special tile – the golden tile.
But from the logo, you can see that 
there are other types of tile available.
What does the green tile do? The 
blue tile? The red tile with the  
dot? The… bubbly red water tile? 
There’s clearly more to this game!
But you can also do it outside of the game.
So before Next Fest began I made a 
Steam news event for the game that  
simply describes all of the stuff that isn’t 
in the demo, but will be in the full game.
How there will be more perks, more special tiles, 
more special rounds, more music, more everything.
That way players can understand what’s to come  
and – fingers crossed – add 
the game to their wishlist.
Oh, and you can make that easier 
by literally putting a button in  
your demo that will take people 
directly to the Steam store page.
Tip Number 5 is to send all of 
your feedback to a single location
Okay, so when I first launched the Word 
Play demo… I was getting a lot of feedback.
Bug reports.
Feature requests.
Ideas for modifiers and special rounds.
Everything you could think of.
But those reports were distributed across, 
well, replies on Bluesky, Discord DMs, emails,  
the comments on two different YouTube videos, 
and discussions on the game’s Steam forum.
Which was completely overwhelming.
I simply could not keep track of it all.
So – I made a single source for feedback.
I made a forum on the GMTK Discord server 
with places to put bugs, ideas, and requests.
And then I funnelled everything into that forum.
I made a pinned post on the Steam forums 
telling people to go to the Discord server.
I put pinned comments on the 
YouTube videos with the same info.
And I even put a “report an issue” button into the  
game – which loads up a page 
linking to the Discord server.
Now I can more easily track 
these issues and reply to them.
Though, the most common piece 
of feedback was not a bug.
Or a feature request.
It was simply… why does the game not 
let me spell WAIFU? Or YEET? Or RIZZ?
Yeah, this is one of the 
perils of making a word game.
Your dictionary will never catch everything 
that people consider to be a real word.
So I knew I needed a bespoke solution for this.
For starters, I added a tutorial that 
appears the first time you spell an  
invalid word and explains that proper nouns 
like countries and companies aren’t accepted.
But also – every time you spell an invalid 
word it will add a button to the options  
panel which lets you petition for that 
word to be included in future updates.
Click this button and it shoots an 
event to Unity’s analytics – and  
I can then get a massive spreadsheet 
of every word that’s been petitioned.
Then I can go through them one by 
one and – as the great arbiter of  
words – decide which ones should go in the game.
The first batch I added 
included terms like BESTIE,  
BOOLEAN, EMOJI, GAMIFY, NERFING, and WEEABOO.
I’m really glad I got all 
of this sorted before Next  
Fest as it has made my life a whole lot easier.
Tip Number 6 is to block content properly
Okay, if you’re making a demo for a game, 
sometimes the easiest thing to do is just  
upload your full game build but block 
access to the stuff outside the demo.
In my case, I have a checkbox 
inside Unity for “demo”,  
and if that’s ticked then the game only 
shuffles in the first 25 perks on the stack.
And it makes sure the buttons for the 
other modes are made non-interactable.
Now I knew that there was probably some technical 
way to make this content accessible again… but  
what I didn’t expect was that on the literal first 
day that I dropped the demo, someone let me know  
that they had fiddled with the files, unchecked 
that box, and opened up the rest of the game.
Oops.
So, from the next patch onwards I made sure 
that the demo files only contained 25 perks  
and 1 round, meaning that there was no 
way to restore the rest of the content.
Now this might sound like a big goof on 
my part, but it’s actually not uncommon.
I remember when the Shadow Complex demo 
launched on Xbox Live Arcade and there  
was a relatively simple way to bypass the end 
of the demo and play through the whole game.
And also, remember when Sega accidentally uploaded 
the full version of Yakuza 6 as a demo? Oopsie.
So – whatever you put in the 
demo version of your game,  
just assume that someone will 
figure out a way to access it.
And so make sure that the demo only 
contains the content… from the demo.
And finally, Tip Number 7 is to release your 
game shortly after the release of the demo
If someone plays your demo, gets excited, 
and wishlists your game – you should ideally  
be able to deliver them the full experience 
before they forget about it and lose interest.
So don’t wait a year for 
the actual game to come out.
And that’s why I’m pleased to 
announce that the full version  
of Word Play will be out on Steam 
on July 14th, 2025 – with 120 perks,  
loads of special rounds, loads of modes, 
more music, more features, and more words.
Thanks for watching, please consider 
adding the game to your Steam wishlist.
And I’ll see you soon.
