In The Legend of Zelda: Tears of the 
Kingdom, Links newest tool isn’t a weapon,  
or a musical instrument, or a shape-shifting mask.
Instead, it's a magic arm that lets 
you whip objects around in mid-air and  
then stick them together with big wodges of glue.
The Ultrahand - named after one of 
Nintendo's mechanical toys from the 1960s -
lets you make vehicles, aircraft, platforms, 
structural supports, puzzle-solving tools and - if  
you've got a lot of patience - giant mechanised 
robots and nuclear-powered war machines.
But how did Nintendo design such a madcap game 
mechanic - without the whole thing falling apart?
Well, I scoured every single interview that the  
studio has given on this game to 
find out the in-depth details.
I'm Mark Brown and this is 
how Nintendo made Ultrahand.
So, shortly after finishing Breath 
of the Wild's downloadable content,  
director Hidemaro Fujibayashi started 
thinking of ideas for the next Zelda game.
And he came up with the idea of letting Link  
build his own contraptions, 
like a pointy-eared MacGyver.
Now, Nintendo designers are encouraged to create  
playable prototypes before 
pitching new game ideas.
So Fujibayashi built a demo using 
the Breath of the Wild engine.
That game has dungeons with these 
perpetually spinning cogs - so the  
director took four of them and attached them 
to a stone slab to create a makeshift car.
Then he put four long slates together to make a  
tube - and if you place a bomb and a 
ball in the tube, you get a cannon.
Put it together and you've got a DIY tank, 
rolling through the fields of Hyrule.
If he had any doubt that the gameplay 
would appeal to fans of the first game,  
Fujibayashi could just look to YouTube, and 
other platforms, to find players already  
using the limited tools provided by Breath 
of the Wild to make vehicles and machines.
These videos, and Fujibayashi's demo, gave 
Nintendo the confidence to make the mechanic  
and the proposal was quickly approved by 
Zelda bosses Eiji Aonuma and Shigeru Miyamoto.
Now Nintendo's primary goal when developing 
Ultrahand was to keep things simple.
It should always feel like making 
stuff in Lego or Minecraft,  
rather than trying to learn how to use Blender.
Because if this thing was complex to learn or 
fiddly to use, it would overwhelm new players  
and frustrate those who didn't really want to 
engage with the feature any more than they had to.
Fujibayashi said "we wanted to 
make sure that the system itself  
is simple enough that anybody can pick 
it up and play without too much issue.
The more we weed out complexity upfront,  
the more versatility and freedom 
there is to provide options [later]."
So the mechanic went through endless iterations 
with the goal of making it more streamlined.
If it initially took five steps to build a basic 
raft, the designers would rethink every part of  
the building process until players could put 
together a boat in just one or two actions.
This simplification came in various forms.
For instance, the game initially 
allowed you to rotate objects in  
tiny one degree increments so you could 
make fine-tuned adjustments to your build.
But the final game moves in chunky 45 
degree rotations to get things done faster.
And by having objects snap together 
at predetermined points, the tool  
makes it quick to set up things 
like wheels, and steering points.
It's also just very playful.
Building takes place in the world, 
rather than a separate menu.
And objects topple and crash into 
the floor as you move them about.
And there are tactile controls, like wiggling 
the stick or joycon to break your creation apart.
If you enjoy using something, it's 
always easier to experiment and learn.
Another source of simplification 
was the Zonai devices.
These are special tools that add powerful 
capabilities to your build like fans,  
wheels, cannons, and floating platforms.
Nintendo came up with dozens of ideas 
for these things but pared the list  
down to just the bare minimum so 
as to avoid decision paralysis.
Plus, while Nintendo experimented with having a 
separate switch item to turn the Zonai devices on,  
they simplified things to the point 
where you just hit any part of the  
machine with a weapon to simultaneously 
switch on all of the connected devices.
(As a nice side effect, this elegantly affords a 
way to activate your machinery from a distance).
It was also just as important to 
consider the way these devices look.
Instead of using supernatural objects, Zonai 
devices are meant to resemble real-world  
objects and home appliances, like a desk fan, 
a skateboard, a fire hydrant, and a light bulb.
Even the stabiliser should be familiar: 
it's modelled after those toys that  
always right themselves, like Japanese 
Daruma dolls or, you know, Weebles.
That wobble. But don't fall down!
Aonouma says "if players are 
shown something they've never  
seen in real life, they'll 
have no idea how to use it.
But if it looks similar to an everyday item,  
they'll understand how it 
should be used intuitively".
And this principle is seen everywhere in the 
design of the Ultrahand and its related mechanics.
Machines are powered by big batteries, 
rather than some vague magical source.
Zonai devices come from giant 
gashapon machines - which is a  
clever way to explain that you're about 
to get a random selection of tools.
And objects that can't be moved are 
intentionally tied down with rope or cloth.
And then there's the glue that seeps 
out from between different objects.
Aonouma initially wasn't a fan - as a 
wood carver who works hard to hide the  
connections, he thought the visible glue was ugly.
But he soon came to see that it was an obvious 
visual clue that two objects are attached.
Now, simplicity wasn't the only goal 
for Nintendo when making Ultrahand.
The team also carefully focused on the feelings 
that such a tool could engender in its players.
That includes, of course, creativity.
Fujibayashi knew the mechanic 
would be a hit when staff members  
were excitedly sharing videos of 
their creations while playtesting.
And despite the streamlined design 
and limited number of Zonai devices,  
players have still managed to 
create absurdly impressive machines.
Stuff that even surprises Nintendo.
Another feeling is humour.
Nintendo is well aware that the 
Ultrahand mechanic is prone to problems -
like accidentally activating a machine 
and having it run away from you,  
or watching your beautiful new tank go up in 
flames because you made the whole thing from wood.
Ya doofus.
But as long as players find those failures 
funny, the mechanic is working fine.
We also see this in two 
often-repeated side quests:  
transporting Koroks and helping out 
Addison with his lop-sided signs.
Both of which lend themselves to 
all sorts of slapstick silliness.
But perhaps the most important 
feeling is one of agency.
Breath of the Wild already 
gave players lots of tools  
to come up with their own solutions to problems.
Aonuma observed that people were 
taking "pride in the things they  
accomplished and finding their own playstyle".
But with Ultrahand, the options are endless.
Where the last game let you climb up any mountain,  
this one lets you fly up to the summit in 
seconds with a custom-made goblin glider.
And for Nintendo, this meant ceding 
the power it holds over players.
While classic Zelda games typically 
have puzzles with a single, specific,  
designer-made answer to figure out,  
Tears instead provides open-ended problems 
that can be completed in any number of ways.
Nintendo just hands out the tools and 
leaves players to find their own solution.
Technical director Takuhiro Dohta 
says "we've placed more importance  
on creating a game that enables players 
to do exactly what they think they can do,  
rather than how we want them to play the game".
Even if... that means cheating.
Many obstacles in Tears of the Kingdom can 
be overcome by using the Ultrahand - and  
Link's other powers like Fuse, Recall, and 
Ascend - in cheeky, unanticipated ways.
It's all part of Nintendo's plan, though: a 
clumsy cheat is still fun because the player  
feels like they're the only person in the world 
to have figured out such a mischievous solution.
Better than finding the exact 
same answer as everyone else.
Though, this still needed some amount of balance.
Internally, testers quickly figured out ways to  
make perpetual motion machines that could 
move across the map with infinite power.
That stuff had to be nerfed 
to make the game work at all.
Fujibayashi and co spent a long time 
finding limits would that would allow  
players to really get creative, but at the same 
time make sure the game still worked as a game.
So Ultrahand is a really fun tool that 
allows for creativity, slapstick humour,  
and an alarming amount of player agency.
But Nintendo had to spend years making 
it work the way it does in the final  
game - with endless iterations to 
the tech to make it simple to use.
And also, somehow, not a complete buggy mess.
Wizards. Nintendo employs wizards.
It's the only explanation.
