Hey. I'm Mark.
Let's talk about destruction.
Let's talk about smashing 
cars and levelling buildings.
Let's talk about terrain 
deformation and fire propagation.
Let's talk about games where things 
can bend and break and blow up.
But I'm not talking about those fancy pre-canned  
animations that play as part of 
a cutscene or a scripted moment.
I'm not talking about buildings that fall 
down in the exact same way every single time.
I'm talking about doing destruction in real-time.
In response to a player's actions.
As part of the gameplay.
That's a whole 'nother thing. That's really hard.
And it's hard because you're 
dealing with unpredictable  
physics and particles and lumps of 
debris and if you're not careful...
you'll tank the frame rate.
And so that's what I find so
interesting about this topic.
Doing dynamic destruction in 
games is about being clever.
It's about using cost-cutting algorithms and 
outright magic tricks to blow up the world,  
without blowing your memory budget.
So in this video I want to look at 6 games 
that have done destruction in wildly different  
ways - and reveal the ingenious techniques 
they've used to make their worlds fall apart.
I'm Mark Brown.
This is Game Maker's Toolkit.
And here's how games do destruction.
Okay - let's start with Control.
This is a game where the environment 
just falls to pieces as you play.
Your bullets rip through tables and chairs.
And you can use Jesse's telekinetic powers 
to rip chunks of concrete out of the wall.
Now this is perhaps the most common kind 
of destruction in games - almost every  
shooter is filled with props and small 
objects that can be broken upon impact.
And they all use basically the same technique.
You store two versions of the object in the 
memory - an intact one, and a broken one.
And then when that object is 
attacked you replace A with B.
It's simple, but it works.
And control uses the same idea - 
it just takes it a lot further.
For one, objects are made up of loads of 
individual pieces that can all be destroyed  
independently - that means objects can break at 
almost the exact point where you attack them.
And because those broken pieces 
are distinct physics objects that  
are connected with joints - well, 
if you break a table in half then  
the table will fall into two parts 
and collapse in a realistic way.
The game will also play a particle effect when 
the object breaks to cover up the transition.
Props are tagged with different 
materials like metal, concrete,  
and wood - and will then play 
a specific effect on impact.
And finally - decals are used 
to really sell the impact.
Decals are basically stickers that you can slap on 
the environment - like bullet holes and craters.
And control has some really good ones that trick  
you into thinking that you just 
made an actual dent in the wall.
Put all of this together and you get 
an environment that is chaotically  
crumbling around you in a truly satisfying way.
Next - let's talk about Astro Bot.
So I just said that the way to do 
destruction is to secretly prepare  
a broken version of whatever 
object you want to destroy.
But it turns out that you don't 
have to fake the fracture.
So in Astro Bot, there are these logs that you  
can cut with your little laser 
tootsies to make smaller logs.
And they seem to cut exactly 
where you damage them.
What's going on there? Does the game just have 
thousands of possible variants of this log,  
tucked away in memory, ready to swap out?
Turns out - no.
The game actually projects a flat 
2D plane, underneath Astro Bot,  
and literally divides the 3D model 
at the place where you cut it.
It then adds new edges and surfaces,  
creates new collision shapes, and then spits 
out two models to represent the cut logs.
All in a single frame.
This is also how Rainbow Six:  
Siege lets you shoot through walls: 
it slices up the model in real time.
It's the tech behind Hardspace:  
Shipbreaker - a game where you use a big ass 
cutting laser to slice up bits of spaceship.
And it was even being used in Red 
Faction back on the PlayStation 2  
to dynamically cut spheres out of the walls.
This turns out to be quite expensive on 
the hardware, so it comes with limitations.
It only works on simple shapes, 
and the games will typically hide  
the broken pieces after some time 
to avoid clogging up your memory.
But still: in certain circumstances, 
you can do the destruction in real-time,  
instead of preparing it in advance.
Next up...
BeamNG.
Okay, so physics objects in games typically 
use something called rigid body physics.
Which means they always retain 
their exact, rigid shape.
But other games use soft body physics to 
create something more malleable and bouncy.
It's the technology behind squishy 
games like World of Goo and Jelly Car Worlds.
And this idea can be scaled up to 
create a realistic vehicle - as  
seen in BeamNG.drive - which can lead to 
extremely detailed and realistic deformation.
Here's how it works.
Every car in BeamNG is made 
up of a bunch of nodes.
Just floating points in space.
And then they're held together with beams - which 
act like stiff springs that try not to stretch.
So when one of those nodes is moved by 
a collision, it will yank on all of the  
connected beams, which pull in all of their 
nodes - creating that realistic crumbled effect.
And so where most racing games just shaders and 
textures to represent damage in a purely visual  
way, soft body games like BeamBG and Wreckfest 
can literally squish and squash the model of the  
car to fundamentally change how the object 
moves, and interacts with the environment.
There's so much more to BeamNG like 
aerodynamics and fuel consumption  
and so on - but most people just use it to 
recreate that one scene from Final Destination.
Okay. Let's go to Far Cry 2.
This game is famous for its 
fire propagation system.
In this game a molotov cocktail can 
set fire to a patch of dry grass and  
it will spread into a raging inferno that 
will engulf nearby trees and buildings.
How does that work?
Well, basically, the game world is represented by 
an invisible grid that stretches over the floor.
And each cell has a certain number of hit points.
If the cell is flammable and 
loses all of its hit points - say,  
when you shoot a rocket at 
it - it will set on fire.
Then - a burning cell will start 
to damage its neighbouring cells.
And when their HP reaches 
zero they'll set on fire too,  
creating a chain reaction that will 
make the fire spread from zone to zone.
There are other bits of nuance 
to the system, of course.
Each cell has a finite lifetime so 
it will eventually stop burning.
Different environments will have more 
or fewer hitpoints to represent, say,  
a dry patch of grass vs a wet jungle - the more 
hitpoints it has, the harder it is to set alight.
And burning cells will deal more damage 
to neighbours that are in the direction  
of the wind, to capture the effect of a 
fire being corralled by a strong gust.
It's a deceptively simple system, 
but it creates a really strong effect.
Next up - Teardown.
But first, let's start by looking at 2D games.
So in a game like Spelunky, we can see that 
the world is divided into a grid of tiles.
Then we create a simple destruction system by  
removing those tiles to create 
tunnels, pathways and chutes.
The devs can just swap out the sprites of the 
neighbouring tiles to hide the rough edges.
And if you want more fidelity in your destruction, 
you can just reduce the size of the grid.
In fact, you can go all the way down to 
destroying individual pixels as seen in Noita.
In this game, every single pixel can be removed in  
order to dig through walls and floors 
with practically infinite granularity.
And so if we take that grid of tiles and 
extend it into an extra dimension we get...
well, Minecraft.
Minecraft is built out of cubes called 
"voxels", which can be independently added  
and subtracted from the world to allow 
for completely free-form destruction.
And, in fact, a lot of games use this voxel 
approach for destruction - including No Man's  
Sky, 7 Days to Die, Astroneer, and the 
terrain smashing Donkey Kong: Bananza,  
where every layer is made up of hundreds of 
cubes that are packed together like dirt.
Most of these games use some kind of smoothing 
technique or algorithm to avoid  
that super blocky Minecraft style in 
favour of something more naturalistic.
Check out this video on marching cubes for 
more info, if you're feeling technical.
And then - like how we went from Spelunky to 
Noita by just reducing the size of the blocks,  
we can do the same in 3D to 
get a game like Teardown.
Teardown is basically Minecraft 
but with way higher resolution.
Where Minecraft represents a piece of furniture 
as a single cube, Teardown represents it as  
hundreds or thousands of tiny blocks - all of 
which allows for much for precise destruction.
Though the other difference with the other 
voxel-based games is that Teardown has physics.
There are no floating platforms here!
Basically, the game makes 
objects from a cluster of voxels.
But if some of those voxels get loose from the 
cluster they are instantly turned into a new,  
rigid body physics object - 
separate from the original.
This means it can fall down, hit 
into other objects, and roll around.
And then finally...
it's the reigning champion 
of video game destruction.
Red Faction Guerilla.
This is a game where almost every 
structure on the Martian surface can  
be brought down with an explosive - or 
just a big swing of your trusty hammer.
This is a game where buildings react 
realistically when you remove their foundations.
And can even fall down and crush 
other structures in the process.
Now there are other games where 
you can destroy buildings.
We just saw it in Teardown.
There are small structures in the 
Just Cause games that you can topple.
And there's fan favourite 
Battlefield: Bad Company 2.
In this game, buildings are made out of 
a large number of prefabricated pieces,  
each with two versions - an 
intact one, and a destroyed one.
and when you do enough damage it will,  
you know the trick by now, swap the 
piece out for its destroyed variant.
So, that's all cool, but all 
of these games struggle with  
a fundamental question: when 
does the building fall down?
Teardown does it when the object 
is completely detached from the  
ground - which means massive buildings can 
be held up by a single strand of voxels.
And Bad Company does it after a certain number 
of those prefab pieces are destroyed - at  
which point it plays a pre-canned destroyed 
animation - but that all feels kinda arbitrary.
Ideally, we'd want to perform 
some kind of structural analysis  
to see if the building should stay 
standing, or whether it should fall.
And that is exactly what Red Faction does - with 
a system that developer Volition calls "stress".
Here's how it works.
So, a building in Red Faction is made up of 
hundreds of individual parts that you can destroy.
Let's think of them like bricks.
And then each brick has two stats.
It's force - which, for simplicity's sake, let's 
just think of it as how heavy that part is.
And it's strength - how much mass it can hold up.
We can then group all of the 
bricks into individual layers.
For a simple building that will be a bunch of 
horizontal tiers like a big stack of pancakes.
But it can be more complicated for horizontal 
structures like bridges and overhangs.
Then, we can tally up the stats on those 
bricks to get each layer's combined weight  
and strength - keeping in mind that the 
weight must include everything above it.
And now we can do a stress calculation 
by simply asking - is the strength of one  
layer greater than the weight 
of the all the layers above it?
Now a building is designed, by Volition, to be 
architecturally sound and hold up its own weight.
With different values for different 
materials - so a giant supporting  
concrete pillar has a much higher 
strength value than a pane of glass.
But, as we start destroying bricks we're 
reducing the strength of that layer.
And we can keep going until the strength is now 
less than the force of everything above it...
at which point, the layer will 
fail and everything above it  
will turn into a bunch of physics 
objects that can come crashing down.
In fact, if you go frame by frame, you can 
see the exact moment where the upper  
layers change from static 
stuff to floppy physics bits.
And because those physics objects can inflict 
damage themselves, we can get into a situation  
where the top layer of the building will 
fall down and crush the layers beneath it.
Or even fall to the side and make a 
big hole in the building next to it.
Super satisfying.
Now there are plenty of 
limitations to this system.
The game takes a while to 
actually do the stress calculation,  
which is why buildings sometimes 
take a while to fall down.
But still - this technique allowed 
for an unmatched level of realism,  
detail, and player freedom...
and that's despite it being over a decade 
old, and running on a PlayStation 3.
Which I think all goes to prove what I said at 
the start - that destruction is about ingenuity.
It's not a problem you can solve by just 
throwing more processing power at it.
....right?
Well, that is true.
But what if we took Red Faction's stress 
system and added on the last 10 years  
of software and hardware advancements.
Well then you'd get The Finals.
*Building crashes down*
Yeah, this is a multiplayer 
arena shooter ala Overwatch,  
buy with truly absurd levels of destruction.
Every building can be busted, blown 
up, bifurcated, and turned into bits.
Over the course of a match the game 
world will crumble to pieces in  
reaction to rockets, mines, and explosive barrels.
And it's even possible to 
level the entire play space.
And the thing is - the system is 
basically identical to Red Faction.
The developers were directly inspired by  
Volition's work and so they 
used a very similar set-up.
The buildings are made up of 
hundreds of fractured parts.
The game calculates stress in real-time.
And if a layer's force exceeds its 
strength, then the whole thing comes down.
Except... it's now running on 
Unreal Engine 5, with Nvidia PhysX,  
and the min spec asks for 20 times more 
memory than you'd find in an Xbox 360.
So those are some of the most effective 
techniques used for adding destruction to games.
Swapping props.
Splitting the world into breakable cubes.
And performing quick stress tests on buildings.
All of which can make for an impressive 
imitation of real-world demolition.
And now you know the tricks - 
you might be wondering why we  
don't see this level of deformation in every game we play.
And I think it's because, well,  
each one of these techniques has some big 
knock-on effects for the rest of the game.
Not just for performance and memory - but 
also stuff like art, and lighting, and sound, and AI  
pathfinding - all of which must be able to adapt 
to a world that's constantly changing and moving.
And then - on top of all of 
that - there's game design.
Teardown's designer 
says "the idea of a fully destructible  
environment is compelling for the player 
but a nightmare for the game designer".
And Noita maker Nolla says 
"It's easy to think that having  
a complex or highly realistic simulation will 
auto-magically result in interesting gameplay.
Often, that's not the case".
And that's because, well, game design 
is usually about setting limits and  
restrictions, about rules and constraints.
and destruction can throw all 
of that out of the window.
Donkey Kong director Kazuya 
Takahashi says "In most games,  
level design is a bit like designing a course.
You’ve got a main route 
you want players to follow,  
and you build paths to guide them along it.
But in this game, even those 
paths can be destroyed.
If you instead dig a tunnel 
and sneak around to grab [a  
Banandium gem] from behind, that’s equally viable.
Designing levels with that kind of 
flexibility in mind was a huge challenge".
So it's like anything else that can be added 
to a game - it must be done for a reason.
Perhaps it's for new combat 
gameplay, like denying enemy cover,  
creating new lines of sight, or 
collapsing structures on enemies.
Maybe it's to let players be crafty by 
making tunnels, trapdoors, and slides.
Perhaps it's for creativity, or immersion, or 
replayability, or a deeper sense of simulation.
Whatever the case, and however 
you implement it - destruction  
should be there to support your game 
design goals, not blow them to bits.
I'm Mark Brown, thanks for watching.
Hey, I'm back.
So, obviously i've glossed over a lot of the 
nuance and technical implementation of this stuff.
After all - according to a recent YouTube poll, 
most of my audience has never made a video game.
But, if you do want to learn more then - as 
always with GMTK videos - please do check the  
description where you will find dozens of links 
to videos, talks, and slides with way more detail.
Thanks! See you in the next one.
