Hi. I’m Mark Brown, and this is Game Maker’s
Toolkit.
Every year I like to celebrate one game for
its innovation and creativity.
Because, game of the year lists tend to focus
on games in well known franchises and genres.
Amazing games, but ones that build, incrementally,
on past successes and well established formulas.
But it’s important to recognise games that
do something completely different, and work
to push the industry in new directions.
So in the past I’ve talked about the non-linear,
murder mystery search ‘em up Her Story;
and the creepy chatbot puzzler Event[0].
But this year, the game won’t be about typing
words into an antique computer!
Instead, it’s a 3D platformer.
A genre that saw a fierce comeback in the
last 12 months.
Mario broke new boundaries with the incredible
Super Mario Odyssey.
Some Banjo Kazooie alums teamed up for the
so-so Yooka Laylee.
Indie dev Gears for Breakfast made the hidden
gem A Hat in Time.
And even Crash Bandicoot got remade.
Plus, there’s Super Lucky‘s Tale, Knack
II, and Sonic Forces which are all games that... exist.
And then... there’s Snake Pass.
This game has all the trappings of this
genre.
It's about a stripy snake with big
googly eyes who explores scrumptious cartoon
levels with his hummingbird sidekick.
All this while collecting coins and grooving
out to catchy music composed by Donkey Kong
Country maestro, David Wise.
But don’t be fooled - this isn’t your
typical 3D platformer.
And it’s all because of one key thing that
the snake can’t do.
But lemme back up a bit.
Snake Pass was created by this chap - Seb
Liese.
He got hired by Sumo Digital - developer of
Sonic Racing, LittleBigPlanet 3, and the upcoming
Crackdown 3 - because of his impressive user-made
levels for the older LittleBigPlanet games.
After he got the job, he was told to figure
out how the Unreal Engine worked, and so tried
to make a dangling rope that would use physics
to realistically respond to a character walking
into it.
But, by accident, he forgot to attach the
rope to the ceiling and, when he pressed play,
it fell down and coiled up in an interesting
way that sparked his imagination.
So, he made it so he could control the rope,
and then added a head to turn it into a snake.
Turning this clever snake tech demo into an
actual game, though, proved challenging.
The team had all sorts of ideas in the early
days, but none of them quite fit.
Having the snake sneak up and kill things
was too scary.
Having the snake coil up and spring out was
unrealistic.
And eating fruit to grow or shrink made the
snake either too short or too long to be fun.
So, ultimately, the team had stop thinking
about what the snake could do - and instead
think about what the snake can’t do.
And it’s something that every 3D platforming
hero does all the time: jump.
But sometimes, taking a mechanic away can
lead to all sorts of interesting consequences.
Designers can find fertile ground by asking
themselves, what does it mean for a shooter
where you can’t shoot?
A driving game where you can’t brake?
Or a platformer where you can’t jump?
And this lead to a game about climbing.
About manipulating this snake’s body to
navigate crazy vertical levels.
About the bizarre biological structure of
a snake, and what sort of crazy movement that
can lead to.
And this would require changes to just about
everything that we know about 3D platformers.
Starting with the need for a completely new
control scheme.
So, here’s how Snake Pass works.
Moving the analogue stick moves Noodle’s
head around on a flat axis, but in 3D space
- all relative to the camera.
So you can use that to point Noodle’s head in
the direction you want to go.
Holding A - typically the jump button on other
games - lifts Noodle’s head up.
And, because of gravity, letting go of A naturally
lets Noodle’s head drop.
This set up allows you to aim the snake’s
head at any point in 3D space.
And then, you can hold the right trigger to
drive Noodle forward in that direction and
- oh.
Why’s he going he so slow?
Ah, yes.
That’s the thing about Snake Pass - while
you only really have direct control over the
head, you also have to think about this big
old body that’s forever trailing right behind you.
Under the hood, Noodle’s body is actually
made up of 35 different “collision spheres”,
which all track things like what they’re
touching, what their neighbours are touching,
and whether they’re part of a bend.
And holding the right trigger stretches those
spheres out - which is why you must perform
that famous serpentine zig-zag manoeuvre to
build up any real speed.
And the thing about this body is that you
can use it to your advantage.
If you move your head around a pillar, the
body will naturally follow afterwards - which
creates traction and grip that can anchor
Noodle in place.
Repeat this a few times and you can move up
or along all sorts of crazy structures.
You can even create anchor points and then
swing underneath platforms.
But on the flip side, this body is also working
against you - because the whole thing is affected
by gravity, so having half your body - and
thus, half the spheres - dangling into nothingness,
can cause Noodle to slip and fall.
So it’s this body - this wibbly wobbly serpent
structure - that really makes Snake Pass stand out.
I mean, we’ve seen games where the character
is a physics object, like the slapstick squid
simulator Octodad and Human Fall Flat which
is like trying to work in an Amazon warehouse
while you’re hammered.
And even physics-driven games about climbing,
like the mountaineering gem Grow Home and
the goofy toast ‘em up I Am Bread.
But it’s giving Noodle this gigantic body.
This huge lump of stuff that is only half
way under your control.
This thing that is simultaneously both your
greatest asset and your biggest enemy.
This is what makes Snake Pass so brilliant,
and leads to this crazy tug-of-war between
upwards momentum, sticky friction, and sinking
gravity that I could mess around with for hours.
Now, the game is not easy.
That much should be obvious.
But learning how to climb is enjoyable in
its own right.
Seb told Nintendo, “mastering Noodle is
a learning process and it’s a skill that
you acquire.
So it requires training.
Anything that you get better at, it doesn’t
even need to be video gaming, is satisfying
and triggers a certain area in your brain
that makes it pleasant to do.
So, we knew the controls were difficult but
we also knew it wasn’t impossible to control
him from the start and it is that self-improvement
that makes the game so appealing.”
And the phrase “self-improvement” is key.
Snake Pass’ advanced mechanics are never
taught to you explicitly.
The tutorial gets out of the way very quickly.
Which leaves you to simply play around, experiment,
and practice.
And over time, you’ll learn a whole repertoire
of moves and start to understand, intuitively,
how to make all sorts of complicated manoeuvres
that would never be possible in another game.
You also get two safety nets.
You can hold the left trigger to grip Noodle’s
body more tightly for greater friction.
And you can hit Y to have your Hummingbird
friend Doodle pick up your tail.
Neither of these are necessary to get around,
but they are helping hands if you need them.
And, ultimately, it’s up to you how hard
the game really gets.
You can just focus on the three key stones
in each level - or you can find the blue bubbles
and gold coins which require exploration and
extra climbing skills.
Up to you, really.
Once you’ve got some of these advanced moves
down, Snake Pass obviously gets much harder.
In the same way that a platformer can ramp
up the challenge by increasing the space between
platforms, there are lots of ways to increase
the challenge in Snake Pass.
Like, by removing the end caps on these bamboo
rods, it’s easier to slip off the end.
The space between bamboo, and the different
angles, can cause problems.
And while early puzzles are over safe ground,
so falling off is just a set back, later climbing
frames will dangle over spikes, fire, and
thin air.
Moving platforms are also introduced.
And these are a nightmare at times.
You don’t just need good timing to get on
and off the platform, but you’ll often need
to get your snakey body in a position where
Noodle will be safe when the platform goes
upside down. Woof.
But Snake Pass also shows that not every new
mechanic needs to add to the challenge.
Water is, actually, not that much of an obstacle
and Noodle can - for the first time - move
easily and freely through these lakes, giving
you a brief respite from oh my god help me
I’m gonna die.
So, this is Snake Pass.
One of my favourite games of the year, and
definitely the most inventive game I played.
And I think there’s some really key takeaways
from this game.
One is to look for inspiration from outside
the world of games.
Sumo certainly borrowed ideas from 3D platformers
like Spyro the Dragon and Banjo Kazooie, but
the core idea came from the real world.
Seb actually had pet snakes in the past, and
he used to be a biology teacher, so he had
the knowledge to make a game about snakes.
So it’s beneficial to look for inspiration
beyond other games.
It’s been a key thing for Shigeru Miyamoto
who has turned real world hobbies like music, pets,
gardening, and beating up gorillas into games.
And Lucas Pope has said that Papers, Please
was inspired by real-world passport checks
he encountered when travelling.
Takeaway two is to think about the consequences
of removing things.
Designers shouldn’t always add and expand,
but also consider what unique outcomes will
arise from ditching stuff.
For Snake Pass, not having a jump mechanic
meant entirely new gameplay was possible.
Takeaway three is to look for interesting
sources of danger and conflict.
Way too many games go for the obvious solution
of adding enemies who can kill you, which
leads to a combat system and - well, it’s
now like every other game in existence.
But having something like gravity, or your
own body be an enemy can lead to new gameplay
and new ways of thinking,
And I suppose the final takeaway is, if you
do something bold - not everyone is going
to love your game.
Snake Pass is a divisive game, with as many
people calling it a frustrating mess as there
are people calling it a fantastic challenge.
That’s the price you’ll pay for trying
something bold - but I think it’s worth it.
Original games like Snake Pass keep the hobby
fresh and exciting, and give us something
truly new to play with.
Thanks for watching.
I want to give a thank you to Chris from Sumo
Digital who answered my questions about the
game, and SplitHareGames on my Patreon who
did the artist’s rendition of the rope in
Unreal Engine.
But I really want to say thanks to all my
Patrons who have supported me at any point
in 2017.
You’ve made this year’s videos possible
- plus, the game jam, boss keys, speaking
at events, and more.
And also thank you to everyone who has subscribed
to the channel, commented on a video, shared
my stuff with their friends, or sent me lovely
tweets and emails.
You’re all brilliant.
Have a great Christmas or whatever holiday
you’re into it, and I’ll see you in 2018.
