Hey, real question - is there any game with a more  
crazy crossover character 
list than Super Smash Bros?
I mean, this is the only place where you 
can watch a fist fight between Pikachu,  
Mega Man, the Wii Fit Trainer, 
and the dude from Minecraft.
The roster is just ridiculous.
Across five games, six consoles, 
two-and-a-half decades, and loads  
of DLC, Smash Bros. has somehow 
featured 89 different characters,  
from around 40 different franchises, 
and dozens of different developers.
And, okay, sure, maybe there's 
a game with an even bigger cast  
of multiversal mates - but remember, 
these aren't just costumes, or cameos.
These are distinct fighting game characters 
with unique animations and movesets.
And they're all somewhat 
balanced for tournament play.
But, at the same time, they are 
also ultra faithful renditions of  
classic video game characters, packed with 
loving details and ultra niche references.
So I wanted to find out how each one of 
these Smash Bros. characters is designed.
How does a new fighter go from 
an idea to implementation?
Now, normally... this would 
be pretty hard to find out.
Japanese game developers are notoriously 
quite secretive about their process.
But Smash creator Masahiro Sakurai 
is anything but tightlipped.
This dude has divulged game development 
secrets across hundreds of YouTube videos,  
magazine columns, GDC talks, 
interviews, tweets, and emails.
So I've used all of that stuff, and more, 
to find out everything there is to know  
about designing a new Smash character - from 
picking the roster, to creating the animations,  
to balancing each fighter's pros and cons, to 
making those show-stopping reveal trailers.
Let's get in the ring.
I'm Mark Brown, and this is Game Maker's Toolkit.
Okay, so a Smash Bros. character generally  
goes through about 8 different steps in 
order to become a fully realised fighter.
But the first step of the process 
is to decide which characters are  
even going to make their way into the next game
But with thousands of potential heroes to 
pick from, how does Sakurai and his team  
choose the roster? Well, it generally 
comes down to a few key factors.
One of which is the character's 
popularity among fans.
I mean, as early as May of 1999 - 
just a few months after the release  
of the first Smash Bros. game on N64 
- Sakurai was already asking Nintendo  
nerds online to suggest fighters 
for an as-yet unannounced sequel.
And of the top 10 most requested 
characters from that poll, well...
Bowser, Peach, Ganondorf, and Mewtwo 
would all show up in Smash Bros. Melee.
And Sakurai has continued to use 
polls and ballots of help pick  
fighters - including Wolf, Bayonetta, and Sora.
But there's also global popularity to consider.
Some characters - like the protagonist 
of The Mysterious Murasame Castle - were  
passed over because their games are 
completely unknown outside of Japan.
Sakurai also wants Smash Bros to 
represent many different franchises,  
systems, and moments from the history of gaming.
So when Sakurai realised that the original Smash 
Bros. game didn't include a single character who  
originated on the Famicom - he picked the Ice 
Climbers to represent that system in Melee.
And he's included oddball characters to show 
off important moments from Nintendo history,  
like the dude from the Game and Watch devices,  
and the crappy plastic robot that 
shipped with the original NES.
He has also tried to make sure that 
characters are evenly distributed  
across the different franchises.
Like, back in Melee, he cut Wario from the roster  
as the entry already included a lot 
of characters from the Mario universe.
But, that being said...
franchise fairness has, let's 
just say, waned over the years.
And Sakurai himself has copped 
to the fact that Smash Bros. now  
features an ungodly number of Fire Emblem reps.
But that's sometimes out of his hands:  
characters may be picked by Nintendo 
in order to promote an upcoming game.
A character's fate can also be 
subject to logistical reasons,  
like technical issues or the game's budget.
For example, Sakurai says it was much easier to 
model Wolf - who is basically a doppelgänger for  
existing fighter Fox McCloud - than the all-new 
character Krystal, from Star Fox Adventures.
And Zelda villain Ganondorf made it into 
Melee largely because the team could reuse  
the animations from Captain Falcon, and borrow 
the model from that infamous GameCube tech demo.
In fact, that's the whole point behind 
clones, alternatives, and echo fighters.
Sakurai can increase the character 
count with much less work by simply  
pairing a new character model with an 
existing animation rig and moveset.
And, of course, a character 
can only be added with the  
permission of the original creator, or IP owner.
But that has certainly gotten easier over time.
Sakurai had to fight hard to convince 
the Pokemon company to lend out Pikachu  
and Jigglypuff for Smash 64.
But as the franchise has gotten bigger,  
developers are now coming to him, 
begging to have their heroes in Smash.
Yuji Naka and Hideo Kojima 
personally asked Sakurai to  
put Sonic and Snake into Brawl, for instance.
SNAKE: Show time!
But beyond all of these other considerations,  
there's one factor that's 
more important than any other.
A factor that can lead to popular characters being 
snubbed, and surprising fighters making the cut.
So let's talk about theme.
You see, Sakurai places the greatest 
importance on the character's uniqueness.
A character must have some characteristic or  
ability or attack that makes them 
different from the other fighters.
Each hero - not including the clones - must offer  
something meaningfully different 
from the rest of the roster.
Something that only that character can do.
Now that could be something really dramatic -
a fighter who is two characters 
being controlled simultaneously.
A fighter who can transform mid match.
Or a character who can change 
the layout of the stage.
Or it could be a special move 
that no other character has,  
like being able to store a projectile for later 
use, or use different-coloured Pikmin to attack.
Or perhaps it's a moveset that makes the character  
feel completely different 
to the rest of the roster.
Like a pro-wrestling character based 
entirely around grabs and counters.
To help with this, this desire to 
make each character feel unique,  
Sakurai tries to boil a character 
down to a single sentence.
A pithy description that sums up 
what this character will bring to  
Smash Bros. Basically, that character's "theme".
And you can see these themes 
in each game's design document.
So perhaps "Puppet Fighter", 
for Rosalina and Luma.
"Pointed Sword Dancer" for Meta Knight.
"Heavy Weapons Specialist" for Snake.
And "Third-party Cover 
Fire" for the Duck Hunt Duo.
But if the single sentence is, 
I dunno, "Dude With Sword",  
Sakurai either needs to go back to the 
drawing board, or cut the character entirely.
So that's exactly what happened when he 
picked a hero from Fire Emblem: Awakening.
Sakurai passed on Chrom because he  
offered nothing new over existing 
sword-wielders like Marth and Ike.
Sakurai says "If I cannot meaningfully 
distinguish them from other characters,  
that's the end for them".
Instead, Sakurai invited the tactician 
character Robin because they can introduce  
entirely new gameplay, such as having magic 
tomes and a sword that break from overuse.
"Sword and Magic, Limited-Use Attacks" 
is a much more interesting theme.
Okay, so with that theme in mind, 
Sakurai can start to design how that  
character will fit into Smash Bros. So 
let's start with the character's stats.
The designers can tweak a huge 
number of parameters to define  
how that character feels to 
move around the environment -
including run speed... and traction.
Jump height.... and gravity.
Air control.
How far they fly back when hit, and so on.
These parameters can dramatically change 
how a character feels in your hands,  
from a slow and lumbering 
baddy, to a lighting fast ninja.
And these stats can be used to capture how 
that character feels in their original game.
Take Mario and Sonic, whose jump height and 
run speed closely match the original games.
Though, to be fair, liberties must be taken.
Bowser, for instance, would 
be too slow and heavy if he  
truthfully matched his appearance as a Mario boss.
And so with these stats alone, characters can 
already feel quite different from one another.
Compare the run speed of Incineroar - the game's 
slowest character - to Sonic - the game's fastest.
Or put Jigglypuff's jump height next to Falco's.
But the characters will become much more 
specialised when Sakurai gives them attacks.
Now, in some ways, every Smash 
Bros. character is exactly the same.
That's because in an effort to 
make Smash more approachable,  
it was decided that all characters 
would use the exact same control scheme,  
rather than having unique combos 
and move-sets for every fighter.
But within this standardised formula,  
there's still plenty of room to 
make each character feel unique.
Even the basic smash attack can vary in the 
amount of damage and knockback it deals,  
as well as its range, area of effect, 
and any status damage it might cause.
And when it comes to specials...
well, a character can unleash projectiles.
Counters. Traps.
Whatever this is.
And, well, as discussed in the chapter 
on theme - there's basically no limits  
on how crazy a Smash character can 
get in the pursuit of uniqueness.
They can mimic other characters.
Unleash a random RPG move.
Change their basic stats.
Pull a motorbike out of their butt. Who cares?
Now, like the stats, the moves are often inspired  
by what the characters can 
do in their original games.
That's especially true when it comes to 
fighting game characters like Kazuya and Terry.
But you'll also see endless references in, say, 
Mega Man's different robot master power-ups.
Or Diddy Kong's peanut 
popguns, from Donkey Kong 64.
Or Mario's water pistol pal 
from Super Mario Sunshine.
Though, again, Sakurai takes plenty of 
liberties in this regard, like letting  
Robin use dark magic, or giving Ness and 
Lucas the ability to use PK Starstorm.
Plus, other characters need 
the Smash Bros team to invent  
entirely new attacks that simply 
didn't exist in the original game.
Consider that Snake never 
jumps in Metal Gear Solid.
And that in F-Zero and Star Fox, the characters 
spend the entire game just sat in a cockpit,  
so Sakurai and co had to come up with moves 
like the reflector shield and Falcon Punch.
Pre-existing moves must also be tweaked to match 
the world of Smash Bros. - as Sakurai says "If  
you were to pit the default fighters from [Tekken 
and Smash] against one another, you'd find that  
the [Smash] fighter's fastest move would launch 
five times faster than their Tekken counterpart".
Now that we have both the character's stats and  
their moveset, we can move 
on to making them balanced.
Now, Sakurai isn't interested in 
perfect balance among the entire roster.
He even lets some characters be purposefully 
underpowered, like Pichu in Melee.
Why? So that "if you can win with this 
character, you’ll look really cool."
But, that being said, there shouldn't be any 
characters who can just dominate every match.
And once you start giving fighters all 
sorts of crazy moves and abilities,  
there's the possibility of making a character who 
is utterly unstoppable in one area or another.
Now it might be tempting to balance those 
characters out by limiting that advantage.
But Sakurai doesn't go for that, arguing 
that this can lead to a flat game,  
where every character feels roughly the same.
Instead, he prefers to accentuate each 
character's strength - but couple that  
with a significant drawback that 
will stop them from wrecking shop.
An obvious example is Ganondorf - 
his attacks are all really powerful.
In fact, his forward smash move is 
among the strongest in the series.
But he's also one of the slowest 
characters and has limited range,  
so it's hard to land those meteoric 
punches on a speedy character.
Likewise, Mewtwo is strong and has rapid-fire 
moves, but it's light and so easy to launch.
Link's powerful projectiles are balanced out 
by his lower walking speed and shorter jump.
And Simon's whip has a huge reach, but 
those attacks have a long recovery time,  
leaving him wide open if he misses.
And there are so many ways 
to balance out an advantage.
Characters in Smash Bros have hundreds 
of parameters to tweak, says Sakurai.
So Banjo and Kazooie's Wonderwing 
is a powerful charge attack,  
but it can only be used five times per stock.
And Charizard's Flare Blitz is 
super strong with high knockback,  
but the character also takes 
damage from its own move.
And a powerful attack can leave 
a character vulnerable because  
of how long it takes to charge up 
the move, or recover from it...
which means it's time to talk about animation.
So, to start, Sakurai uses a 
spreadsheet to create a master  
list of every animation that character needs.
And a Smash hero needs a lot of animations.
Not just for attacks and special 
moves, but also for walking, running,  
taking damage, and grabbing 
onto characters or ledges.
Plus there are taunts, 
celebrations, and a Final Smash.
No wonder Smash characters 
take roughly a year to produce.
Now, this spreadsheet has detailed 
written instructions on how the  
character should move and act 
while performing each action.
But to further help explain 
his intention to the animators,  
Sakurai might also include illustrations, 
screenshots from the original games,  
and - if the character has human 
proportions - he'll even use one of these...
A Figuarts Body-K...
wait, £12? Wait a second..
*Click* *Thud* *Rip*
Yeah, a Figuarts Body-Kun reference figure.
It's pretty cool.
You can adjust this dude's limbs 
to create any pose you want,  
and then snap a photo and use that 
as reference material when animating.
There's a link in the description to get 
one from Amazon if it tickles your fancy.
Of course, an animation consists 
of dozens or hundreds of frames.
But the most important parts for Sakurai to 
figure out are the key poses the character  
strikes throughout the course of each animation.
The rest can be filled in later.
So, for instance, an attack 
consists of four main poses.
There's the idle pose - the 
basic stance the character  
will assume when it's not doing anything else.
Then, the character goes into the wind-up,  
which depicts the character charging up 
before they can unleash their attack.
Then the character actually performs the attack 
- this is the moment the move does damage.
And then, finally, the character 
goes into the follow-through pose,  
which shows them recovering from the attack, 
before transitioning going back to idle.
Each one of these poses needs to be cool, 
dynamic, and convey lots of information.
The wind-up needs to clearly signal that 
an attack is coming - to both the player  
who just pressed the button, and their 
opponents who are about to get squashed.
The attack may linger on screen for 
a short while during the hit-stop  
hiccup that occurs upon collision, so it 
must convey the full power of the hit.
And the follow-through needs to show the character 
being vulnerable, and unable to immediately move.
Sakurai and his animating team will use lots of 
tricks to sell these poses - perhaps squashing  
and stretching the character model or twisting 
their rig beyond the limits of a real body.
But the most important point is clarity:  
Smash is a fast-paced game with lots 
of effects and a zoomed out camera.
So the focus is put on making the character's 
silhouette as readable as possible.
When it comes to moving between these poses, 
there are a few considerations to make.
For instance, the wind-up happens instantly.
The character snaps to this new pose on literally 
the first frame after pressing the button.
And while this can cause the character to 
awkwardly snap between distinct poses in the  
blink of an eye - it's more important that Smash 
feels instantly responsive to the player's action.
Also - instead of smoothly interpolating 
from one pose to another, the team can  
speed through the transition to 
make a kick feel faster. Snappier.
And the duration of the wind-up and 
the recovery can change dramatically  
from character to character and move to move.
King Dedede's hammer takes a long time to 
swing, to convey the strength of this move.
But Zero Suit Samus's neutral jab 
completely skips the wind-up - the  
game just snaps directly to the 
attack when you press the button.
So while Sakurai will define the animation 
timing when planning out the character,  
the exact frame data becomes yet another parameter 
that can be tweaked to help balance the fighter.
Okay, so we now know how the 
character will move, fight,  
and animate - but we still haven't talked 
about how the character will actually look.
Because it's not as easy as simply copy and 
pasting a character model from an existing game.
For one thing, outside of weirdo outliers like Mr.
Game and Watch and Steve from 
Minecraft, every character in  
Super Smash Bros. should look like they 
exist together, in the same universe.
Sakurai says "if we simply 
matched their official designs,  
we would end up with an incohesive visual style".
An ugly mish-mash of realistic 
humans and cartoon characters.
So, a number of techniques are used 
to make the fighters feel consistent.
For one, the most brightly-coloured 
characters tend to have their colours  
desaturated - so that they don't clash with 
characters who use more subdued palettes.
Character proportions must also 
be tweaked to stay in line.
In their respective universes, 
Ridley is roughly 20 feet tall,  
while Olimar is shorter than a flower.
But in Smash Bros, all characters are squished 
and stretched to end up between 3 and 9 feet tall.
The team also try to make sure the characters 
have the same level of detail - by adding extra  
texture to the simple characters, while removing 
fussy details from the more realistic ones.
So notice how Olimar's suit gets more pockets,  
straps, and widgets, and how Donkey Kong 
gets rounded teeth and, uh, toenails.
Thanks Sakurai! Just what I always wanted!
Still - these changes cannot override 
the design of the original character.
So Ness retains his cute Funko Pop eyes,  
and the Pokemon generally look like plastic 
models rather than furry or scaly animals.
In fact, Sakurai places great importance 
on being faithful to the OG designs,  
saying "I absolutely did not want to 
betray the original characters’ creators".
He felt this strongly after being less than  
pleased with certain depictions of his 
most famous original character, Kirby.
Another consideration is which 
version of the character to use.
Because in many cases, a character can look 
completely different from game to game,  
and in different mediums and depictions.
For instance - how do you represent 
Pac-Man? As a pixel art circle? Like  
the picture on the arcade cabinet? Like 
the Pac-Man cartoon from the 80s? Or the  
Pac-Man cartoon from the 2010s? What 
about this absolute friggin' doofus?
Well - it's usually up to Sakurai to pick.
And in this case, he simply preferred the  
old-school design from the 
game's original sketches.
In other cases, Sakurai chose an 
NES-era Mega Man design for the  
blue bomber, but a much more modern 
depiction of Sonic the Hedgehog.
You've also got characters who don't 
have a modern depiction at all.
Perhaps the most obvious is Pit, 
from the NES game Kid Icarus.
Before Smash Bros. Brawl, Pit 
was a 24 pixel high sprite,  
a cartoon illustration in 
a manual, or, uh... this.
KID ICARUS: "Now I need to make one more wish".
MEGA MAN: "No Kid Icarus, it's too dangerous!"
So to bring him to life, Sakurai and his 
team took inspiration from Link - another  
NES-born character, but one who has 
changed and evolved from game to game.
What might Pit look like if he had 
followed that same trajectory? And so  
the team imagined an updated character 
with suitable details and flourishes.
And so, finally, with the character 
complete - it's time to reveal them  
to the world in a fighter reveal trailer.
This is probably my favourite bit, to be honest.
You don't even have to make new 
characters for Smash, Sakurai.
Just make more of these trailers!
The idea came out of Smash Bros. Brawl,  
where the team commissioned expensive CGI 
cutscenes for the Subspace Emissary mode...
only to watch as people published them 
online, before the game even came out.
Well that was a waste of money.
So Sakurai stopped adding cutscenes 
to the Smash Bros. games, and instead  
started using them as marketing 
tools to introduce the new roster.
Like pretty much everything else in Smash Bros., 
these are initially designed by Sakurai himself.
He details the events of the trailer 
in text, and then works with a studio  
to create storyboards, and then a rough 
previz, before the final version is made.
Sakurai says "It was a lot of work to make the 
videos while working on the game at the same time,  
but there were always big reactions 
from fans, so it was worth the effort."
Some of the trailers were designed to 
trick people - this video was supposed  
to look like a new version of Wii Fit, 
but is actually a fighter reveal trailer.
Others are about hyping up the 
crowd, for that dramatic reveal.
But there are other factors to consider 
- the Ridley video was toned down,  
because the first version was too intense.
And the Minecraft reveal had to feature Steve and 
Alex equally, following guidance from Microsoft.
So that is the eight-step process 
to making a Smash Bros. fighter.
And with this knowledge, we can see how 
any character in Smash Bros came to be.
Take... Punch-Out!! protagonist Little Mac.
He represents an important moment 
in Nintendo's arcade history.
He has a unique role on the roster,  
as a super offensive up-close brawler 
with a unique Power Meter mechanic.
To close the gap with his enemies, he 
has outstanding speed on the ground.
And his moves are all based around boxing.
But to balance those powerful punches,  
Little Mac is useless in mid-air, with 
a weak jump and crappy aerial attacks.
His animations are short and snappy 
to convey those powerful punches.
His visual style is largely based on the 
Wii game, but with a little more detail.
And his fighter reveal trailer uses a comic 
book style to, well, save money, says Sakurai.
Ultimately, it's a delicate balance of 
trying to honour that character's legacy  
through their visual design, animation, 
feel, and moveset - but also make them  
a balanced addition to the Smash roster, 
and a cohesive part of the Smash universe.
Now, this video is probably not going to 
be super useful for the average game dev.
I'm not sure how many of you are planning to put 
89 famous characters into the same video game.
But, even still, there's so much to 
learn from Sakurai's creative process  
when it comes to animation, balancing, and more.
And there's even more in-depth stuff on his  
YouTube channel - so you can find a 
link in the description down below.
Hey, thanks so much for watching.
Let's finish off with one more bit of info while  
we thank the amazing Patrons who 
support GMTK every single month.
So there's one other consideration 
that Sakurai and his team must make  
when designing a fighter and 
that's the game's age rating.
You see, Super Smash Bros. Ultimate was actually 
given an A on the Japanese CERO rating system.
Which is for games that are 
suitable for gamers of all ages.
Which is kinda surprising when the roster features 
characters from games that have been rated C or D.
But, whatever the case, this does mean that some  
things have to be tweaked 
to pass the rating board.
Character designs had to be changed, like 
giving Mythra tights and a fuller shirt.
Some attacks had to be rethought - that's 
why Snake doesn't use knives or guns.
And the King of Fighters stage features a bunch 
of famous brawlers - except for the busty Mai.
This has caused Sakurai no end of headaches - 
the Wii U version of Smash almost missed its  
release date as the team had to keep revising 
the models for female characters like Palutena.
But, hey, if you can get that all-important CERO A  
rating with a game that features 
Bayonetta, Joker's gun attack,  
a DOOM Slayer Mii outfit, and a trailer 
where Luigi literally just full-on dies...
I think you should probably keep quiet.
