Hi, my name's Mark and I am 
making a video game about magnets.
So in the previous episode of this series 
I looked at the feedback on my MVP,  
and if there's one thing I really need to 
improve, it's the feel of the character.
This little robot guy just feels slow and floaty, 
there's that annoying hitch whenever you land,  
the jump is way too big, and 
the throw is overly complex.
So I've spent the last month and a half completely 
overhauling the character and I'm pretty pleased  
with what I've come up with. So please sit 
back and let me show you what I've made.
Okay, so before I jumped into Unity I set 
myself four key goals with this character  
controller. Goal number one is just to make it 
feel really good to move around the environment,  
really tune those physics just right. Goal two 
was to simplify the aiming system down to a single  
button. Goal three was to add character, charm, 
and personality to both the robot and the magnet.  
And goal four was to add in accessibility options 
like rebindable controls and colourblind options.
So I opened up yet another blank Unity project and 
started working on the character. Though I did go  
and get a character controller off the 
internet to make sure I got the basics  
right. Now there's a bunch of really good ones 
online: there's this one which I used for the MVP.  
This one from tarodev feels very good if 
you're making a platformer. And Mix & Jam  
made one entirely inspired by Celeste. But 
I actually went with one from a much smaller  
youtube channel called Shinjingi. I like it 
because it's actually a very small amount  
of code which means I can use it for the absolute 
basics, but put my own spin on it. So Shinjingi’s  
character controller is just a box that moves 
around and there's a few numbers to play with.
For movement there's acceleration and top speed, 
so I can make the character get going immediately  
for that very fast, responsive, snappy feel.
And for jumping this character 
actually has something really crucial:  
two types of gravity. You've got one for going up,  
which should feel a bit low and floaty 
- and another for coming back down,  
which should be very high gravity and snaps you 
back to the ground. That makes it feel amazing.
And so I just fiddled around with these 
numbers for quite a long time until I had it  
feeling nice to move around this simple blocky 
environment. After that I set about adding in  
a few extra features that I documented 
in my video on Celeste's movement system.
So first up: jump buffer. Basically, whenever 
you're coding a jump you first ask if the player  
is currently on the ground, and if yes, let 
them jump. But this means if you press jump a  
split second before you land, the game 
ignores your command and it feels crappy. So  
instead when the player hits the button 
the game should keep requesting a jump  
for a few frames and then you'll do a jump 
if you hit the ground within that window.
Next up, coyote time: the opposite of the 
jump buffer. Basically if you jump just after  
you leave a platform, again the jump won't 
register because you're not on the ground.  
So we remember that the 
player has been on a platform  
for a few frames after they leave it, and 
allow them to jump during that time. Again,  
this feels better than punishing the player for 
being a few pixels too late with their jump.
We also need variable jump height. This has been 
in game since Super Mario Bros.: you know, you  
press the button for a short hop, 
or hold the button down for a big  
springy leap. To achieve this 
I just check if the player has  
let go of the jump button and throw on that 
heavy downward gravity, like, immediately.
And finally, it's never fun to bump your head 
when you get a little too close to a platform  
or bonk off the edge of a platform because you're 
not quite high enough. This was easily fixed by  
changing the character's collider from a box 
to a capsule. Now it rounds things easily.
And at this point I feel really happy with 
how the character controls. It just feels  
good to move around an environment. Especially 
when compared to the robot from the MVP. But  
I can make it feel even better with some juice.
So I went back to that tarodev controller and, 
uh, stole some of the excellent effects like  
dust particles when you run, jump, and land. 
And this really lovely little tilt when you're  
running. I also changed the pixel art. It’s 
still an orange robot with a single wheel and a  
face on a screen but it just looks more cute 
and cartoony now. To really sell the cartoon  
effect I added some animations, so when 
the robot jumps his screen pops up first…  
and then the wheel joins a second later. I found 
that when working with video game animation you  
really have to cut out the anticipation 
part of the animation to make things  
feel more responsive. So the robot just like 
immediately pops up when you hit jump. Likewise,  
animations need to instantly interrupt each 
other to account for changes in player input.  
That's not a hard and fast rule for every type 
of game, but it's definitely what this one needs.
Oh, before I finish, now that the robot works 
nicely on simple basic blocky platforms I did want  
to try a couple other things. So… slopes! They 
feel really nice with the wheel and it means I can  
add more height and verticality to levels without 
having the player jump constantly all the time.
And moving platforms were a nightmare. Because 
of the way this character controller is coded,  
it doesn't gel perfectly with the Unity physics 
system so I was basically stuck. Luckily I've  
got the GMTK Discord which is full of super 
smart people who know Unity much better than  
me. User GuitarKid really sorted this one 
out with some black magic that essentially  
tracks the velocity of the moving platform and 
adds it to the player's velocity. But, you know,  
way more complex than that. For what it's 
worth though, I figured out how to make  
the character be able to jump along 
with the platform. So hooray for me.
At this point it feels like I 
have completed the first goal  
to make a character feel good to control. 
So next up it's on to throwing the magnet.
Luckily, a lot of this code 
worked pretty nicely in the MVP,  
like picking up nearby objects, 
aiming with a trajectory arc,  
and magnetically snapping to metallic surfaces. 
And so I could bring a lot of that over  
without rewriting it from scratch. Though I 
did want to, like I say, redo the controls.
I wanted to put everything on one button so now 
you can press the button to pick up the magnet,  
and then hold it down to enter aim mode, 
and release to throw it. Or just press  
it once to throw it quickly. I also added in 
mouse support. And this was a little tricky:  
a mouse and a controller analogue stick 
are similar, but they're not identical.  
And so making something work seamlessly 
across both is a real challenge. But  
I got it done and so that's goal two 
completed: to simplify the aiming system.
I also wanted to add more animation as part of 
the throw. I decided to make the robot, like,  
swing the magnet behind itself so it really feels 
like you're chucking this thing across the screen.  
I also gave the magnet different facial 
expressions. I added some screen shake - that  
feels good. I also added a particle burst when you 
change polarity. And I added some nice new visuals  
for the magnetism system. Thanks to Dan Root from 
Video Game Animation Study, the YouTube channel,  
for advice on this. He suggested the big 
chevron arrows that point towards the panel.
And I think with that, that's goal three 
met. Both the robot and the magnet now have  
charm and personality. They feel like 
proper little video game characters.
Oh and I also wired up all the sound 
effects but they're just placeholders  
so I'm keeping them on mute for now. Sound 
design is a… future problem to figure out.
Finally, there was that fourth 
goal: adding in accessibility.
You know, when it comes to putting in 
accessibility options I feel like you  
have to pick the right moment. You don't want 
to do it too soon when it's just a prototype  
and ideas and code are constantly changing and 
being thrown out. And you definitely don't want to  
do it too late, like really close to release, when 
retrofitting those options into the code would be  
a nightmare. You want to do it now basically. 
I’m still pretty early on in development  
but this is hopefully final game code. So it's 
the perfect time to implement some options.  
And so I tried to put in as much stuff as I 
could like remapping controls. An option to  
toggle aiming on and off, instead of having 
to hold a button. A low sensitivity snap  
aim. An option to turn off particles and 
trails and screen shake and more. Oh,  
and I also needed to add in colourblind support. 
This is a game all about red and blue and  
while those are pretty distinguishable with 
most forms of colourblindness, I wanted to  
add in some options just in case. So by making 
the magnet actually black and white by default  
I could then apply a colourful tint in code and 
that way let you put basically whatever colour  
you want on the magnets, and apply that same 
colour to all the panels in the game as well.  
I posted this on Twitter and people suggested I 
should add symbols as well and… okay you can now  
show symbols as well! A plus and a minus show 
up which tell you where the magnet will sail to.
Now I have to admit accessibility 
stuff is pretty hard. Like,  
it's really time consuming and it adds so 
much extra stuff to your code. There was  
one option I wanted to have in the game but had 
to drop it because it just added so much extra  
junk to an already messy and oversized script. 
But other than that I've got a lot of stuff  
in the game and I'm pretty proud of that. 
Accessibility is really important and I'm  
pleased to have it in the game now. And that also 
means that goal four is well and truly ticked.
So overall I am very happy with this character 
controller. I mean, especially when I compare it  
to the disaster that is the MVP character. In a 
lot of genres the main character is the backbone  
of the game ,and so it just needs to feel good to  
move around the world. And with 
this controller I think it does.
Though to validate it I had to do one important 
thing: I crossed my fingers and sent a demo to  
Noel Berry, one of the creators of Celeste. And he 
played it and he said that it feels pretty good,  
which, you know, made my friggin’ week! 
And if you want to try it for yourself  
everyone who backs GMTK on Patreon now has 
access to a special, super short demo room.
But while it does feel very good to get this thing 
done, I have to admit I am exhausted. Remember,  
the MVP - a complete, playable, 10 level game 
took me 30 days to complete. But this one single  
character moving around a simple test room took 
almost two months of long hard work. I'm talking  
full days just coding, problem solving, and bug 
fixing. Thank you to everyone in the GMTK discord  
who played various builds of the game and told 
me suggestions, bug fixes, and other oversights.
And I mean I'm still not done. The camera is 
a placeholder, there's no death and respawn,  
and the magnetism system is still a bit 
broken in places and needs some more code.  
But I think ultimately I do need to give 
myself a bit of a break: this was a long sprint  
of development. And I mean part of game dev is 
being aware and cognisant of your productivity  
and energy and mood. And I have to say I am 
nearing burnout on this project so I think the  
smart thing to do would be to put Unity down for 
a while, focus on some other types of GMTK video,  
and also think about the project more generally.
Like, what is the next step for this project,  
now that the character controller is 
done? I think some time away from the  
coal face of making games will give me a much 
needed perspective on where I should go next.
So until then, uh, oh wait! I won 
the award! I won the Unity award,  
the best devlog 2021. Thank you so much 
to everyone who took time to vote for the  
show over at Unity. I don't really get 
anything but it's still a good feeling.
Also congratulations to all the other amazing 
nominees. These are great youtube channels you  
should definitely watch and subscribe 
to. Special congratulations to Jonas  
who has finally finished Will You Snail 
after four long years of development.
I did say that I would release a basics 
of Unity tutorial if I won the award and  
I will keep that promise, but right 
now I don't think I can look at Unity  
for a good month or so. But sometime in the future 
I will release that as a thank you. Until then,  
thank you so much for watching and I'll 
see you when I see you. Thanks, bye.
