Hi, my name's Mark and I am making a video 
game about magnets. So in the last episode  
of this series I said that my next goal was 
to work on some actual content for this game:  
the puzzles for this puzzle adventure. All of the 
stuff I've made so far has just been test levels  
and prototype stages, stuff that ultimately ends 
up getting thrown away when I change the code too  
much. But in the spirit of 'finish the game', 
it's time to knuckle down and really get to  
work on the content that should - hopefully - end 
up in the final game. So my challenge for January  
2023 was to make 30 individual puzzle chambers. 
How did I get on? Well stick around to find out.
So on January 2nd,  
I sat down in front of Unity with a 
big mug of tea and a great deal of  
determination and went "all right! 
Puzzles. Puzzles... puzzles". Man!  
Turns out it's really hard to just 
come up with ideas for puzzles.
I've made a few good ones during the development 
of this game but they honestly feel like flukes  
that came about at random. The thought of 
doing that on demand, 30 times in a row:  
I'm not sure how to do that. And so in the 
beginning, progress on this challenge was  
pretty slow. I made a few levels but it was 
like pulling teeth. And this really shot my  
motivation for working on the game. I could 
only do it for a couple hours a day before  
getting completely bored and burnt out. And so at 
this rate I simply wasn't going to meet the goal.
Now I did start to think that maybe I was 
just done with this game after working on  
it for so long. It's been well over a year 
now, plus I just took a massive four month  
break at the end of last year. But no. You 
see, sometimes when I was bashing my head  
against one of these puzzles I realised that 
I needed to make some kind of new mechanic:  
a new button, or switch, or a door, or block, 
or whatever. And so I would do the artwork and  
then write the code and then test and debug 
and make tools in Unity - and suddenly it  
was like game development used to be! I 
could just hyper focus on the problem for  
hours and hours at the time without even 
realising that I haven't had lunch today.
But then I go back to level design and it 
was slow and difficult and tedious. But I  
realised that there was a fundamental difference 
between these two modes of working. You see,  
when I was working on a game mechanic it would 
always begin with some kind of goal: like I  
need to make a block that the robot can push left 
and right. And then I can work towards that goal.
But when I'm making a level, the only goal I 
have is "make an interesting puzzle", which is  
pretty ambiguous. What I could really do with is 
a bit more structure. So I looked for resources  
to help me come up with ideas for puzzles and came 
across this great post by Patrick Traynor, creator  
of last year's wonderful game Patrick's Parabox: a 
sort of mind-bending, meta-level recursive Sokoban  
gem. It was one of the honourable mentions 
in my video on the most innovative game of  
2022. It's a great game. Anyway, this post 
has loads of great advice on coming up with  
ideas for puzzles but there was one thing that 
really stuck out to me. so here's what I did.
I took screenshots of all of the mechanics in 
my game: that's the magnets, the drill bit,  
the one-way platform, the electromagnet, the 
laser, and so on. And then I put them along the  
top of a table. I took those same mechanics again 
and put them along the side of the table and got  
rid of all the duplicates. This left me with a 
matrix, where every cell is at the intersection  
of two game mechanics. This one, for example, is 
at the intersection of the electromagnet and the  
drill. I would then take those two game mechanics 
and put them into an empty room in Unity,  
alongside some other bits and bobs like 
the character, maybe one of the magnets,  
some buttons, some floor tiles, whatever. And 
then I just start playing around, experimenting,  
just kind of messing with the system, and 
looking for interesting interactions, or  
interesting consequences of these two mechanics. 
Like, for example, if the drill bit is over the  
electromagnetic beam then my little magnet gets 
stuck. And then if you retract the drill bit,  
if you are near the tip the magnet will quickly 
shoot up and escape, but if it's on the other side  
of the drill bit it will take much longer. And 
so this little realisation, this little trick:  
that can be the solution to the puzzle. 
That is what the player has to figure out.
And then I can essentially work backwards to 
create a level where the only way to solve it  
is to do that one thing. And so if I just add a 
few more mechanics, like so, here we get a level  
where you have to trap the magnet underneath the 
drill bit, away from the tip, so you have enough  
time to get here before the magnet escapes and 
makes these two doors switch places. That's not  
a bad little puzzle! What else is on the puzzle 
matrix? Electromagnet plus laser beam... okay not  
bad. Block Plus drill bit... quite like that. 
Laser plus wheelie block... yeah pretty good.
Suddenly, puzzle design wasn't so difficult 
anymore and my motivation was coming back. I  
put this largely down to the puzzle matrix: 
it's all about giving me that prompt, giving  
me a suggestion, giving me a jumping off point. 
Just some kind of structure to help me find ideas.
Now of course it didn't always work. Not 
every combination leads to good puzzles  
and sometimes progress was still difficult and 
slow. But overall this made puzzle design so,  
so much easier, and it got easier with 
every puzzle I made. I put that down to  
a few things. One is that I just got better at 
puzzle design. I learned the tips and techniques  
that you get when you do something over and 
over again, and it's like building a muscle.
So, for example, I started to see the 
importance of the number of actions the  
player has available to them at any one time. If 
it's too many, the puzzle can feel confusing and  
overwhelming. But if it's too few then the player 
can just do the thing that's in front of them,  
over and over again, until they solve the 
puzzle... without actually solving it. I also  
thought back to my video on puzzle design where 
I talked about luring the player into making a  
wrong assumption about the puzzle, so they get 
a bit stuck, and then have to think in a lateral  
way to find the real solution. So I tried to 
incorporate that into some of my puzzles as well.
Puzzle design also got easier because I boosted 
the number of mechanics I had available to me. As  
I said before, so much of puzzle design is about 
forcing the player to do one very specific thing,  
so you need to cut off other routes that 
would allow them to finish the puzzle in a  
much easier way, and render the whole thing 
pointless. That usually comes down to some  
kind of mechanic like a laser beam that 
can block the player but not the magnet,  
or a beam that can block the magnet but not the 
player, a button that you have to hold down for  
it to operate, or a door that operates 
a switch every time you go through it.
Every time I made one of these to solve 
some kind of problem in my puzzle design,  
I would then have it in my toolbox to solve 
that same problem, much faster, in the future.
I also swapped some of my mechanics for ones 
that would be more open to combinations in the  
puzzle matrix. For example, this flippy 
lever is pretty cool but I swapped it  
for a big spinning fan blade which can do 
things like this... that could be a puzzle!
And the final thing that helped make puzzle 
design easier was investing even more time  
into my tools. Like, before, if I wanted to 
wire a button up to a mechanic it would take  
many clicks to assign the right function 
to both the on and off triggers for the  
button. So I rewrote the whole thing and 
now that whole thing can be done with a  
single click. So much of this process is about 
playing around and experimenting and iterating,  
so I want it to be as friction free as 
possible for me to edit these levels.
So between the puzzle matrix, and the tips 
and techniques, and the added game mechanics,  
and the improved level design tools, I was able 
to make a whole bunch of levels for this game.
And each time, I would create a slide in my puzzle 
bible in Apple's Keynote. On each slide I would  
jot down which mechanics I used in that puzzle, so 
then I could easily reorder the stages to have a  
nice progression of slowly introducing the player 
to the different game mechanics. Eventually I'll  
also want to do this for difficulty as well, 
but that will come after play testing. And  
then when I looked at the puzzle bible I could see 
places where the progression just kind of jumped,  
so like the first puzzle I have introduces the 
player to the red block, the electro magnet,  
and these touch buttons. Then the second 
puzzle adds blue blocks. And then the third  
puzzle adds the drill bit and the winch. But 
then the fourth puzzle adds orange buttons,  
green buttons, laser beams, and moving platforms 
- woah, that's way too much stuff! Slow down!
But I could see this gap as fertile ground for 
making more puzzles, and again with a really  
clear goal this time of introducing the player 
to the mechanics that they would need for that  
fourth level. And so each gap in the puzzle 
bible would add even more levels to the total.
And so did I meet my goal to make 30 levels 
in January? Not quite! I got about 26 before  
I had to stop and make this video. I am still 
running a YouTube channel, after all. But I am  
really proud of my progress and I'm really 
excited for the game now, especially after  
I overhauled some more of the visuals. I 
think it's starting to look like a proper,  
bona fide video game. And so in the space of a 
few weeks I went from hating my game and wanting  
to delete it and go live in a cave in Serbia to 
being really excited about this game coming out.
And for the first time - the first time 
this entire process, I feel like I can  
see the end. So far it's been like climbing 
a mountain where the peak is obscured by fog,  
but in January I felt like I could finally see the 
summit. I can see the road map I need to follow to  
get this game done. I need to make a bunch more 
levels; I need to do some kind of narrative,  
story, cut scenes, something; I gotta make 
a level select screen, I've got to do music,  
and I've got to do the general polish and bug 
fixing and release. That's a huge amount of work,  
still many many months, but it does at least feel 
like a road map. It does feel like something I  
can follow to get this game done. But the 
next step is play testing these levels,  
making sure they're actually any good. Puzzles, 
more than anything else in game development,  
I feel, are something where the creator just 
cannot gauge their quality or difficulty. So  
I need to bundle them together into a demo 
and give them out to people to play. That  
will start with family and friends but then 
it will go on the GMTK Discord for Patrons.  
Make sure you're in the Developing with 
Mark thread if you want to have a play.
That's all for now, thank you for 
watching, thank you for your patience,  
and I'll see you - hopefully - in March!
