Hi, my name's Mark and I made 
a video game about magnets.
It's called Mind Over Magnet, 
it's available on PC and Mac,  
and if I did absolutely everything right it 
should be available to buy right now on Steam.
But before you run away and buy like 16 
copies for yourself and your friends and  
everyone who lives on your street, let's 
just take a moment to look at the final,  
final steps I had to go through to get 
this game onto Steam and into the world.
♫ Music ♫
Okay, so in the last episode of Developing 
I said that I had locked the content down.
I had to stop myself from making any new features  
or mechanics or puzzles or 
cutscenes or anything else.
I had to work on polishing the 
content I had already made.
But I did want to make one final 
little addition to the game.
You see, one of the most influential 
things on creating Game Maker's Toolkit  
was the developer's commentary system in 
Valve games like Portal and Left 4 Dead.
When you've got this mode turned on you get 
these little audio commentary nodes that when  
you click on them someone from Valve will pop up 
and tell you how they made that bit of the game.
And this feature just completely opened 
my eyes to game design as a craft.
When these clever people from Valve talked 
about creating game mechanics or teaching  
things to the player, about guiding their eye, 
about creating puzzles, or running play tests,  
it just blew my mind and it kicked off a lifelong 
obsession with learning about game design.
And seeing as that obsession took me all 
the way through my game journalism career,  
through to making Game Maker's Toolkit 
and making all of these videos,  
all the way up to making my first 
proper Steam game, I thought it  
was only fair for me to put a developer 
commentary system into my game as well.
So if you finish Mind Over Magnet you'll be 
given the option to play through the game again  
with developer commentary turned on.
Now there are these little speakers in 
some of the levels and when you use them  
you'll get a voice note from me telling 
you how I made that part of the game.
But okay, that really was the 
very last feature and now it was  
time to do one of the most important 
things - root out all of the bugs.
So I put together a crack team of testers on 
the GMTK Discord and had them run through the  
game with a fine-tooth comb looking for any 
problems, bugs, or issues they could find.
No matter how big or how 
small, just tell me about it.
And they found a lot of bugs.
Like, there were almost 100 things for me 
to look at, including if you turn off the  
magnetism just before Magnus connects he'll 
bounce off the ceiling at an awkward angle.
If you mash the change polarity button on 
this level the platform can get stuck midway.
And this one actually came from an 
anonymous tip via email from someone  
who played the Next Fest demo, but 
if you bind move to the mouse scroll  
wheel you can rapidly scroll the mouse to 
make Uni speed along like a jet engine.
Now I wanted to fix all of the bugs 
but I had to make sure I was spending  
my time wisely, so I put all of them into 
a spreadsheet and gave them a score from 1,  
meaning inconsequential visual glitch 
that doesn't really matter, all the way  
up to 5 for critical game-breaking 
bug that really needs to be fixed.
Then I could rank the spreadsheet 
in numerical order and make sure I  
started by working on the really 
important game-breaking stuff  
before running out of steam and just 
kind of going "eh, it'll be fine".
Now some bugs were pretty easy to fix, others 
took a lot longer to root out, diagnose,  
and solve, and there were some bugs 
where I thought I had fixed them,  
only to find that my fix had created 
a bug somewhere else in the game,  
so we had to go through several rounds of 
QA testing to make sure everything was fine.
But after a few weeks of that my 
playtesters either found all of  
the bugs or just got bored and moved on 
because there were no new bugs coming in  
and I was able to put together the final 
release build and upload it to Steam.
That also meant that I could request a bunch of 
Steam keys to give out to friends and family and  
members of the press who have very generously 
written reviews and done interviews with me and  
written features about the game, none of which I 
have read because none of them have been published  
as of the time of me recording this little 
video that I'm doing a week ahead of launch.
Fingers crossed they're all very positive and  
not at all mean about the thing I have spent 
the last three years of my life working on.
Anyway, I'll save all of that stuff 
for the inevitable "how did the game  
do" video that will come out in a few weeks time.
And so now, all that is left for me to do is to go  
into Steamworks and press that big 
green "release the game" button.
I think it's green, I haven't actually looked at 
the button, I'll put up a video of the button now.
Is it green?
You tell me.
And so, here we are.
The game is finally out, it's done, it's released,  
people are hopefully downloading 
it, buying it, playing it.
What a wild ride.
Because I announced my plan to make a 
game at the end of 2021 and it was not  
supposed to take this long, but 
here we are three years later.
And so after making character controllers 
and level editing tools and user interfaces,  
transition shaders, sound effects, and puzzles, 
after releasing prototypes and builds and demos,  
after getting feedback and bug reports 
and advice, after changing the game's  
genre and after changing the game's entire 
art style, after all of that, it is done.
Now of course I could not have done this alone,  
so I wanted to take a moment to thank all of 
the people who helped me get to this point.
That includes Zach Jones who put together an 
incredible original soundtrack that just elevates  
this game to a whole new level of quality, Grayson 
Evans made the awesome promotional artwork, Rahul  
Gandhi provided legal services for contracts, my 
dad made me a 3D animation of a giant robot arm  
which I incorporated into the background of World 
4, TheGamingBrit suggested the name of the game,  
and various GMTK Discord people helped with chunks 
of code, including Sophie Stevens and Dom Harris.
I'd also been remiss not to shout out a few 
Unity assets I just couldn't live without,  
including Text Animator from Febucci Tools,  
DoTween from DemiGiant, and my 
custom scene picker from Kira Lord.
I ran so many playtests for this game and 
people were so generous with their time,  
so thank you to all of my friends and 
family members and GMTK Discord users  
and social media strangers who recorded 
themselves playing through the game.
I also got so much amazing feedback and 
advice from professional game makers,  
including Patrick Traynor, Oliver Granlund, Austin 
Wintory, Alan Hazelden, Jonas Tyroller, and more.
Thank you for sharing your experiences 
and listening to my problems and my woes.
And finally, a massive thank you to 
my supporters on Patreon who literally  
funded the game and gave me the time and 
space to make this whole dang video game.
Okay, enough chat, I really hope you 
take the time to check out the game.
It's available on PC and Mac as I say,  
and it also runs really nicely on a 
Steam Deck if you've got one of those.
I made sure it fills the screen 
fully and all of that good stuff.
I will be back in the future with a 
full post-mortem on this whole project,  
but until then, thank you and have fun.
