[Music]
Every openw world game is different
because each game uses its gigantic map
for a different purpose. Maybe it's to
give the player options in how they
approach their objectives. Perhaps it's
a stage for a shifting political drama
or a sandbox so the player can blow off
steam between missions. And sometimes
it's just a way to dump a big checklist
of content on the player. For The Legend
of Zelda: Breath of the Wild, Nintendo
used an open world for a very specific
purpose, to let players go on an
adventure. And in this video, I want to
look at how Nintendo used and ignored
different bits of openw world design to
make a fantasy kingdom that you'll want
to explore, survive, and conquer.
For starters, Nintendo gives players an
enormous amount of freedom in how they
approach the game. There are only two
things you have to do in Breath of the
Wild, after all. Finish a tutorial and
fight Ganon. Everything in between is up
to you. You can do the four major
dungeons out of order or not at all. You
can finish as many shrines as you like,
track down as many memories as you want,
and it's up to you whether you take
Link's famous sword into the final
battle or a wooden mop.
What this means is that you carve your
own path through the world, which is a
pretty important factor in an adventure.
Link's story is your story defined by
what you do and what you don't do as you
explore Hyrule. This is very different
to previous Zelda games, but also to
most other openw world games, which
feature a rather linear story made up of
mandatory main quests where your only
choice is to either follow it or delay
following it.
And aside from limiting the player's
freedom, this often has the unfortunate
side effect of providing a disjointed
story where you desperately need to
track down your kidnapped son, but
you'll get to that just as soon as you
explore the entirety of Boston. But I
think Zelda gets around this in a clever
way. You can take on Ganon at any point,
but because you'll likely get killed
before you can even approach Hyrule
Castle, you're not delaying your
showdown with the big bad. you're
training for it, which means everything
you do in the game, from collecting
heart pieces to boosting your equipment
slots to activating the divine beasts is
in preparation for that fight. Zelda
shatters that barrier between following
the story and doing side activities
because everything you do is relevant.
Well, almost everything.
Another thing Zelda does differently to
most other openw world games is in how
much information it gives you about the
world, which is to say hardly any. At
the start, your map is completely blank
and you need to climb up and activate
these towers to fill in the gaps. But
unlike the towers in Assassin's Creed
and Far Cry games, this doesn't litter
your map with icons for nearby
activities, side quests, and
collectibles.
Instead, you have to find all of that
stuff yourself. And this means you are
led through the world not by icons and
waypoints, but by your own curiosity.
You might see something interesting on
top of a mountain and decide to hike up
there. You might choose to climb up a
tower and use your magic iPad to survey
the landscape before dropping down pins
and stamps to mark locations you want to
check out. Or you might scour the map
screen for interesting place names and
structures and then go find out what's
there. Importantly, there's probably
something good. Any collectibles you
might find are genuinely helpful,
especially after your 325th sword just
broke. And any shrines you might find
provide genuinely unique puzzles instead
of the usual copy and paste side content
we see in open world games. Or you might
find something that tells you about the
world of Hyrule because most of this
game storytelling is done through the
ancient ruins, giant bones, forgotten
battlefields, and other bits of the
environment. It's also important that
you can always go where your curiosity
leads you. I was playing Horizon Zero
Dawn the other day and was intrigued by
these giant robot bones up on the side
of a mountain. But when I tried to get
there, I was greeted by a cliffside too
steep to climb and an actual invisible
wall. Bummer. Zelda, though, not only
offers complete freedom, but a generous
climbing system means you can clamber up
any wall, provided you have enough
stamina or can find spots to rest. By
the way, Zelda makes it really fun to
traverse Hyrule. Whether that's
climbing, riding a horse, paragliding
down from a tall tower, or best of all,
surfing on your shield. Exploration is
always encouraged when it's fun to move
around. Anyway, maybe that invisible
wall in Horizon was to stop me from
coming across a mad robot dinosaur that
I was not yet ready to fight. But Breath
of the Wild shows that letting players
get pummeled by killer enemies is no bad
thing. In the game's opening hours, I
stumbled upon this centaur chap,
Alional, and the fight didn't exactly go
well.
Immediately, the world no longer felt
like a playground to enjoy, but a
daunting world to survive, much more
conducive to an adventure. And it's not
just big enemies, but the world itself
feels out to get you. You'll need to
contend with harsh climates like ice
cold lakes, volcanic areas that burn up
wooden weapons, and deserts that flip
between hot and cold. And weather
affects you, too, such as rain that
makes surfaces too slick to climb, and
lightning storms that, well,
But the thing about adversity is how
good it feels when you overcome it. I
returned to that coliseum 50 hours
later, now with better equipment, more
hearts, and a stronger understanding of
the combat system, and destroyed that
Lionel. Zelda games have often explored
the themes of growing up and becoming a
hero, but never quite like this.
Breath of the Wild also uses those tough
enemies as well as steep walls and harsh
climates to discourage you from
exploring the map in one go and
immediately seeing everything the game
has to offer. By withholding bits of the
world in this fashion, you'll still be
discovering surprises, including entire
towns and different biomes well past the
point where other openw world games
would start to feel plain and
predictable.
Let me just go back to the map marker
thing for a second. Breath of the Wild
does actually use some of the typical
openw world style wayfinding. The main
dungeon quests, for example, are marked
on your map with yellow dots, though
thankfully the game avoids the little
dotted line, instead asking you to find
your own route to one of the four dots
and no doubt getting lost and distracted
along the way. You can also turn them
off, which I'd recommend. Unlike some
games, Zelda is perfectly playable
without this help, as characters give
directions, the map features place
names, and most forks in the road
feature signposts.
But that's just the main quest. And with
all of the side missions, Nintendo
decided to ditch these navigational aids
altogether, and instead the secrets,
side quests, and shrine quests can only
be found by following scraps of
information. Here's an example. These
two lads are talking about a treasure
and they give me a clue to find it. The
little twin steps over the little river.
My cave rests above that river's source.
So, I wander around, find a sign
pointing towards the little brother
bridge. That sounds about right. Follow
the river to its source, climb up beside
the waterfall, and then uncover the
hidden stash. Get in.
By following these rumors, as well as
song lyrics, paintings, and riddles,
you're asked to really explore the world
and take in environmental details that
in another game you might blow straight
past. Plus, finding these solutions is
always more rewarding, if you ask me,
than simply following way points and
stink trails.
If all of this sounds a bit familiar,
it's because I talked about almost all
of this stuff last month in my video
about the very first Zelda game. Breath
of the Wild features more than just Old
Men, Spectacle Rock, and Centaurs, but
also the freedom, mystery, and general
standoffish design of Zelda 1. Though,
you are going to have to turn off the
HUD and objective markers to really get
that experience. But Nintendo didn't
just look backwards to make this game.
It also looked outwards with the game's
creators saying they researched games
like The Witcher and Minecraft. And you
can see elements from loads of openw
world games in Breath of the Wild. The
Coror puzzles feel like the Riddler
trophies in the Arkham games. Cooking to
prepare for a big battle brings to mind
the Witcher's alchemy. Smashing ore is
totally Minecraft. And Breath of the
Wild captures Skyrim's Wonderlust. and
horse bugs.
But you can tell that Nintendo used
these ideas with careful consideration,
deciding which bits of design to use and
which bits to forego. Because an open
world isn't just an excuse to chuck in
loads of random features and hope they
all stick together. Like any good game,
everything should work together to
contribute to a specific experience.
And in the new Zelda, the level of
freedom you're provided, the focus on
exploration, the use of cryptic clues,
the daunting enemies, and the consistent
surprises all add up to give Breath of
the Wild a truly adventurous spark.
[Music]
Hey everyone, thanks for watching. GMTK
is funded by everyone on my Patreon,
including these top tier supporters. If
you're a longtime viewer of my channel,
you might be surprised to hear me praise
a gigantic openw world game after making
videos about the joy of exploring much
smaller, more compact worlds like Batman
Arkham Asylum and DSX Mankind Divided.
But in that Batman video, what I said
was game environments should be measured
by how much meaningful content is inside
rather than in square meters. And
Nintendo is one of the few companies
alongside Rockstar and sometimes
Bethesda who are actually capable of
filling a massive world with unique and
interesting stuff. Plus, the game uses
its space to make your adventurous tres
epic and provide those allimportant
moments of quiet and introspection
during travel. So, like everything in
game design, the size of a world comes
down to what sort of experience the
creators are going for. Anyway, at the
risk of turning this channel into Zelda
Makers Toolkit, my next video will be a
Boss Keys episode on Phantom Hourglass
and Spirit Tracks. And yes, I will
finish that series by talking about the
dungeons in Breath of the Wild. And then
I will never talk about Zelda ever
again. Until the next one.
