Okay, so imagine this.
You’re playing the new Spider-Man game,
and you’re swinging about, beating up bad
guys, and generally feeling like a super hero.
And then Spidey has to save these people who
are trapped under some rubble and… you can’t.
The game’s asking you to press the square
button really fast, but for whatever reason
- maybe you’ve got arthritis, or tendinitis,
or Parkinson’s, or repetitive strain injury,
or muscular dystrophy - whatever the case,
you can’t hammer that square button fast
enough.
So much for feeling like a super hero.
Video games are heavily based on physical
interaction, and so gamers with motor impairments
- those that impact the use of their fingers,
hands, or arms - may find it extremely difficult
to enjoy certain titles.
Especially those that test your precision,
timing, strength, and endurance.
Thankfully, there are awesome accessible controllers
out there, such as tailor made set-ups from
places like Special Effect and AbleGamers,
as well as Microsoft’s awesome new Adaptive
Controller that hooks up to the Xbox One and
PC.
But that’s not the end of the story - because
getting past hardware barriers can often meaning
finding more barriers in the games themselves.
So there’s lots that game designers can
do to make their games more accessible.
And that’s what we’re going to look at
in episode three of designing for disability.
Here are some options and design choices to
make games better for those with motor disabilities.
The first step that designers should take,
is to allow players to modify the way they
control the game.
This will see them playing the exact same
game as everyone else, but you just control
it in a slightly different fashion.
That starts, naturally, with remappable controls,
which allow players to move functions around
the input device - to a place that they can
reach more comfortably.
For example if bending a finger around to
pull a trigger is difficult, painful, or impossible
- being able to move fire or accelerate or
whatever to a face button can be a massive help.
Now this is almost always found in PC games,
where it’s expected that you can map every
action onto any key on the keyboard, or any
mouse button.
But it’s very rare to find on console.
Some games, like Overwatch, Titanfall 2, and
Nier Automata do let you remap controls in
their console versions, but most games do
not.
Some control presets, including one for left-handed
gamers, are better than nothing - but full
remapping on controllers is one of the most
requested accessibility options around.
And, yes, it’s true that some consoles - like
the Xbox One and PS4 - have system-level controller
remapping.
But devs shouldn’t rely on this.
These options are not super robust - and don’t
account for things like a different control
scheme for different modes, or different characters.
And gamers may need to change the entire system’s
controls every time they want to play a different
game, and that’s no fun at all.
It’s also good to allow players to use different
input methods.
Nintendo has been a bit rubbish with this
as of late, forcing gamers to use motion controls
in games like Twilight Princess and Donkey
Kong on Wii, and Super Mario Odyssey on Switch.
Because if you can’t shake the device - or
can’t stop shaking the device - those games
just aren’t going to work.
They should look to their own Splatoon for
inspiration, which lets you pick between gyro-controlled
aiming, or typical analogue stick aiming.
Or London Heist on PlayStation VR, which supports both the PS Move waggle wand and a more traditional pad.
PC developers can do the most, here.
Keyboard shortcuts in games like XCOM save
you needing to move the mouse all over the screen.
Controller support is great for those who
can’t use keyboard and mouse, though it
should still be remappable.
Allowing external devices, by not blocking
input from other applications, lets players
with disabilities use their own hardware.
And a windowed mode, that doesn’t lock your
mouse to the game, lets players use the onscreen
keyboard inside Windows, instead a physical
keyboard.
And any time you have an input that requires
fine motor movement, like a mouse, an analogue
stick, or a gyrometer, it’s great to let
players futz with the sensitivity.
Titanfall 2 is a good example here, letting
you go right in and mess with the response
curve, dead zone, and ramp-up time when aiming.
But for most games, a sensitivity meter, which
simply dictates how fast your cursor moves
when you wiggle the stick, is a great option.
Options to customise the controls are terrific,
and will help many players enjoy games just
like everyone else.
But some games go a step further and let you
reduce the complexity of the input type to
make it easier to control the events on screen.
For example: can you make the game playable
with just one analogue stick, instead of two?
Well, in the most recent Uncharted games,
you can turn on a camera assist to make the
camera always follow behind your character
- meaning you can control both movement and
looking with the same analogue stick.
And if you also flip the sticks while aiming,
you can aim your gun with the same stick you
use to move Chloe around.
Uncharted can also automatically target enemies,
if you’re struggling with the fine grain
aiming controls.
And if you’re on PC, can the game be controlled
with just the mouse or just the keyboard,
instead of both?
A good example of this is The Witness on PC,
which has both traditional mouse and keyboard
controls, or a more accessible click to move
system akin to old school adventure games.
This allows the entire game to work with just
one hand.
Another avenue is to reduce the number of
buttons needed.
In Bayonetta 2, an automatic mode lets you
pull off advanced fighting moves and crazy
combos with a single button.
And Nier Automata lets you install chips that
automate certain actions, provided you’re
playing on easy mode.
My favourite is the one that makes your pod
automatically shoot, saving you from holding
down a button all the time.
That’s because forcing a player to hold
down a button can make a game completely inaccessible
to those with certain disabilities.
Thankfully, many games let you change that
to a toggle - so in Battlefield 4 you can
press the left shoulder button once to aim
down sights, and then press it again to go
back to a normal view.
And in Mario Kart 8, you can just make the
karts drive forward by themselves, instead
of having to hold down accelerate for the
entire race.
A big brick wall for gamers with disabilities
are these tiny micro-games that pop up from
time to time, that randomly require precise
or vigorous button pressing - like bits where
you need to wiggle a stick, or bash a button,
or press a button with perfect timing, or
manipulate the controller in some weirdly
specific way.
These often put a greater demand on a motor
ability than regular gameplay.
Luckily, this is something that developers
are finally figuring out, and giving players
lots of options to make this stuff easier,
or just completely skippable.
So that bit in Spider-Man, from the start?
You can actually turn on an accessibility
option so you just need to hold the button down.
As someone who suffers from repetitive strain
injury, this option is a god send.
Spider-Man also lets you auto-skip these tricky
quick time events, and Shadow of the Tomb
Raider won’t force you to rotate the analogue
stick when turning cranks if that’s going
to hurt your hand.
Don’t be like Detroit: Become Human, though.
This game has you tilt the right analogue
stick in a very specific way to interact with
things, which can be very challenging to certain
gamers.
But while you can swap that for a simplified
control scheme, it also makes the actual difficulty
of the game easier - with fewer chances to
lose a character.
What does having a motor disability have to
do with your ability to make decisions or
solve puzzles?
Now, that being said, difficulty modes can
be great.
Players struggling with input may find life
easier if they can simply relax the challenge
level of the game, to give themselves a bit
more leeway in combat encounters, or a bit
more time to wrangle the controller.
But one-size fits all difficulty modes are
not the only way to go.
The recently released Shadow of the Tomb Raider
is a nice example, as it lets you independently
change the combat, exploration, and puzzle
difficulties.
If you want to make the fiddly fights easier, but
still want to test your logic skills without Lara
just giving away the answer, you can do that.
Some games also offer options that sit a bit
outside what you may normally think of as
difficulty.
Celeste’s Assist Mode, which lets you completely
change the speed of the game, is really great
- and helpful for those with many types of
disability.
And Fallout’s VATS option - which suddenly
turns a frantic first person shooter into
a measured turn-based game - is a good example
of how normal gameplay systems can do double
duty as accessibility options.
One more thing to consider, is rumble.
It can be great feedback or a fun puzzle solution,
and it can even be used for accessibility
as a way to communicate information to people
who have difficulty seeing or hearing.
But it can also be a painful shudder or something
that causes your controller to slip out of
your hand.
Let players turn rumble off, or reduce its
intensity, and don’t have anything in the
game be expressed exclusively through controller
rumbles.
And finally, pausing.
Most games let you pause no problem, but titles
like Dark Souls - that don’t let you pause
proceedings even while playing singleplayer
- can be challenging for those who need to
rest their hands, or are having a flare up.
Making games accessible to players with motor
disabilities is a humongous challenge, and
even titles I’ve praised in this video haven’t
got everything right.
Spider-Man doesn’t have controller remapping,
and many important commands require holding
down buttons or pressing two buttons at once.
And XCOM can be controlled by the keyboard
alone - but not the mouse alone.
But it’s not impossible.
The basics are straightforward: offer flexible
controls and avoid unnecessary complexity
both in general controls and of specific interactions.
But beyond that, go get feedback from disabled
gamers - or work with consultancy groups like
DAGERS.
Do that, and you can make a really big difference
to a lot of people’s enjoyment of your game.
Thanks for watching!
And thanks to Stephen of AbleGamers, halfcoordinated,
Ian from Game Accessibility Guidelines, the
Merc with One Arm, and more gamers who helped
with this episode.
There are two more episodes of Designing for
Disability that you might want to watch, on
audio and visual disabilities.
And a fourth episode on cognitive disabilities
will be out before the year’s end.
