Welcome to On the Level - a 
new video series in which I play  
excellent video game levels, 
alongside the designers who made them.
In this episode I'm talking to Chris McEntee, 
who was a level designer on the Rayman games,  
before becoming lead designer on Ori and 
the Will of the Wisps over at Moon Studios.
For this video we picked an area from Ori called 
the Windswept Wastes: which features a perilous  
climb up a mountain in the desert - with crumbling 
platforms, the ability to dig through sand,  
giant laser beams, and a final 
escape from a monster worm.
Chris was kind enough to 
share concept art, sketches,  
prototypes, and other behind-the-scenes 
goodies - and really go in-depth into  
how a new ability is designed, and 
how a level is built around it.
So, without further ado, please 
sit back and enjoy this interview.
<i>MARK INTERVIEWING: So where exactly did you start 
when you were making this area?</i>
CHRIS: It was very much mechanics focused at 
first. When I first joined the team one of my  
first tasks as a level designer was to come up 
with some interesting level design situations  
using these platforms that collapse when you stand 
on them, which actually are featured in the the  
Windswept Wastes. But back then it was just a very 
simple gameplay element, a very basic prototype.  
And it's like 'how can we use this in interesting 
ways?'. And so I did a bunch of sketches for how  
we could use these platforms. For example, I 
like this one where it's sort of multi-use,  
right? So first you have to jump on the platform, 
don't touch the ground, then jump over again,  
and then when it comes back on the other side 
you use it to then get up to somewhere higher.  
Or something like this where you have to force 
yourself to drop down, catch yourself after  
dropping, and then use a double jump to get out. 
And just playing with all kinds of different,  
like just on paper really. Like what would be 
interesting ways to use this gameplay element?
<i>MARK: I think my favourite take 
on it is up here where you have  </i>
<i>to intentionally break the platforms to 
guide this projectile across the room.</i>
CHRIS: That's also again one of those very… it's 
one of the earliest blockouts that I did for this.  
Because that's the kind of designer I am: I like 
to basically workshop. I take the elements that I  
have at my disposal and then I just create as 
many unique scenarios that I can. I think you  
actually made a video about it, about workshopping 
in Mario Maker. The way that you sort of create  
interesting situations, you take the elements 
and you try to make interesting combinations of  
different things and create unique situations 
that exploit all of their unique traits and  
properties and all that kind of stuff. And so I 
was like what would be an interesting way to flip  
the collapsing platform on its head? And, 
well, what about if you have to intentionally make  
all of them disappear without touching the ground, 
so that way you can escort a projectile across.
<i>MARK: So now in this room we 
get the area's main new ability:  </i>
<i>the burrow. Tell me how that came about.</i>
CHRIS: A lot of what's in the Windswept Wastes 
came as a result of wanting this burrow ability.  
It wasn't because we had a desert environment 
that we said we want to be able to burrow in sand,  
it was because we said 'what are some cool, unique 
moves that would complement Ori's already really  
robust moveset?' and burrow was something that… I 
think we saw a video from Sonic Colors where there  
was a cool ability. Some kind of weird little 
guy you collect that makes you dig in these  
big volumes and it was like 'hey, that could 
be a really interesting traversal method  
for a Metroidvania'. And so I just started with 
doing a couple sketches like this. So there's sand  
and you have to have to get up here. You can't wall 
jump because there's spikes there. How do you get  
up? Well, you have to dig through this wall and 
then you have to launch yourself out. And then  
I started, as I was looking at the situation, 
I added this kind of sand thing above here and  
I was like 'well, wouldn't it be cool if I could 
dash out upwards, based on my aiming trajectory,  
and then dash backwards into another sand zone'. 
And I have this feeling of control and it opens up  
for a more expert move and you can put a reward 
up here because it's not an easy thing to do.  
Or I even sketched out things like this, you 
see in the Windswept Wastes there are these  
little hanging balls of sand and you can basically 
dash through them from any side, any direction,  
and then it launches you straight through in a 
straight line. And so I sketched something like  
this as the initial concept for that. 
It worked out quite well in the game,  
it's one of my favourite uses of the burrow 
because it's so versatile and it gives such  
a feeling of control. And then so I just 
sketched out an idea like this where it's like  
'this would not be possible without this 
ability'. In this one it was sort of  
illustrating Ori's normal jump height here, he 
would jump straight into these spikes. But then  
what if I jump and dive into the sand and then 
dash out and now I can suddenly clear it because  
the dash jump is higher than normal. Then what I 
would do is I would actually just recreate these  
situations in the blockouts and then that's when 
we would take it to the programmers and say 'okay  
look, we have these environments, we want to be 
able to play them the way that they're illustrated  
in these schematics and everything else'. We 
got some animations from the the animation team.
And then we were basically at the first playable 
prototype of it. And that became very exciting  
because it was like up until that point it had 
just been something on a concept. It was just  
something that existed in our minds of like 
this is how I imagine this playing and then  
you actually get your hands on it and it feels, 
you know, pretty cool. But then obviously there's  
months and years of fine-tuning and tweaking 
the controls and everything else to make it feel  
just as cool as it does in the final game. You 
can see that it feels actually slower than the  
final game and what you're probably going to 
see as well is that the turning isn't as tight  
as it is in the final game. And the original 
intention was I wanted it to feel a bit  
tricky to control, that it felt like there was 
some, you know, friction in the sand and you're  
not as nimble as you always are and everything 
else. But the more we play tested it with the team  
the more we tightened it up because, 
ultimately, Ori controls are tight. Like,  
all round. And in the end I'm happy that we got 
there, right, it's just one of those things that  
when you're in the process you don't immediately 
see these things. At this point you can even see  
that I was using the collapsing platforms but 
I wasn't actually… they're not made of sand.
<i>MARK: When did you realise that 
they should be made of sand?</i>
CHRIS: That came quite… that came later because 
I created a scenario. I created a little level.  
You have these collapsing platforms above lasers 
and the idea would be that you have to gauge  
yourself as you land on them and you have to glide 
and you have to wait for the right opportunity to  
then drop through the laser. So it's a little bit 
of a fairly straightforward collapsing platform  
challenge, let's say. But then by the time I got 
to the bottom I was like 'oh that was cool, but  
that's a one-way thing' and for a Metroidvania, 
of all things, that's not acceptable. In a game  
like Rayman you could have a level design sequence 
that, basically, you touch a trigger, this whole  
thing collapses and explodes, and if you manage to 
survive: cool. You can keep going with the level.  
But you can't go backwards. But in a Metroidvania, 
if all of a sudden your path backwards is  
broken... now you're screwed. You need to always 
be able to backtrack, re-explore, re-traverse.  
And so then what I did was, I asked one of the 
programmers to basically take the sand and give  
them the sort of collapsing property so they could 
disappear and reappear. But then you could also  
dig through them. And so then that resulted in 
me basically being able to create the situation  
where now you can backtrack just by digging 
through these platforms. And all of a sudden it  
started to make sense: you know it was like 'wait 
a second', these things, you can do much more with  
them in the environment and level design and it 
really starts to open up the possibilities and  
the flow opportunities, and things like that, in 
a way that we didn't have before. I want to say,  
a little bit like, I'm a bit ashamed of how 
long it took to put two and two together that  
those things worked. But I'm not really because 
it was never the intention from the beginning,  
you know? We didn't make these collapsing 
platforms with this burrow in mind because  
that didn't exist at the time. But then as I was 
prototyping and playing it was just one of those  
things that naturally came out of the exploration 
and it just felt like a light bulb moment.
<i>MARK: So now we have the burrow, 
the player isn't explicitly told  </i>
<i>where to go next. So how do you 
trust that the player won't get lost?</i>
CHRIS: That was actually a tricky one. If you pay 
attention to the environment there's actually two  
ways to get back to the main path and a lot of 
players tend to go down this path that you just  
went through. But then there's actually another 
path that leads you to the golden path as well. We  
want the players to feel like they have options 
and that they are free to sort of explore and  
discover and see what's exciting and fun to to do 
with the burrow now that they have it. We kind of  
wanted that feeling of openness and discovery 
as opposed to it just being 'now get to the  
main path and get on with it' pretty much. But the 
bottom line is that all roads kind of lead to the  
same destination so that no matter what, you're 
going to eventually land on where you have to be.
<i>MARK: As the level is going along, the difficulty  </i>
<i>is slowly increasing. How do you maintain a 
good difficulty curve throughout the area?</i>
CHRIS: So as a designer you kind 
of have to gauge the difficulty of  
adding extra layers on top of certain mechanics. 
Like the burrow, for example. So having to aim  
and burrow through a ball like this is something 
that's far more complicated to understand and do  
and perform than it is to just simply stand on a 
sand floor, hold down, and then press the burrow  
button. And so it's about understanding the layers 
of complexity that are added on top each time you  
change up the the recipe or you change up the 
elements in a given situation, and then sort of  
gauging that, you know. Where should that best be 
placed, you know, what comes first. And there's  
also one thing you really don't want to do, is 
take the the learning for one specific element  
in isolation and kind of get it all over with in 
one row. Like you don't want to just say 'okay,  
here's all three or four difficulty escalations of 
one specific gameplay element and then completely  
move on to another one'. You kind of want 
to, you know, intersperse them and mix them  
around and everything else so that way it feels 
like there's variety throughout the experience.
<i>MARK: The whole area is absolutely packed  </i>
<i>with secrets to find. What's your 
process for hiding these things?</i>
CHRIS: We don't go for the crazy obscure 
secrets, I think there's… for example,  
this secret is a perfect example of how 
we tend to do it. Where what you'll see  
is that there's a little lip when you're out 
of the secret wall that guides your eye and  
tells you there might be something behind 
here. And it's the same for sort of broken,  
breakable walls. We kind of have these visuals 
that indicate that this wall is different from  
others without making it super obvious. 
Like here's a giant crack in it, you know,  
like a bombable wall in a Zelda. game. I'm 
personally not a fan of the hidden barrels in the  
old Donkey Kong games that are just like off the 
edge of the screen that you just can't even see…
<i>MARK: Where you just have to, like, kill yourself.</i>
CHRIS: Exactly. It's just basically you have 
to keep jumping off the bottom of the screen  
in random places and hope that you manage 
to to land in a barrel. The end of the day  
we want people to find secrets because we want 
them to feel smart. We want them to feel like  
they've accomplished something and so everybody 
should have the ability to find many of them.
<i>MARK: I really love this room with the giant 
laser beam. Tell me about how you made this.</i>
CHRIS: This was one of the oldest ones. 
It was there in that very first demo that  
we sent to Microsoft. It was one of the early 
things that I prototyped because it felt like,  
well, this is a crazy thing like having to kind 
of dig through this environment while avoiding  
a giant laser and stuff. It's also one of those 
ones that went through quite a bit of iteration  
and back and forth from the team because it wasn't 
super easy, especially the first version that we  
did. But I pushed pretty hard to keep it around 
because I kind of believed in it as this kind of  
ramp up for the one of the final challenges 
of the burrow. And it felt very memorable.
<i>MARK: So as we come towards the end 
of the stage, I wanted to ask about  </i>
<i>progression. In act two of Will of the Wisps you 
can visit four areas at the same time, including  </i>
<i>this one. What sort of considerations did you have 
to make to let the player choose their own path?</i>
CHRIS: Yeah, there were a lot of 
considerations and it wasn't easy.  
From the get-go of the sequel the team decided 
this one is going to have a more open structure  
than the first one but then the question arose, 
well, how do you maintain the balance of the game?
<i>MARK: Yeah, the big one I assume is that the 
player may or may not have certain abilities  </i>
<i>when they get here. I guess that could lead 
to them sequence breaking bits of the game?</i>
CHRIS: The thing that you literally did with the 
sand worm there is a perfect example of just that  
where, yes if you do have the light burst - which 
you do - you can actually just throw the light  
burst and you don't have to deal with the the sand 
worms. But to be totally fair I think you're just  
in this mindset of, like, I'm doing burrowing, 
I'm digging around and everything else, so you  
just naturally explore and find the solution to 
it. But we're also firm believers in the ability  
of the player to take the tools that they're given 
throughout the game and solve the issue the way  
that they feel is the most interesting or natural 
way to do it. As long as that doesn't feel like  
boring or that it kind of undermines the entire 
situation. But honestly, throwing a grenade,  
catching it in the air with bash, and then 
dashing through a sandball… it's not exactly  
the most trivial thing in the world either. It's 
still a decent challenge, it's just not exactly  
the way that it was designed. But that's the price 
you pay for a little bit of freedom and options.
<i>MARK: And what about the difficulty of 
the enemies and challenges, which is  </i>
<i>gonna feel different depending 
on where the player goes first?</i>
CHRIS: In some games it's nice that you 
go to an area you see strong enemies or  
difficult challenges and you go, 'I'm probably 
not ready for this yet, I should come back later'.  
But we didn't want to force people to take 
one path over another, in even a soft way.  
We really wanted it to be, if you choose to go 
to the Luma Pools first you should be able to  
complete Luma Pools at that point of the game. 
And interestingly enough the Windswept Wastes,  
it was kind of an outlier from the rest of those 
areas because it is the last area you have to do  
to be able to progress the story forward. But 
we decided to not block it off and say 'no no,  
you can't even enter the Windswept Wastes until 
you've done all these things'. We wanted to  
still give you a chance to discover this cool 
desert environment and get this new cool ability  
quite early, but there had to be something at a 
certain point in the progression that told you  
you can't go forward anymore. You need 
to go off and explore the other areas.
<i>MARK: Were you worried that it might 
be a bit anticlimactic if you got  </i>
<i>all the way to the end of this 
area only to find a dead end?</i>
CHRIS: Yeah, yeah, definitely. And, I mean, it 
did come up when we were playtesting and we tried  
our best to really make sure that it didn't feel 
as anticlimactic as possible. We put fast travel  
spirit wells as close to the entrance of that 
temple as possible so that you can always fast travel  
right back without having to redo the entire area 
all over again. And so right now you might feel a  
little bit like 'ah, what did I come here for?'. 
But at least you leave with a cool new ability,  
having gained some experience, levelled things up, 
found some shards and buffs, and things like that.  
And also you have a fast travel zone 
where you can easily come back later. So  
in the end it was again one of those 
trade-offs that we decided to make  
but it definitely didn't break the experience 
from what we observed and how we felt.
<i>MARK: So the final part here is very different to 
the ends of the other areas in the game, right?</i>
CHRIS: Exactly. The Windtorn Ruins originally was 
a dungeon. We were gonna explore new mechanics,  
get a new ability: which was the drill, which 
actually would let you kind of burrow through  
really thick rock blockers. Which ultimately got 
cut because it wasn't admittedly the most amazing,  
versatile skill. We wanted every ability to feel 
like it really changed the way that you play,  
not just gave you a key to open a door or 
something like that. But, yeah, so it was  
originally meant to be a dungeon but then when 
it came down to production concerns we made the  
decision that it just wasn't necessary and we 
decided that we would turn it into this linear  
storytelling moment. And it actually turned out to 
be perfect for pacing because you've already done  
all these intense platforming challenges with 
the burrow leading up to this and you're about  
to go into one of the hardest challenges in the 
entire game, and it's just been really important  
for the pacing of the overall experience 
to sort of break it up every now and then.
<i>MARK: Let's talk about these escape 
sequences. How do you design them so  </i>
<i>they're hard enough to be a challenge, 
but not so hard as to be tedious?</i>
CHRIS: It's funny because if somebody doesn't 
escape on their first try in the team,  
it's always 'it's too easy, I did it 
on my first try'. So everyone kind of  
acknowledges the fact that an escape needs to be 
something where you at least die once or twice.  
But nobody wants to die five times or ten times 
in an escape because then it starts to get really  
frustrating and it feels like trial and error. 
So there has to be a lot in an escape that feels  
intuitive and natural that you see it on screen 
and you know immediately how to to overcome the  
challenge. Let's say like 60, 80 percent of the 
escape has to kind of flow naturally while being  
challenging but then there can be like 20 percent 
where there's a couple curveballs thrown in there  
that catch you off guard or surprise you. It 
still has to be react-able, it shouldn't be that  
you touch a random trigger and a thing falls on 
your head and you die because that's just not fun.  
It has to feel like I had the time to predict 
this thing I had the time to read the situation  
I just sort of failed to do so 
and I can do better next time.
<i>MARK: So, last question. Were there any sequences or 
mechanics that didn't make it into the final game,  </i>
<i>other than the drill?</i>
CHRIS: Well when we're building these things we 
have kind of like a surplus of ideas of things  
like… what about these like this big physical 
block? And you actually have to burrow left  
and right underneath it to kind of tunnel out the 
ground so it can fall down, and everything else,  
and open a path. Obviously you can imagine the 
programmers weren't too thrilled about that kind  
of idea, so it didn't make it in. We had an idea 
for like sort of a big mama worm that that would  
kind of leave an acid trail or something. 
One day I thought, well what if I have a  
platform like a sand platform that's so thin that 
you can't actually dig and so what would happen  
is you would burrow into it and immediately be 
bounced out. And it ended up becoming a kind of  
trampoline platform. It's like in some of these 
environments, it feels like we had enough ideas  
to almost do its own little sub game around a 
certain mechanic or concept or whatever. But then  
it's just the process is finding what works best 
what's the easiest for players to appreciate and  
understand and what's like a novel idea but not 
necessarily gonna make the game so much better.
<i>MARK: That's brilliant. Thanks 
very much for doing this Chris.</i>
CHRIS: Well thanks for having me, I appreciate it. 
It's just nice to look back at all these materials  
and remember like all of these cool moments and 
the process and how we got there and everything.
MARK NARRATION: And so there we have it. I thought it was amazing  
how we saw the burrow mechanic go from 
inspiration, to sketches, to prototype,  
to the final in-game ability. My thanks 
to Chris for his time and transparency.
This was, of course, just a pinch of 
the full interview - so if you want  
to see the entire thing (and support the show)  
the full version is now available to 
everyone who supports GMTK over on Patreon.
Speaking of supporting the show - if you like what 
you just saw and want to show your appreciation,  
please check out this quick YouTube ad break.  
Stick around afterwards for 
an indie game recommendation.
Okay, my recommendation this time is a game called 
Dorfromantik. It's a cross between a city builder,  
a tile-based board game, and a puzzler. You've 
got to plop down tiles featuring forests,  
lakes, towns and more - and you'll need 
to think carefully in order to solve mini  
quests and objectives. It's very clever, 
it's super relaxing, and it strips down  
city builders to their DNA. Dorfromantik 
is in early access now, over on Steam.
