Video games are for everyone, and they can
even be enjoyed by those who live with disabilities
if game developers make certain design decisions,
or introduce certain options. In this series
of videos, I’m looking at how to implement
some of the most popular and easy options
to make games better for those with auditory,
visual, motor, or cognitive disabilities.
In this second episode of the show, I’m looking at 
options for those living with visual impairments such
as colourblindness, and low vision.
Part 1 - Colourblindness
In Cuphead, it’s easy to tell the difference
between these pink punches (which you can
parry), and the blue ones, (which you can’t).
Unless, the game looked liked this.
And when hacking cameras and whatnot in Bioshock
2, you shouldn’t have a problem differentiating
between green cells, which give you access,
and red cells, which trigger an alarm. Unless,
the game looked like this.
This is what playing games can be like for
those who have colour vision deficiency - more
commonly known as being colourblind. That’s
when one or more of the receptors in your
eyes is defective, which can reduce your ability
to see a particular chunk of the colour spectrum
and make it difficult to tell the difference
between some hues.
There are three major types of colour blindness:
Deuteranopia, which effects the perception
of green tones, is the most common form. Protanopia
is less common, and affects red tones.
In practice, these two forms of colourblindness
look quite similar, and are sometimes referred
to together as red-green colourblindness.
And then there’s tritanopia which is very
rare, and affects your ability to see yellow
and, to a lesser extent, blue.
We use the suffix “anopia” when the cone
is completely missing, and the suffix “anomaly”
when the cone is defective. There’s also
the ultra rare achromatopsia, where you literally
see the world in black and white. And colour
vision deficiency can result from physical
or neurological damage, which can lead to
very unique effects.
Colourblindness affects approximately 1 in
12 men, and 1 in 200 women.
Developers can check to see if their games
are readable by those who are colourblind
by checking with colourblind gamers, or using
free filter tools to simulate what their game
might look like to people with the three major
vision deficiencies.
A tool like Color Oracle allows you to see
static images in a simulated colourblind mode,
while the program Sim Daltonism can show you
the world through colourblind eyes, in real
time. There are also filters for game engines
like Unreal Engine, which is available by
default, and Unity, which I’ll link to in
the description.
Then, once the filters are applied, developers
should see if critical information like HUD
elements, alerts, enemy differences, crosshairs,
explosive barrels, loot rarity, damage indicators,
or waypoints are lost or difficult to distinguish.
And so, if you’ve run the filter and realised
that colourblind gamers won’t be able to
see their red laser sight against different
backgrounds, or tell the difference between
the red team and the green team, or pick out
the gold loot from the green loop, what do
you do?
The best solution is to design around this
issue, and simply avoid relying on colour
alone when communicating information, or 
distinguishing between two different things.
Designers should try to use shapes, symbols, shading, animation, and other visual tricks to make critical parts
of the game stand out from one another.
Take, for example, Recore: a shooter with
colour-coded enemies and weapons, where you’ll
need to use red bullets on red enemies - and
so on. Developer Armature Studio wisely decided
to not just use colours, but also put high
contrast white arrows on the enemy’s health
bar - left for blue, up for yellow, and right
for red - which corresponds to the d-pad direction
you must press to change to the same-coloured
bullets.
If you don’t want to make these symbols
appear for everyone, you can have them as
part of an optional colourblind mode. A great
example of this is the charming colour-swapping
puzzler Hue, where a colourblind mode applies
symbols to the different colours to make them
visually distinct from one another.
And in Chromagun, which has to deal with lots
of colours and colour combinations, a really
clever symbol system is used. So there’s
a unique symbol for the base colours - a vertical
line for yellow, a horizontal line for blue,
and a circle for red. And then these symbols
can combine to make the mixtures of orange,
purple, and green - and a final one for black.
That means you can play the game fully, no
matter what colours you can and can’t see.
Where it’s not possible to design around
this issue, the next best step is to allow
players to customise the colours they see
on screen.
The gold standard is Battlefield 1. Here,
the squad and enemy colours - that pesky red
and green again - are hard to distinguish
for players with deuteranopia. And the squad
and team colours - green and blue - merge
together for those with tritanopia. So DICE
provides a colourblind option that lets you
swap those four colours for a palette that
will be more distinguishable for those with
different forms of CVD.
Bonus points for showing the change on the
options screen itself, and mega bonus points
for letting players simply pick four colours
of their own choosing from a Photoshop-like
colour picker.
Slightly more simple, one-size-fits-all options
can be found in Far Cry 5, which changes red
elements to yellow. And in the Call of Duty
games, where a colourblind option swaps the
classic green and red labels, for team members
and enemies, to blue and yellow ones.
Here’s another good example, from the puzzle
game The Spectrum Retreat, which has four
different coloured blocks to play with. In
this game, a colour vision mode has a different
colour palette for deuteranopia or protanopia,
another for tritanopia, and a black and white
one that will work with achromatopsia and other
rare vision deficiencies,
If you’re looking for a good colour palette
for a colourblind mode, use blue and orange
as your primary colours when contrasting key
elements - these will stick out from one another
for gamers with all three major types of CVD.
Beyond that, very light and dark colours will
also show up, as those with colourblindness
can still see differences in brightness, provided
the difference is strong enough. And, of course,
black and white are visible to everyone.
Now, some developers seem to think that the
best solution is to provide a filter that
will try to recolour the entire screen. But
this is tricky to get right, and rarely the
best approach. Overwatch, for example, has
these filters that completely recolour the
game and while some players do appreciate
these filters - for many, they don’t really
help, and just end up making the game look
utterly bonkers.
These settings
shouldn’t mean you experience colours in
games differently than you perceive them naturally
in the real world. Instead, they should simply
help players to clearly see vital bits of
information.
At least its better than Doom, which somehow
managed to include a filter that actually
simulates the effects of being colourblind,
rather than help them. Chuck on deutronopia
mode, for example, and it just… shows you
what the game would look like if you had that
form of colourblindness. How this ended up
in the final game is beyond me.
And finally, for games where colour combinations
keep changing - like the ultra colourful Splatoon
- it’s good to offer an option that will
lock team colours to something universally
distinguishable - in this case light orange
and dark blue - so players will never come
across a colour combination they can’t see.
This doesn’t affect all players, as the
colours are only locked on the console of
the player who chose the option.
Part Two - Low Vision
When God of War came out on PS4 this year,
many players struggled to enjoy the game for
one, significant reason: the text size was
tiny. Anyone with low vision - or just those
who are trying to play the game on a smaller
TV - would struggle to read the game’s subtitles
and menus.
Thankfully, Sony Santa Monica updated the
game, and included a slider that lets you
change the text size. It’s still pretty
small, but it’s something.
And it's a good reminder that games can do better
to help players see critical information.
Because there are a huge range of conditions
that can reduce your your field of vision,
meaning how much you can see, and acuity,
meaning how clearly you can see it. But designers
can work to help those players with design
considerations that generally come down to
two core things: size and contrast.
So, devs should make text, user interface
elements, button prompts and alerts big and
easy to read. As a rough guide for console
games, you should not drop below 28 pixel
fonts on any UI text, and nothing below 46
pixels for subtitles. Plus, developers should
try to make them contrast against different
backgrounds by using dark shadows or outlines.
Don’t fall into the trap of only ever testing
your game from a computer on your desk - see
what it looks like on a TV on the other side
of the room.
If you don’t want to do it by default, then
at least consider adding in an option. In
Monster Hunter World, there’s an option
that will boost the size of text on the interface
and tutorial. In Borderlands The Presequel,
you can boost the size of the whole user interface
to make things like your health and ammo easier
to see. And in Assassin’s Creed Origins,
there’s an option to add a black box behind
the subtitle text to make it easier to see
them against the game.
One more thing to consider is the use of clear,
easy-to-read fonts. Sci-fi screen text or
gothic letterpress or handwritten scribbles
might fit the game world, but they can be
a nightmare to read with low vision, or from
a distance. You don’t need to take the personality
out of your game, though: simply give players
the ability to read the on-screen text in
a standard, sans serif font - like in The
Awesome Adventures of Captain Spirit.
Another option that benefits players with
low vision, is some form of high contrast
mode that makes critical parts of the game
better stand out against the background. Take
Street Fighter IV, where the animated backgrounds
might be beautiful and atmospheric - but they
can also make it hard to see the actual fighters.
A graphical option replaces these backgrounds
with a simple black room, making Ryu and chums
easily visible to all.
Meanwhile, an indie shmup, Shoot 1UP, lets
you choose the opacity of the background layer.
Drop it down to low, and the unimportant backdrop
gets darker - causing enemy ships and bullets
to stick out like a sore thumb. For some games
this can be a really easy option to implement,
because it’s just a black rectangle between
foreground and background.
It’s also important for a game to have a
really vivid soundscape, so that critical
information can be picked up by those with
low vision. It’s easy to know that you’ve
killed a Combine soldier in Half Life 2, for
example, because they play a loud flatlining
sound when they die.
In fact, some games can even be played by
gamers who are completely blind, if the soundscape
is detailed and covers all important information.
Fighting games are a good example of this.
Their simple environment, combined with great
sound design, mean they’re often accessible
by default. But some extra considerations
are needed.
For example, NetherRealms’s fighting games
Injustice and Mortal Kombat X have interactable
stage elements, and - at the launch of Injustice
- the only way to know that you can use them
is to look out for a white visual cue.
But after receiving feedback from blind players,
the devs added an accessibility option that
plays a pulsing sound effect if a player is
near one of these interactables. The sound
plays in the left ear of your headphones if
you’re stood in front of it, or in the right
ear if your opponent is. Now, blind gamers
can even compete in tournaments.
Another blind gamer, SightlessKombat, asked the devs of Killer Instinct to add audio cues
to correspond with HUD elements like the knockdown
value meter and the shadow meter - so he knows
when combos are about to drop, and when special
attacks are ready for use. Those sounds are
now in the game, and there’s a menu option
that lets you change the volume of those sounds.
Because, like in the audio episode, games should
let you change the volume of different audio
sources so players can dip or mute the music
to better focus on critical sound effects.
You can also support screenreaders, which
are external pieces of software that can read
out text from a game. The fighting game Skullgirls,
for example, is configured to work with screenreaders,
and it will read out menu text to low sighted
players. This would make lots of sense for
interface-driven games like Hearthstone, or
text-heavy games like visual novels that don’t
have voice acting. I’ve put some links in
the description to some handy resources, if
you want to consider this option.
Ultimately, video games are a massively visual
medium - which means disabilities that affect
your vision will undoubtedly affect your ability
to play. But smart design choices and handy
options will make most games way more accessible
to those who are colourblind, or live with
low vision.
Just remember: don’t rely on colour alone,
focus on size and contrast, and invest in
good audio. Beyond that, make sure you test
your games for this stuff - either by working
with players with disabilities, or simply
playing your game on a TV that’s across
the room, or by using colourblind filters.
Do that and not only will your game be more
accessible - but also help out players who
are playing on a smaller screen, or squinting
to see their TV in a sunny room, or playing
on a phone in battery saving mode, and so
on. As with all accessibility measures, pretty
much everyone will benefit from a little extra
work.
Thanks for watching! Huge thanks this week
to accessibility specialist Ian Hamilton,
of the Game Accessibility Guidelines, who
provided loads of help. Plus, a team of colourblind
gamers on Twitter who shared their experiences
with me.
Future episodes will cover motor disabilities,
as well as cognitive disabilities like simulation
sickness, epilepsy, and dyslexia. GMTK and
Designing for Disability are powered by Patreon.
