Earlier this month we held the 9th 
annual GMTK Game Jam which is… well,  
you know the drill by now.
It’s a game-making marathon where people 
race to make a game in just four days,  
and that game must fit within a specific theme.
As always, we saw even more people enter the jam  
than last year, with more than 37,000 
participants making over 9,600 games.
Which means that it’s still the 
biggest jam in itch.io history.
And boy, do their servers feel it.
So, what was this year’s theme? 
Well, it was a single word: loop.
And so we saw thousands of games about 
programming loops, about musical loops,  
about running loops around people, 
about loops in time and in space.
The way you all managed to take this theme 
and spit out so many distinctly clever,  
imaginative, and fun games… 
well, it’s absolutely inspiring.
And now it’s time for me to pick 
my 20 favourite games from the jam…
Pause the video right there.
Normally this is where I’d say I’m 
choosing the “best” games from the jam,  
or even the “winners” of the jam.
But the truth is… as GMTK Game Jam grows bigger 
and bigger, I don’t think it makes sense  
for the whole thing to come down to a single 
judge who really likes puzzle platformers.
Especially when I’ve only played 
like 1% of the total entries.
So, from now on, I’ll let the community pick the 
winners through rating and ranking the games.
You can see those over on itch.io.
But I’ll simply choose some personal favourites.
That cool? Cool.
Back to the video.
Let’s start with Rhythmetric.
This is a game about a circle who 
fights rather more pointy shapes,  
using laser beams, dodges, and shields.
But it’s up to you when those moves are triggered.
You see, there’s a track on 
the right side of the screen,  
and here you can plop down 
moves at different points.
Then, when the looping indicator scrolls across 
the track, it will play each move on the beat.
This turns your fighting style 
into a personalised anthem.
Attack, attack, attack, 
shield… dodge, dodge, dodge.
You know, simply by feel, when it’s time to 
aim at the enemies and unleash a barrage,  
and when it’s time to swing the mouse 
in the opposite direction to dodge away.
It turns the player into a deadly DJ, 
mixing between fighting and composing.
And then, as you pick up more beats and add to 
the track, the game naturally gets more complex.
It’s addictive, smart, and puts 
you into a dizzying zen-like state.
The next game, Voodloop, has 
a somewhat similar premise.
This time, though, it’s a 2D platformer 
and we can assign moves like jump, kick,  
and dash - which will then trigger on the beat.
So you’ll need to build the right 
loop to do double jumps over pits,  
or to fight simple enemies.
What I really like about the game, though, is 
that each level is like a miniature Metroidvania.
You must hunt for new moves to lay down on the 
track - which then lets you access new areas,  
in order to find new moves - so you can 
reach the exit and do it all over again.
Also, by changing the style and 
tempo of each level’s soundtrack,  
the game takes on a very different 
feel from stage to stage.
Super smart stuff, with a rather 
dashing, chunky pixel art visual style.
With a theme like loop, we were bound to see a few  
entries inspired by the ultimate 
time loop game, Outer Wilds.
But my favourite of the bunch is Night 
O’Clock - a quick-fire murder mystery  
where you have just one minute to 
scour a mansion, collect clues,  
and gather knowledge… before time’s 
up and you have to start again.
A clever twist on the formula is that you keep 
hold of any item you’ve got when time runs out, so  
you have to think carefully about, say, which key 
you want in your hand before restarting the loop.
Night O’Clock is absurdly polished 
for a game made in four days,  
and it kept me rapt for the entire run time.
An easy recommendation among a sea of games 
about repeating the same day over and over.
Now, game ideas can come from the weirdest places.
Like, what about that shower thought of… 
if you plug a power strip into itself,  
wouldn’t that give you an infinite energy 
source? Forget conservation of energy and other  
boring realities - in this game, you can cheat 
physics and unlock an eternal electrical source.
But it’s more than a meme - this is actually 
a very clever, mind-bending puzzle game.
You need to understand a simple set of rules - 
about where power comes from and where it goes.
Deal with restrictions like the 
short length of your cables.
And think outside the box as you make temporary  
connections and purposefully undo 
your actions to make everything work.
It made my brain hurt… but 
like, in a nice fuzzy way.
Talk about thinking outside of the box.
When developer SI Interactive 
heard the theme loop, they  
thought about the looping lasso tool in Photoshop.
And so we get a game about 
being a freelance photo editor.
Each day you get a request in your inbox.
Can you take this photo of me 
and add hair? Can you block out  
my ex? Can you add friends to my birthday party?
You can then use the loop 
to select stickers, people,  
and cartoon characters to place into the photo.
Send it back and hope the client is happy.
There’s even a hint of detective work in here,  
as your clients ask you to figure 
out relationships from their email.
It’s only a sprinkle - but you could 
see this being expanded into a clever  
deduction game where you provide your 
answer through doctored digital images.
But as for the game that’s 
actually here - it’s cute,  
clever, and as someone who spends 
their life selecting crap in Photoshop,  
it was nice to play a game where my 
pointless life skills are finally validated.
Circuit Breaker starts out as a 
pretty simple puzzle platformer.
Walk, jump, manipulate machines, 
plop batteries into sockets.
But when you finally make it 
to the far end of the room,  
you realise you can loop back around to 
the start and do the whole thing again.
Or, you can walk back on yourself and play the 
level in reverse - all while making changes to  
the level that may help or hinder your progress 
depending on which direction you’re going.
It turns a single level into a 
galaxy-brained spatial reasoning puzzle.
I want to reach this spot but it’s 
impossible from where I’m standing.
But if I loop all the way around the other side,  
I can make my way up! It reminds me of those 
puzzle box Zelda dungeons I love so much.
It scratches a very specific 
itch, and that’s why I dig it.
Walk It! takes Crypt of the Necrodancer 
- that excellent roguelike where you have  
to move on the beat of the music - and turns 
it into a series of single-screen vignettes.
You play as a dancing dude 
who cuts shapes from pavement  
slab to pavement slab, while dodging 
dogs, pushchairs, and Pilates posers.
You have to move to the beat.
You have to start on the first beat.
And you have to reach the goal on the last beat.
It should be effortless.
And maybe it is if you have any sense of rhythm.
But I do not - so it turned each 
one of these short levels into an  
epic showdown where I had to learn 
the beat, internalise the music,  
and feel the rhythm before I could 
finally dance my way to victory.
Great animations, great art style, 
make 100 levels and put it on Steam.
I’m always impressed by people’s ability to make a  
Zachlike - a game inspired by SpaceChem 
and Opus Magnum - during a 4-day jam.
It shouldn’t be possible! And yet, here we are.
This is Cooking by the Numbers, a game 
where you build an engine to turn one  
number into another, using nodes that 
can add, minus, divide, and multiply.
But most importantly, there 
are the conditional nodes:  
do one thing if the number is greater 
than 15, and another if it’s less.
With these, we can - going back to the theme - 
make loops where the same sum is performed over  
and over until the condition is met, and then a 
different path is taken through the flow chart.
You’re constantly thinking about how to 
use loops to get the result you want.
And - if you didn’t realise it by now - you’re 
also learning the basics of programming,  
as you figure out the inner workings 
of if statements and while loops.
You clever clogs, you.
Okay, this game - Caw Across 
Time - needs a bit of set-up.
You get a phone call - it’s you from the future.
Future you delivers a key that helps 
present you get through a door.
Handy! But now the space-time continuum 
is all goofy, so you’ve gotta fix it.
But aha - you’re now future you.
And you can deliver the key to present you.
Who is now past you.
Thus finishing the time loop, fixing 
that nasty rift in the timeline,  
and letting you move on to the next level.
Did that make sense? Does 
your brain hurt? Whatever.
Keep up.
Because this game is really clever.
A whole sequence of single-screen conundrums where 
you have to not only make it through the level,  
but also tidy up the timeline by putting back any 
time-travelling keys and blocks you end up using.
It’s an absolute belter of a game - 
and it’s utterly frustrating to play  
a puzzle platformer made in 4 days that’s 
better than the one I made in 4 years.
Burn this jam to the ground.
Nokia classic Snake got some 
love in this loop-themed jam.
But my absolute favourite take 
on the idea came from Goop Snake.
It’s a Sokoban-style grid puzzler that works on  
the basic rules of Snake - 
eat apples to grow in size.
Your lengthy body mimics the 
exact movements of your head.
But then it adds loads more ideas.
Eating soft apples lets you shift past your own 
stomach, but hard apples block your head entirely.
You can spit out apples to shrink 
back down, or hold down buttons.
Stuff like that.
With each of these additions to the rule set, 
Goop Snake can create some truly clever levels,  
with those all-important “a-ha” moments.
Alright, let’s look at 
Curse of the Amethyst Skull.
This is a dungeon-crawling puzzle game,  
where each time you die - you have to 
start the whole thing from scratch.
But you can at least keep your items, your notes,  
your knowledge, and most fun of all, 
your hand-drawn map of the environment.
Maybe I’m just a massive frickin’ nerd, but I 
really enjoyed charting out the contours and  
contents of this underground world - making 
notes of traps and treasure and dead ends.
I think I hit a bug where 
my map didn’t show properly,  
because I think I should have been able to 
see my current position on the map screen.
But I guess I just played on hard mode,  
because I had to draw things out 
without knowing where the hell I am.
Another nice touch - you can light lanterns 
to know where you’ve been on previous runs.
And when you come back as a new adventurer, 
you have a new, randomly generated name.
No idea how Frances Grumblejack got 
access to Roswell Chapman’s notebook,  
but we’ve seen stranger things in this jam.
Here’s another common take on the theme:  
looping around from one side of the 
screen to the other, like in Pac-Man.
Mobia’s Trip uses it as the main mechanic 
in a cute platformer - hold a key to lock  
the camera in place, and then you can 
waltz off to the left of this frame  
to appear on the right - which lets you 
bypass a big ol’ wall and be on your way.
This kicks off a number of clever scenarios where 
you’re manipulating the position of the frame,  
perhaps shifting the frame up with each jump 
so it’s high enough to reach a platform.
Another mechanic comes from looping through 
the loop multiple times to build up speed,  
before using that excess energy 
to crash through the floor.
How’s this for a unique spin on the 
card battler? Like a Record puts  
your moves on a spinning disc - playing 
each card as the record shifts position.
Only - your opponent is doing the same thing.
So you’ll need to be smart about 
how the two discs will line up.
Things get even more strategic when you add in  
cards that can change the direction 
of your disc - or your opponent’s.
I’ll be honest, this was too 
much for my pigeon-sized mind,  
but even this simpleton can see the potential 
of putting Hearthstone on a turntable.
Here’s a clever one - Side Effects.
It’s a puzzle game on a Rubik’s Cube.
You’re presented with a starting point.
Perhaps some seeds.
And a goal.
Say... a forest.
By rotating the cube, you move the seeds 
into different zones - the water zone  
turns the seeds into saplings, and the 
sun zone turns the saplings into trees.
Done, smashing.
But just like solving a real Rubik’s 
Cube, things get complicated fast.
Sometimes you’ll need to manipulate 
things so two elements perfectly line up.
Other times you’ll realise that one 
turn will solve one part of the puzzle,  
but utterly ruin another part.
It becomes a sticky strategy game 
of thinking several moves ahead  
to get everything to the goal simultaneously.
Maddening, but good.
Next up: Killover.
A super-stylish game where you 
hunt down and kill a target.
Then you do it again - only you also have 
to kill yourself from the previous loop.
Then do it again and again and again,  
and now you’ve got to murder an 
entire army of yous from past loops.
Every time you advance, the game 
naturally gets harder and more chaotic.
You’ve got to defeat more targets 
in the same short timeframe.
And you have to dodge the bullets 
of all your previous selves.
It becomes a manic warzone of your 
own creation as you dance through  
a hailstorm of bullets for which, to be 
honest, you only have yourself to blame.
Quick shout-out to the clever animation style.
Snapping between distinct poses makes things very 
economical for a hurried game jam participant.
But it also means that every time 
the game freeze-frames on the last  
kill of the round… it looks utterly badass.
Everyone’s going to be jacking 
this style soon, I can feel it.
Okay, this is Draftula - which 
deserves a nod for its name alone.
On each loop, you draft a new mansion for Dracula 
by plonking down rooms on this Tetris-style board.
Each room has benefits and drawbacks - and must be 
placed strategically to get the most out of them.
For instance, one room adds more coins every 
time you draft another room on the same row.
Another room blocks you from 
drafting anything directly above it.
Once you run out of money, a valiant knight 
knocks on the door, knocks down your gaff,  
and you have to start the whole thing again.
But there’s also a meta-level mystery to solve,  
as you must draft specific rooms next to 
each other to unlock more stuff - like  
putting two sigils next to each other 
to unlock infinitely high buildings.
There’s a, ahem, lot of room to build on top 
of this idea, if the developer fancies it.
Okay, next up is Songrunner.
This is a series of single-screen platforming 
stages where you build the level yourself.
How? By playing notes - triggered through  
the keys 1 through 8 - when the 
timeline sweeps through the stage.
So it’s like Lumines, but as a platformer.
And that’s pretty neat.
Best of all, your stage-making shenanigans 
create a unique track as you play.
And when you finish the stage, all the other 
instruments kick in to turn your level layout  
into a song - which sounds surprisingly good for 
a track made up of awkwardly placed platforms.
This one is simple but smart 
- just the way I like ’em.
While 1 couldn’t be much more basic.
Use your mouse to draw a loop 
around the entire screen.
And yeah, it’s so straightforward that  
you can look at the screen and 
intuit what to do in seconds.
But that’s an impressive feat.
Also impressive: how the developer used 
music, visual effects, and a singular  
sense of style to make something so basic 
into something thrilling and dangerous.
An easy recommendation.
Another interesting take on the theme: 
how repeating the same level over and  
over again allows you to gain 
mastery and new understanding.
That’s clearly shown in Loophole Pie.
The premise is simple: a little boy wants to sneak  
into his neighbour’s garden 
and pinch a cooling pie. Easy.
Only once you do that, the loop repeats with a new  
rule that blocks you from doing 
what you did in the last go.
So: no more gate.
Maybe sneak across the grass.
Okay, next time - no gate, no grass.
Then: no gate, no grass, no crates, no 
remote-controlled lawnmower, no rocks.
It turns the game into a sort of mix of 
Untitled Goose Game and Hitman, as you must  
use your mastery of this simple level to find 
more and more outlandish ways to reach the pie.
It’s a great game design lesson: the 
more restrictions you put on the player,  
the more devious they must become.
And then finally - there were a lot of games in  
the jam about drawing loops 
around enemies to kill them.
That became a common refrain.
But no one did it better than 
the developers behind Bootloop.
This is a rapid-fire knockabout arcade gem about  
ensnaring computer viruses 
in a deadly electrical trap.
Here’s how it works: walk 
into a peg to start a loop.
Then walk into another to make it bigger.
Then hit Z to close the circuit and 
make a zapping zone in the middle.
Simple enough, but things escalate.
For one, every peg you use must cool down,  
so using too many at once will leave 
you vulnerable after you attack.
New enemy types appear, including a nasty scissor  
enemy that can cut your wire before you 
have a chance to complete the circuit.
And then, between rounds, we get the 
classic three-upgrade screen as we  
must choose whether to boost health, the 
circuit, or last-ditch bombs.
It’s got fantastic pixel art and music, but 
this thing is not all style, no substance.
It’s also just a really sharp time sink that I 
could see myself going back to again and again.
Bravo, Team Booti.
And so there we have it!
By thinking about a game being on a loop, we 
got games about building knowledge and mastery,  
about considering your past actions, about feeling 
the beat, and about manipulating space and time.
And now it’s, ahem, time for 
some honourable mentions!
Ninja Step has you programming the 
looping choreography of your player  
character to get through baddies and obstacles.
Bend-Jo has you bending the entire 
playspace to solve mind-melting puzzles.
Love Letters has you circling letters to get  
your jumbled words out to a 
lady who has you tongue-tied.
And Loop / Death has you looping back to 
the starting point to solve tricky conundrums.
I could go on - did I mention there 
were over 9,000 games submitted?
As always, I want to give a humongous thank you 
to everyone who took the time to make a game.
There’s something amazing about 
a bunch of people coming together  
to make something just for the thrill of it.
To be part of a community, to impress 
their friends, to better their skills,  
or for the sheer joy of making games. And 
all by hand - no AI slop in sight.
It’s absolutely inspirational.
Thanks also to my fabulous mod 
team who make the jam run smoothly,  
the staff at itch who are always on hand to help,  
and my patrons who pay for the jam and mean we 
never need to bother with corporate sponsors.
GMTK Game Jam will be back in 2026 for its 
10th birthday! 10! How time flies! You can  
register your interest now by following 
the link in the description down below.
Thanks, see you soon.
