Hi I’m Mark Brown, and this is Game Maker’s
Toolkit.
Platforming heroes often have a signature
move.
A single action that defines their character,
and is used for much of the gameplay.
I’m talking about stuff like Mario’s hat
throw in Odyssey, Madeline’s dash move in
Celeste, flipping gravity in VVVVVV, and the
spin in Crash Bandicoot.
But one developer has had to work harder than
almost anyone else to create amazing signature
moves, and that’s Shovel Knight maker Yacht
Club games.
Since 2014, it has updated the game with three
new characters and each one has a unique,
well-developed, and imaginative move at the
heart of their mobility design - from Plague
Knight’s explosive leap to King Knight’s
bash and spin combo.
I wanted to find out how these moves came
to be, so I called up the game’s designer
and director Sean Velasco, and its lead programmer
David D’Angelo, to find out how they made
each character’s special move.
Starting, of course, with Shovel Knight.
So Shovel Knight himself has the shovel drop.
Hit down whenever you’re in mid-air and
you’ll swing your shovel downwards - ready
to crush anything below you.
Which, in turn, will send Shovel Knight into
a big springy bounce.
It was based on one of Sean’s favourite
moves from the NES era: the downward thrust
in Zelda 2.
In that game it’s an under-used and under-developed
attack, so the team at Yacht Club decided
to borrow it and build an entire game around
it.
With a bit of extra inspiration from the pogo-jump
in DuckTales and the ground-pound in the Mario games.
To make it work, they had to make some usability
tweaks - for example, unlike Zelda 2, you
don’t have to hold the down button, which
frees your thumb up to easily move horizontally
in mid-air.
And the collision detection on the shovel
is pretty wide, to give you a better chance
of hitting your target.
And then, while Link only bobs up a tiny amount
when he does the thrust, Shovel Knight flies
high into the air - at different heights,
depending on what he hit.
The resulting bounce makes it as much of a
platforming tool as a combat one - happily
unifying the two sides of Shovel Knight’s
gameplay, with a single mechanic.
This also takes Zelda 2’s high and low combat
style and turns it into side-on and top-down,
making it more dynamic, and blowing it out
to fill the whole screen in the process.
VELASCO: “That’s why you have Gold Armor
who blocks up front and then when you go above
he blocks up here.
It's very similar to Iron Knuckle in Zelda
II where no matter which vector you're attacking
from he's blocking you in some way and you
gotta be quick to get around and get a couple
hits in“.
And ultimately, a huge number of enemies and
level elements in Shovel Knight’s campaign
are built around the Shovel Drop - including
these magic books, floating bushes, sea snakes,
giant gears, floating jellyfish, massive cannonballs,
this angry angler fish, and this bouncy beetle.
It certainly makes it fun to play as Shovel
Knight, but it gave Yacht Club a big problem
to solve when designing the next character:
Plague Knight.
Here's the thing: the boss characters were originally
intended to work like the robot masters in
Mega Man: Powered Up or Richter Mode in Symphony
of the Night: the same levels, but with slightly
different mechanics.
And so the game’s first new character, Plague
Knight, uses almost the exact same level layouts
as Shovel Knight: bar a few extra routes here
and there, and some challenge coins.
And because you’ve already interacted with
the stage elements, Yacht Club had to figure
out how to make it fun to traverse through
the same levels all over again.
The answer: mastering the main character’s
mobility.
VELASCO: “The complexity of the character
is where the fun comes from as opposed to
the complexity of the environment, which was
already a known quantity”.
And so we get the bomb burst.
Here, you can charge up by holding down the
attack button - then let go to trigger an
explosive blast that sends Plague Knight rocketing
halfway across the screen.
Chain in double jumps and secondary bursts
to sail through stages.
There’s some light inspiration from the
volatile leap of ‘Splosion Man and Samus’s
screw attack in the Metroid games, but the
main idea came from Plague Knight’s boss
battle in Shovel Knight’s campaign.
How do you turn a bonkers, explosive, chaotic
entity into a playable character?
The resulting action comes with a steep, sharp
learning curve - not dissimilar to learning
how to bomb jump in Metroid or chain hat throws
in Odyssey.
It’s strikingly easy to chuck yourself into
a pit or into the path of an oncoming enemy
- and Plague Knight has a much higher knock-back
than Shovel Knight, just to make things harder.
Plus, holding the charge while simultaneously
jumping can be tricky for those who aren’t
used to bending their thumb to manipulate
two different buttons.
And figuring out how to chain together jumps,
bursts, and double jumps is a serious challenge.
It’s not fair to say that Plague Knight
is completely uncontrollable, though, and
Yacht Club did lots to help you out.
The exact trajectory of Plague Knight’s
burst is the same every single time, so it’s
entirely possible to learn just how far you’ll
be flung.
You also regain control towards the end of
the burst, allowing you to make adjustments
to your landing.
You can cancel the burst entirely with a neutral
jump - which is a jump without any directional
input.
And you can slow your descent by throwing
bombs, which also gives you a slight lift,
and can be useful for scrambling up ledges
at the last minute.
You can even do a second burst, which can
be used to save you from disaster - but with
the charge taking almost an entire second
to warm up, you’ll probably be off the bottom
of the screen by the time it’s ready.
So it is entirely possible to feel cool and
fluid - you’ll just need a lot of practice.
Pair up a speed run between Shovel Knight
and Plague Knight and you’ll see the latter
character elegantly sail through stages in
half the time it takes steady ol’ Shovel Knight.
But for its next character, Yacht Club wanted
to give players that feeling of fluidity from
the word go.
Enter: Specter Knight.
I asked Yacht Club whether Specter Knight’s
design was, in part, a response to the feedback
they got from some players about Plague Knight
being uncontrollable.
D’ANGELO: “Oh yeah, that's definitely
where it started.”
VELASCO: “Every game is an answer to the
previous one.”
D’ANGELO: “So where Plague Knight was
‘we're gonna put the mastery in the controls
versus the environment’.
I think Specter Knight was like ‘we want
to make it really easy to be cool as opposed
to really hard to be cool as Plague Knight’.”
The resulting action is Specter Knight’s
dash slash.
Whenever he gets near objects and enemies
he can slice through them with a single strike
- sending him diagonally up or down, depending
on his initial position.
The funny thing is, Plague Knight’s bomb
burst and Specter Knight’s dash slash move
their respective heroes roughly the same distance
across the screen, and fully take away your
control for roughly the same amount of time.
And yet, no one ever calls Specter Knight
uncontrollable.
How did Yacht Club do that?
Well, for one, Specter’s dash slash is context
sensitive.
While Plague Knight can bomb burst anywhere,
at any time, Specter Knight can only perform
his move when in range of specific objects,
like enemies and projectiles.
It limits your options, but it does make it easier
to understand where it should be used.
Then, the trajectory of the move is shown
to you.
When you get close to a slash-able object,
this line appears - diagonally upwards if
you’re below the object, or diagonally downwards
if you’re above it.
It’s not only a handy indicator, letting
you know that the slash is available - but
it shows you roughly where you’ll end up
after the move ends.
Specter Knight’s basic movement is also
quite different to Plague Knight’s.
He’s got a long hang time on his jump, giving
you a chance to move in mid-air and get in range.
And he falls slowly after dashing, letting
you manoeuvre into a good landing spot.
Whereas Plague Knight absolutely plummets
to the ground following his burst.
He does have a double jump though, but only
if you saved it until after using the bomb burst.
We’ve got to note Specter’s wall run,
too.
It’s generally used to gain height - he
can’t jump as high as Shovel Knight, meaning
that you’ll need to use the environment
to get up to enemies, rather than simply leaping
on them.
But this secondary move can also be used to
scramble up a ledge if you just miss the landing
after your dash slash.
And unlike Plague Knight’s second, life-saving
burst, the wall run is entirely automatic.
And then there’s big one.
The level design.
While Plague Knight re-used Shovel Knight’s
levels, Specter Knight has radically different
stages with new mechanics that suit his mobility
set and - most crucially of all - new layouts
that lead you through the level.
VELASCO: “Everything’s really designed
around Specter Knight as well.
Because those levels were all done it was
easy to set up a cadence for people so you
see ‘oh here’s three enemies in a row,
I know what I’m supposed to do.
I’m supposed to… *swooshing noises*.
You can see it all laid out for you.
And then you just need to execute on it.
But with Plague Knight it was like ‘okay
there's a big gap…
D’ANGELO: “You figure it out!”
VELASCO: “‘What do I do?
Where do I land?’
There are so many platforms in Plague Knight
that Shovel Knight has to land on but you
don't even need to land on.
You could just fly through the air for three
quarters of the screen.
When you put a platform somewhere people go
to stand on it.”
Now, Yacht Club Games rationalised the work
it would take to build all new level layouts,
by telling themselves that they could re-use
them for the fourth character.
Just like how Shovel Knight and Plague Knight
share levels, so too would Specter Knight
and our last hero - King Knight.
That, actually, didn’t end up happening.
King Knight has an entirely new set of stages,
once again.
But that initial desire to recycle Specter
Knight’s levels did impact on King Knight’s design.
The team had to make a character who could
interact with walls.
And then another move for bouncing off objects.
So King Knight can use the shoulder bash to
crash into enemies or walls, which sends him
shooting in the air, and transitions the decadent
dandy into a pirouette.
If you land on something during this spin,
you get your bash back so you can continue
your combo.
The shoulder bash is straight out of Wario's playbook,
 and the spin is borrowed from Super
Mario World.
In fact, lots of King Knight’s design comes
from Mario - like the shorter courses and
secret exits.
And for a while, the team even experimented
with giving King Knight some Mario-like momentum.
VELASCO: “We've done so many games that
didn't have momentum like Mario, and we're
like ‘this is going to be like the Mario.
It's gonna have shorter courses. 
It's gonna have a world map.
It's gonna have a Wario bash. 
It's gonna have momentum!
But we just couldn’t…”
D’ANGELO: “It didn’t work.
I think especially because we were doing this
big bash it didn’t work.
You're already sending yourself a million
miles and it's scary and to put bad momentum
on top of that it's just like ‘Whoa! 
Calm down!”
So the developers ended up with a character
who is similar to Shovel Knight, but slightly
more challenging to control.
Because to enter the pirouette - King’s
version of the shovel drop - you first need
to bash, which is a high commitment action
that can have disastrous results if you miss.
But when you do it right you have a wonderful
back-and-forth between horizontal and vertical actions.
A constant shift between the two axis of movement.
And that’s even more pronounced by the mechanic
where if you hit something during your pirouette,
you get an extra bash to use in mid-air.
However, that combo does make King Knight
quite a complicated character to wrangle,
and that’s because he has an awful lot of
states.
Characters in games can be described as being
in different states like running, jumping,
and falling - and each state has certain properties
and abilities.
Shovel Knight is a character with very clear
and distinct states - you can enter Shovel
Drop anytime you’re airborne, and you can
cancel out of it with an attack. Easy.
King Knight is a lot more complicated.
There are two different states depending on
whether you hit something with your bash or not.
And there’s a state where you’re spinning
- but you can’t access your bash.
And a state where you’re spinning - but
you can access your bash.
And what’s even more challenging is that
these two states have the exact same animation
with nothing to indicate a change between
them.
This is something other games have done well:
in Celeste, Madeline’s hair changes colour
when you have access to her dash move.
And in Downwell, a flash goes over the character
when you land, to signify that your guns have
reloaded and you’re ready to shoot.
Why doesn’t King Knight have 
something like this?
I had to ask Yacht Club if it was something
they considered.
D’ANGELO: “We had a million discussions
about it.
I think were we tried to land is trying to
make it so you could feel it more.
The same way like I don't I don't know how
many dashes I have in Mega Man X.
We were trying to land in a place where it
felt like you could intuit that information.
And if you couldn't intuit it that we were
leaning in your favour.
For example you only have one bash in the
air but if you get hit we give you one automatically.
So making it something that's like, ‘well
how do we use the rules of games that have
double jumps or have a dash in them and they
don't sell that’ and how do we make it so
it feels natural to intuit.”
So this is why Shovel Knight is such an interesting
case study for signature moves - there’s
so much to glean from the design of these
four different characters.
For one, all of these moves unify combat and
platforming in some way.
For Shovel, Specter, and King, their signature
move is used to both defeat enemies and move
around the level.
And for Plague Knight, you can damage enemies
when you burst, but it’s more about using
the burst to gain considerable height, and
then unleashing a torrent of bombs on the
enemies down below.
These characters also show us how taking control
away from the player is a surefire way to
increase the learning curve.
Doing a bomb burst with Plague Knight or a
shoulder bash with King Knight puts you into
these committed animations that are hard to
get out of, which means you really need to
think ahead about what you’re going to do
next.
As oppose to Shovel Knight where you have
complete control over the character as he
does the shovel drop.
He falls at the same speed when shovel dropping
and jumping, after all.
Plus, you can easily cancel the attack.
We can also see how the clarity of the character’s
different states can help or hinder our understanding
of what we can do.
Shovel Knight and Specter Knight have clear,
delineated states with obvious animation changes
and on-screen indicators to tell us what our
character can do.
With King Knight, it’s not clear whether
you have access to your bash move.
And with Plague Knight, you can’t be certain
if you can double jump.
Learning to intuit that in your head is part
of mastering the character, but that also
steepens the learning curve.
It’s also interesting how some characters
give you a chance to recover if you make a
bad move.
If Shovel Knight is heading down a bottomless
pit, you’re pretty much screwed.
Plague Knight, however, can use his bombs
to gain height, or do a burst to escape danger.
Specter can run up walls, and King can bash
to recover himself.
And that’s before you start checking out
the relics.
And then there’s the big point about how
characters can either find complexity through
their interaction with the level layouts - or
through their basic mobility.
Shovel Knight is simple to control but put
him in a blank room and he can barely do anything.
Just sort of jump around.
Plague Knight is way more expressive and can
touch almost every corner of a blank room
- but he’s really tricky to manoeuvre.
Specter and Knight Knight show how using level
layouts can help players enter a sort of fluid
movement style but it can also feel restrictive,
prefabricated, and puzzle-like.
Perhaps games with more complex move-sets
lend themselves better to speedrunning and
player mastery?
That's a topic we can maybe backtrack to in the future.
For now, though, I want to end this video
by asking you a question: which character
did you enjoy using the most?
Shovel, Plague, Specter, or King?
Ignore the story stuff, the card game, the
map structure, and the secrets - just think
about the mobility and the signature moves.
You can drop a comment down below, or use
the handy card up in the corner to answer a poll.
Hi there.
If you want to see my full, hour-long interview
with Yacht Club Games, it’s now available
for GMTK supporters over on Patreon.
Thanks so much for watching, and I’ll see
you again soon.
