[Music]
Some games are all about
nostalgia. They remind us of the good
old days, the days before
microtransactions and military shooters
and massive updates. And maybe we should
thank or blame, depending on your
experience, Kickstarter, the
crowdfunding platform where we give
designers millions of dollars not to
make new games, but to make distinctly
old ones. games like Bloodstained and
Ukulele and Thimbleweed Park. But I hope
all of those developers have played this
[Music]
game, Shovel Knight. It was also a
Kickstarter project generating some
$300,000 for its developer and perhaps
more than any other game successfully
tapped into this sentimentality for the
past. Well, I'm Mark Brown. This is Game
Makers Toolkit, and here's how Shovel
Knight did it.
With his blue armor plating and the way
he battles similarly shaped boss
characters, all with similar names,
Shovel Knight is definitely reminiscent
of Mega Man. But he doesn't shoot lemons
out of his arm. Instead, he's got a
short shovel swipe that brings back
memories of Ninja Giden's stubby sword,
and his downward plunge is reminiscent
of Ducktals.
Shovel Knight's special moves are cribed
from Castlevania, most notably the
throwing anchor that works exactly like
Simon Belmont's iconic axe. Levels are
picked from a map like in Super Mario
Brothers 3, complete with these enemy
encounters. And the towns where you
level up and talk to other characters
look like the ones in Zelda 2.
Instead of trying to copy a specific
game from yesterday year, Shovel Knight
borrows liberally from the entire NES
catalog to make a game that's
reminiscent of 8-bit games in general.
And that's smart because when you're
trying to evoke the memories of one game
or one series, you're not only trying to
compete with the actual game, but also
people's nostalgic memories of that
game. And that's something else
entirely. Old games look better, sound
better, and feel better in our heads. We
misremember the size of the worlds and
the length of the quests. And our memory
is rosetinted. We remember the epic
moments, but we forget about the
grinding. We remember the thrill of
beating a tricky level, but block out
the onehit kills that had us breaking
controllers.
Shovel Knight dodges most of that
because it isn't tied to the
expectations and baggage of a specific
game, but it does have to contend with
our cognitive bias of what retro games
in general were like to play. To do
this, it first takes everything that
made those games so good. The strict
focus on a single mechanic and
imaginative level design that conjures
up dozens of ways to explore that idea.
The precision and consistency that comes
from chunky characters and gridlike
levels, the secrets and the bosses, the
way these games taught you stuff through
level design instead of tutorials, and
the way they let you start playing in a
matter of seconds. But it's not afraid
to throw away the stuff that sucked
about those games. most notably the
punitive death systems that were a
holdover from arcade game design and a
way to stop you finishing these games in
an afternoon. So you won't find yourself
running out of lives or witnessing too
many cheap hits or respawning enemies.
The game might knock you back when you
get hit, which is what sent you to your
death over and over again in
Castlevania, but Shovel Knight quickly
gives you air control to get back to
safety. Oh, and you also don't have to
blow on the cartridge to stop the game
from glitching out.
When fixing those issues from the past,
Yacht Club borrows from modern games
when it makes sense. The game's got a
system where you lose your money when
you
die, and you have to make your way back
to where you failed to reclaim your
loot. A system ripped straight out of
Dark Souls. But it makes sense. It gives
your deaths meaning and introduces a
layer of tension without forcing you to
replay entire levels or start from
scratch. The checkpoints also let you
pick your own difficulty, which is a
more modern way of thinking about
challenge. If you break a checkpoint,
you will get a big load of loot, but you
won't come back to that area when you
die. A clever risk versus reward setup
and proof that Shovel Knight isn't just
ripping off other games, but coming up
with ideas of its own. And well, here's
the one that's going to get me in
trouble with the commenters, but Shovel
Knight is also more progressive than
most NES games. Many 8-bit adventures
were about saving your girlfriend or
your sister or a princess from capture.
And while Yacht Club does reference
this, it flips it on its head by making
Shield Knight strong and
capable. In essence, Shovel Knight is
tricking you. It makes you think you're
playing an NES game without you fully
realizing that you're actually playing
one without the limitations of that
console. And nowhere is that more true
than in the presentation of the game
because hey, no NES game looked like
this. The most obvious change is the
switch to widescreen to fit modern TVs
and handhelds. But it also has full
parallax scrolling, which is where the
foreground and background layers move at
different speeds to suggest depth. The
NES only had one layer, so games like
Shatter Hand, Return of the Joker, and
Swordmaster used animated tiles and
backgrounds with distinct horizontal
lines to fake the effect. But Shovel
Knight totally cheats by using multiple
layers like on a Super Nintendo. The
game can also render loads of sprites on
one horizontal line without flickering.
There are more particles on screen than
the NES could handle. The game's got a
higher color palette, and there are more
colors per sprite and more pallets
simultaneously on screen than were
allowed by the hardware. The music is
more faithful, but perhaps not to
Western ears. It mimics Konami's
powerful Famicom only VR C6 sound chip
that gave the Japanese version of
Dracula's Curse three more sound
channels to play with. Here's how that
compares to the US release.
[Music]
[Music]
Plus, Shovel Knight ignores the
limitation that saw sound effects cut
through the music on the NES, as sounds
and music had to share the same
channels. This game cheats and plays
both simultaneously. To most people,
they won't even notice these tricks. It
looks and sounds faithful to the NES
because this is what retro games feel
like in our memory. And when you play a
game like Mighty Gunvault, which is more
slavishly faithful to the 8-bit
aesthetic, looks a bit too
plain. Shovel Knight presents us with
four principles for successful nostalgic
design. It borrows from multiple
sources. It takes the best bits of its
source material and isn't afraid to
modernize what didn't work. And it
presents the game with a familiar retro
aesthetic, but with a rose tinted
filter. And we can use this to see why
other nostalgic releases did or did not
work. Hyperllight Drifter borrows not
just from A Link to the Past, but also
Mega Man Zero, Miyazaki Movies, and
Diablo. It's challenging and oblique
like a good retro game, but has smooth
analog controls and liberal checkpoints.
And while it has 16- bit pixel art, it
has a unique color palette and more
things on screen than any Super NES game
would dare show. But Mighty Number N on
the other hand is just trying to be Mega
Man. It takes everything from those
games, not just the frantic boss battles
and themed levels, but the frustrating
deaths and limited lives. And its visual
style is just what is this? This isn't
anything. It was supposed to remind us
of the best bits of Capcom's forgotten
hero, but ended up reminding us of all
his worst traits, even the awful, awful
voice acting.
You must recover all the energy
immediately, Mega Man. But where is Dr.
Wy? That's a good question. We may be
able to locate another energy emission
from the radar room. When we find that
media, we'll find Dr. Wally. There is,
of course, more to Shovel Knight than
nostalgia. It's built by exway forward
developers who have years of experience
making 2D platformers. The level design
is topnotch, and it's charming and funny
without relying on memes or grown worthy
references. But above all, it's a
fantastic example of nostalgia done
right. Hi there, thanks for watching.
One big way to help Game Makers Toolkit
reach more people is to subscribe on
YouTube. The site will then think I'm
really popular and cool and recommend my
videos to more people. But the big one,
as ever, is Patreon. Here are this
month's mega rad $5 contributors.
[Music]
