Will I make another game?
That is a question I've been 
thinking about a lot lately,  
and it's the question that people keep asking me.
"Mark, are you going to make another video game?"
But the thought of making another 
full, big Steam release...
I'm not sure I've got that in me.
I'm not sure if I'm ever going to do that.
So next time you see me, it will 
just be my disembodied voice,  
and that means it is time to dismantle 
the developing studio, aka my spare room.
Turn off that light, turn off 
this light, let's get rid of this.
Thank you and goodbye.
[Plug removed]
Hi, me again!
Yeah, I was really not expecting to be here  
in the formless blue void of the 
developing studio any time soon.
But I guess I've got some explaining to do.
Right, so last year I finally finished my 
first proper Steam game, Mind Over Magnet.
After a long and frankly 
torturous development period,  
I finished all the content, polished 
it up, and plopped it on Steam.
And then, with all of that game development 
stuff finally out of my system, the plan was  
to take December off, and then go back 
to being a full-time YouTuber in 2025.
You know, go back to having a 
proper, regular upload schedule.
Oh, I just had one teensy-weensy obligation 
to fulfill at the end of the year.
Because you know the GMTK Game Jam, right? 
We've got a new one coming up on July 30th.
Well, we've also started doing a secret 
second jam just for GMTK Patreon supporters.
Now that happened in December of 2024,  
and I had almost forgot that I had promised 
that I too would take part in this jam.
Oops! Okay, so I'll just make 
a tiny game for this jam,  
then take the rest of the year off, and 
then go back to being a YouTuber in 2025.
Okay, so the theme for this jam, 
which was picked by a Byzantine,  
Conclave-like series of 
suggestions and secret votes,  
ended up being "Bending the Rules", 
which gave me an idea for a game.
Basically you make a spelling game, like 
Boggle or Scrabble, and then when the  
player has scored enough points to level up, 
they get to unlock some kind of upgrade or  
modifier that changes the rules and makes 
it easier to spell words and score points.
Maybe you can add a few extra Z tiles to the bag,  
or 'Q' tiles now become 'QU' tiles, or your word 
scores more points if it starts with a vowel.
That sort of thing.
Essentially, you combine a word game with 
the roguelike shenanigans of a Balatro,  
or a Vampire Survivors, or a Slay the Spire.
So that's what I did.
I made a system that would give you 
a random selection of 16 letters.
You can click on them to create words, and 
then it checks your words against a dictionary.
There's a nifty open source 
dictionary with about 200,000 words,  
so it checks against that list, and 
if it's on there, you score points.
And then I added in some upgrades.
Multipliers for longer words, multipliers on 
specific letters, a wildcard that can be used  
in place of any letter, a powerup that lets 
you hold some tiles and refresh the others.
And then within just two days, I had built a game.
Now it was an ugly, slightly broken,  
and obviously unfinished prototype 
of a game, but it was something.
And it was actually quite good fun.
And other people agreed.
Almost everyone I showed the 
game to got a bit hooked.
One person told me that they played 
this scrappy two day prototype for  
more hours than they spent playing the 
entire campaign of Mind Over Magnet.
And when I posted about it in a Discord full of 
friends, as soon as one person posted a screenshot  
of their results page, everyone wanted to 
have a go and see how they could get on.
The game obviously had appeal.
And so I started to think, maybe I 
should make this into a full game.
And I know, sure, I struggled 
to juggle game development and  
being a YouTuber throughout the 
development of Mind Over Magnet.
And I know that the plan was to stop making 
games and just become a full time YouTuber.
But also, what if I completely 
ignored all of that and just got  
immediately started on making another video game?
What could possibly go wrong?
So while I was working on 
videos for GMTK, like the one on
Smash Bros, and Zelda's UI, and Locator, I was 
secretly building this game in the background.
I threw out the prototype 
code and started from scratch,  
with the goal of making a more 
stable, playable, and adaptable game.
That meant adding in quality of life features 
like controller support, typing on the keyboard,  
drag and drop support, and the ability to save 
your run if you need to come back to it later.
It meant making things more pretty, with 
animations, more colour, and juicy numbers.
And it meant under the hood, the game could 
support all manner of different upgrades,  
like passive perks, active upgrades, special 
tiles, game-breaking synergistic stuff, the works.
So it was going well.
And then I made a new video on GMTK.
It was about coming up with game ideas,  
and it was actually the start of 
a new series called Game Dev 101.
A series all about the production 
pipeline of making your own indie game,  
and how I kinda screwed it 
up for Mind Over Magnet.
But this gave me an idea, because this new game, 
this word thingy, was the perfect opportunity to  
basically go through the development process 
again, and hopefully get it right this time.
I could take everything I learned 
from making Mind Over Magnet,  
and apply it to a second game with the idea 
of making it more quickly and efficiently.
That way I could do this Game Dev 
101 series with a lot more authority.
I wouldn't just have to talk 
about how I screwed everything up,  
I could also talk about how I got things right.
So that was it.
At the beginning of March I decided to 
take two or three months off YouTube again,  
and get to work on finishing this game.
So I kept building.
I added more modifiers and upgrades to the shop.
I endlessly fixed bugs.
I tweaked the numbers to nerf the game-breaking 
power-ups and to buff the rubbish stuff.
Added in some really fun perks, like a glass tile 
that can be used to temporarily clone a letter.
Or modifiers that build up score over time.
And every time I added a 
perk, the game got better.
And the more time I spent playing the game, 
the more I understood what made it fun.
Which is basically, if the game 
is just "find the longest word in  
this grid" over and over again, 
well that quickly gets boring.
So I had to add in things to mix that up.
Like make shorter words, use specific 
letters, don't use letters, and so on.
That's when the game gets really good.
I also added in special rounds, kind 
of like the boss blinds in Balatro.
These have unique requirements that 
force you to play in a special way.
Like your word must have six tiles to score.
Or you've got to use this specific letter.
Or the tiles refresh every turn.
Those break up the game loop and change the 
game from just "spell the longest word".
I also playtested the game endlessly.
I took the game to universities where 
I was doing talks, to game dev meetups,  
and the biggest one, GDC in San Francisco.
When I was there, I would spend all day 
showing the game to different people and  
talking about the design and the balancing 
and the onboarding and everything else.
Then I'd go back to my hotel, crash, wake up 
at 3am because of jet lag, and then immediately  
apply all of the feedback from yesterday's 
sessions before going back onto the expo floor.
It was pretty exhausting.
But I made some critical changes 
to the game during that time.
For instance, initially I thought that the player  
should be penalised if they spell a 
word that's not in the dictionary.
Like if you spell a wrong word, 
you should lose some points.
Right? But everyone hated this.
Especially those who don't speak 
English as their first language,  
or they have dyslexia, or 
they're just bad at spelling.
It never felt good to be penalised for that.
And also sometimes you have a word that 
you really think is a word, but it's not  
in my specific dictionary, and the game just 
goes "too bad, lose some points, game over".
It just didn't feel good.
So I took that out and, yeah, 
the game was much better for it.
But I also tried to filter out feedback that 
went against the type of game I was going for.
For instance, some people asked for the game  
to have a cartoon mascot or 
a more distinct art style.
But I'm happy with the slick, 
clean, minimalist style.
It's like a video game version of a GMTK video.
And others asked for the sort of crazy, 
game-breaking synergies you get in Balatro,  
with the possibility of scoring 
essentially infinite points.
But I'm going for more of a tabletop,  
Scrabble-esque game with smaller, 
easier to digest numbers.
Anyway, back home I was also 
posting about the game on Discord,  
and I showed a video of some of the animations.
And then a user called Tunote decided to use it  
for sound design practice 
to make a video like this.
[Sound Design]
And I was like, "Damn, that's pretty good.
Can I just pay you to make all the sounds for this 
game?" And so now this game has a sound designer.
Oh, and I also reached out to Zach Jones, who 
did the epic soundtrack for Mind Over Magnet,  
and he's now hard at work 
on the music for this game.
And then the game just sort of came 
together, and it's now almost done.
I just have one last goal, and that's to 
bring the total number of perks up to 100.
That feels like a nice round 
number to put on the Steam page.
And as of this video, I have 88 made.
12 more to go.
And so, yeah.
The game is called Word Play.
It's a word-spelling, score-chasing, perk-choosing 
roguelike, and I'm super proud of it.
It's really fun, it's really 
slick, and it's really addictive.
Trust me, it's really hard for me to bug test 
this game because even if I go in looking for  
some specific thing to fix, I just end up 
playing the game for like half an hour.
And look, I know that this isn't the first game 
about words, or the first roguelike word game,  
or the first game to mash up 
Balatro with a board game.
But I'm still super happy with my 
version, and I hope you check it out.
So if you head to Steam right now, 
you can play a free demo of Word Play.
It's super short, it's just got 
one mode and about a quarter of  
the total perks in the game, but 
it should give you a pretty good  
idea of what the game will be like 
when it launches later this summer.
Also while you're there, make sure 
you wishlist the game on Steam,  
as that is the number one way of telling the Steam  
algorithm to push my game to the top of 
the charts when it launches on the store.
You'll also get an email as soon as 
the game launches, and as per usual  
there'll be a launch day discount to 
get the game at a super cheap price.
I also totally plan to do a mobile version.
The game works beautifully on an iPad,  
so I'll put it on the App Store and 
the Google Play Store at some point.
I guess I'll do ads or in-app 
purchases or something.
I don't really want to do that, but paid 
apps don't really work on those stores.
If you work at Netflix and want to buy the rights 
to the mobile version of this game, call me.
But yeah, I'm really pleased to say that 
the game has come together in record time.
I made the first prototype at the end of December.
I started the new version in January and February.
I took the game to GDC in March.
In April I, uh, oh yeah, broke my goddamn arm.
That was annoying.
That slowed me down.
But then in May I basically finished 
the game, ready for release in June or  
July depending on Next Fest and when Zach 
finishes the music and stuff like that.
I'll talk more about these stages 
in future episodes of Game Dev 101,  
which is, as I say, pretty much 
exactly what I did this game for.
But now I really can go back to being a YouTuber.
Because here's the thing.
When I was showing this game to people at 
events like GDC or Guadalinde in Málaga,  
I talked to so many people who told me that GMTK 
was really important and influential to them.
That my YouTube channel had 
changed their life in some way.
Perhaps the videos got them interested in  
game design and led them to 
study the subject at school.
Or that watching me make my own game 
in Unity inspired them to do the same.
If this bozo can do it, so can you.
Or that their GMTK Game Jam entry turned 
into a full game and now they have a studio.
Incredible.
And so as much as I like making video games,  
I really have enjoyed this process, I feel 
like I can do so much more here on YouTube.
Probably it's the difference between 
making a handful of games myself,  
or inspiring people to make hundreds of games.
Or, let's be honest, looking at the 
game jam, tens of thousands of games.
So while I will definitely make more games, I want 
to enter game jams and I want to do interactive  
video essay type stuff like Platformer 
Toolkit and other GMTK adjacent things,  
I think this really is the end 
of me making big proper games.
I say that now, I will probably 
be back here in six months.
But that's how I feel right now.
So thank you so much for your patience, 
especially thank you to my Patrons who  
have been there while I have not been making 
videos because I've been working on games.
Thanks for checking in, and thanks 
for finding out about Word Play.
You can wishlist the game on Steam 
and it will come to other platforms,  
iOS and Android, eventually.
Until then, I just want to say see you soon, 
thanks for checking in, and have a tremendous day.
Bye bye.
Woooo!
