Nintendo has been trying to 
solve the exact same problem,  
for the last 30-odd years: how do you 
design the difficulty of a Mario game?
Because here’s the thing: Mario means 
different things to different people.
On the one hand, he’s a cultural icon, a Hollywood 
super star, a pudgy plumber mascot for kids.
And so his games must be 
approachable to absolutely  
everyone - even to someone who has 
never played a video game before.
But on the other hand, Mario has gathered 
a rabid fanbase of gamers who have been  
playing his adventures since 1985 and now have 
expert, muscle memory skills for triple jumps,  
ground pounds, and infinite 1-UP shenanigans.
And so they expect Mario’s games to 
keep pace with their advanced skillset.
How on earth do you make a game that’s suitable  
for both of those players 
- and everyone in between?
“No matter how hard you try,” says 
Mario’s creator Shigeru Miyamoto,  
“it just isn't possible to settle on a 
difficulty level that will satisfy everyone”.
Now, in another genre this might be 
fixed with a difficulty select screen.
You know… do you want to play on 
easy, medium, or hard? But these  
features are usually created by tweaking some 
numbers, like the amount of health you have,  
the damage you do with each attack, 
or the number of enemies that spawn.
But in a meticulously hand-crafted 
platformer, with extremely distinct  
interactions between enemies and the 
player… well that stuff just wouldn’t fly.
Which is why, in more than 30 
mainline Super Mario games,  
only one has anything even 
resembling an explicit “easy mode”.
And besides: that’s just 
not really Nintendo’s way.
Miyamoto says ”one way is to add an 
“Easy Mode”, but I think the best  
method is when the player can adjust the 
difficulty [themselves] while playing”.
How does that work? Well, 
that’s what I wanted to find out.
In order to do this, I played through 
a bunch of different Mario games.
I mean, I'm talking a lot of Mario games.
I mean, every single mainline entry 
in the Super Mario Bros. series.
Let's just put Super Mario Land 
on top, just for good measure.
That is not going to stay there.
All of this in order to figure 
out how Nintendo designed Super  
Mario's invisible difficulty setting.
So, for the 200th time, I'm Mark Brown,  
and this is Game Maker's Toolkit, 
a series on video game design.
Okay. So I think the best metaphor 
for Mario’s difficulty design is to  
think of three pipes, placed on top of each other.
The central pipe represents the path 
you must take to finish the game.
To go from A to B.
In a level, that’s from the 
starting line to the goal pole.
And in terms of the game itself,  
it’s from the opening cutscene to 
the final showdown with Bowser.
This is the critical path - and it’s designed 
to be a pretty average level of difficulty.
But then there’s the other two 
pipes - in the lower pipe the  
game is easier and more forgiving for new players.
And in the pipe up above, the game is harder, and 
designed to test the skills of expert players.
And then within the game’s design there are 
ways to shift between these three pipes.
If the game is proving too difficult,  
you can accept some help and drop into 
the bottom pipe and have an easier time.
But if the game is a little too easy,  
you can rise to the top pipe and take 
on the game’s more challenging content.
Now this is an idea that Nintendo has used 
in, well, just about every Mario game.
From World to Wonder, and from Galaxy to Odyssey.
But the exact ways that players can move between 
the pipes has changed a lot throughout the years.
We’ve seen these methods evolve and change as 
Mario has bounced between different systems,  
eras, game directors, and meta-level structures.
So let’s look at them all - by breaking 
them down into different categories.
I’ll start by looking at the top pipe,  
with the stuff that allows the player 
to make the game more difficult.
And that starts in the levels themselves, with 
one-off rewards that encourage you to take risks.
Take this block in the first underground 
level of Super Mario Bros. When Mario bops  
it with his bonce, a 1-UP mushroom appears 
and starts to saunter across the ceiling.
If you want it then you’ll need to speed up, 
manically dash through the next group of enemies,  
and make a daring leap to grab the extra 
life before it disappears into the void.
Mario levels are absolutely 
filled with this stuff.
Whether that’s runaway power-ups, those 
coloured coins that disappear after a  
few seconds, or the final tricky 
leap to the top of the flagpole.
These are all entirely optional,  
meaning that if you’re not confident 
then you can just ignore them entirely.
But if you’re feeling skilful then you can 
push your luck, and get a reward for it.
This is never more obvious than the star coins,  
which were formally introduced 
in New Super Mario Bros. on DS.
Every level has three special coins which require 
extra skill - or even more advanced moves.
A Nintendo designer said “all of the courses 
can be cleared without dashing or wall jumping,  
but you can't get Star Coins without doing 
those things or making use of special items.”
These star coins have become a recurring motif and  
now show up in just about every Mario game 
- perhaps in a slightly different guise,  
like the green stars and Miiverse stamps in 
3D World, or the comet medals in Galaxy 2.
Again: these things are entirely optional and - in  
many games - you can finish the game 
without picking up a single one.
But, to an advanced player, they transform 
an easy level into a challenging obstacle  
course where you have to risk life and 
limb to walk away with all three coins.
Another idea is to reward the player if they 
can finish a course under specific criteria.
Yoshi’s Island is one of the 
easiest Mario games thanks to a  
very generous regenerating health system 
that lets you take, well, infinite hits.
So it’s entirely possible to limp through a 
level in the most ungainly way imaginable.
But - the game will score your 
performance at the end of the stage,  
and one of the criteria is how much life you 
have left when you cross the finish line.
So if you want to max out the score card you’ll  
need to finish the level with 
almost perfect performance.
Score has always been part of the Mario games, 
of course - a weird relic of its arcade roots.
But Super Mario Bros. Deluxe gives each level a 
par score to hit, as an optional challenge - which  
is a more concrete goal than simply “get 
a lot of points”, or “beat your friends”.
And in Super Mario Maker’s 3DS port,  
every level comes with two medals which 
add special conditions to the stage -
like fishing it while holding 
on to a certain power-up,  
or speed-running through a level 
under a super strict time limit.
These are actually a lot of fun - I’d like 
to see them come back in a future game.
So those are ways to place optional 
challenges within the levels themselves.
but what about if we zoom out 
and think of the game as a whole?
In Super Mario Odyssey you can finish the 
game after collecting 124 power moons.
This unlocks the climactic final battle with 
Bowser on the moon - which wraps up the story.
Roll credits. The game is over.
Except, of course, it’s not.
Doing this unlocks access to new moons 
which are now scattered throughout the game.
And tricky additional post-game levels that 
will put everything you’ve learned to the test.
Basically: the most difficult content in Mario  
Odyssey doesn’t even exist until 
after you’ve finished the game.
So if we think about the game’s difficulty curve,  
Nintendo could have forced players to 
reach the very end before offering closure.
But instead, they stop the story 
long before the curve hits its peek.
This means that pretty much everyone 
can see the game through to the end,  
and wrap up whatever little 
storyline there is in the game.
But those wanting more 
challenge can keep on playing.
This is a common refrain in the Mario series -
heck, the very first Super Mario Bros. ended 
with an invitation to start a new quest,  
which is like a B-side remix of the entire 
game with harder enemies and level layouts.
Plus, if you find all 120 stars in Mario Galaxy,  
you’re rewarded with the chance 
to do it all again as Luigi.
Finishing Super Mario 3D World unlocks three more  
worlds filled with difficult courses 
- and the infamous Champion’s Road.
And all of the New Super Mario 
Bros. games have bonus worlds  
with more difficult courses, 
hidden after the credits roll.
Of course, this does mean that expert 
players have to go through an entire  
game’s worth of pretty easy content to 
finally get to the challenging stuff.
So other games don’t make you wait until the 
very end to access these bonus harder levels.
In Super Mario World, certain levels have secret 
exits that open hidden pathways on the map -
some of which go to a mysterious place called Star  
Road, which hides a bunch of bonus 
levels that will test your mettle.
There’s even a secret world within 
this secret world: a Special Zone,  
filled with bizarre dream logic levels 
with the most 90s names imaginable.
“Tubular”! “Groovy”! “Way Cool”!
Other examples include the challenge 
mode in New Super Mario Bros. U,  
which is unlocked gradually as you play the game.
And the odd extra difficult courses that are 
peppered throughout Mario Wonder’s campaign.
But how about we go one further,  
and make the entire game be designed just 
for those who were experts at the previous game?
Shortly after the release of 
the original Super Mario Bros.,  
the designers put together a sequel that 
was full of extra challenging stages -
with nonsense jumps, BS enemy 
placements, absurd wind physics,  
poisonous mushrooms, and warp pipes that 
can send you backwards to earlier worlds.
The entire game is a nightmare 
joke for Mario experts - so  
much so that it was hard to market it properly.
Miyamoto has said “we were certain that  
this was a lot of fun for those who 
played Super Mario Bros. immensely.
But we thought it would be 
hard for first time players,  
so we put a sticker on the package 
that said ‘For Super Players’.”
That wasn’t enough for Nintendo of America 
who refused to localise the game - which  
is why we got a completely different 
Super Mario Bros. 2 outside of Japan.
Anyway - this idea makes a lot more 
sense in the age of downloadable content.
So, if the old eShop still existed then you could  
grab some stupidly hard levels 
for New Super Mario Bros. 2.
Or, even better, the excellent New Super 
Luigi U expansion pack, which is designed  
for platforming experts thanks to its tricky 
stage layouts and super short time limits.
So, those are all ways that Nintendo 
can make Mario games more challenging.
Risky one-off rewards.
Optional star coins.
Challenging bonus criteria.
Post-game content.
Bonus levels.
And expert-level DLC.
But what about the opposite?
What can Nintendo do if the 
central pipe is proving too  
difficult and players need a helping hand?
Well, one very effective solution is to simply 
let players choose which courses they take on.
Super Mario 64 features 120 power 
stars, littered throughout a number  
of difficult levels - but you actually 
only need 70 of them to finish the game.
This means that outside of a few mandatory 
stages, the player is able to pick and  
choose the levels they feel comfortable 
playing - and skip others entirely.
And because you can access multiple 
levels simultaneously you can put  
off a tricky level for the time 
being and come back to it later.
This has become a common 
structure in Mario’s 3D outings -
you never need all of the stars, shines, or 
moons to finish these games, and so you get  
to decide which levels you want to play, 
and the order you want to play them in.
But we also see the option to skip 
levels in some 2D games - whether  
that’s using the warp zones in Super 
Mario Bros. to skip past tricky worlds,
using the map screen in Super 
Mario Bros. 3 to bypass courses,
or using the job list in Super Mario Maker 2 to  
pick out the levels with the 
lowest difficulty ratings.
Another solution is to change the 
layout of the levels themselves.
In Super Mario World there are 
these switch block palaces.
Hit the big coloured button and 
it will populate the world with  
new blocks that fill in tricky 
gaps or provide useful power-ups.
This makes levels much easier to play - 
which is a bit like activating an easy mode.
Though, because you can’t undo 
the action… this doesn’t really  
let you move back and forth between the pipes.
Press the button and you’re now stuck in 
the lower pipe for the rest of the game.
Luckily, this idea would be revisited 
more effectively in Super Mario Wonder  
with a badge that makes some extra blocks appear.
But only as long as you’re wearing the badge.
Take it off and the game goes back to normal.
Nintendo can also change the difficulty by 
letting you switch to a different character.
In the western version of Super Mario Bros. 2,  
Princess Toadstool is arguably the 
easiest character to control thanks  
to her floaty jump that makes it less 
challenging to land on small platforms.
Same goes for her appearance 
as Peach in Super Mario 3D World.
This is taken even further in 
New Super Mario Bros. U Deluxe,  
where Toadette and Nabbit are dedicated 
as easier characters to play as,  
thanks to tighter physics, 
faster movement in water, and -
in Nabbit’s case - the dude doesn’t 
even take damage from enemies.
Changing the difficulty is as 
easy as changing character.
In New Super Mario Bros. Wii, Nintendo wanted 
to do something for players who kept dying,  
over and over again, on the same level.
These players are obviously getting stuck 
and probably quite frustrated - so how can  
they be helped? The solution is the Super Guide.
Activate this box and Luigi will show 
you how to finish the level - notably,  
without getting secrets or star coins.
When he’s done you can either take 
the, uh, take the L and skip the level.
Or use what you just saw to try 
the level again for yourself.
This feature would appear again 
in New Super Mario Bros. U,  
and in certain parts of Mario Galaxy 2 
as the slightly unsettling Cosmic Spirit.
You could perhaps put the assist mode for 
Mario Odyssey in this category too, as one of  
the primary features of this system is to show you 
exactly where to go using these handy blue arrows.
A slightly different version of this 
system appeared in Super Mario 3D Land.
You’ll still get an optional box 
if you fail a certain number of  
times - but in this game it provides a power-up:  
an invincible tanooki suit which lets you float 
forever and smash through enemies and obstacles.
If that’s not enough, then dying 10 
times lets you skip the level altogether.
The invincible tanooki suit is actually a 
callback to a power-up in Super Mario Bros. 3.
Finishing a castle can sometimes net you a P-Wing 
for your inventory, which can be used to give you  
infinite flight and soar over an entire level 
like you’ve activated a broken Game Genie code.
A similar assist system appears 
in New Super Mario Bros. 2,  
and there’s a clever twist on the idea in 
Super Mario Maker 2’s story mode where you  
can open a toolbox of items and blocks 
to paint into the level as you see fit.
And finally… if you’re stuck in a game,  
sometimes the best solution is to ask a 
friend to jump in and just do it for you.
But what if they could actually 
play alongside you and help out.
That was the idea behind Super 
Mario Galaxy’s co-star mode,  
where a second Wii Remote can be 
used to collect and shoot star bits.
In Galaxy 2, the second 
player can even kill enemies.
There’s also a particularly clever version 
of this in New Super Mario Bros. U,  
where a second player can plop temporary blocks 
into the world by tapping on the Wii U gamepad.
And, of course, the multiplayer modes in 
various Mario platformers let an advanced  
player help out less their skilled 
friends as they chill out in a bubble.
So if Nintendo wants to help 
out novice players, they can…
Let players choose which levels they take on.
Change the stage layout to be more forgiving.
Introduce other characters 
who are easier to play as.
Help out players who repeatedly die with 
a guide, a power-up, or a level skip.
Or allow players to get a 
friend to jump in and help out.
So as we can see, simply getting 
through a Mario level - or an entire  
Mario game - is supposed to be of a 
pretty standard level of difficulty.
It might change from title to 
title - some are slightly easier,  
others are a little tougher - but on the whole, 
this should be suitable for an average player.
But as you play, there are all sorts of 
ways to change that difficulty level.
Intimidating trials like enticing extra 
pick-ups, super hard bonus levels,  
and tricky optional conditions are there for 
those who demand a greater level of challenge.
Whereas generous assists like invincible 
player characters, co-op modes, and skippable  
stages are there to help out players who 
find the baseline difficulty too hard.
And so, ultimately, Mario games do have difficulty  
modes - because we can think of these 
three pipes as easy, normal, and hard.
But they’re very different to a 
more traditional difficulty setting.
There, these pipes are separate and siloed.
A player is sorted into one of 
the three at the very start of  
the game - and typically stays in it 
for the duration of the adventure.
But in a Mario game, the pipes are all connected,  
and so the player seamlessly 
shifts between them as they play.
Perhaps accepting help when 
they become frustrated,  
but then pushing themselves to take on more 
challenges as they become more confident.
And so instead of asking the player to predict 
their level of skill before the game even begins,  
Mario games let players opt in 
and out of challenges midway  
through the game… or even midway through a level.
At every step of the journey, players 
get to ask themselves… “can I do this”?
And Nintendo wants them to say “yes”.
Because even though Nintendo adds in all of 
these features to help out beginner players,  
it still understands the value of difficulty.
In an interview about Star Fox Zero, 
Miyamoto said “part of the fun of taking  
on a challenge is that the challenge 
has to be a hurdle that you overcome.
Simply lowering the hurdle doesn’t necessarily 
mean that the challenge will be fun.
What’s fun is you mastering the 
skill and having that sense of  
accomplishment—of achieving 
something that’s difficult.”
So part of this three pipe design is making 
sure that players are always encouraged to  
move up - to stop using assists and 
to try taking on harder challenges.
And this is done in a number of ways.
For one, assists are usually a one-off,  
temporary help - a thing that helps you 
get through that one specific level.
But then it goes away and you 
have to do the next one yourself.
Also, using assists usually means 
that you don’t get a true reward.
In Mario Galaxy 2, using the Cosmic Spirit nets 
you a bronze star instead of a proper power star.
You’ll need to come back to get the real deal.
In Super Mario Bros. 2, you won’t unlock World 
9 if you got to the ending by using warp zones.
And playing on easier mode in Super Mario 
Run means your purple coins aren’t saved.
Plus - Nintendo often hides the assists 
altogether until players truly need them.
On New Super Mario Bros. Wii, the 
developers spent a long time deciding  
on exactly how many times you have to 
die before the Super Guide shows up.
Late Nintendo president Satoru Iwata says “it's 
fine if it appears when you're on the verge of  
tears, but [not] if it pops up when you're 
still brimming with determination to do it.
Getting that timing right is extremely important”.
Nintendo also encourages players 
to tackle greater challenges by  
letting them proudly display their achievements.
Ever since Super Mario Bros. 2, the games 
have used shining stars and medals on the  
file select screen to let players show off that 
they’ve finished the game’s hardest challenges.
Further still, in some games, if 
you ever use those assists then  
the stars on the file select 
screen will no longer shine.
It’s a way to stop expert players from giving 
in to temptation to use an assist tool.
And finally, Nintendo makes 
sure that being skilful  
doesn’t inadvertently make the game easier.
What I mean by that is… in early Mario games,  
completing optional challenges 
would net you useful rewards.
in Super Mario World, finding all 
five dragon coins gives you a 1-UP.
And in New Super Mario Bros., the star coins let 
you unlock toad houses with 1-UPs and power-ups.
This means that showing skill - 
and proving that you’re an expert  
player - rewards you with stuff that 
actually reduces the difficulty level.
It’s a nasty negative feedback loop that 
inadvertently pushes you out of the top pipe.
In more recent games, then,  
those expert-level challenges are instead 
used to unlock even more difficult stages.
They reward skilled players with even 
more chances to show their skill.
All of this means that players are 
put off from using the assists,  
and encouraged to seek out 
ever greater challenges.
But, then again… players don’t actually need all 
that much encouragement to make a game harder.
Provided it’s fun, of course.
Just look at how players create self-imposed  
challenges like speed running, no coin 
collection, or the Mario nipple% run.
It’s good to track the player’s achievements to 
provide a sense of progression, but players will  
often surprise you in how they find ways 
to wring out more difficulty from a game.
So let’s finish by looking at how all of 
this comes together in Mario’s latest game:  
the wonderful Super Mario Bros. Wonder.
Things start with the character select screen - 
Mario, Daisy, Toad, and so on all play the same,  
but Nabbit and Yoshi are cordoned off as easy-mode 
characters who can’t take damage from enemies.
However, you can switch character at any time 
from the menu - and you may be enticed to do so,  
when you learn that these easier characters 
can’t make use of the game’s fun new power-ups.
There’s no “Elephant Nabbit” for instance.
You can also change the difficulty 
by using the game’s new badge system.
Some make the game easier - like, 
one saves you from falling into pits,  
another gives you a mushroom 
at the start of every level.
But other badges make the game more 
difficult, letting advanced players  
take on a self-inflicted challenge like going 
invisible or forcing Mario to continuously hop.
You can only wear one at a time,  
and you’re encouraged to change 
your current badge whenever you die.
The game’s structure is designed to let players 
pick and choose the levels they want to play.
To finish a world you’ll need to own 
a certain number of wonder seeds - in  
Pipe-Rock Plateau you’ll need 14 
of them to tackle the end boss.
But, between the levels, secret exits, 
and even the shop, there are more than  
30 of them in this hub - meaning you can 
skip some stages entirely if you choose.
This also allows Nintendo to 
drop in a few harder stages  
that advanced players can enjoy - 
and beginner players can ignore.
Nintendo game designer Koichi 
Hayashida says “up until now,  
2D Mario games have been in a format where 
players complete each course in sequence.
But in this title, players who want a 
challenge can start with a difficult course,  
and beginners can start with an easier one”.
Each hub also hides a secret exit 
which takes you to a special world,  
filled with the hardest levels in the game.
And, again, they’re entirely optional.
There’s even the customary end game level which  
you can only unlock if you’ve 
aced every level in the game.
That involves getting every wonder seed, 
picking up all of these 10 flower coins,  
and getting to the top of every flag pole.
This stuff is all represented 
by medals on the title screen  
so players can proudly track their 
progression throughput the game.
Also: the game is multiplayer, so 
you can get a friend to help out.
And the new online standee system lets you 
place down checkpoints ant any point in a level.
And in each level, there are lots of opportunities 
to push your luck - including the 10 flower coins,  
which are this game’s version of the star coin.
They don’t confer any advantage on 
the expert players who get them.
In fact, in this game, it’s the less 
skilled players who are rewarded.
If you die you’ll unlock a special 
bonus “Coins Galore” level which  
gives you a chance to earn some more 
1-UPs and cash to spend in the shops.
So Mario Wonder perfectly shows 
off this excellent bit of design.
The main path through the game is of 
a reasonable level of challenge - but  
Nintendo offers plenty of ways to make 
things easier if the player needs it.
And, on the other hand, the game keeps 
offering ways to make things harder.
Enticing little challenges 
to keep expert players happy.
And it’s entirely up to the 
player which path they’ll take.
But I don’t think this shows that Nintendo has 
finally solved that decades long problem - and  
I expect they’ll still be experimenting with 
ways for players to change Mario’s difficulty.
In an interview for Wonder, a Nintendo 
staffer explained that long time Mario  
designer Takashi Tezuka wanted 
a system that could change the  
difficulty level of the entire course, 
in real time, at the push of the button.
It proved too complicated for Wonder 
but, says Tezuka, “you never know,  
right? Maybe it’ll be in the next game”.
Thank you so much for watching this 
200th video on the GMTK YouTube channel.
That is quite the way to begin this 10th 
calendar year of running this YouTube channel.
And to celebrate this milestone, I have 
made some brand new GMTK merchandise.
Let me just, let me just... 
*Struggle* 
new GMTK t-shirts featuring this, if 
I dare say so, rather spiffy design.
Let me find another one.
So it's got the GMTK logo and little 
symbols representing various games  
and franchises and videos that I've made.
And then on the back of the t-shirts you've got  
little icons representing the five 
main prongs of the GMTK empire.
You've got a Mario question mark block 
to represent GMTK videos, a boss key,  
obviously, a magnet for Mind Over Magnet, 
the Flappy Bird from the Unity tutorial,  
and a dice from the GMTK Game
Jam.
If you fancy getting one of these, please head 
over to gamemakerstoolkit.com/support where  
you can find a link to the merch store 
as well as other ways to support me on  
my mission to provide free, high quality 
game design and development information.
Places like Patreon and Substack, 
and a way to donate directly.
If you've found any value in the last 200 episodes 
on this channel, then please consider chipping in.
Oh, and one more thing.
No, I'm not retiring.
Unlike a lot of YouTubers at the 
moment, I'm not going anywhere.
I still have so much I want to do.
Speak to you soon.
