Hi, my name is Mark, and I am still 
making a video game about magnets.
So, in the previous episode of this 
series back in March, I took my game,
slapped it on a Steam Deck, and took it 
to the Game Developers Conference in San
Francisco where I got loads of amazing 
feedback from other game designers.
They gave me ideas and suggestions 
for where to take the game next.
Then, I flew home and… didn't work 
on the game for 6 months straight.
And this is not the first time that I've 
taken a massive break from game development.
Remember when I released a video about 
how I was super inspired to get off my
butt and finish the game, and then didn't 
work on the game for 5 months straight?
In fact, I've looked at the calendar, and 
while the game has been in development for
about 24 months, I've only actually worked 
on it for about nine of those months.
So, if I do ever want to finish this 
game, something has got to change.
[Music]
Okay, so I think one of the biggest 
problems surrounding my crappy output
has been that I've struggled to 
juggle game dev and YouTube work.
I've never wanted Game Maker’s Toolkit to 
vanish and die during this development process.
And besides, YouTube and Patreon are literally 
paying the production budget for this game.
So, I've tried to maintain a relatively 
normal upload schedule throughout the process.
But that means that whenever I make a bit of 
progress on the game, I have to down tools,
change gears, and go make videos for a while.
And the longer I spend making videos, the 
harder it is to get back into game dev.
Now luckily, that's a 
reasonably easy thing to fix.
I can just change my schedule.
So going forward for the next few 
months, as I try to finish this game,
I'm going to put all of my focus 
and energy into game dev and let
the YouTube channel go more or less 
onto the back burner for a while.
If I do make videos about other games 
that don't have magnets in them, I'll
try not to stay away for so long that it becomes 
impossibly daunting to get back into the game.
That should hopefully help,
but I don't think it's going to fix the 
fundamental root cause of the problem.
Because even when I do work on the game, I don't 
feel like I'm making a lot of forward progress.
I'm just kind of aimlessly noodling around,
hoping that the game will eventually just 
coalesce by itself into a finished game.
Sometime, presumably, within 
the next one or two decades.
And the reason is because I 
don't really have… a plan.
There is no concrete list 
of tasks and actions I need
to do in order to bring this game to completion.
It is all just a bunch of random ideas in my head.
And look, when you first start working on a game,
I think it's vitally important to 
avoid planning as much as possible.
You want that freedom and leeway to 
experiment and innovate and just play around.
You don't want a detailed design document 
luring over your head stifling your creativity.
But once you've made your prototype and 
figured out what makes your game fun,
if you want all of those disparate elements to 
come together and make their way into a finished
game that you can put on Steam and sell to people, 
then… Mark, you're going to need to make a plan.
Whether that's on a whiteboard or it's in 
a notepad or it's a design document or,
in my case, a Trello board - whatever the 
case, it's something that tells you what
is going to be in this game and crucially by 
extension what's not going to be in this game.
And it also gives you a list of 
tasks and objectives to carry
out that will get the game to the finish line.
The funny thing is that I did one of these for my 
interactive video essay thing, Platformer Toolkit,
and it was an essential tool for getting that 
game finished within a reasonable time period.
Not 100% sure why I've never done it for 
this magnet game, but enough is enough.
Better late than ever.
Let's make a plan.
So, I started by making a really 
high-level overview of all the
main objectives I need to do 
in order to finish this game.
Everything from giving the game a 
name to building all of the levels
to writing all of the story and 
to creating a Steam store page.
Then as I started on each one 
of these tasks, I would create
a more specific sub-plan giving me detailed 
instructions for how to finish that thing.
Take level design, for instance.
So far, my plan, if you can call it that,
for level design has been to make a bunch 
of levels, which is not very specific.
How many levels is that, and how 
many worlds does that go into.
And when am I introducing 
all of the main mechanics?
So this time I have a plan.
I came up with 50 levels across five worlds.
So that's 10 levels per world.
That is not going to be an enormous game.
In this context, a level is a single screen puzzle 
chamber that you can finish in 2 or 3 minutes.
But a huge part of doing this plan 
is deciding on the game's scope.
How big is this game going to be?
And considering my schedule and output 
so far, I think it's a good idea to be
as conservative as possible if I want 
this game to ever go out of the door.
I'll focus on the first 
three worlds for this video.
So in each world, it's going to revolve 
around a different type of magnet.
World one has no magnets, so it's 
just these big magnetic blocks.
Then world two is about Max, the simple 
magnet that you can throw around the room.
And then world three is about Maggie and Meg,
which is like one magnet but can switch between 
two different sisters as you change its polarity.
For each one of these magnets, I'll 
need a few levels to introduce them
to the player and teach them 
the most basic abilities.
So let's give them four levels each for that.
And then there's all the mechanics 
I made, like the moving drill bit,
the block on wheels, the one-way 
platform, the laser beam,
the switch that resets itself after 
a few seconds, and the scissor gate.
Each one of those will need a level as 
a tutorial to teach you how it works.
Then an actual puzzle to solve.
And then another level: perhaps 
a harder puzzle or a level that
subverts the mechanic in an interesting 
way or a level that pairs the mechanic up
with another mechanic elsewhere in the game as 
per the puzzle matrix I explored in episode 9.
So if each mechanic has three levels 
each… if I put that on my plan… woah!
I've basically filled out the entire game.
Just got to make the levels now.
But this is something I can actually do.
It made level design so much easier because each
level now has a clear goal 
and purpose to strive for.
And so this, along with all of the lessons 
I've been learning in the previous videos
on this channel, allowed me to bang out 
sometimes four or five levels in a single day.
And within the space of about a month, I had 
made around 40 final levels for the game.
Not to mention the 100 drafts that 
will never see the light of day.
Did I say draft or giraffe?
There's no giraffes in this game.
Now, of course, the plan did change 
slightly as things went along.
For starters, I realised that it was 
a bit weird to have so many levels,
relatively speaking, with no magnet whatsoever.
The magnet is the entire point of the game!
That would be like playing Portal and there 
being 10 levels before you get the portal gun.
So, to counter this, I decided to introduce 
the magnet partway into world one.
Also, it's a bit of a jump to go from 
having no magnet whatsoever to having a
magnet that you can pick up, put 
down, ride up magnetic fields,
and throw around the room using a somewhat 
complicated aiming trajectory system.
So, I decided to move Max, the 
throwable magnet, into world three.
And then take Magnus, the mighty magnet 
who I briefly showed off in episode 8,
and reimagine him as the first magnet in the game.
He's big and heavy, so it makes 
sense that you can't throw him,
meaning that I can delay teaching 
that mechanic until world three.
He also travels up magnetic 
fields slower than Max,
which is a nice way of easing players 
into that novel game mechanic.
Maybe he'll come back later in the 
game with his mighty magnet powers.
Yes, he will. I know he will… 
because it's on the plan.
The plan also slightly changed 
based on playtesting and feedback.
Throughout this level design sprint, I would 
often give the current crop of levels to friends,
family members, Twitter randos, and fellow 
puzzle game designers to get some feedback.
Sometimes those ideas would inspire 
me to change the game slightly.
For instance, here's Adam, one of 
the developers behind Snipperclips.
ADAM: “Look at that! You should make 
a puzzle where you have to do that.”
Okay, good idea. I'll do that.
So sometimes the worlds would 
balloon beyond 10 levels,
and then I'd have to put more levels in 
the other worlds to balance things out.
And you could see this getting out of hand.
But luckily, I caught it early and kept 
the game within a reasonable scope.
But I think this is okay.
The plan has proved massively useful, 
but I still need a bit of leeway to
change things based on feedback 
or discoveries during development
Besides, I think there's a big difference 
between slightly altering a plan and just
randomly aimlessly noodling around in the dark.
Now I wasn't able to finish all of the 
levels during this development sprint.
I've still got a few more I need to make 
and then sprinkle throughout the campaign.
I've got loads more playtesting 
to do on the levels I have made.
And I need to make the entire final last world.
But I have made a big dent.
Plus, I can take a break because I know exactly 
what to do when I get back because of… the plan.
The plan! Arthur, I had a plan!
And a break is ultimately what I needed.
I've gone slightly mad.
But that's another cool thing about the plan.
When you get burnt out on doing one 
type of game development like super
cerebral level design stuff, you can 
look at the plan and find something
else to do that will tickle your 
brain in a slightly different way.
Like making some nice pretty pictures.
Now I know exactly how many 
worlds will be in this game,
I was able to do some of the 
background art for these levels.
Like this sewer system underneath 
the factory. That's world one.
I'll talk more about making the game 
pretty in a future episode, but for now,
these new backgrounds allowed me 
to make some nice screenshots that
show what the game will look 
like when it's finally done.
And also make some nice 
animated gifs for marketing.
Okay, so this is going pretty well.
What else is on the list?
Uh, oh yeah, this is a big 
one—give the game a name.
For the longest time, like two 
or more years of development,
this game has simply been 
called Untitled Magnet Game.
It can't be that because that 
joke's already been done,
and I also want a clever catchy name 
that sums up what this game is all about.
So I had a good long think and came up with…
A load of really terrible 
names that I will never use.
ChatGPT wasn't much better.
I mean, MagniMech: Factory Fugitive? 
Mate? Are you having a laugh?
The best name, in the end, came from a friend.
The Gaming Brit on YouTube casually suggested
Mind Over Magnet, and I was like… 
damn, that's pretty good, actually.
It's clever, it's catchy, and it instantly tells 
you that this is a puzzle game about magnets.
I literally can't think of anything 
better, so that is the name of this game.
Now, a good name needs a good logo, so 
I threw the words Mind Over Magnet into
Photoshop and started playing around 
with layouts and fonts and colours.
I knew I wanted the magnet in the logo somewhere
and realised that I could just 
replace the 'a' with a magnet.
I like how the rounded corners of 
the magnet contrast nicely against
the harsh edges and corners of the other letters.
This is what I came up with.
Then I put it in the GMTK Discord 
to get some feedback and ideas.
The best piece of feedback or the best idea I
saw was to have the other letters be 
attracted towards the magnetic 'a'.
It looks really cool and 
sells the concept even more.
And so, this is the final logo for the game.
So now I have a name, a logo, some 
screenshots, some animated gifs,
and a pretty good idea of how much 
game there is going to be in this game.
Which means I have all of the ingredients 
needed to finally make the Steam store page.
Yes, it's been a very long time coming.
Conventional wisdom suggests that 
you should make your Steam store
page as early as possible so you can build up 
those all-important wish lists on your game.
But, uh, better late than never.
Now, as it turns out, it's a lot harder to get 
your game on Steam than something like Itch.io.
Itch just needs your bank details and 
then lets you upload whatever you want.
Steam has a lot of checks in place to 
make sure you are a legitimate business,
and you're not flooding their 
store with absolute junk.
Well, that's the idea at least.
Now, in terms of getting a Steamworks account,
I had to fill out a huge 
questionnaire with loads of details.
I had to pay Valve $100.
And I had to get a certificate 
from the UK government to prove
that I am a legitimate business 
person, man, real human being.
And then, in order to get your store page online,
you've got to go through a 
huge checklist of things.
You've got to write the description,
set all of the tags, set the minimum system 
requirements, upload five different screenshots,
make loads of different banner arts 
and capsule art and stuff like that.
And you have to set a release date, though 
you don't have to show that to the public.
So my page just says 2024.
So it's not the most detailed 
Steam page in the world.
It doesn't have a trailer or anything like that.
But it is at least live, which is a commitment 
that this game will be finished—a $100 commitment.
And it also means that you can 
now go and wishlist the game.
If you want to do that, please do.
Much in the same way that leaving a comment on 
this video will push the video in the YouTube
algorithm, adding this game to your Steam wishlist 
will make Valve push it with its algorithm.
We are all just praying at the altars of robots.
The future kind of sucks sometimes.
But anyway. Phew!
I feel like I've achieved more in this one month
of development than I have at any 
other point during the process.
And I put that largely down to the plan.
Now, as I was talking about before, you have 
to find the right time to make your plan.
If you do it too early, you risk compromising 
the opportunity to be creative and inventive.
But if you do it too late, like I have,
it means the game development just ends up 
taking way longer than it ever should have.
But it is now done. I have a plan.
I have a concrete set of tasks to 
complete in order to get this game done.
It means every game dev session has purpose,
and it means I have more motivation 
and drive to get this game done.
If you would like to try the demo that's 
currently being given to playtesters,
then please consider being a GMTK Patreon.
Every Patreon member gets access to the demo plus 
loads of other goodies like bonus videos, early
access to new episodes, reading recommendations, 
access to the Discord, and, oh yeah…
You're literally funding 
the development of the game.
Thank you so much for watching, and I'll 
see you again, hopefully quite soon.
