Last month, I invited 32,000 game 
designers to make games in just four days.
And what's more, those games had 
to fit a theme - "Built to Scale"
So I wanted people to make games about 
teeny tiny things - like mould and ants.
I wanted people to make games about absolutely 
massive things - like giants and planets.
And I wanted people to make games about  
changing size - games about growing, and 
shrinking, and squeezing, and scaling.
As always, the incredible GMTK 
community did not disappoint!
You put together a whopping 7,600 
games - making it - yes, you guessed  
it - another recording-breaking 
jam for both GMTK and Itch.io.
And so, just like every year, I got people to rate  
and rank all of the games - leaving 
me with the top 100 games to play.
And boy, there were some 
incredible titles in here.
Beautiful, imaginative, creative, 
and just plain fun games.
But - I have to gonna be picky.
So these are the 20 that really stood out to me.
20 super smart games about 
size, scale, and dimensions.
Let's take a look.
Conventional design wisdom suggests that you  
shouldn't use a full-on physics system 
to drive your platforming character -
or else you'll end up with something 
floaty and finnicky, like LittleBigPlanet.
But then there's Little Slime Blows Up.
Here, the devs lean in to the 
float and the finickiness.
So this soft-body speedrunner 
is about a tiny blob of slime  
who can suddenly expand to double 
size with a hit of the space bar.
This motion launches you off the ground - making  
for a springy, bouncy jump that 
is surprisingly fun to finagle.
But, then, you realise you can also use your 
expanding body to shunt other objects around.
And then, it becomes clear than you 
can jump up into small crevices,  
expand, and get stuck in the gap -
useful for bypassing some of 
the game's most clever levels.
Bringing to mind Jelly Car 
and the PSP's Loco Roco games,  
Little Slime Blows Up is a cute 
and fun physics obstacle course.
We always see a few grid-based puzzlers in 
the jam, so lemme pick two of my favourites from 2024.
First up is Nested.
This is a really clever game 
about Russian nesting dolls.
So in each level we start as a big pink doll.
But hit a button and the top will pop off, 
to reveal another, smaller doll inside.
You can now move that one around independently.
Perhaps go off and hit a button, 
go through a colour-coded door,  
get back in the pink doll's belly,
or - hit the button again to reveal 
an even smaller doll inside that one.
This nested, fractal design sets up a number of simple  
conundrums about getting the 
right doll to the right spot.
And sometimes having the right 
combination of colours in the same doll.
There's nothing too taxing here - but you could  
imagine this game being expanded to 
contain some real head-scratchers.
Lovely stuff.
The other grid-driven puzzle game I 
want to point out is Get Some Helium.
So we have this red balloon dude.
And we can use the pump to increase his size until 
he's big enough to sit across these checkmarks.
Later levels will teach you that the 
balloon won't expand if there are  
level tiles in the way, so you can use 
this knowledge to limit your expansion.
Until that bites you in the butt, of course.
Time for a rethink!
More ideas are introduced in each stage,  
like blocks that must not be 
covered up if you want to win.
There are new rules - like, what happens 
when you hit more than one pump at the  
same time? And later you'll have an 
entirely new character to work with.
Thanks to some smart puzzle 
solutions, a generous undo feature,  
and overall sharp presentation, 
Get Some Helium is well worth a go.
Next on the docket is Picture Perfect.
So this is a cozy game about forced perspective.
You know - that fun optical illusion where 
you place one object close to the camera,  
and another far away, in order 
to radically swap their sizes.
So by fiddling with the zoom, the camera 
position, the pose, and the height.
we can make someone pinch the Washington monument.
Or fit inside the Gateway Arch.
It's a fun little challenge, made twenty times 
better thanks to some gorgeous illustrations.
And then you hit the final scene and 
realise that this wasn't just a random  
collection of images - but it was a road trip.
A father and daughter traveling across 
America as she leaves for college.
And that's just incredibly sweet.
Picture Perfect takes the vibe of cozy 
narrative games like Florence and Venba,  
and crushes them down into 
a beautiful playable poem.
Now, speaking of photography, here's Shutterbug.
This is a game about snapping photos of the  
insects in a grove - by using your 
browser window as your viewfinder.
So you can move the window around to 
survey the scene, and resize the window  
to make the shot smaller - or swap between 
portrait, landscape, and square framing.
In order to challenge you on this, the 
game gives you a number of simple missions:  
like take a photo of a bee but without 
getting a butterfly in the shot.
Or take a landscape shot of 
a dragonfly and a spider.
It's a simple game - but it's a good time 
and a very clever use of your browser window.
Speaking of which...
There were so many games about 
resizing windows in this jam.
Like, so so many.
Yes, you're all very clever!
But lemme pick my favourite: Windowframe.
In this one, the game takes 
place in a number of different  
windows - including some that you can resize.
So maybe we can stretch out this 
frame in order to reach the flag.
Or inch this window around a big red obstacle.
Then we hit windows that actually 
scale the objects inside, so we  
can use this window to shrink down 
and squeeze through this tight gap.
Later we get moveable windows, clever 
levels about searching for the goal,  
windows that move alongside 
their contents, and more.
Nothing will give you trouble,  
and - I'll be honest - without the floating 
window gimmick it wouldn't be noteworthy.
But the simple design, easy controls, and clever 
concept still make it a standout game in this jam.
I wasn't surprised to see games 
inspired by Katamari Damacy in this jam.
But I was taken aback by Sucky Safari.
This game - about a cute vacuum cleaner 
on wheels - follows that idea of taking  
on mass in order to grow bigger - so 
you can envelop even larger objects.
But this time there's a twist.
You see: you can easily suck 
up tiny animals like frogs.
But larger critters like geese will 
resist your pull unless they're stunned.
So what do you do? Well, you spit those 
frogs at the geese to wear them down,  
so you can safely suck them up.
What on earth am I saying 
right now? This is madness.
Uh, anyway - when you've got enough stuff in your  
belly you can choose to swallow 
some critters and grow in size.
Now you're using ducks to pelt penguins 
and penguins to knock out rabbits.
Oh - but watch out! Angry animals can damage 
your character so you can't be complacent.
Watch that heath bar!
This is, as you can hopefully 
tell - a dreadfully silly game.
But it also puts a tactical spin on Katamari that 
turns that game into something new and fresh.
And that was a really nice surprise.
It's Pizza Time! Which means 
we gotta play Need for Knead.
This one is about rolling out a pizza base in  
different directions in order 
to catch falling ingredients.
It's just that the ingredients 
become bigger, the bigger your base -
from mushrooms and olives to, well, fridges, PCs,  
cars, biplanes, sky scrapers, 
asteroids and entire planets.
This game has no chill.
Zero chill.
It is chill free.
The scale expands so fast it's utterly comical.
And to keep up you'll have 
to franticly zip your mouse  
around the desk as you practically 
burrow a hole into your mouse mat.
Always remember that you only have a couple 
minutes to grab someone's attention during a jam,
so make them smile, make them laugh, and 
make your game so frenetic that there's  
no chance to even think about 
stopping until the game is over.
Next up: PlankTown.
This one is about building a plankton village 
- on the back of a mechanised walking robot.
A village, I should add, that includes 
saw blades, cannons, and nuclear missiles.
All to protect your plankton people 
from the local crab population.
So, yeah, it's a Vampire Survivors like - a 
game where you automatically attack nearby  
enemies, leaving you free to waltz 
around the map and pick upgrades.
In this case, upgrades are literally building 
blocks that can be placed on your village -
and while the game is pretty generous 
about letting you stick stuff anywhere  
you like - including entire houses at 
a 90 degree angle - you will sometimes  
have to stop and rebuild to make everything fit.
And that happens a lot because this 
game doesn't give a hoot about balance.
It's not pick one of these things and shove it on  
your building - it's take all 
of them, and hope they fit!
And so within the space of a few 
minutes you'll have a towering,  
lumbering, weaponised shanty town 
just blitzing crabs to pieces.
Hitting them so hard they fly 
off the screen, and the world.
It's fun, frantic, and a good 
lesson about game jam games:  
don't worry about making it fair on the enemy.
Just give the player a good time.
Alright. Lemme show you My Shadows Are Bright.
This is a game about a valiant knight, 
clambering over castle ramparts to reach a goal.
Well, that's the dream at least.
It's actually just some blocks, action figures,  
and other toys being placed in front of a 
torch - creating a silhouette on the back wall.
But you can then swap perspective, 
into the imagination of a child,  
to see those familiar objects interpreted 
as towers, spikes, and castles.
That means you must flip back 
and forth between the two worlds,  
rearranging the objects to 
make a pathway to the goal.
The scale bit comes from the fact that as 
objects get closer to the light source,  
their shadows gets bigger - making it 
take up more space in the dream world.
So you'll need to think carefully about the 
object's position in both the X and Z axes.
My Shadows Are Bright is short, but it's sweet.
And I think shows a lot of potential to explore 
even more ideas with this silhouette gameplay.
Check it out.
We saw a lot of games about game development.
Games about making games.
It's all very meta.
My favourite, though, was Blueprint Hell.
If you've ever spent some time with 
Unreal's visual scripting system or  
Unity's shader graph then this game 
will give you 'nam style flashbacks.
It's all about hooking nodes up to other 
nodes, with stringy coloured connections.
Level one is nice and easy.
But each level just adds 
more stuff to think about.
More nodes.
More connections.
More inputs and more outputs.
Because each level builds on 
top of your previous solution,  
you'll need to think ahead and keep things tidy.
You'll need to make sure your 
solution is, well, built to scale.
Now - I do wish the game 
added an extra twist or idea.
Maybe certain connection 
that can't be crossed over,  
or bits of the graph that you can't build on.
But still - as a veteran 
of the animator graph war,  
it felt good to have a blueprint 
that I could definitively defeat.
Okay, I didn't really think that someone could  
make Tears of the Kingdom 
in 4 days, but he we are.
This is Tinker Co.
This is a game about building your 
perfect vehicle to drive through a mine.
So slap on some wheels, a drill, and a hopper.
And it just works!
You can now drive your madcap machine around the mine.
And you can add more.
Giant wheels that let you bounce.
More body parts.
More drills! Go nuts.
The physics system can handle it! Almost...
It's a smart idea, and it's achieved really well.
It would be a pretty standard game 
if it was just about mining for ore -
but the creative twist of letting you make 
your own machine really adds something extra.
I had a good time with this one.
Okay - it's kind of a meme that people 
make puzzle platformers for GMTK Game Jam.
And this year was no exception.
In the top 100 alone there were about 20 
games about moving a little guy around a  
world, pushing boxes, pressing 
buttons, and solving puzzles
So this year - I'm being mean.
I'm being ruthless.
I'm picking one puzzle platformer.
And that one is Getting Goopy.
This game is about a bouncy green blob who can  
pick up slime to grow - or 
shoot out slime to shrink.
And thus begins a handful of 
really nice little puzzles.
Perhaps using the recoil of 
shooting slime to jump higher,  
or shooting your blobs through a tiny 
gap and then getting them back later.
And new ideas are quickly introduced:  
like walls that you can only walk 
through when you have no slime.
And buttons that have to be 
held down by slime in order to work.
It all feels great - it's nippy and 
bouncy, without ever feeling slippery.
It has quick transitions and an instant restart.
And it's got genuinely brilliant puzzles 
with those all important "aha moments".
Basically - you know that thing where 
you've been working on a game for 3 years and then  
you play a game made in 4 days and 
it's, just... better?
Don't you hate it when that happens? Uh..
asking for a friend. Of course.
Okay, I love this one.
It's called Grow to Perfection.
So it's a game about guiding ants around a tiny  
nest to gather resources and 
bring them back to an egg.
Once they've got enough, the egg 
hatches - revealing an even bigger ant.
The camera zooms out, 
revealing another, larger area.
So you do it again - there's now more resources.
A new mechanic about combining raw 
materials to craft better stuff.
And a new egg to hatch.
And so on.
But here's the thing: at any point 
you can zoom back in to a lower level.
Perhaps improve the speed and 
efficiency of those previous ants,  
so you have more workers 
to use in the upper level.
Wait - this is basically Factorio, but fractal.
This is Fractorio! And it's blowing my mind.
It's just so satisfying to scroll 
that mouse wheel back and forth  
as you burrow into the Earth and then 
pop back out to the planet's surface.
And seeing all the levels 
working efficiently feels great.
I ended up playing this for twice as 
long as any other game on the list,  
which is a high complement to give when 
you have 100 games to get through.
Give it a go.
Probably the best dragon-based postage 
game in the jam: it's Scale Mail.
So this is a game about packing 
objects into the tight confines  
of a bag, by carefully placing and 
rotating the objects on a grid.
But if you have too much stuff you can simply 
hit S to shrink the object down and make it fit.
Sounds easy, right? Well, notice that 
shrinking an object also makes it heavier -
so other objects need to be scaled up to 
keep everything under the target weight.
You also have to deal with multiple 
bags and multiple characters,  
just to keep you on your toes.
The game also has a clever scoring system.
You just need to pack the 
items into the bag to win:  
but you can get more points by 
adding in complimentary candies.
They also fill out the grid and impact the weight,  
so you'll need to think carefully 
in order to win all three stars.
This game's cute art style, 
creative central mechanic,  
and smart scoring system make 
it a real winner in my book.
Let's get artistic, with Nearest Neighbor.
The set-up behind this game is delightfully silly.
Aliens have invaded the planet and 
demand to see our greatest artwork.
The only catch: the aliens 
are practically microscopic.
So your job is to recreate these great 
works of art on a much smaller canvas.
That means recreating shapes, colours, 
and compositions on a weeny pixel grid.
Which, for anyone who's done a 
little pixel art, is a fun challenge.
You'll get the idea behind the 
game pretty quickly - but it's  
surprisingly relaxing to turn these 
masterpieces into microscopic versions.
This jam saw a number of games about the 
growing nature of plants and flowers.
But my pick of the bunch, so to 
speak, was Through the Great Vine.
This is a game about a giant thistle that 
grows towards a ball of concentrated sunshine.
You can use this to snake the plant through gaps 
and crevices, and lead it to the beehive goal.
But you also need to think about water.
The plant drinks water as it grows, and if the 
water source runs dry the vine will stop and wilt.
So you'll also need to think about 
how to redirect drops of liquid to  
your roots - how can you use your 
body as a slope, barrier, or path?
More mechanics are introduced later,  
like multiple paths and spheres that 
make plants retract, instead of grow.
And while the World of Goo inspirations are clear 
to see, this game still feels like its own thing.
It's very impressive and well worth 
playing through the 10 levels on display.
While the theme of a GMTK Game Jam
is intended to challenge you
to make a game within a certain limitation or rule,
it's always totally fine for people to interpret the 
words of the theme in whatever way they like.
So how about taking the word "scale" to mean the  
scales on a fish? That's the 
idea behind Scale the Depths.
This is one of those addictive feedback loop 
games - this time about fishing in the ocean.
So we send a little hook into the depths, hunt 
for fish, and then bring them back to the boat.
Next, we need to scale the fish in a cute mini 
game about speed, precision, and accuracy.
Go too fast and you'll damage 
the fish, reducing its value.
Then, we feed the fish to a hungry 
animal in order to earn some cash.
And then finally, use that cash to buy 
upgrades so we can fish for longer,  
go deeper, and grab fish more easily.
Loop, repeat, do it again.
It's a winning formula, and it's done to perfection here.
Not much more to say - just give it a go!
Another interpretation of the theme was taking 
the word scale to refer to climbing up towers.
Like our next game: Blueprint Bob.
In each level we have a handful 
of blocky building parts.
And we must place them down to construct a tower.
Hit play and all the blocks 
turn into heavy physics objects.
And hero Bob goes from architect to acrobat as 
he tries to clamber up to the top of the pile -
and stand on a point higher than the goal line.
Simple but cute, effective, 
and a smart use of the theme.
There's always one team that 
goes a bit extra during the jam.
And this year, that award goes to Pizzascaper.
Yes - these crazy cats made 
Neon White in four days.
A fast paced, neon-lit, 
score-chasing arcade platformer.
In this one you can shoot out blocks into the environment, and 
then hit the right mouse button to scale them up -
making bridges and platforms to 
help you get around the level.
But soon enough you'll realise 
that there's a better way.
Because if you stand on a block while it expands,  
it shoots you into the air and gives 
you a massive amount of momentum.
And so it becomes a whole new game: creating 
trampolines to bounce you across the stage.
And so sure - it's pretty similar 
to the explosive card in Neon White.
But the infinite usage allows for 
some really fun speedrun strats.
This game just flows, and it feels 
exceptional to fly through the level.
It's tough, but really rewarding.
And there we go! By playing with size and scale,  
these designers came up with 
some truly innovative ideas.
Games where players have to decide 
when to go big, and when to go small.
Games about the chaotic thrills 
of constantly getting bigger.
Games about scaling in power.
Games about playing in multiple scales.
And games about scaling the 
very confines of the game window
Now: time for some honourable mentions, I reckon!
Cappy & Tappy is a co-op game where one 
player's plopping down Tetris blocks,  
and the other is climbing up a gigantic tower.
The Boiler Room is a brilliant squished-down  
Pikmin game about collecting 
leaves and shovelling coal.
Train Set GO! is a nested metro manager that's 
split between a toy train and a tube map.
Benedict Beaver the Builder is all about 
munching on logs to fill out a blueprint.
And Shrink is all about a psychotherapist who 
literally leaps into their patient's mind.
But there were just so many great games!
What you lot can achieve in 
just 96 hours blows my mind.
And I played even more amazing games on stream - 
now on the brand new Youtube channel GMTK Live.
A huge thank you to everyone who took part, 
and those who played and rated the games.
Thanks to itch.io for hosting the jam, to 
my Discord mods for keeping everyone chill,
and to my Patrons for letting us run GMTK Game 
Jam, year after year, without corporate sponsors.
You can now register your interest for 2025's jam,  
so you'll get an email as soon 
as next year's date is announced!
But until then, thanks for 
watching - and I'll see you soon.
