Hi.
I’m Mark Brown and this is Boss Keys - a
series about the dungeons in the Legend of
Zelda games.
But actually.
Pause that for a second.
We can’t talk about 2013’s Nintendo 3DS
game A Link Between Worlds without first talking
about the overworld.
Because while we’ve certainly seen the design
of Zelda‘s dungeons shift from game to game,
the changes above ground have been even more
dramatic.
And a lot of it comes down to the order in
which you can visit the dungeons.
In the very first Zelda game, you were given
the freedom to tackle the dungeons in many
different orders, with only a few obstacles
blocking your path.
This meant that you explored Hyrule by following
your curiosity instead of a predetermined path.
A Link to the Past added a bit more structure
to the game.
You needed to visit the light world dungeons
before the ones in the dark world, and large
parts of Hyrule were locked away until you
unlocked specific items.
Plus, the dungeons are numbered on your map,
which suggests an order.
Miyamoto said this shift was because of the
story stuff, saying that programming in the
logic to have the plot still work when the
player is dictating the order of the game,
would need more memory than the Super Nintendo
could handle.
But later games on better hardware just got
more and more predefined in their structure.
Ocarina of Time offers some choices in the
middle of the game, but you’ll have to defiantly
ignore Shiek's instructions to take them.
And later games, like Wind Waker, have just
one order.
Some earlier games could technically be done
out of order by leaving the dungeon as soon
as you get the key item and then using that
to open a new path, but later titles would
clamp down on this.
Games like Minish Cap and Twilight Princess
use special events that only trigger when
you finish the dungeon, to lock off future
parts of the game.
All of this culminating in Skyward Sword.
The video game equivalent of following a GPS
on an straight road.
But with A Link Between Worlds, things changed
dramatically.
It’s like a Link to the Past, but even more
open.
The game’s dungeons can be finished in pretty
much any order you like, making it one of
the most freeform Zelda games... at this point
in time at least.
So you need to beat Eastern Palace, which
is the tutorial dungeon, first.
But then you can tackle either House of Gales
or Tower of Hera.
Up to you.
Then, once you’re in Lorule, you can do
the remaining seven dungeons in pretty much
whatever order you please.
All of this required some significant changes
to the Zelda formula.
So Instead of finding items inside the dungeon,
you rent the items you need from a cheeky
chap called Ravio who will lend out key Zelda
gear like the fire wand, hookshot, and boomerang.
And you can keep them - until you die.
At which point, you’ll need to pony up and
rent them again.
And this is pretty smart: it makes death more
meaningful and makes you think hard about
spending rupees.
Unfortunately, the game’s really easy and
rupees are absolutely everywhere so you can
just rent everything and it’s pretty unlikely
that you’ll die much anyway but still...
If you’re going to need an item in a dungeon,
then you won’t even be able to get through
the front door without first renting the appropriate
gear - like, with these pegs blocking the
Tower of Hera’s door, which forces you to
go get the hammer.
That’s better than Zelda 1 where you can
hit a brick wall midway through a dungeon
because you don’t have the stepladder yet.
And I think this is all fantastic.
You get to wander off in any direction you
please, you very rarely hit brick walls, and
if you get stuck in one part of the game you
can just try something else.
But I would say that while this change to
the formula has helped the overworld, it actually
harmed the dungeons themselves.
Let’s go back underground.
For one, this set-up means that you no longer
find items inside the dungeons themselves.
As we’ve seen in this series, Zelda dungeons
typically have you exploring a space filled
with obstacles that are impossible to overcome
with your current skill set.
You then find a new item, and can return to previous parts of the dungeon to open up new pathways.
Only one dungeon does this in A Link Between
Worlds.
The Desert Palace gives you titan’s mitts,
which let you pick up some heavy rocks you
came across earlier.
The other dungeons simply don’t have this,
which removes a significant bit of puzzle solving.
Two, is that the dungeons largely have to
assume that this could be the very first dungeon
the player has visited, which means the difficulty
curve for the second half of the game is pretty flat.
Not entirely - some dungeons are more complex
than others.
But it’s pretty steady.
I mean, technically the game could ramp up
the difficulty of the enemies and bosses depending
on whether this is your first or your seventh
dungeon.
I don’t think A Link Between Worlds does
this.
But in terms of actual puzzles and dungeon
structure - that definitely stays the same.
That would be a nightmare to make.
Three, is that the dungeons must also assume
that the only item you’re carrying is the
one you needed to get into the dungeon.
So while Swamp Palace can be filled with puzzles
and enemies that relate to the hookshot, it
can’t have anything related to the boomerang,
bow, fire rod, Pegasus boots, hammer, ice
rod, sand rod, titan’s mitt, or tornado
rod.
And if the dungeon needs bombs, it also has
to feature these regenerating bomb-like enemies.
Which kinda gives the solution away, doesn’t
it?
Again, the later dungeons in a typical Zelda
game can have puzzles based on any and every
item you have at that point.
But that’s not possible in A Link Between
Worlds.
Though one nice thing is that certain enemies
and puzzles are easier to deal with if you
have rented other items.
It’s not quite Breath of the Wild levels
of improvising puzzle solutions, but it’s something.
You could listen to all of this and say, hey! Listen!
No - hey, maybe Zelda games should be linear,
because the dungeons have all of these annoying
compromises to account for the player taking
the dungeons out of order.
And okay. Fair point.
But I think this is only because Nintendo
has tried to retrofit a linear style of game
and dungeon design into something more freeform,
with kinda strange bits of design to tape
over the cracks.
Perhaps what the game needed was an entirely
new design philosophy.
But I suppose we’ll come back to that down
the line.
For now, let’s talk about the dungeons themselves.
Doing Boss Keys has made me realise that there
are basically three types of dungeon in the
Zelda series.
The first is all about locks and keys.
The dungeon is a maze, where your path to
the boss is cut off by padlocked doors, big
obstacles, and other hazards.
To succeed, you need to slowly untangle the
dungeon’s knot by finding and using keys
of all varieties.
I’ve previously called these find the path
dungeons, but let’s just call them
lock and key.
I’m going to call the second type of dungeon
the puzzle box.
This is when the dungeon itself is a puzzle,
and you must manipulate its very architecture
to beat it.
It’s like trying to solve a Rubick’s cube
from the inside.
This might involve manipulating water, going
back and forth in time, chucking the dungeon
upside down, and more.
Some people consider these the most annoying
dungeons in the series, whereas personally
I think they can be the absolute best.
And then finally there are more simple and
linear dungeons.
These are less about navigating the space
itself and more about solving puzzles and
fighting enemies.
They might have some elements from other dungeons,
but the layouts are more linear and you don’t
have to put in much effort to find your way
through.
I’ve called these follow-the-path dungeons
before, but let’s call them gauntlet.
Now, every individual dungeon can be put into
one of these three categories, but it’s
a bit harder to put an entire game into a
single box.
In Ocarina of Time, for example, the Forest
Temple is lock and key, the Water Temple is
the most famous puzzle box dungeon of them
all, and the Shadow Temple is pure gauntlet design.
But if we’re generalising, then classic
and 2D games generally fall into lock and
key, the N64 games and more recently Skyward
Sword and Breath of the Wild go into puzzle box.
And all the other games go into gauntlet.
Which of course begs the question: where does A Link
Between Worlds go?
And the answer is: for the first time in forever,
we’ve got a game filled with lock and key dungeons.
And we can use the test I made up earlier
in the series to confirm it.
Do the dungeons have branching paths?
Yes.
You’ll often come across rooms with lots
of exits, which means you’ll have to start
building a mental map of where you’ve been
and where you’ve yet to explore.
Does the game offer choices?
Sure.
For the first time in ages you’ll be carrying
around a pocket full of keys and can sometimes
pick between multiple locked doors at once.
Does the game have backtracking? Yes.
You’ll often have to wander back through
the dungeon with a key, or because pressing
a button in one area did something in another.
And no, the game doesn’t just do the backtracking
for you with cheeky shortcuts.
Now, A Link Between Worlds is not as complex
as the classic lock and key games, like Link’s
Awakening or the Oracle games.
And that’s down to a number of reasons.
One is that the dungeons generally have fewer
keys - only about three or four.
And, like I said before, only one dungeon
has those classic item-and-lock puzzles.
Without them, the number of things you must
keep track of is greatly reduced.
Also, the map on the 3DS touchscreen is very
generous.
You get the entire layout from the moment
you step into the dungeon, and the compass
shows you everything.
Plus, the levels are quite cramped and interconnected
which makes backtracking easier - but I’d
generally call that a plus.
As I always say, making the decision to go
back is the fun bit, actually schlepping back
through the dungeon is often less enjoyable.
But still, the dungeons aren’t too shabby
and the graphs - I bet you missed ‘em - the
graphs look good.
We want wide graphs, because those represent
branching paths and choices and backtracking.
Not these thin graphs for Skull Woods and Tower of Hera, which are two of the less ambitious dungeons.
Though, they're still fun in their own way.
Tower of Hera, for example, has lots going
for it even if it’s simple to navigate.
It’s 12 storeys high, and it looks amazing
in stereoscopic 3D when you’re at the top
of the tower.
These springboard panels are a lot of fun
to use.
And oh, man, I still haven’t even mentioned
the game’s main gimmick!
You can merge with the wall, turning link
into a sketchbook drawing so you can cross
otherwise impossible pathways.
This mechanic leads to a great boss fight,
and some fine puzzles.
The game’s got a bunch of clever conundrums
actually - one of my favourites is in skull
woods where you trick a wallmaster into slapping
a button for you.
All of the elements - the enemy, the button,
the way the monster can’t get you if you’re
under a walkway - they’re all explained earlier,
making for a good puzzle.
There’s also a few puzzles that make use
of the fact that these dungeons have multiple
floors, which is good.
Asking you to consider the dungeon as a real
place is always the sign of a good Zelda dungeon.
So you’ll drop through holes to get to keys
in the room below.
And there’s a dungeon where you have to
get light to leak down from the top floor
to the bottom which is actually really cool
but it’s so simple that you don’t have
to really think too much about it to make
it work.
The same thing happens with Swamp Palace, which is the game’s obligatory water manipulation dungeon.
Here, you’re raising and lowering the water
level, just like the Water Temple and Jabu
Jabu’s Belly.
But in most instances, you can only exit the
room when the water is at a specific level
so you’re not actually making a decision
to impact some off-screen room but just solving
the current puzzle and then, hey, you also
solved the puzzle in the other room too I guess?
Also sometimes the water level simply doesn’t
affect other rooms and the whole dungeon is
a bit disappointing.
It is the first dungeon in a million years
to have an entirely optional key, though,
so that’s something!
Okay, I have a few stray thoughts. So let’s get to them.
I think A Link Between Worlds is one of the
best feeling Zelda games ever made.
Zelda has always been a bit clunky if you
ask me - the retro games are kinda stuck in
a grid, and in the 3d games, Link has to get
locked into a duel with an enemy to actually
stand a chance of killing them, giving the
games a jerky stop and start rhythm.
In A Link Between Worlds, Link can move around
fast and freely, he can absolutely wail on
enemies, and it’s also the only 3D Zelda
game to play in 60 frames per second and,
man, it feels so smooth.
The dungeons are filled with optional goodies,
which works pretty well.
You never know if a puzzle will lead to a
key, or just some rupees.
But because rupees are so important in the
game, it doesn’t feel like a consolation
prize or a red herring.
The dungeons also have these super useful
hidden items like better tunics, extra magic
power for your items, and ore that can be
used to improve the master sword.
These are really well hidden and they’re
a nice bonus for those smart enough to find 'em
Oh yeah, I haven’t really mentioned that
A Link Between Worlds is like a strange quasi-sequel,
quasi-remake of Link to the Past.
Like, way more so than Twilight Princess is
a strange love letter to Ocarina of Time.
Link Between Worlds has the same general world
map, the same light world/dark world concept,
and some similar dungeon names and ideas - but
all new layouts.
I’m not sure what to think about all of
this, but I guess it's what Nintendo does now
So that’s A Link Between Worlds.
The dungeons are generally quite easy, but
overall they’re good fun, and it’s nice
to go back to a very classical style of dungeon
design that we’ve only seen a few times
in recent years, in the odd Minish Cap or
Twilight Princess dungeon.
I personally think the move to a non-linear
structure was a good one.
But it definitely wasn’t executed as well
as it could have been.
We’ll chat more about that soon.
But next time on Boss Keys, I’m not going
to talk abut Breath of the Wild.
That’ll come later.
I might wait for the DLC dungeon.
Until then... we’ll see. Watch this space.
Boss Keys is powered by Patreon, and these
are my top tier supporters.
