[Music]
Hi, my name's Mark and this is
Bosskis. So, I make a YouTube show
called Game Makers Toolkit. And an
episode I've wanted to make for a long
time is a breakdown of the dungeon
design in The Legend of Zelda games. I
think these things are fascinating.
They're these twisting, contorting,
nonlinear maze-like puzzle boxes filled
with enemies and traps. They have
terrific boss fights and unique
architecture, and the best ones are
these gigantic mechanical riddles for
you to solve. But if I want to do this
episode properly, I'm going to need to
revisit every major Zelda game, and
that's going to take hundreds of hours,
which is a lot of research for just one
video. So, I thought it might be fun to
release a bunch of spin-off episodes as
I go. one video on each Zelda game I
play with my thoughts and findings on
the dungeon design in that game. If you
want to follow along, that's cool. If
you prefer the more thoroughly
researched and bite-sized episodes I
usually make, just wait a few months and
I'll do a proper episode of GameMakers
Toolkit featuring everything I've
learned on this
subject. I'm kicking off with The Legend
of Zelda: A Link to the Past. It's the
third Zelda game, but it's where
Nintendo really established the formula
and introduced iconic elements like the
Master Sword, heart pieces, and the hook
shot. Let's start by talking about
linearity. Do the dungeons usher you
from room to room or let you explore
their layouts in any way you desire? The
answer is that some dungeons do the
former, others do the latter, and some
lie in the middle. Those in the middle
include the Eastern Palace, the first
proper dungeon in the game. What you'll
notice is that there is only one path
you can take through the dungeon. You
have to go up here past these boulders,
then around in a big loop to get to this
room, then across to this area to get
the big key. Then it's off to the item
chest to get the bow, and upstairs to
fight the boss. But the dungeon feels
less linear than that for a number of
reasons. One is the number of optional
rooms. This one contains the dungeon
map, which isn't essential. And this one
just contains a bunch of rupees. Those
rooms, plus the ability to visit rooms
that you'll come into later, such as
this area, where a pair of blocks make a
one-way path, give the dungeon a large
explorable space. There are lots of
rooms and doors to choose from. Also,
keys force you off the critical path.
You can't get through this door until
you make a detour off into this room to
find a key. Nintendo can modulate
difficulty by moving the key further
away from the door. And finally, the
path crisscrosses over the entire
dungeon. This bridge is over the
boulders you dodged earlier. The
excursion to get the big key sends you
off in a huge loop around the dungeon,
and the big key makes you backtrack to
this room with the giant chest. All of
this obscures the critical path, forcing
you to explore to find it. So, while the
dungeon essentially guides you along one
path, you get the sense that you're
making your own route. Clever stuff.
Other dungeons are less prescribed in
the way you solve them. The Palace of
Darkness, the fifth dungeon, will see
you holding more than one key in your
pocket for the first time in the game,
and you can use those keys on multiple
locked doors. What this means is that
you can proceed through the dungeon in a
truly nonlinear way. For this door, you
could use this key or this key, and then
you could open this door or this door
and use this key, this key, or either of
the first two keys. There's still a
predetermined set of rooms you have to
visit, but having some agency over your
route gives you the real sense that
you're making decisions, and you find
yourself hitting fewer dead ends. What's
surprising is the number of optional
rooms in dungeons of this design. Take
this main floor of Ganon's Keep. You
don't need to go in any of these rooms
to finish the dungeon. And in Misery
Mer, there are five keys to find, but
you can actually solve the entire
dungeon with just two if you know what
you're doing. Of course, you rarely know
what you're doing. So, these unnecessary
rooms must be there to make the dungeon
feel bigger and tougher than it truly
is, giving you so many keys and locks
and rooms to explore that you feel like
a champion puzzle solver when you
finish. Turtle Rock is another dungeon
that feels harder than it is. This room
has a crazy spaghetti junction of pipes,
but in reality, you only need to keep
track of two of them to succeed. Some
dungeons are completely linear,
especially in your return to Hyrule
Castle. You move from room to room and
all the locked doors are unlocked with
keys found in the exact same room. But
that fits the tone of the story. At this
point, Zelda has been kidnapped again,
and you're charging up Hyrule Castle's
tower, slashing everything in your way.
This is the time for a gauntlet of
enemies as you chase after Zelda, not
pensive puzzle solving and getting lost.
This is the only dungeon like that, but
you'll find that some dungeons are
halfway between two styles. Desert
Palace, the second dungeon, starts
relatively nonlinear with this massive
opening chamber that has a whopping
seven doors to explore and one more to
unlock, but after that it turns into a
straightforward path to the boss. This
gives a sort of ramping tension. You
rarely just stumble upon the boss door
while exploring. You get there after a
section where you have to move quickly
from room to room, fighting baddies and
amping up the stakes before you go
headto-head with the final monster.
There's a nice moment in the Tower of
Hera, which reminds us that while Zelda
wouldn't go 3D for seven more years,
dungeons in A Link to the Past were
already making us think about the space
as a building with verticality. Because
to get to the moon pearl, which is in
this big chest on floor 4, you have to
drop down from the exact right spot on
floor five.
This puzzle won't bust your noggin, but
it will get you to think about these
dungeons as actual 3D spaces. It's a
shame that there aren't more dungeons
that really make you think about how
they're put together in order to
navigate them. But here's a nice setup
that does just that. In the Palace of
Darkness, you need the orange blocks to
be lowered to get up this staircase. But
if you drop them by hitting either this
switch or this switch, it will also
raise the blue blocks and stop you
getting to the staircase. So, you have
to go in a loop around the dungeon and
come up from the room to the south. It's
simple, but it's an elegant piece of
design that encourages you to understand
the layout of the level, and it promotes
some forward thinking. A more
complicated version of this puzzle comes
in the long and winding ice palace. It's
perhaps the hardest dungeon in the game.
And then when you finally get to the
end, you realize that you need to push
this block down the hole. And this time,
you need to lower the blue blocks, but
that will lift the orange ones and block
you. And this time, the route back
around is a lot harder to find. Another
dungeon worth mentioning is Skull Woods,
which takes place both underground and
overground. It's interesting to see
Nintendo toying with the dungeon formula
so early in the series. Likewise,
Thieves Town has you leading this girl
to a room bathed in light, where she'll
transform into the dungeon's boss,
blind. So, there we have it. 12
dungeons, some straightforward, some
twisting, some nonlinear. They ask you
to understand the way the dungeon is put
together, and they surprise you by
breaking with convention. Overall, it's
a strong start for this series. And the
question is, where to next? onto Link's
Awakening or do we jump to Ocarina of
Time? Let me know your thoughts in the
comments below. Thanks for watching.
Boss Keys is made possible thanks to the
fine folks at Patreon who are somehow
happy to fund a several month-long
project to make a 10-minute video about
Zelda games. What a bunch of cool
weirdos.
