The games industry in Japan started life in
the arcade.
In America, you could argue that it began
in the offices of a young Atari.
But in Britain, the business had a very different
start: over here, it began in the bedrooms
of teenagers, all across the nation.
Computers in the UK took a while to get going.
Devices from America were prohibitively expensive,
and the only thing you could buy from Britain
required you to hand solder about 3,000 joints
on a circuit board.
They were for hobbyists, only.
But in the early 80s, things changed.
Electronics firm Acorn forged a partnership
with the state broadcaster, which gave the
newly christened BBC Micro nationwide prominence.
And electronics inventor Clive Sinclair launched
the ZX line of computers - culminating in
the ZX Spectrum - which were enormously successful
thanks to the ultra low price point of around £100.
Joined by the American-made Commodore 64,
this trio of microcomputers wormed their way
into the average British home.
And once they were there, people started coding.
That's thanks to the fact that the computers
all ran some version of BASIC - an easy-to-use
programming language.
Plus, the manuals taught you about if statements
and loops.
And computer magazines were full of tips and
sample code.
Among the first things people made, were games.
Most of them were rip-offs of the arcade cabinets
that were popping up along the seafront - but
there were original ideas too.
These were games made in bedrooms and in college
dorms.
They were made by single creators, or perhaps
a pair of friends or brothers.
Soon enough, these people realised that they
could copy their games onto a cassette…
and actually sell them.
Perhaps take out an advert in a magazine and
sell through the post.
Or sell them at a computer fair.
Get the code published in a magazine for a
few quid.
Or sell them to an independent computer shop.
It was a cottage industry - with early game
designers stuffing cassettes into envelopes
in their kitchen.
Very quickly, though, the industry started
to grow - especially when highstreet chains
like WH Smiths and Boots started to stock
games.
Now, if you wanted to sell big you needed
access to a proper cassette duplication machine,
someone to make full-page magazine ads, and
perhaps even offices overseas.
And so began the software house - or, what
we'd now call a publisher.
Essentially, a small company that would handle
the sales and distribution of a bunch of different games.
They might have a few in-house programmers
making software, but they would also buy games
from "freelancers" - or youngsters in their
bedrooms - in exchange for royalties or a
fat one-off fee of, say, £1000.
A huge number of software houses popped up
all across Britain.
Like Quicksilva in Southampton, Hewson Consultants
in Oxford, Gremlin Interactive in Sheffield,
and Bug-Byte in Liverpool.
Each one had its own style and brand.
Software Projects had a distinctly odd art
style across its game collection.
Ocean Software secured the licenses to upcoming
films and Olympic athletes.
US Gold snatched up the rights to games made
in America, like Sid Meier's early flight sims.
And Ultimate Play the Game maintained a cool
reputation by only publishing its own, ultra
high-quality titles: like Jetpac and Knightlore.
And so it was during this period that we saw
the games that would go on to define the era.
We saw games that were surreal, quirky, experimental,
political, and subversive.
Manic Miner, from Matthew Smith, was about
a bloke trapped in a weirdo world of penguins
and man-eating toilets.
Deus Ex Machina was a sci-fi adventure that
took you from a cell to old age.
The games of Jeff Minter were trippy, colourful,
and featured an unsettling number of ungulates.
And in a world without clear-cut genres, designers
were constantly coming up with unique ideas
that would ripple out into future games.
Skool Daze, which is about sneaking past teachers
and pinching your report card from the staff
room, is like an early sandbox game.
Kevin Toms' Football Manager wildly predates
the Football Manager we know today.
A young Julian Gollop cut his teeth on tactical
games like Time Lords and Rebelstar before
he made X-COM.
Perhaps the most influential game of the time,
though, was Elite.
Made by university buddies David Braben and
Ian Bell for the BBC Micro, Elite was an open-ended
space trading game which had impressive wireframe
graphics and used procedural generation to
magic up planets and galaxies.
It was unlike anything else, with CVG calling
it "the most complex game released for the
Beeb, if not the most complex program of all".
And pretty much every space-sim released since
counts Elite as an influence, including Eve
Online, Wing Commander, and No Man's Sky.
But it was also a key influence on early versions
of Grand Theft Auto - described by its designers
as "Elite in a city".
Which basically means the entire open world
genre goes back to the BBC Micro, and that
makes Elite a confident Design Icon.
While games were now branded by the software
house that published them, the original programmers
were still given a huge amount of prominence.
Magazine ads would feature the names of the
game's creator, and the press would report
on designers like they were celebs or football
players.
Perhaps reporting on Matthew Smith's transfer
from Bug-Byte to Software Projects - or just
tagging along on Jeff Minter's holiday.
The press and the software houses created
stars of these people.
They made them rich and famous.
Which, for one company at least, was the start
of their downfall.
Imagine Software, in Liverpool, built itself
a reputation on hype and grandeur.
The founders of the company bought fast cars,
rented a flashy office, and took on staff
by the dozens.
The newspapers reported on the (probably made-up)
salary of its teenage programmer, Eugene Evans.
And in 1984, the company started hyping up
something big.
It took out full-page magazine ads, promising
a pair of so-called "mega-games" called Psyclapse
and Bandersnatch.
Each month, there was a new ad to build up
the hype.
And it was all being captured in a BBC documentary
about the race to make the big Christmas smash hit.
PRESENTER: "And this is it: Bandersnatch.
The ultimate adventure game which, when it's
finished Imagine claim, will take you into
a fantasy world".
Which made it even more embarrassing when
the company folded mid-way through filming.
The money had run out because of mismanagement
and broken promises.
The bailiffs had come in, and Imagine's doors
were shut.
*Door slams*
The mythical mega-game Bandersnatch was never
to be released - outside of the interactive
Black Mirror episode on Netflix, which is
a reference to the game.
But okay, while some software houses fell
to the overspending habits of its twenty-something
rockstar founders, others succumbed to more
humdrum illnesses.
Software piracy was a big one - there wasn't
much stopping you from copying the game from
tape to tape and giving it to a friend, or
selling it on a market stall.
The other was the introduction of more powerful
and complex machines like the Amiga and Atari
ST, which usually required a full team to
make games.
So the business model of scooping up the rights
to games made by bedroom coders was over.
Instead, we saw the rise of dedicated developers
like Sensible Software, DMA Design, Bullfrog,
and Psygnosis.
And they needed big money to invest in upcoming
games - often from overseas publishers.
But most importantly, there was the introduction
of the console.
Sure, the UK had dabbled in devices like the
Atari VCS and the Sega Master System - but
we were usually more interested in Dizzy,
Monty Mole, and Chuckie Egg than Alex Kidd.
But in the early 1990s, the Super Nintendo
and the Sega Mega Drive completely dominated
the games biz.
ACTOR: "There are over a hundred Mega Drive
games.
They get faster, they get harder.
What are you gonna do to keep up?"
Sure, the Amiga had a strong foothold but
Superfrog and Zool had nothing on Super Mario
and Sonic the Hedgehog.
So the survivors were typically the ones who
were able to adapt to this changing landscape.
Software houses like Ocean, Codemasters, and
US Gold expanded to include console games.
While developers Argonaut Games and Ultimate
Play the Game - now named Rare - worked with
Nintendo to bring 3D graphics to the SNES.
Down the line, on PlayStation, Psygnosis hit
big with Wipeout, Core Design went global
with Tomb Raider, and DMA Design changed the
industry with Grand Theft Auto.
The UK games biz didn't get completely consumed
into the world of consoles, of course - and
you could argue that its rich history of computer
game design gave it the foundation to be a
leading player on PC today.
Like Planet Coaster maker Frontier Developments,
which was founded by Elite dev David Braben.
Or Total War studio Creative Assembly, which
started its life in the late 80s porting games
between different computers.
So in the space of a single decade, the UK
games industry changed from teenagers selling
games from their bedroom, to a monster industry
propped up by American and Japanese powerhouses.
But in recent years, there has been an interesting
shift.
The barriers to make, release, and sell a
game have completely shrunk - allowing anyone
with a copy of Unity or Game Maker to become
part of the games industry.
And this has given the UK a batch of awesome
indie games made by individuals, small teams,
and tiny development studios.
So when Mike Bithell made Thomas Was Alone
largely by himself, he was echoing Matthew
Smith and Jeff Minter.
When brothers Tom and Adam Vian made Snipperclips,
they harkened back to the Stamper brothers
making Jetpac or the Oliver twins making Dizzy.
Simply put: after a long holiday, the British 
bedroom coder is back.
