It was easy to be sceptical about Metroid
Prime.
Our beloved side-scrolling adventure series
was being transformed into a first-person shooter?
By some dudes from Texas?
That doesn’t sound good.
Uh. No offence to any Texans watching, of course.
But - credit where credit is due, Retro Studios did a bang up job.
Metroid Prime captured the essence of the
classic games - the isolating atmosphere,
the lock-and-key structure, the interconnected
world design - and effortlessly turned it
into 3D.
And while it had first-person combat, this
wasn’t some brain-dead shooter.
It was less about precision aiming, and more
about movement, weapon choice, and flipping
between different visors.
About outmanoeuvring your foes, not just outgunning
them.
So there’s lots to love about Metroid Prime.
But this is Boss Keys - a video series about
world design in Metroidvania games.
How does it stack up in that regard?
Well. It’s a good attempt - but I would argue
that the game suffers from various issues
in structure, layout, and design that can
make it quite tedious to play through.
And we might end up learning more from Prime’s
mistakes… than its successes.
So without further ado.
Let’s take a closer look.
Just like Super Metroid, Prime kicks off with
an opening section that doesn’t take place
on the main map.
In this game, it’s the cramped corridors
of a space pirate frigate.
It’s part prologue, part tutorial, and part
preview of what Samus will be using later
in the game as she starts all kitted out with
her iconic Varia Suit, and tonnes of gadgets
like the Morph Ball and Grapple Beam.
But then, just like Castlevania: Symphony
of the Night, those powers are stripped away.
Samus gets hit with an electrical blast and
is reduced to her most basic gear.
She then hops in her ship and chases Ridely
to the planet Tallon IV.
It’s here that Metroid Prime starts properly.
And from this point on, the game works like
a typical Metroid game.
Your path through the world is stymied by
locked doors and blocked off paths - so you’ll
need to hunt around and find new upgrades,
which allow you to retrace your steps, get
through those previously inaccessible areas,
and move on.
And so, like other Metroid games - as well
as similar titles that were starting to crop
up at the time - the main gameplay challenge
is about trying to keep the game’s world
in your head.
About juggling the locations of dozens of
dead ends, and the twisting pathways that
connect them.
And the test of that knowledge happens right
here: the second you get a new upgrade.
Because as soon as you pick one up, you’re
forced to ask yourself a critical question:
“where can I use it?”
Whereabouts in the world have I come across
a dead end, which I’ll now be able to overcome
with this new item?
But while that’s all part of the challenge
for the player, it’s actually more of a
challenge for the designer.
To help the player keep all of this in their
head so they feel super smart when they figure
it out.
And Metroid Prime shows us a few clever ways
to achieve this.
One way is to make the dead end memorable
in some way.
Take, for example, the crashed frigate.
This place is flooded with water and you can’t
climb up this shaft because your suit is too
heavy to swim up.
So when you finally get the gravity suit,
which lets you jump in water, you’ll know
to return here.
It’s memorable because you can see exactly
where you want to go, but you’re held back
by the water.
And it’s really easy to make the connection
between the gravity suit, and this room, once
you grab it.
Adversity is another good way to make things
memorable, like the super hot rooms of Magmoor
Caverns which quickly sap your health bar
if you try to explore them.
When you finally find the Varia Suit, which
lets you resist hot temperatures, you’ll
know exactly where to go.
Another trick is to have a copy of the dead
end, near the power-up.
So when you get the Boost Ball in Phendrana
Drifts, you need to speed up this half pipe
to get out of the room.
This isn’t just a quick tutorial on how
the new item works - like the Morph Ball trap
in Metroid 1 - but it should also bring to
mind the other half pipes in the world - the
one in Chozo Ruins and the one in Tallon Overworld.
It’s also generally a good idea to try and make sure
the player sees the dead end before they get
the power-up.
Metroid Prime’s designers often do this
by giving you a power-up, leading you down
a path, and then quickly hitting you with
another dead end.
Like, after you get the missiles you’ll
immediately want to use them on the door in
front of you, where you’ll get an energy
tank and find… a hole you can’t squeeze
through yet.
But now you’ve seen it, and will hopefully
remember to come back with the Morph Ball.
So Metroid Prime is pretty good at making
its dead ends memorable.
But not always.
One example is how doors opened by missiles,
the wave beam, the ice beam, and the plasma
beam are simply drawn onto the map as different
coloured door icons.
This means once you get the relevant beam,
the game becomes “open the map, find a nearby
door you can go through, and walk over there”.
That’s not using your brain, that’s basically
just following an objective marker.
Other dead ends just aren’t very well communicated.
Straight after you get the power bomb, you
come to this room.
A Metroid quarantine area.
And it’s clear you can’t get across the
room because it’s covered in deadly Phazon.
And it’s very easy to assume that you’ll
need to get something to withstand Phazon.
But no.
The Phazon suit is actually found beyond this
area.
Instead you need to find the X-Ray Visor which
shows up hidden platforms.
And by definition, it’s impossible to make
these invisible platforms memorable to the
player because, well, they’re invisible.
That whole item needed a bit of a rethink,
if you ask me.
So sometimes you’re going to get a new power-up,
and your answer to “where can I use it?”
is simply “I don’t know”.
And so the the player’s going to need some
help.
Of course, there’s the hint system.
Metroid Prime has a pretty heavy handed system
that tells you almost exactly where to go,
at all times.
i don’t really care about this because it’s
completely optional - unlike some hints - though,
it’s a shame that it’s on by default.
The other thing to do if you get stuck is
to just wander off and explore.
See if you can’t find the dead ends yourself.
And this needs a few things to work well.
One is an abundance of optional goodies behind
dead ends.
Things that you can find while exploring so
you’re constantly making small victories
- rather than searching the entire map for
the one single location that you can now explore.
Prime’s definitely got this.
There are charge combos, missile tanks, power
bombs, and energy tanks scattered around the
world.
You also need a good map that shows you where
you have and haven’t explored.
Metroid Prime does a pretty good job at this
- orange rooms have been explored, and blue
ones haven’t.
But it sometimes falls apart.
After getting the spider ball, the place to
use it - here - isn’t shown on the map.
Even if you activated the terminal.
So you might write off returning to this room
altogether.
The final consideration is constraints.
You see, the more of the world you unlock,
the more difficult and daunting it is to revisit
each room in search of progress.
Like: after you get the morph ball at the
beginning of the game, you have access to
about 25 rooms.
It’s not impossible to simply check each
room to see if you can make further progress.
But once you have the grappling beam towards
the end of the game, there are hundreds of
rooms to go in.
You can’t possibly check them all without
getting bored and resorting to a walkthrough.
Some games try to limit your options.
Super Metroid did this really well by trapping
you in Norfair for a while, so you couldn’t
possibly backtrack to Brinstar and - thus
- limited your options to just one part of
the game.
Metroid Prime never really does this, so the
explorable space simply grows and grows and grows.
Okay. So let’s say you do know where to go.
You got the Boost Ball in Phendrana Drifts
and you say to yourself, “Aha!
I know exactly where to use that!
To the Tallon Overworld!”
The next question is: How easy is it to travel
across the world, to where you need to go?
Well. In some ways, I found Metroid Prime quite
easy to navigate.
Largely because the world is split into five
distinct areas that were easy to tell apart,
and organise in my mind.
There’s the Tallon Overworld, which is grassy
and Earth-like.
The Chozo Ruins, which are dusty and ancient.
Magmoor Caverns, which are filled with lava.
Phendrana Drifts, which are covered in snow.
And the Phazon Mines, which are corrupted
by deadly toxins.
They’re so distinct that you could blur
out a screenshot of just about any area and
still know where you are based entirely on
the colour scheme of each area.
That’s really good design.
But what makes life tricky is the way these
places are connected.
So the first three areas you visit, the Tallon
Overworld, Chozo Ruins, and Magmoor Caverns
are all connected to each other by elevators.
That makes it relatively easy to jump between
these locations.
But the other areas are a bit more isolated.
The Phazon Mines are only connected to Tallon
and Magmoor, which makes the mines slightly
more difficult to get to.
But the real kicker is Phendrana Drifts which
is only accessible through Magmoor Caverns.
So no matter where you are in the world…
you’ve got to go through Magmoor whenever
you want to go to Phendrana.
Which, as it turns out, is quite often!
You need to travel through Magmoor Caverns
after getting the Varia Suit in the Chozo Ruins.
After getting the Boost Ball in Phendrana
Drifts.
After getting the Space Jump Boots in Tallon
Overworld.
After getting the Spider Ball in Phendrana
Drifts.
And after getting the Ice Beam in Chozo Ruins.
That’s at least five trips through the same
area.
And there’s not even that much in Magmoor
Caverns!
Just one item - the Plasma Beam.
And two other things, which I’ll come back
to in a bit.
So Magmoor Caverns is basically just a subway
station between two other areas in the game,
and Metroid Prime’s structure would barely
change at all if this entire place was removed
- which is never a good sign.
One thing Magmoor does have going for it is
how the space becomes easier to traverse as
the game goes on.
The space jump boots let you leap over obstacles
that, last time you came this way, you had
to slowly crawl through.
The grapple beam lets you swing over molten
lava that previously needed to be carefully
avoided. And so on.
I also found the map quite difficult to read.
This cute 3D wireframe map is real nifty when
looking at what’s in your current location
- but it’s pretty useless from a worldwide
perspective.
It’s hard to know where this elevator, which
just says “Transport to Phendrana Drifts
North” will link up without zooming out
to the world map, finding Phendrana, and then
making a decision about which spot that actually
refers to.
And, ultimately, I think the disconnected
nature of each area - the way you zip between
them in an elevator cutscene - makes it harder
to remember how everything links up.
Especially when compared to something like
Dark Souls, where having to physically move
from place to place makes it easier to understand
how the world is put together.
Though, I appreciate that Metroid Prime was
having to fit the technical specs of the Gamecube
and these elevators are probably hiding a
loading screen.
So, thus far, I’ve only been talking about
upgrades.
Stuff like the morph ball, wave beam, thermal
visor, and gravity suit.
The game’s got 17 of them to find and for
the vast majority of them, the have to be
acquired in the order set by the developer.
As in, you need to use the missiles to get
the morph ball, use the morph ball to get
the bombs, use the bombs to get the varia
suit, and so on - right up until Samus is
decked out in a phazon suit.
But collecting upgrades is not actually what
you need to do to get to the final boss and
trigger the ending.
Instead, you need to find 12 Chozo Artifacts
that are hidden around the world.
Getting the power ups, ultimately, just lets
you get to these artifacts.
So hopefully you’ll stumble upon this room
and find these 12 statues.
Each one is linked to an artifact and will
give you a clue to its location when you scan
it.
The highlighted word matches up to the name
of a room somewhere in the game, and there’s
maybe a small hint at what you need to do.
I think this is really cool because while
the power-up collection is very linear, the
artifacts are decidedly non-linear.
You can collect them in any order, and find
them at various points in the game.
You might religiously follow the clues, or
just stumble upon them while exploring.
I did both.
This does bear some resemblance to the entrances
to tourian in Metroid and Super Metroid, which
are accessible at the start of the game but,
remain locked until you’ve finished off
the game’s major bosses.
But having them as separate objects to find,
and not tied to the bosses that you’ll be
killing anyway, makes Prime’s key hunt feel
more exploratory and non-linear.
But, as always, there’s a couple things
holding this idea back.
One is that I don’t think it’s made super
clear that finding the Chozo Artifacts is
the ultimate goal of the game.
Compare this to The Witness.
When you finish one set of puzzles, a laser
beam shoots to the top of a mountain.
And up there, you can see that this has opened
one of seven locks.
i think it now becomes crystal clear that
the ultimate goal of the game is to turn on
seven lasers so you can open the lock on the
top of the mountain.
The mountain and the lasers are consistently
visible, and the size and central location
of the mountain makes it feel obviously like
the final area of the game.
Metroid Prime doesn’t really have this in
the same way.
The temple with the artifacts is slightly
hidden away, and i don’t think it fully
explains that this is the ultimate goal of
the game.
Scanning the first artifact says collecting
all 12 will “open a path to the centre of
the impact crater”, but that doesn’t actually
mean much.
The other issue is that the artifacts are
all clustered towards the end of the game.
You can get the artifact of truth as soon
as you find the temple.
The artifact of strength once you have the
space jump boots.
And the artifact of wild after the spider
ball.
But the remaining nine artifacts can’t be
accessed until you at least have the gravity
suit, way into the final hours of the game.
And four different artifacts - world, sun,
elder, and spirit - all require the plasma
beam, which is the penultimate item you get
in the game.
And I think this can leave players feeling
like they’ve nearly finished the game only
to realise that they actually need to go back
through the entire map to find a whole bunch
of keys.
That’s one way to kill the pace.
So, what can we learn about Metroidvania design
from Metroid Prime?
Well, for one: make your dead ends memorable.
Give players that “aha!” moment of knowing
exactly where to use an item.
Some of Prime’s dead ends definitely stick
in your brain, other’s just don’t.
Two: think about the space that players will
have to traverse between items.
Map it out, and look at what ground is covered.
If, say, I dunno, the same path needs to be
taken five times, maybe move some items around,
or make more connections between areas.
And three: make the player’s ultimate goal
crystal clear, and let them work on it throughout
the game.
Prime’s chozo artifacts offered a wonderful way to
mix linearity and non-linearity it one game,
but fluffed it with the execution.
I’d say that these are the three issues
that hold Prime back from true greatness,
and stop it from eclipsing its predecessor.
But Retro’s not done yet!
Next time on Boss Keys, we’ll be scouting
out temples, collecting loads of keys, and
entering the dark world as we explore the
Metroidvania design of Metroid Prime 2: Echoes.
