There’s something very special about the
combat in the most recent DOOM games.
As you bounce between enemies like an angry
pinball, it’s not uncommon to come out these
gauntlets with an elevated heart rate and
a white knuckle grip on the controller, or mouse.
Every single combat encounter is a rollercoaster
ride of glory kills, weapon switching, quick
decision making, and lighting-fast movement.
So let’s break one down.
Not a whole level from DOOM Eternal, but just
one, single, five minute fight.
What can we learn about DOOM combat from a
single combat encounter?
Let’s find out.
So let’s jump to the game’s 11th stage,
Nekravol Part II.
This level takes place in a towering citadel
in the heart of hell where souls are extracted for...
uh, I dunno.
I wasn’t really paying attention to the
story.
Anyway, the level’s first proper fight takes
place in this chamber, which is built around
a massive soul-sucking… fountain thing.
The first thing to note is that the area looks
more like a multiplayer map than your standard
singleplayer corridor.
This is a pretty large, and totally symmetrical
arena with different levels of elevation - including
a raised platform at the bottom, and two areas
on the sides which are accessible via ramps,
or acrobatic bars.
Lower down, you’ll find pools of toxic soul
juice which hurt pretty bad if you tumble in.
There are also lots of items scattered around,
like ammo, armour, and chainsaw fuel - plus
a handy overdrive power-up which momentarily
gives you infinite ammo for all your guns.
But more important than all of that, is the
monsters.
This single encounter features almost half
of the entire DOOM Eternal cast - but they
don’t all come in at once.
Instead, they spawn in at specific points
during the fight, giving the encounter a unique
flow - which I’ve split up into a bunch
of different phases.
So in phase one we’re faced with two Imps
- bouncy critters who can throw fireballs,
a Mancubus - a bloated lump with flamethrowers,
and a Revenant - a scrawny skeleton with a
jetpack and missile launchers.
There’s also a few Zombies, but more on
them later.
After you kill a handful of enemies, we enter
phase two.
Here, two more Imps spawn in at the bottom
of the map, and four new enemies appear at
the top.
These are Gargoyles - basically Imps with
wings, which makes them even more of a nuisance.
Kill a couple more enemies and we get the
first big baddy: the Baron of Hell.
This guy is a super upgraded version of the
Hell Knight, and relentlessly charges after
you with deadly ground-pound attacks.
The next phase only kicks off when you drop
the Baron of Hell’s health pool to about
a third.
At that moment, a Pain Elemental appears.
This dude floats around like DOOM’s famous
Cacodemon - but can also spawn Lost Souls
who zoom towards you like kamikaze missiles.
And if you drop the Pain Elemental’s health
to roughly one third, we’ll be greeted with
two Whiplashes: slithering monsters who zig-zag
right up into your face.
Kill either the Pain Elemental or one of the
Whiplashes and we enter the fourth and final phase.
It starts with the Doom Hunter: a shield-covered
baddy on a hoverboard who was introduced as
a boss in level four, but is now liable to
show up in standard encounters.
And if you drop the Hunter’s health to about
half, we’ll see the last spawn of the encounter:
two Prowlers, who are teleporting nasties
with a painful claw attack.
This trigger system ensures that you won’t
be completely inundated with different demons.
But it does mean that if you don’t take
out the biggest demons fast, you can have
a whole bunch of monsters to juggle simultaneously.
And while there is a predictable rhythm across
all of your restarts, it’s never going to
be exactly the same each time you play.
Okay, so that’s the set-up out of the way.
But how does this encounter actually feel
to play?
Well, from the moment you start playing, this
combat encounter will see you asking yourself
a number of key questions.
Starting with this: “which enemy should
I focus on?”
Staying alive in DOOM Eternal means figuring
out where you should focus your fire, by deciding
who is the biggest threat.
So, in phase one, the Mancubus is slow and
its projectiles are relatively easy to dodge.
Especially if you neuter its launchers with
a well-aimed attack.
That means you can leave it alone with only
minimal worry while you concentrate on other
enemies - like the Revenant, whose endless
missile barrage makes it a good target for
destruction.
(I should note that in this specific combat
encounter, the Mancubus and Revenant seem
to be practically glued to the spot.
I'm not sure if that’s a bug or intentional,
but it does make both of them way less threatening
in the grand scheme of things).
In the second phase, the decision of who to
fight first is largely made for you.
The Baron of Hell is ultra aggressive and
makes a constant beeline towards your position
- so you really need to focus your fire on
him.
And in phase three, we see a good example
of an enemy who demands to be taken down quickly:
the Pain Elemental.
Because it can endlessly spawn new monsters,
it should probably be taken out pretty quick.
Though, as it’s quite slow and the Souls
go down in a single shotgun blast, you might
be alright to leave it for a while as you
focus on the more aggressive Whiplashes.
When you’ve picked an enemy, the next question
you should ask yourself is this:
“which weapon should I be using?”
Success in DOOM Eternal often means making
smart choices about which weapon to use on
which monster.
The Mancubus, for example, is a giant, slow-moving
target, so he’s easy to bonk with a rocket
launcher - especially when compared to the
small and nimble Revenant.
The shotgun is great for monsters who like
to get right in your grill like the Whiplash,
while the heavy cannon is great for picking
off enemies who hang back, like Gargoyles.
The Pain Elemental is a flying enemy, and
so it’s particularly weak to your ballista weapon.
While the Doom Hunter is covered in a blue
shield so you’ll probably want to use the
plasma rifle to break his defences.
And the Baron of Hell can be chopped to bits
with the chain-gun.
Throughout this encounter, you’ll be changing
your weapon constantly.
You’ll also want to think about the other
stuff in your arsenal.
Your freeze bombs are great for stopping the
teleporting Prowlers.
And the blood punch can deal huge damage to
the Doom Hunter’s shield.
Plus, you’ll want to choose the perfect
moment to use your get-out-of-jail-free cards
like the BFG and the crucible.
And don’t forget about that tasty overdrive
power-up.
Great for chewing up the Baron.
Soon enough, you’re going to run out of
ammo, or lose a bunch of health.
So DOOM Eternal throws up another question:
“how am I going to recover my resources?”
Maybe you’ll dart towards one of the health
kits or ammo pick-ups on the map, but there’s
only a few and once they’re gone… they’re
gone.
Luckily, DOOM turns every enemy into a loot
crate on legs.
A resource piñata just waiting to be burst.
So you can use the glory kill on staggered
enemies to get health.
The chainsaw to get ammo.
And the flame belch to make enemies drop armour
shards.
To facilitate this, the Zombies actually infinitely
respawn during the fight.
These staggering idiots can barely do damage
and get killed in a split second, but they’re
a handy source of ammo, armour, and health.
And in the middle of all of this chaos, you’re
going to have to ask yourself the even more
fundamental question of “where am I going
to move to next?”
Many enemies in DOOM Eternal will punish you
for standing still, and others will force
you into specific movement patterns.
So the Baron of Hell makes you backpedal,
while the Revenant’s lock-on missiles force
you to jump and dash.
And because there’s no such thing as cover
in this game - you’ll spend pretty much
this entire combat encounter in a state of
constant movement.
So the arena’s floor plan contains
 a number of distinct pathways - both
on ground, and in the air.
In fact, these monkey bars allow you to move
between the three most elevated areas without
ever touching the ground.
This allows you to move around unimpeded by
obstacles, while picking between different
routes, depending on where you need to go,
and what you want to do.
So getting through this fight - or, in truth,
any combat encounter across both DOOM 2016
and DOOM Eternal - means finding answers to
four key questions.
You might want to think of these as priority,
preference, preservation, and position - or,
the 4 Ps.
All four Ps must be considered simultaneously,
and constantly reevaluated as the new information
arises - like running out of ammo, or seeing
new enemies spawn in.
The weapons and monsters are distinct with
unique properties and different weaknesses
- encouraging you to find preferences and
priorities - but without creating a single,
“right answer” to the combat puzzle.
Plus, the four Ps regularly feed into each
other: especially by having resource management
be part of the combat system.
This means that running out of stuff can hijack
the other questions: so your priority might
quickly shift from taking down a boss monster
to shotgunning a zombie.
And the open level design gives you the space
to dodge and weave through the environment
as you weigh up your options.
And with all that in mind, you can see why
DOOM feels so different to other shooters.
Indistinct enemies provide no real reason
to prioritise targets, so you might as well
pick at random.
Two-weapon arsenals limit your ability to
make interesting choices.
Regenerating health makes you run and hide,
instead of changing your engagement style.
And a cover system means you often don’t
need to think about your position, simplifying
the mental load to only three questions at
a time.
It’s no wonder why DOOM feels so intense
in comparison.
But that’s not to say that the series is perfect.
Especially so in Eternal, which makes a number
of bizarre changes to its design
that, in mind, meddle with the beautiful balance
of its predecessor.
So, some enemies now carry weapon-specific
weaknesses - like tossing a sticky bomb in
a Cacodemon’s mouth to instantly stagger
it.
And these are drilled into your head with
pop-up tutorials on every loading screen.
Even though other weapons will work, this can make
it feel like there actually is a single right
move you must perform to win, effectively
reducing the game’s raft of tactical possibilities
down to a single, correct answer.
Likewise, the Buff Totem and Archvile - which
continuously spawn new, super-powered demons
- are so dangerous that they simply must become
priority one.
Compare those to the Pain Elemental, which
spawns Lost Souls, and DOOM 2016’s Summoner,
which spawns Imps - both are good candidates
for early destruction, but can also be ignored
for a while without you becoming totally overwhelmed.
And finally, there’s the more aggressive
resource management.
The max ammo on all your guns has been massively
reduced, and you’ve now got to regularly
use the new flame belch to get armour.
Both of these facts can push the preservation
question to be unevenly pronounced in your
mind - so you can find yourself spending more
time patching up your resources than slaying demons.
Oh, and don’t even get me started on the
Marauder.
Just... screw that guy.
But when they’re at their best, the combat
encounters in the new DOOM games are a flurry
of fast movement and tactical decision making.
And all of this happens in the blink of an
eye.
A single playthrough of this encounter might
last all of five minutes - much less time
than you’ve spent watching this video - but
it’s an incredibly tense five minutes - with
your brain having to be on full alert at all
times as you constantly find new answers to
those four key questions.
I won’t blame you if you need a moment to
catch your breath when the last demon drops.
Hey, thanks for watching!
I’m curious to hear your thoughts on
which game did it best: DOOM 2016 or DOOM Eternal.
Please leave your thoughts in the comments
down below.
As always, Game Maker’s Toolkit is funded
almost exclusively by viewers like you who
donate every month to my Patreon page.
I couldn’t just do this without you lot.
