Hi. My name's Mark, and I 
am making Mind Over Magnet,  
a cute and charming puzzle platformer about 
- and this is no word of a lie - magnets.
Okay, so in this episode of Developing,  
I am really pleased to announce 
that Mind Over Magnet is finished.
Wait, let me rephrase that slightly.
Mind Over Magnet is done.
And those two things are actually very different.
Let me explain.
Okay, so in a previous episode of Developing,  
I talked about how I had made a 
plan to finish Mind Over Magnet.
And it went something like this.
Design 50 unique puzzles.
Create 5 different worlds.
Build a whole bunch of different mechanics.
Introduce the player to 3 
different magnet friends.
And write an involving 
storyline with twists and turns.
That all sounds pretty good, but I 
also had another slightly secret plan.
Which was to finish the game in 2024.
No later than December 31st.
I refused to work on the game 
for another calendar year.
But as the months started to march on,  
it became increasingly clear that these 
two plans were essentially incompatible.
Because when I looked at all the content 
I still had to create, and also factored  
in stuff like polishing, bug fixing, marketing, 
burnout, breaks, travel, making YouTube videos,  
and running the GMTK game jam - starts August 16th 
- it was looking like I wouldn't hit my deadline.
And trust me, I really want to hit that deadline.
I've been working on this game for 
over 3 years, which was never the plan.
But I do desperately want to 
release this game this year.
I want to move on. I want to 
stop thinking about magnets.
I want to make other games. 
I want to make other videos.
And I feel like I am really straining the 
patience of my very generous Patreon backers,  
including the 38 new supporters who have joined 
the campaign since the last episode of Developing.
Hang in there, I'm almost done.
So if I'm not willing to change the 
deadline, I guess I've gotta change the plan.
But that kind of feels like cheating?
Well, I took a few Zoom calls, and popped 
to the Develop Conference in Brighton,  
and started talking to other game developers 
about their experience of finishing games.
And basically everyone told 
me the exact same thing.
That very few games ship with all of the ideas,  
levels, mechanics, and story beats 
that the developer originally intended.
And in fact, it's super common for 
a game's scope to change at the very  
last minute in order to hit the game's 
release date, or to come in under budget.
And in fact, some of the greatest 
games of all time are missing  
significant amounts of content due 
to last minute changes in scope.
Nintendo scrapped two whole dungeons from 
The Wind Waker to make the release window.
Shadow of the Colossus was 
supposed to have 48 colossi.
It ended up shipping with just 16.
And in Dark Souls, Lost Izalith 
and the Bed of Chaos were cobbled  
together quickly to meet the game's deadline.
And in that case, it might have been 
better if they were just cut from the game.
And I think this is just a 
universal truth for making art.
I mean, back in 1933, French poet Paul Valéry 
said a work is truly never completed...
French poet Paul Valéry said a work is 
never truly completed, but merely abandoned.
A quote that is more usually attributed 
to poetry expert George Lucas.
But I think there's a fundamental fight between 
wanting to put absolutely everything into  
the game, and wanting to release 
the game while you're still alive.
And it sucks, but I'm not getting any younger.
So I did it. I changed the plan.
Instead of 50 puzzles, I could 
happily ship with about 40.
And instead of five worlds, I could 
squeeze things down to end in just four.
And how about the three magnets? Like, 
originally you would meet Magnus.
Then Max, a magnet that you can throw.
And then Maggie and Meg, a single magnet that can 
switch between two sisters and two polarities.
But I realised I could make 
do with just two magnets.
I could get rid of Max.
Then have you meet the switcher magnet earlier, 
but she's missing the power to switch polarity.
Then you could unlock that 
ability later on in the game.
That saves assets and streamlines the story.
In terms of mechanics, I could 
stand to drop a few of them.
This scissor gate leads to some really 
annoying bugs I'd rather not deal with.
And I haven't made any levels for the mighty 
magnet, so let's ditch that idea also.
And does my game really 
need an involving storyline?
I'm not much of a writer, and the 
cutscenes only really need to exist  
to give you motivation to escape the factory 
and to break up the endless puzzle solving.
So that can be simplified down dramatically.
So I started to work to this new plan.
I made a few more levels, I wrote a short story, 
and within a couple months the game was done.
You could play the game from the introductory 
cutscene to the final credits roll.
There were four worlds with lots 
of puzzles, mechanics, and magnets.
And it had a storyline that... existed.
And now I just needed to 
fix up all of the problems.
So I went through the game with a 
fine-tooth comb and ran a bunch of  
playtests, and made a monster list 
of problems that needed to be fixed.
This looks pretty ugly, so let me fix that.
The game goes weird if a magnet dies 
while talking, so let me change that.
Magnets can get stuck on corners in 
weird ways, so that needs to be remedied.
And whenever a playtester found a way to 
skip a puzzle in a weird, unexpected way...
"Uhh, I have no idea if that 
was the intended solution."
I would change the level to impede that.
But this process wasn't just about fixing bugs.
It also just changed the way I worked.
Because now that I have the game in 
front of me as a complete package,  
I can see the game in its 
entirety from beginning to end,  
I could see where the game still needed 
work, where the game was lacking.
And because the game is basically done 
at this point, I could make much smarter  
decisions about how to spend those last 
few weeks and months of development.
So for starters, this new story 
is really not very interesting.
So I threw in a few extra cutscenes and made 
a slightly more involving narrative that pokes  
a little fun at artificial intelligence, 
and has a tiny twist to keep you guessing.
It's still not going to win any awards 
for storytelling, but it's something.
I also really missed the scissor gate mechanic,  
so I fixed the bugs and put in a 
couple levels featuring that device.
It also felt kinda anticlimactic 
to finally have access to all of  
the magnets, and only have a few levels to play.
So I made more puzzles for that section of 
the game, including a more exciting finale.
And at this point, World 4 had 
become kinda bloated with about  
20 levels compared to the 15 or so 
stages in the other three worlds.
So I went back to the original plan, and 
split the game into five worlds again.
Only the last world is much 
shorter than the others.
Which I'm fine with.
By the time the player has gotten all of 
the magnets and reached the rooftop of  
the factory, I don't think they want to 
do another whole world of hard puzzles.
That kinda brings the pacing to a halt.
So having world 5 be surprisingly short can 
make the game finish on an exciting high.
And finally, I didn't like how anticlimactic 
it felt to move between worlds.
So I added a little transitional 
stage at these key points in the game.
But that is it.
No more levels, no more 
mechanics, no more magnets.
At some point I had to just decide to 
lock down the content and decide that  
this was everything that 
was going to be in the game.
And from that point on, to focus my attention 
exclusively on polishing and playtesting.
And that lets me worry about really small things,  
like when a playtester is disappointed that 
there's no dialogue for a specific interaction.
"Actually, I kinda wanna see 
if there's dialogue for that.
Okay, there isn't."
Well I can just add that in.
Also, some playtesters didn't realise that the 
game had a hint system, so I added a pop-up  
that appears if you're stuck on a 
level for a certain amount of time.
And so at this point I'm now playtesting 
the game almost every single day.
Just subtly changing things to make it better.
And you know what? The playtests 
are now getting really quite good.
People are having fun.
People are liking the game.
"Wow, okay, wow, that was...
Now I need to go sleep.
That was crazy.
Okay, okay."
And I guess you could look at it like this.
When I was producing new content,  
the game was getting longer, but it 
wasn't really getting much better.
But now I'm focusing exclusively on polish,  
the game is just getting better 
and better with every update.
And the morale boost of a good 
playtest cannot be understated.
So I'm getting really excited to 
show this game to more people.
And so I am excited to announce that 
Mind Over Magnet now has a release date.
The game will launch on Windows, 
on Steam, on November 6th, 2024.
That is still a long time in the future, 
that's still three more months to go.
I could make a lot of levels in that time,  
but instead I am focusing exclusively 
on polishing, playtesting, marketing.
It'd be nice to go into the 
launch with a few more wishlists.
And maybe I'll get the Mac and Linux builds 
ready for launch as well, but no guarantees.
Plus there's also a sentimental reason behind 
that release date, because on November 6th,  
2014, I uploaded the first episode of Game 
Maker's Toolkit to this YouTube channel.
And so it feels kind of apt for me to release my 
first game on Steam exactly ten years after that.
I hope you'll check it out.
So that is what I've learnt about finishing games.
That there is no finish line.
There is no goalpost.
There is no giant pipe that sucks up 
you and all of your magnet friends.
There is no external sign 
that the game is finished.
You just have to stand up, say "this 
is it. I'm done. I've called it."
You just have to be okay with content going 
unfinished, and ideas being unexplored.
But hey, there's always the sequel, right?
This is not an announcement of Mind Over Magnet 2.
Do not take that seriously.
But while it is incredibly hard and scary 
to just decide that the game is done,  
it does come with some advantages.
It allows you to see the game in its 
entirety, so now you can make more  
informed decisions about where to spend 
those last few months of development.
And because you've changed your focus 
from endless content generation to just  
pure playtesting, and polishing, and perfection,  
the game just seems to get exponentially 
better in these last few weeks and months.
With every playtest, and every day, 
and every week, the game just seems  
to get better and better until it just feels 
like it could be a pretty good video game.
But in terms of Mind Over Magnet, I guess that 
is on you to decide on November 6th, 2024.
So, I hope that you will 
check it out when it releases,  
and I hope in the meantime you 
will wishlist the game on Steam.
It truly does help me out.
Thank you so much for watching, 
and I'll see you soon.
