Super Mario is famous for his jump, but it
wasn't always so great.
In his very first game, Donkey Kong, Mario's
leap was incredibly simple.
You could do one jump while standing still,
and another while running.
You can't move in mid-air, and the animation
is the same every single time you press the button.
When it comes to verbs - which are the actions
that a player can perform in a game - this
jump is pretty basic.
The standing jump, for example... is no more
complicated than 'press A to do B'.
But in more recent games, like Super Mario
3D World, the plumber's jump is way more interesting.
You can change the length, height, angle,
and landing zone.
You can transition in and out of different
moves.
And spring off walls and bounce on koopa shells.
Far from 'press A to do B', this one verb
can lead to a massive number of different outcomes.
Mario's jump is just one example of, what
I call, "versatile verbs", which is where
one action can have multiple uses - depending
on how you perform it.
And these are a great starting point for action-orientated
games.
Because, as I hope to show you in this video,
it means interesting gameplay - full of tricky
choices and player expression - can be derived
from the most fundamental interactions with
the game.
Plus, they often make the game more satisfying,
and reduce the number of buttons that a game
needs to have.
So, on this episode of Game Maker's Toolkit,
I'm going to look at a number of terrific
games, to find different ways to design versatile
verbs.
Because verbs are driven by buttons, it's
useful to think of the different ways that
a button can be used.
For example, what's the difference between
pressing a button, and holding it down?
In some games, not much.
In others, like Owlboy, you're actually at
a disadvantage if you hold the button because
the hero's fire rate is slower than if you
hammer the button in rapid succession.
There's no choice to make.
But in Mega Man X, you can press the fire
button to shoot a tiny low-powered pellet,
or hold that same button down to charge up
a bigger and more powerful blast.
If you've unlocked this piece of armour,
you can hold the button down for even longer
to charge up even more deadly shots.
To fire, you let go of the button.
With this set-up, we get an interesting tactical
choice between doing a small amount of damage
immediately, or doing a large amount of damage
in the future - and risking getting hurt while
the shot charges.
A more modern take on the charge shot, is
the cooked grenade.
You can throw a grenade immediately and it
will bounce around a bit before exploding
- or you can hold onto a grenade for a couple
seconds, and then throw it, so it explodes
in mid-air, or upon impact, or in your hand.
Whoops.
This time the decision is about risk versus
reward.
How far are you willing to push it, and how
well do you know the invisible timing window
of the grenade?
And in Mario, you can tap the button
for a short hop, or hold the button down for
longer to give yourself more height.
But here's a different way to think about holding
buttons.
In the game Luftrausers, you hold a button
down to fire your gun - but the only way to
repair your ship is to release that same button.
This means you have to make a choice between
offence and defence, and you'll swing between
the two throughout the battle.
When you're shooting, you're terrified of
getting killed, and when you're healing you're
anxious to get back into the fight, giving
the game a feisty back-and-forth feel.
Also in Luftrausers, you need to let go of
the throttle if you want to make sharp turns,
so you can pull off that sweet move where
you whip around and blast away at the bogies
on your tail.
Developer Vlambeer really knows the thrill
of letting go of a button.
Or how about in Dark Souls, where your stamina
meter restores more slowly if you're holding
your shield up.
So to get your energy back sooner you've got
to drop your shield and put yourself at risk
for a few seconds - your eyes will be darting
back and forth between the stamina meter and
the enemy who's about to kick your arse.
And then you've got Motorstorm - which is
a bit like the cooked grenade of racing games.
You hold a button to boost your car forward
- but hold it too long and your car will explode.
So you've got to release that same button
to let your engine cool.
You spend the entire race nursing this button,
trying to push your car to its absolute limit
and then letting go for a quick cooldown at
the optimal time, like around corners or in mid-air.
A button can also be pressed more than once.
Not like this!
I'm talking about verbs where pressing the
button once leads to one action, and pressing
it again leads to another - almost certainly
with a timing window on that second press.
So you've got moves like the double jump,
where you have to choose the perfect time
to fire off that second leap.
Throw in a few more mid-air jumps, and you
get the manic thrills of Ms. 'Splosion Man.
Or how about the reload button in Gears of
War.
Press it again when the line is in the right
spot on this bar and you'll get a damage boost
on all your next shots.
It takes one of those super basic 'Press A to do
B' type verbs, and gives it this satisfying,
tactical bite.
And, of course, there are combos in action
games.
A simple punch can transition into a more
powerful attack if you follow it up with two
more jabs of the same button.
Things get much more interesting, however, if you
start adding in more buttons to your combos.
Because verbs can take on whole new meanings
when you combine them.
Look at Psychonauts: you've got a basic attack,
and a jump.
But perform the attack after jumping, and
you unleash a devastating palm bomb move.
That's an example of using one verb directly
after another - within a specific timing window
- to transition into an entirely new move.
It's a lot like the previous example, but this time with
two different buttons.
This sort of combination requires timing,
and a skilful understanding of how and when
different verbs interlink - whether that's
a simple transition or a much more complex
move set that players will need to learn and memorise.
Aim down sights in a shooter works slightly
differently: you can press the trigger to
fire wildly in a general direction, or you
can hold down the aim button to fire with
more accuracy - but usually at the expense
of player movement.
It doesn't work for every game... but, hey,
it's a good example of how you can hold down
one button, to modify another verb.
Combining two buttons is one thing - combining
a button with an analogue stick - or some
other fine-grain input device - opens up a
whole new world of fun.
Now, in any game about moving around a space,
you're going to have a relationship between
movement - and many of the game's key verbs.
Because, Kazuma's punch is just a pointless
swing at thin air, if you haven't first moved
him next to an opponent.
But games can forge an even deeper connection.
Which brings us back to this guy.
The angle and distance of Mario's jump, is
directly connected to his horizontal direction
and speed before you press the A button.
The only way to clear a massive gap, then,
is to start with a run-up.
You can also move in mid-air, and perform
different jumps by starting with a spin, or
an abrupt turn.
So, back in Donkey Kong, you could effectively just
turn Mario's left and right jumps into dedicated
buttons on the arcade cabinet.
But in every other Mario game, the d-pad or
analogue stick allows for such a nuanced modification
of your leap, that the two must be kept separate.
Mario's jump can also combine with the crouch
button for all sorts of new moves.
Crouch and then jump for a tall backflip,
or crouch while running before jumping for
a long-jump.
Or crouch in mid-air for a ground-pound...
which can transition into another springy leap.
That might sound complicated.
But there are a few things to note.
One, is that the moves feel like the natural
outcome of the combined verbs.
So, this isn't an excuse to squeeze yet another
action onto the controller, by having it be
the outcome of pressing two, unrelated buttons.
Instead, by thinking of it in terms of
combining verbs - instead of combining buttons
- it's easier to think about what move would
intuitively arise from their combination.
The other thing to note is that you almost
never need to do any of these advanced moves
to get to the end of a Mario game.
They're just extra skills for pro players
who want to express themselves, or collect
certain secrets, or reduce their completion
time.
So, these are all different ways to make verbs
that are incredibly versatile.
And with these, you can make actions that
force the player to make loads of rapid-fire
decisions - or give the player really expressive
verbs that can be used to overcome all sorts
of situations.
There are other benefits too.
In Luftrausers, for example.
you could heal your ship by pressing a dedicated
button, or by picking up health packs.
But by linking heal to the shoot verb, the
game gets rid of a lot of clutter and complexity.
Basically, versatile verbs let you do more, with less.
These verbs are also quite satisfying to
use.
Whether that's the tactile thrill of squeezing
your NES controller to make Mario jump higher;
or the breathless tension of letting go of
the shoot button in Devil Daggers,
to make gems attract to you;
or the thumb gymnastics of linking up combo attacks
in your favourite brawler.
But there are drawbacks to keep in mind, too.
These versatile verbs can be troublesome for
those with discomfort or disability issues,
that can arise from holding buttons, pressing
multiple buttons, or repeatedly tapping buttons.
I'd recommend checking the game accessibility
guidelines for more on this.
So, by looking at Mario's jump through this
lens, we can see how this one verb can be
modified, depending on whether you press or
hold the button, whether you transition from
or into different verbs, whether you're holding
the run button before you hit jump, and depending
on how you move the analogue stick before
and during his leap.
Plus, if you're wearing the raccoon suit,
you can choose to hold the button to float,
or release it to drop immediately.
And in Mario's other games, like Super Mario 64,
you can even press the jump button repeatedly,
with good timing, to unleash a ridiculous
triple jump.
This intense level of versatility means that
before Nintendo even designs a single level,
Mario's jump is fun, satisfying, and expressive
- and it does all that with just a tiny handful
of buttons.
And so, is this the secret to Mario's jump?
Well, sort of.
It's definitely a big part of the equation.
But there's a bit more to it than that, and
more things to consider when making engaging verbs.
So, consider this video a 'part one', of sorts,
and I'll be back in the future with more ways,
to make more interesting actions for your games..
If you like this sort of video, please consider
supporting me on Patreon.
Special thanks to the people on screen, who
donate five dollars, or more, per episode
of Game Maker's Toolkit.
All done! Okay! Good stuff.
Right, I'm about to leave the internet for
about two weeks while I go play Zelda non-stop.
So, see you around.
