Welcome back to Boss Keys.
This is my series about the design of games with 
sprawling, interconnected, maze-like worlds.
Including dungeons, alien planets, 
fantasy kingdoms, and gothic castles.
Now the most viewed episode in this series 
- by far - was on the game Hollow Knight - a  
modern day masterpiece, and perhaps the 
finest example of the Metroidvania genre.
That's a genre, if you still don't know,  
that describes games that take place 
in a single, contiguous world map.
Where progress is made 
through careful exploration,  
by making connections between abilities...
and obstacles, and by slowly untangling 
the knot at the centre of the world.
Now Hollow Knight did this with aplomb.
And then combined it with beautiful 
graphics, a deep well of lore,  
sharp controls, and terrific boss encounters.
And so a sequel had a lot to live up to.
But after seven long years of 
waiting, it’s finally here,  
in the form of Hollow Knight: Silksong.
So in this video I’m going to investigate 
how Australian developer Team Cherry has  
put together this new world, and 
how they've thought about topics  
like progression, non linearity, navigation, 
back tracking, optional content, and more.
There will be major spoilers 
for basically every inch of this game.
There will be charts and graphs.
And there will be hot takes about corpse running.
I hope you’ll join me.
I'm Mark Brown. This is Boss Keys.
And this is the world design 
of Hollow Knight: Silksong.
So, Hollow Knight: Silksong takes place in 
the withered kingdom of Pharloom - a twisty,  
maze-like land with 12 distinctly different areas:
including a crumbling road made of bones,  
an industrialised forge, a gusty garden, 
and a farmland beset by eternal rainfall.
And the game starts with a very clear goal.
Hornet has been kidnapped, caged, 
and transported to this broken land.
But with the help of a mysterious 
silken fly, she manages to escape.
Now she can climb out of Moss Grotto 
- taking on her first boss along the  
way - and emerge in Bone Bottom, 
where she is given her first quest:
To climb to the very top of 
Pharloom to find The Citadel,  
and track down the ones who tried to imprison her.
Or in other words: go up.
Yeah, it's a lot more to-the-point than the 
first Hollow Knight, where the protagonist has,  
essentially, ended up in Hallownest by accident,  
and just starts wandering around, 
looking for something to do.
Your goal in Silksong, on the 
other hand, is super clear.
Now in terms of progression, Silksong 
mirrors Hollow Knight 1 by starting  
with a pretty linear and guided trip 
through the first few areas of the game.
After we emerge in Bone Bottom - our first 
town - we can journey through the Marrow,  
until we get our very first 
ability: the Silkspear.
Well, it's technically not an ability, just one of 
a handful of different silk skills that we can use  
in combat - but, we do need it to blast through 
this web, so we can take on the Bell Beast.
That's the second boss, but once defeated,  
it becomes our means of fast 
travel throughout Pharloom. Handy.
With the Beast on our side, we'll then 
get safe passage to the Deep Docks,  
where we'll find ability number 
two: the Swift Step, aka the dash.
This lets us hop over this gap 
so we can open up this gate,  
and then face another boss: 
the dainty swordfighter Lace.
With her defeated - for now 
- it's off to the Far Fields.
Here we'll meet the Seamstress who 
offers us a sort of side quest:  
basically, if we can gather up the spines 
that are shot out from these floating fleeces,  
she'll sew a new layer into Hornet's dress, 
which turns it into the Drifter's Cloak.
This lets us catch these updraft 
winds and fly up to higher areas.
On the way back we'll face 
boss number four: a giant,  
creaking metal automaton called the Fourth Chorus.
With that thing dead we can ride 
the winds up, and up, and up...
all the way to Greymoor.
Here we'll face all manner of flying critters 
- including the fifth boss, Moorwing.
This guy's a right pain in the butt.
But, with Moorwing defeated, we've 
reached the town of Bellhart - but  
right now it's ensnared in giant webs of silk.
So we'll pass straight through to Shellwood where,  
after a bit of climbing, we'll 
fight boss six - Sister Splinter.
And with her defeated we can get another ability, 
the Cling Grip, which lets us climb up walls.
Okay! Press pause.
So far Silksong has proven to 
be a pretty straightforward  
game with a tightly plotted sequence of events.
If we chart it out - this is Boss 
Keys, after all, we love a chart,  
we see a linear set of boss 
fights and new abilities.
And if we lay this path over 
the world map, we see this:  
a giant U-bend through Pharloom, taking us, 
in turn, through Moss Grotto, Bone Bottom,  
The Marrow, Deep Docks, Far Fields, 
Greymoor, Bellhart, and Shellwood.
It looks like the world's most 
simple metro map - without the  
usual zig-zagging and backtracking 
you'd see in other Metroidvanias.
Of course, it doesn't feel so 
simple when you're on the ground.
This is a game of winding pathways, and 
one-way doors, of enemy gauntlets and  
tricky platforming sections, of side rooms, 
elevators, chatty NPCs, and secret areas.
So while you're in the thick of it, the game 
certainly feels labyrinthine and knotted.
But, from a more zoomed-out perspective, 
the path is actually pretty straightforward.
And here's why:
For starters - if we think of an ability like 
a key, and the obstacles that ability helps  
you overcome as a lock - well, at this 
point each key only opens a few locks.
Like, when you get the Drifter's Cloak...
there's no point going back to 
the Deep Docks or The Marrow,  
or Bone Bottom because you won't 
get access to any new areas.
And as for the lock that actually lets you 
make further progress through Pharloom? Well,  
it's always literally just 
around the corner from the key.
Plus, there are only a few diversions you 
can make away from the intended route.
For instance - from very early on, you can 
climb across these perilous hanging cages,  
and dodge this acidic barf, to 
enter an area called the Wormways.
But, then again, almost all of the 
area is guarded behind a locked door,  
the only key we can get right 
now is from the shop in Bone  
Bottom and - 500 rosaries?! In this 
economy? You've gotta be kidding me.
You can also mess around in the eastern side  
of Greymoor to find Craw Lake 
and unlock a new silk skill.
And then the biggest diversion 
of the bunch is Hunter's March.
But I'll come back to that later on.
And finally - it's hard to 
ever get lost because you  
can always just use the ol' map-poking technique.
Uh, sorry, that's a term I totally made up.
But if you've played a few Metroidvania 
games you'll be familiar with map poking.
It's when you open the map, look for paths 
and doors you haven't been through yet,  
and then methodically go to each one 
and see where you can make progress.
And it's easy to do that in Silksong.
The game has the same map system as Hollow Knight 
1 - you start each area with no map at all,  
for that old school, Metroid 1, 
'where the hell am I?' sensation.
Until you find a cartographer - in this case,  
the warrior Shakra - who will 
sell you a map of that zone.
Now you've got a scrappy, 
half-finished layout of the world.
But when you next rest on a bench, the map 
will fill in with the areas you've visited.
And crucially - you'll see open paths and 
passages to the areas you haven't visited.
So if you're ever stuck, you can just poke at  
each unexplored area of the 
map until you make progress.
You can also place markers on your map to remind 
you to come back to specific places later.
So, so far, this is a pretty straightforward game.
You're always moving forward through the map.
Each key only has one or two locks,  
and the one that lets you make progress 
is always just around the corner.
And the map gives you all the 
info you need to get going.
But - once we get that Cling 
Grip, things change dramatically.
Unlike before, this one key lets us 
open up a lot of different locks.
And owning this ability suddenly opens 
up a bunch of new rooms and areas.
So there are high-up areas all across 
Pharloom that we can now reach,  
letting us get to more goodies and items.
We can even face new optional boss fights - 
like the charging Skull Tyrant in The Marrow.
Also, once we have the Cling Grip - these guys 
will start to appear in a handful of locations.
They're called Wardenflys.
Little snotty jerks with big cages.
And if they manage to trap Hornet, she'll be 
kidnapped, again, and whisked off to The Slab.
This is a prison complex, high above Pharloom,  
where Hornet has no weapons or cloak 
until she tracks down her attackers.
Now it's always a surprise in Metroidvanias 
when you're transported to some random corner  
of the map - like the teleporting chests in 
Elden Ring or the Snatcher in Bloodborne.
For a genre that's so much about knowing 
where you are and where you're going,  
it's a big deal to suddenly be in 
completely unfamiliar territory.
And so if you ARE taken to the Slab,  
you'll have to use the Bell Beast to fast 
travel back to Pharloom and carry on.
Right. Let's get back to the actual progression.
So, the Cling Grip lets us go 
to two very important places.
For one, we can use it to climb to the upper 
area of Bellhart, and uncover the mystery of  
what has trapped this town - turns out, 
it's a fleet-footed weaver named Widow.
And with her defeated, the spell 
is broken - reverting Bellhart to a  
normal town where we'll find NPCs, shops, 
side-quests, a needle upgrade, and more.
Plus, we get the fifth upgrade 
in the game: the Needolin.
This turns our needle into a musical instrument,  
which can be used to unlock a number 
of specific doors throughout the game.
It's also essential for finishing this 
first act, but more on that in a second.
The other important place to use 
the Cling Grip is to gain access  
to the next part of Pharloom - the 
Blasted Steps, which holds a perilous,  
wind-swept platforming obstacle course that will 
finally take us to the front door of the Citadel.
Only... to find that it's, maybe, locked up tight.
That's because it's jammed shut until we've 
rung five massive bells throughout Pharloom.
You might have found and rung them already,  
or you might have missed some and 
have to go back and find them now.
This is... a slightly strange quest.
After triumphantly climbing all the 
way to the top of the Blasted Steps,  
you may find you are stopped at the very last 
moment and have to go all the way back down again.
It's like getting to the top of a mountain and 
realising you left your camera at base camp.
Luckily there's a fast travel 
point nearish to the summit.
It's also a strange quest because finding 
these bells just isn't that tough - I mean,  
two of them, the ones in the 
Marrow and the Deep Docks,  
have to be rung to make progress 
through those areas, anyway.
Another two, in Shellwood and Greymoor, 
can be missed if you're rushing,  
but they're not hard to find and aren't behind 
a boss or a platforming challenge or a puzzle.
And then the final one is rung after 
defeating Widow and freeing Bellhart.
Which might make you think that this bell quest  
ensures we've saved Bellhart 
before entering the Citadel.
But... we need the Needolin, which we got 
from defeating Widow, to open the door anyway.
Now it's not a bad quest, and it certainly ensures  
that you've explored a bunch of 
Pharloom before the next act.
But it also feels like there 
could have been more to it.
And, as it turns out, these bells may have had a  
different purpose during an earlier 
stage of development. So who knows.
For now though, let's add them to the chart.
Anyway! After ringing the 
bells, reaching the summit,  
and opening that gate, we face the 
hardest boss fight yet - and what  
might prove to be one of the hardest boss 
fights in the whole game - The Last Judge.
She's the powerhouse guardian of the Citadel, who 
fights with flames, does two masks of damage upon  
impact, and can even kill you, right at the 
very end, with her final, dying explosion.
Not cool, love.
She is an extremely hard boss.
Certainly a suitable cap to the end of Act 1.
I had a lot of trouble with this fight, almost to 
the point of wanting to quit the game altogether.
But, as it turns out...
you don't have to fight The Last Judge at all.
So I've just described Act 1 of 
Hollow Knight: Silksong as having a  
pretty straightforward and predictable structure.
A sequence of bosses and abilities that must be 
fought and unlocked in a very specific order.
And for most players, that is 
how they will scale Pharloom.
It's certainly how I did it.
But there are actually a bunch 
of ways to break that sequence,  
leave that intended path, 
and do things your own way.
So, for starters - in The Marrow, 
you'll find the Flea Caravan.
This works a lot like the 
Grubfather in Hollow Knight 1.
You'll find fleas dotted around the 
world and when you get enough of them,  
you can go back to the caravan to get a reward.
But unlike the Grubfather, the 
caravan will actually move to  
a new location on the map after you 
hunt down a certain number of fleas.
From the Marrow to Greymoor 
after getting five of them.
To the Blasted Steps after getting 12.
And to the Pale Lake at the end of 
the Putrified Ducts after finding 22.
And because the caravan site in Greymoor is  
literally in the boss fight 
room with Moorwing, well...
if you manage to find 5 
fleas before that boss fight,  
you can ride the caravan to that space and 
Moorwing simply won't appear in this room.
Now it will appear later in the game in a 
different spot - but you won't have to fight  
it at all if you don't want to, turning this once 
mandatory boss fight into an optional encounter.
Also - remember that expensive simple key from 
earlier? You know - in this economy? Well,  
500 rosaries is a tall order 
at this early part of the game,  
but it's not impossible with 
a little grinding and farming.
And purchasing this key lets you 
really throw a spanner in the works.
For one, we can open this door in the Deep Docks.
This lets us sneak through a bunch of rooms and  
pop out in the Far Fields - bypassing 
that boss fight with Lace entirely.
Again, turning this essential encounter 
into a completely optional fight.
Or, even better - we can go 
through THIS door in the Wormways.
This lets us climb up to the top of Bone Bottom 
and enter Shellwood from the western side,  
meaning we've skipped Lace, the Drifter's 
Cloak, Fourth Chorus, and Moorwing.
(Though, we will need to go get the Drifter's 
Cloak at some point as it's needed in Act 2).
All of this stuff is totally intended and planned 
by the developers at Team Cherry, of course.
Like, if you skip Lace by either method, 
she'll show up in a later location with  
a unique cutscene to tell you that 
she'll save the fight until later.
But then there's the biggest skip of all.
You see, among the many new places we can 
go with the Cling Grip, is Sinner's Road.
This is a whole new area, off the 
northeastern corner of Greymoor,  
that's filled with nasty 
guard dogs, swinging traps,  
and pools of acidic goop that cover Hornet 
in a bile that slowly saps her silk.
This place sucks.
But within this area is another, even 
more hidden zone, called The Mist.
It's one of those, you know, Lost 
Woods type of deals - a loopy,  
impossible maze where taking the wrong path 
will just whip you back around to the entrance.
So you'll have to figure out 
that playing the Needolin will  
send these fireflies off towards the correct door.
And if you successfully follow them a bunch of  
times you'll end up in an entirely 
new place called The Exhaust Organ.
This is the home of another boss - Phantom,  
who is perhaps the closest to the Hornet 
fight in the original Hollow Knight.
And defeating him not only unlocks another 
silk skill, ooo, a parry - but - surprise! - it  
also opens a path to the Citadel, and Act 2 - 
meaning you don't have to fight The Last Judge.
That's right - there are two completely different 
ways to finish this act and enter the Citadel.
There's the typical route through the 
Blasted Steps and past The Last Judge,  
and the more hidden route through 
Sinner's Road and past Phantom.
And I like this a lot - because if you're 
struggling with The Last Judge (hello!),  
the game gives you an alternative 
route to tackle instead.
One that's less about sheer boss fighting 
skills - I mean, Phantom is a lot easier  
than the Last Judge, and has less total 
health and does less damage with each hit.
But is, instead, more about exploration, 
secret-hunting, puzzle solving, and survival.
Plus, it just makes the world feel 
more complete and interesting.
Of course there's not just one single entrance 
to the Citadel through some massive gate.
There's also a sneaky side door 
by breaking in to its Underworks.
And so here's the thing - when I first played 
through Silksong, taking that predictable path  
I showed in chapter one - I was ready to make 
this video and say that Act 1 is very linear.
A strict sequence of events that must be 
followed exactly as Team Cherry intended.
But it turns out there are sequence-shattering  
secrets all over Act 1 that let you 
tackle the game in all sorts of ways.
Which is great. This offers different 
ways to play in future playthroughs.
It rewards those who explore, 
or save up money, or find fleas.
And while most players will take the 
quote-unquote normal path, it gives  
those who do stumble upon these alternative 
routes a very unique and special experience.
And this doesn't even mention that 
you can also skip the Bell Beast,  
Sister Splinter, and Fourth Chorus...
but with cheeky jumps and pogos, 
that are more like speed-running  
exploits than normal Metroidvania choices.
So I won't go into them properly in this video.
All of this means that Act 1 is perhaps more  
open-ended and non-linear 
than you might first think.
With more optional bosses and alternative routes,  
and a more player-driven structure, 
than you initially realise.
But if you think Act 1 is 
open, just wait for Act 2.
Okay, now that we've made the pilgrimage 
up through Pharloom - however you ended  
up doing that - it's time to tackle The Citadel.
This area is shown as just one 
big blob on the zoomed-out area  
map - alongside the Cradle and the 
Underworks - but, inside The Citadel,  
you'll realise that it's made 
up of a bunch of distinct areas.
Well. Sort of distinct.
To me, Pharloom - the land of Act 1 - very 
much feels like a bunch of different zones.
Each one has its own colour palette and vibe 
and can be easily identified from a screenshot.
But in the Citadel, the different 
areas feel slightly more same-y,  
and I felt like I was exploring one single 
space rather than lots of different areas.
Though, I'll admit that each 
area does have its own ideas.
The Cogwork Core is an industrial 
zone with spinning gears.
The Whispering Vaults has box-shoving puzzles.
The High Halls are all up-and-down elevators.
And Whiteward is a small slice 
of a psychological horror game.
Plus, there's some great environmental 
storytelling here - like how the enemies in the  
Choral Chambers carry loads of rosaries, but the 
worker drones in the Underworks have hardly any.
And how the benches down here are pay-per use, 
showing how the staff are getting squeezed dry.
So perhaps I'm talking my 
way out of this position.
But still - as I reminisce on the game, 
I can't help but think of Pharloom as  
a bunch of distinct places and 
the Citadel as a single zone.
Maybe it's like exploring a Metroid map, 
which then leads to a Castlevania map.
Perhaps Pharloom is Zebes, and 
the Citadel is Dracula's Castle.
That could work.
The Citadel also feels - suitably - self contained  
and disconnected from all 
of the stuff we just did.
For starters there are separate fast travel 
systems, with the Bell Beast in Pharloom,  
and pneumatic elevators in the Citadel - 
and only one connection between the two.
So going back to the Act 1 areas has the extra 
step of getting to the Grand Bellway first.
Plus, there's actually no reason to ever return 
to Pharloom once you've reached the Citadel.
Now I'm sure you will for wishes, pick-ups, needle 
upgrades, and whatnot - but all of the upgrades,  
bosses, and paths forward through Act 2 are found 
exclusively within the Citadel and the Underworks.
But the biggest difference between Acts 
1 and 2 is in how progression works.
Act 1, as we just explored, certainly 
offers variance - but that was by  
skipping and bypassing bits of 
an otherwise linear structure.
Act 2, on the other hand, is 
completely open-ended by design.
Okay, so both paths into the 
Citadel start in the Underworks.
But once we've made our way through 
there we'll enter the actual building.
A grand, opulent palace with 
stages, dining halls, and a spa.
At the very top of the Choral Chambers is 
a boss fight against the Cogwork Dancers.
Side note: what a brilliant boss.
That's, like, an all-timer right there.
But anyway.
Beating these ballroom bots gives us a new quest.
We need to collect three bits of a melody 
and then bring back the completed tune.
These three song-lets are 
spread across the Citadel.
And each one tests a different skill.
The Conductor's Melody in High 
Halls is found after a frankly  
ridiculous enemy gauntlet with 10-or-so phases.
The Architect's Melody in Cogwork Core requires  
serious platforming skills as 
you bounce over deadly gears.
And the Vaultkeeper's Melody 
in the Whispering Vaults is  
behind a more traditional boss fight 
- against the theatrical ham, Trobbio.
TROBBIO: Trobbio!
Best of all, these three melodies 
can be found in any order.
Lemme show you how.
So, after we defeat the Cogwork 
Dancers, we enter the Cogwork Core.
This gives us access to the Whispering Vaults 
where we can fight Trobbio - which, in turn, gives  
us access to the eastern side of the Underworks, 
where we find the Vaultkeeper's Melody.
(It's actually just a cylinder, so we'll 
need to take it to Vaultkeeper Cardinius,  
also in the Vaults, to actually 
play it. But whatever).
So that's the first part of the chart.
Now, the other two areas 
with songs - the High Halls,  
and the upper part of Cogwork Core - are 
locked until we get the next ability.
That would be the Clawline - a 
speedy hookshot-style ability,  
which can also latch on to hanging rings.
This thing is in the Cauldron, on 
the east side of the Underworks.
But there are actually two very 
different ways to reach it.
For one, we can get to it after defeating Trobbio.
We'll take this elevator down to the 
Cauldron and get the Clawline from there.
Or, we can find the White Key in Songclave, use 
that to open Whiteward, work our way through, and  
then drop down into the Cauldron from that area.
So... take your pick.
Now, I love a Metroidvania upgrade that 
can be found through multiple routes.
It gives players more agency, and it 
doubles their chance of finding it  
through exploration - or simply stumbling around.
It also means that we don't 
have to fight Trobbio first,  
as he's not necessarily 
between you and the Clawline.
And it means that it's actually 
possible to get to the High Halls,  
finish that tricky gauntlet, and 
meet Conductor Ballador before  
we've even defeated the Cogwork Dancers and 
gotten the quest to find the three songs.
We'll just have to come back for 
the melody after the quest begins.
So, you can hopefully see now that Act 
2 is a very different beast to Act 1.
Not only do you have three destinations, 
which can be completed in any order you  
like - but the whole business with the 
Clawline creates a tangled spaghetti mess.
With the outcome being: how you finish 
this act is very much up to you.
But you'll still unlikely to get lost.
You can always rely on the map-poking 
technique I explained earlier.
And the game even puts icons on your 
map to show you where the melodies are.
They don't really spoil the game, if you ask 
me - they're just there to stop you getting  
completely lost, as you'll always know the 
general location of these all-important tunes.
And so once you have all three pieces of 
the melody, that is, well, ultimately...
the beginning of the end of the game.
We can now take this elevator up, to the Cradle.
Here we'll fight Lace - again, or for the first 
time, depending on what when down in Act 1.
And then continue through the Cradle to 
face down the final boss of Hollow Knight:  
Silksong: Grand Mother Silk.
Beat her. Roll credits. You're done.
All of that gives us a final graph for 
Act 2 that looks something like this.
I've simplified it a bit.
But - in truth, this is not an accurate 
representation of playing the game.
Not at all.
Because we really have to talk about...
So far, I've been talking almost exclusively about 
the main progression of Hollow Knight: Silksong.
You know: the things you have 
to do to advance the story,  
finish the main quests, and 
get to the end of the game.
But that is only a small part 
of what this game has to offer.
Because here's the thing.
In every Metroidvania, there's the stuff 
that you have to do to finish the game,  
and there's the optional stuff you can do that 
doesn't impact the progression either way.
For instance, in Metroid Prime you'll need the 
high jump boots, the Varia suit, the boost ball,  
the missiles, and so on to overcome the 
obstacles between you and the final boss.
But there are also energy tanks, missile upgrades, 
and even special weapons like the Wavebuster which  
all make Samus more capable, but they aren't 
required for any locks, bosses, or puzzles.
So: totally optional.
That means very Metroidvania has two piles: 
the mandatory pile and the optional pile.
And in Hollow Knight: Silksong - 
well, the optional pile is massive.
Like whopping. Like astronomically big.
The amount of stuff you CAN do far 
outweighs the stuff you HAVE to do.
I mean, to put it in numbers - there are 12 bosses 
that must be defeated before finishing the game.
Moss Mother, Bell Beast, Lace, Fourth 
Chorus, Moorwing, Sister Splinter, Widow,  
The Last Judge - or Phantom, Cogwork Dancers, 
Trobbio, Lace - again - and Grand Mother Silk.
And, yeah, that includes all the 
ones that can technically be skipped.
But then are 17 more bosses on top of them.
17 beautifully drawn, designed, 
and developed baddies that are  
totally optional and do not stand 
between you and the end credits.
17 boss fights that you just 
might never come across.
That's wild!
Another way to think about 
it is in terms of items.
All the goodies and pick-ups and bits and 
bobs you can stuff in Hornet's pockets.
All of this stuff is optional - but just 
think how much crap there is in this game.
There are 20 mask shards that increase your 
health, 18 spool fragments that boost your mana,  
8 pouch upgrades, and 3 bottles of pale oil 
to increase the power of Hornet's needle.
There are 6 different silk skills, 
which are powerful combat moves.
Seven crests, which change Hornet's 
moveset and unlock special attacks.
There are 20 red tools, which are sub weapons.
21 blue tools, which help in combat.
And 12 yellow tools, which help with exploration.
Plus 20 memory lockets, which let you 
equip more tools at the same time.
There are also 3 silk hearts to improve 
mana regeneration, a charge attack move,  
endless bundles of the game's two 
currencies - rosary beads and shell  
shards, plus rare objects that can be 
sold to merchants for even more cash.
There's craftmetal which can 
be used to make special tools.
There are fleas, simple keys, 
and bags of frozen peas.
There's so much stuff.
Some of these things are simple upgrades that 
give you more health, mana, ammo, and money.
But others completely change the game 
- giving you a chance to make a totally  
unique build that works for you 
and the way you like to play.
It is a lot.
And all of this stuff is going to be useful 
because Silksong is, famously, a very hard game.
A game with gruelling boss fights, exhausting 
enemy gauntlets, and difficult obstacle courses.
Now Team Cherry knows this - but 
has always said that the solution  
to getting stuck in a Hollow Knight 
game is to just... go somewhere else.
To stop beating your head against a 
brick wall and instead try another route.
Ari Gibson says that players who get stuck “have 
ways to mitigate the difficulty via exploration,  
or learning, or even circumventing the challenge 
entirely, rather than getting stonewalled".
So, as Ari said, sometimes that means skipping 
the fight through a cheeky secret path.
Other times, that means finding someone to help.
For instance, you can find Garmond 
and Zaza in a side room in Greymoor,  
and get them to assist in the fight with Moorwing.
But the most obvious way to 
help improve your chances is  
to find some of these optional items and goodies.
Some extra health or a tool that speeds up healing 
can be the difference between success and failure.
Though - I do want to note that 
this intention, for players to go  
somewhere else if they get stuck, is largely 
undercut by Silksong's use of corpse running.
That's a gameplay system where - when 
you die, you'll lose some of your stuff.
Specifically: all of your loose 
rosaries - the game's main currency.
And also any spool upgrades you've found.
So you'll need to go back to the place you died 
and smack your cocoon to get your stuff back.
This idea was popularised by Dark Souls, 
and then borrowed for Hollow Knight.
And the idea is once you've died, 
you're in a heightened state of play  
because you're less strong - and if you die 
again before getting back to your corpse...
you'll lose your stuff for good.
So it can be a good tool for amping up the stakes.
But I just don't think it 
works for a Metroidvania.
We want players to die... and then 
go explore somewhere else instead.
But the corpse running system 
just encourages them to keep  
going back to the same place, over and over again.
Now, Silksong does have some ways to 
reduce its impact - like these tools  
that turn loose rosary beards, that are lost 
on death, into strings of beads, which aren't.
And the Silkeater item gives you a 
few chances to retrieve your corpse.
But overall - I just don't think this 
is a good system for this sort of game.
I didn't like it in Hollow Knight, I didn't like 
it in Elden Ring, I don't like it here, either.
But, okay, another thing worth noting is how  
many items you can possibly 
find before each boss fight.
For instance - in terms of mask 
shards, there are 20 total in the game,  
meaning you can double your 
health with 5 additional masks.
But the vast majority of them 
can only be found in Act 2.
And that's true of almost 
every other pick-up, too.
So if we consider the bosses at the ends 
of Act 1 and 2, The Last Judge and Lace.
Ignoring Phantom for now.
Well, before fighting The Last Judge we 
can theoretically find 6 mask shards,  
(which gives 1 extra mask) 6 spool fragments, 
1 needle upgrade, and about 25 tools.
And considering that the Last Judge 
does two masks of damage with every hit,  
one extra mask doesn't help all that much.
But then before fighting Lace, we can find 
10 more mask shards, adding 4 more masks,  
12 more spool fragments, 2 more needle 
upgrades, and almost every tool in Silksong.
That makes a big difference.
Like, there's just not a huge amount of stuff we 
can do to improve our chances against The Last  
Judge - the biggest one being this magma 
bell that nerfs incoming fire damage -
but when it comes to Lace, 
well an industrious player  
can massively tip the fight in their favour.
And so I think this is why I found 
Act 2 to be almost easier than Act 1.
In the first act I felt like I had to just 
constantly retry boss fights like Moorwing,  
the Fourth Chorus, and The Last Judge.
There wasn't much else I could do.
But in Act 2, if I was struggling with 
Trobbio or Lace or Grand Mother Silk I  
could just go somewhere else, get 
more power, and come back later.
But okay. With those caveats aside, let's ask 
the question: where you do find all this stuff?
Okay, so we've established that Silksong 
has a buttload of optional stuff to find.
But the important question, in terms of Boss 
Keys, is asking how players will discover them.
And well, ultimately, there are four 
main sources for finding optional  
items in the game - backtracking, 
secret walls, shops, and wishes.
Let's start with backtracking.
For the main progression, Silksong almost 
never asks you to go back on yourself.
Act 1 can be finished through 
endless forward progression.
And Act 2 is entirely self contained 
- with everything you need to complete  
that quest being found exclusively 
within the Citadel and the Underworks.
That's a bit unusual for a 
Metroidvania, where part of  
the joy of the genre is zig-zagging 
back and forth across the entire map.
Perhaps unlocking a new ability 
in one place and then going all  
the way back to the very start 
of the game in order to use it.
Silksong doesn't really do this for its main path.
But it does have stuff for those who 
return to a previous zone with a new  
ability in tow - it's just almost always optional.
For instance, there's a path 
off of the Marrow with a big  
beefy baddy who will promptly 
turn you into mashed potato.
It's teaching you, very early on, that sometimes 
you'll want to leave and come back later.
So if you return after getting the dash 
you can outfox this guy, defeat him,  
and enter a whole new area: Hunter's March, 
which holds a flea and a secret shop.
And if you come back with the 
Drifter's Cloak, you can fly up here...
in order to face the Savage Beastfly and - if you  
manage to defeat that - unlock 
the powerful Hunter's Crest.
And this happens throughout Silksong.
Each time you get a new ability you can use it 
NEARBY to move forward and make more progress.
OR you can turn around, go back to 
somewhere you've already visited,  
and use the ability to unlock something cool.
The Clawline is a particularly 
good example, actually.
Technically, it's only needed within the 
Citadel - to open the paths to High Halls  
and the Cogwork Core, in order to 
get parts of the Threefold Melody.
But we can also backtrack to the zones we 
visited in Act 1, and use it to unlock a  
bunch of new places in Pharloom - including 
a whole new area called the Sands of Karak,  
a new part of the Deep Docks, plus 
a mask shard back in Far Fields.
Oh! And it can also be used in the Slab to 
reach another whole new zone: Mount Fay.
This is an icy alpine area on 
the western edge of the kingdom.
It's so cold that Hornet will take 
damage if you've been exposed to  
the elements for more than a few seconds.
So you'll need to dash between these heating 
lights to stay warm, and reset the countdown.
At the very top of the mountain is, actually, 
another upgrade - the Faydown Cloak.
This fuzzy winter coat not only protects 
you from the freezing temperatures,  
but also gives you a double jump.
And seeing as I've only just mentioned it, 
after talking about how to finish the game,  
you'll hopefully realise that 
this thing is - again - optional.
I mean, if you do find it while playing 
Act 2 then it will certainly come in handy.
It will make the Cogwork Core 
platforming section a lot, lot easier.
And you can also use it to find 
a secret area in the High Halls,  
where you can stop these silk-sucking 
marionettes from ever appearing  
throughout the Citadel - which will help 
out during that ridiculously long gauntlet.
But, still, the Faydown Cloak is not technically 
essential and you can finish the game without it.
But, again, with this thing under your belt 
you can now backtrack across the map and use  
this new power-up to find a whole bunch of new 
areas across both Pharloom and the Citadel.
Like Wisp Thicket, which is above Greymoor, and 
Memorium, which is at the top of the Citadel.
There are new optional bosses like 
The First Sinner, Father of the Flame,  
and Voltvyrm - all of which drop 
powerful silk skills and tools.
And there are lots of useful goodies to find.
So - the point is, Silksong almost never 
asks you to backtrack - but if you do it,  
you'll be rewarded with 
all sorts of helpful items.
And I think this approach to 
backtracking works really well.
It means casual players can just stick to the main 
quest and make progress by always moving forward.
But it also means that Metroidvania 
obsessives still get a big advantage for,  
you know, committing the world map to memory, 
and being super fastidious about exploration.
Okay, so that's backtracking.
The other way to get these optional 
items is through secret walls.
All across Silksong are these crumbling 
walls that you can break open.
Or they're sometimes just cheeky passageways 
that are covered up by bits of the foreground.
These things defy map poking because, until you 
find them, they do not show up on your map at all.
It looks like you've explored the 
whole space - but, ahh, no you haven't.
Now these things are everywhere 
- I counted more than 50 across  
the map on my second playthrough for Boss Keys.
And they hide items, boss fights, 
shops, and even entire areas.
Seriously - both Bilewater and the Putrified 
Ducts are hidden behind secret walls,  
and so it's entirely possible to play the entire 
game without ever knowing these places are there.
Seriously - I beat the whole game 
without stepping foot in Bilewater.
The only clue was that 
suspicious empty space on my map.
Though, it should be noted that you are 
given some help with finding these locations.
Bilewater can be discovered through two 
different hidden walls - in Sinner's Road  
and in the Whispering Vaults, meaning 
you've got two chances to find it.
Meanwhile, there's a side-quest where you track 
the shopkeeper Jubilana - which shows a trail  
through a secret passageway in Memorium, and 
takes you to a hidden area above Songclave.
From there, it shouldn't be too hard to find this 
breakable wall that leads to the Putrified Ducts.
We can also get optional items from shops.
That one's pretty self explanatory.
There are shopkeepers across Pharloom and 
the Citadel, and each one will sell tools,  
spool fragments, mask shards, and 
more in exchange for rosary beads.
So if backtracking and secret 
walls reward exploration,  
then these shops reward 
being economical with money,  
and not losing your cocoon - and the rosary 
beads you were carrying - by dying a lot.
And then there are wishes.
These are side quests that can be picked 
up from bulletin boards in the major towns,  
or by talking to specific characters.
Many of these are simple quests 
that you'd see in other games.
You know: kill specific enemies 
and gather their spoils.
Track down an NPC by following 
their trail. Find materials.
That sort of thing.
But there are more notable ones too.
There are wishes with special boss fights,  
like the Skull Tyrant in the Marrow 
and the Broodmother in the Slab.
And there's the wish Great Taste of Pharloom,  
where you need to find four ingredients 
across the entire map of Silksong,  
and deliver a rasher from Bellhart to 
the Citadel without it disintegrating -
all of which gives you the necessary 
item to boost your needle's power.
Oh, and there are also other side activities 
that aren't listed as specific wishes.
Like in the Citadel, you can find three cogheart  
pieces - which then go together 
to power up this robot sentinel.
And so between the cogheart 
pieces, the taste of Pharloom,  
and the threefold melody - you could 
be doing three completely different  
"find all of these objects" quests, 
simultaneously, throughout Act 2.
Overall, I think side quests fit 
really well in a Metroidvania.
It's not typically a part of the genre - I 
can only think of a few examples with them,  
like Prince of Persia and some 
of the Castlevania entries on DS.
But they make sense.
They give you something else to do if you're 
lost or banging your head against a boss fight.
They often give you a reason to revisit 
an area you've long forgotten about.
And they reward other types of activities 
like scouring the map, or collecting things.
So - Silksong is jam packed 
with optional goodies to find.
And as I said in the previous section - they'll 
prove very helpful in a game this difficult.
But this stuff actually has a much bigger impact 
than just letting players modulate the difficulty.
Because the real side effect of having so much  
optional stuff is that it makes the 
adventure inherently less linear.
At almost every moment in Silksong, you can 
make a choice about where to go and what to do.
You could follow the main quest progression 
- or you could go and work on a wish,  
or explore some new area of the map, or 
backtrack to an old place with a new ability,  
or retry that boss you skipped 
earlier, and so on, and so on.
And this makes each player's 
experience way more personal.
The areas you visit, the bosses you 
fight, the secret walls you uncover,  
the wishes you find and complete, the crests 
and silk skills and tools you find and use...
all of this changes from player to player.
Which ones will you encounter, and 
what order will you discover them?
By having so much stuff be entirely optional,  
it means that each playthrough of Silksong is 
unique - and not at all defined by the developers.
But. With all of that being said.
Perhaps I'm being a bit hasty to describe 
all of this stuff as being truly optional.
Because, as it turns out,  
a lot of this stuff ends up being way 
more important than I've first let on.
Okay, so you might have felt like 
the final boss fight was a bit easy.
And that the final cutscene before 
the credits was a tad bleak.
Like... this can't be the real 
ending of the game, can it?
And you'd be right.
Just like Hollow Knight 1, 
there's a lot more to do if  
you want to see this thing through 
and unlock the true, final ending.
This all comes in the form 
of a wish, Silk and Soul,  
which is given by the Caretaker in Songclave.
This quest will kick off a sequence of events 
that will lead to the real ending of Silksong.
But actually getting wish thing to appear means  
fulfilling a hodgepodge collection 
of prerequisites and requirements.
Including... a whole bunch of specific wishes,  
many involving big donations of 
rosaries and shards to wish walls.
That also includes the wish Trail's 
End, which involves buying all of  
Shakra's maps - meaning you'll need to have 
been to all the major areas in the game.
You'll need the Faydown Cloak from Mount Fay.
You'll need the Bellhome key, which 
you get from doing wishes in Bellhart.
You need to move the Flea caravan 
to Fleatopia - which means  
finding the Pale Lake and hunting down 22 fleas.
And you'll need 17 "quest points", which 
come from completing miscellaneous wishes.
Now this list is not actually in the game.
You can of course find it on 
Wikis and Reddits and whatnot.
But inside the game itself - well, I 
guess it's supposed to just be a thing  
that will trigger when you've proven 
that you've done a lot of the game.
Lore wise, I think it's supposed to show that 
Hornet truly cares for the people of Pharloom,  
and has shown this through 
charity, effort, and bravery.
Which is very cute.
But because it has so many specific 
prerequisites - like the Bellhome key  
and that one wish with Shakra's mentor - 
well, a lot of players may not trigger it,  
and just want to know how 
to continue with the game.
I mean, it's quite telling that 
the first results on Google for  
"Silksong how" are all about unlocking Act 3.
So perhaps there could have been another, 
less obtuse, way to have this thing unlock.
But okay. Once we have this quest, the Caretaker  
has a plan to defeat Grand Mother Silk 
without plunging Pharloom into chaos.
We just need to gather up four items.
We need to get the Maiden's Soul 
from the Chapel Maid in Bone Bottom,  
and the Hermit's Soul from 
the Bell Hermit in Bellhart.
Both of those are just about asking nicely.
The Seeker's Soul is a lot tougher because we 
have to defeat Groal the Great in Bilewater,  
which is perhaps the worst boss 
in perhaps the worst area. Joy.
And then finally, we need the Snare Setter item,  
which can be found in Weavenest Atla, 
back at the very beginning of the game.
What's interesting is that three of the four items  
needed are behind hidden 
walls, or in hidden areas.
And as I explained earlier, these 
things aren't shown on your map and  
so can't be discovered through simple map poking.
And on top of that - this 
is where Silksong finally  
makes backtracking part of the main progression.
We'll need to return to 
Bone Bottom, to Moss Grotto,  
and to Bellhart in order to grab items that 
weren't available on our first trip there.
Basically: now that casual players 
have seen the ending and left somewhat  
satisfied - Team Cherry can amp up the 
challenge for us sickos who want more.
Not just the difficulty of the bosses,  
mind you - but the difficulty of 
the exploration and navigation.
Though, it should be noted that the Caretaker will  
at least give you clues for each 
part of the quest in his dialogue.
So that's Silk and Soul - it adds another 
dose of non-linear exploration to the game.
And with the Soul Snare finished, we 
can fight Grand Mother Silk again - but,  
this time, we'll play the Needolin at the end.
This gives us a very different ending cutscene.
And if we load up the game again, uhhh, 
our save file looks rather strange.
Let's load it up.
Welcome to act three.
Now there's a bit in Hollow Knight 
1 where the familiar Forgotten  
Crossroads area has become corrupted.
Useful pathways are shut off, and basic 
enemies have mutated into more powerful forms.
Well, this is the premise of Silksong's 
third act - only it covers the entire map.
Entire areas are damaged and destroyed, 
there are broken pathways, and enemies  
have a chance of being corrupted by the void 
- which makes them more deadly and resilient.
It's a case of reimagining a place that 
you thought you had come to know well.
A twist on the familiar.
Kinda like the upside down castle 
at the end of Symphony of the Night.
And for the first big twist - when we go to use 
the Bell Beast to fast travel back to Bone Bottom,  
we'll find that it has been usurped by the 
Bell Eater - our first new boss of Act 3.
Killing that pooping weirdo gives us back 
the Bell Beast, plus a handy new ability.
We can now use the Needolin to 
call out for the Bell Beast's  
kids - which warps us back to 
the nearest fast travel point.
Now I'm always a fan of holding back quality 
of life stuff until the back part of the game.
You wouldn't want to have this throughout the 
whole of Silksong - it would make things too easy.
But now we're in the final stretch, 
it's nice to remove some of that tedium.
Anyway - while it's nice to have the Bell 
Beast back, I think it would have been fun  
to have to walk all the way back to Bone Bottom 
on foot, rather than just fast travelling there.
It would have been a good way to see how both 
the Citadel and Pharloom have changed for Act 3,  
it would give you a bunch of new 
combat challenges on the way there,  
and it would be a clever twist on the goal of the 
first two acts - to descend, rather than to climb.
Whatever the case, once we're back 
at Bone Bottom we find the Shamans,  
who give us a quest to dive deep 
beneath Pharloom, into the Abyss.
(I guess that's the twist on the Act 1 goal - to  
reach the lowest part of the 
map, rather than the highest.
Fine. Whatever. Ignore me).
So it's time to go back to the Deep 
Docks, where there's a diving bell.
Now we might have already found this 
thing in Act 2 - it's just sitting there,  
behind a Clawline ring and a boss fight 
against the Forebrothers Signis and Gron.
In fact - that might be for the best 
as the boss encounter is actually  
harder if playing in Act 3, thanks 
to the addition of mutated enemies.
Whatever the case - we take the diving bell down.
Deep down. Very deep down. Into the abyss.
This is a slightly more linear section,  
and also the location of the game's 
final ability: the Silk Soar.
This lets us fly up vertically.
It's useful for getting to areas that are 
too high for even the double jump - and  
it's a bit like the Shinespark in 
Metroid, but without the run up.
We can also use this new move to leave 
the abyss in a thrilling escape sequence.
Which is also quite Metroid 
coded, let's be honest.
Now we're back in Pharloom,  
we can use the Silk Soar to finally 
reach every single area on the map.
Nothing is off limits now.
And we can use it to backtrack to various 
areas and unlock a number of optional goodies.
That includes a mask shard on Mount 
Fay, a silk skill in the cradle,  
a new quest involving Mr Mushroom in Pale Lake,  
and an optional boss fight against the 
Watcher at the Edge in the Sands of Karak.
Who drops a completely useless memento.
Great. Cheers. What was the point of that?
But our actual goal is to go back to Bone 
Bottom and get the real quest of Act 3.
That quest is to gather three hearts 
by tracking down dead or otherwise  
defeated warriors - and then using a new 
Needolin song to pop into their memories.
There we can defeat them and win their heart.
Those hearts are...
The Heart of Might.
This comes from Crust King Khann in the 
Coral Tower at the top of the Sands of Karak,  
past two boss fights against giant Conchflies.
Again, like with the diving bell, we 
might have already been here in Act 2.
But either way, we can now use the 
Needolin to enter Khann's memories,  
fight through several tricky gauntlets, 
and then take down Khann himself.
Then there's the Heart of Pollen.
This one will take us back to the elevator shaft 
that goes from the Grand Gate to the Underworks.
And by using Silk Soar we can 
leap up to this higher section.
That leads us to two bosses in a row - Shrine 
Guardian Seth (rest in peace) and then Nyleth.
This is a tricky platforming-focused 
fight that will have you bouncing back  
and forth from wall to wall, over a pit of spikes.
And finally there's the Heart of Wild.
For this one we can go back to Hunter's March 
and use the Silk Soar to jump over this statue.
This takes us to a new part of 
the Far Fields and eventually,  
to a showdown with the 
operatic Skarrsinger Karmelita.
One of the hardest bosses in the game.
Like in Act 2, the locations of these bosses are  
put onto your map as icons - 
to help you track them down.
But because this is Act 3, the 
actual entrances to these boss  
areas are often hidden, and 
thus not shown on the map.
The paths to Nyleth and Karmelita are  
behind secret walls - and so 
they're immune to map poking.
But - like Act 1, there is also 
another way to complete the quest.
You see, there's actually a secret fourth heart.
If you saved the Green Prince 
from his cage in Sinner's Road,  
using a simple key, you can find him in Greymoor.
Here you can enter his memories to find 
an entirely new zone, Verdania, and fight  
the Clover Dancers - a clever storytelling 
callback to the Cogwork Dancers in the Citadel.
Defeating the Clover Dancers gives 
us the Conjoined Heart which can  
be used in place of another of the other three -
useful if you can't find the 
entrance to Nyleth's shrine,  
or you suck too much to beat Karmelita. Hello!
So, those are the four hearts we can find.
But we only need three of them,  
at which point we can take them back to the 
Shamans to kickstart the ending of the game.
We'll go through Hornet's 
memories to get the Everbloom.
Then return to the Abyss 
and fight the real, actual,  
promise this is the final boss - Lost Lace, 
before seeing the true ending of the game.
All of which means Act 3 
looks something like this...
with a few steps being completable in Act 
2 if you were being particularly thorough.
Like Act 2, this final act is non-linear  
and free-form - guided by the 
player's decisions and abilities.
Oh, and before I wrap up this section - 
it does mean I'll need to recalculate that  
previous claim that there are more optional 
bosses than mandatory ones in Silksong.
So, at the end of Act 2 there were 12 
mandatory bosses and 17 optional ones.
We'll need to promote the Great Conchflies, Groal 
the Great, and the Forebrothers to mandatory,  
as they're part of the progression through 
Trail's End, Silk and Soul, and Act 3.
If we ignore Khann and go after the 
Clover Dancers, we'll need to add Seth,  
Nyleth, Karmelita, Clover Dancers, 
and Lost Lace as mandatory fights.
It's not looking good...
But! There are loads of optional bosses in 
Act 3, including a fight with the Pinstress,  
an annoying chase after a mythical Palestag in 
Verdania, and a rematch with a tormented Trobbio.
TORMENTED TROBBIO: Trobbio!!
Which all, to my count,  
means there are 20 mandatory bosses 
in Silksong, but 25 optional ones.
My point still stands! The video still works!
Okay, let's bring this all together.
When we consider the entire game, 
Silksong has a very interesting structure.
Act 1 has this tightly paced, 
pretty linear progression,  
with a non-stop parade of boss 
fights, upgrades, and new areas.
But then Act 2 is more loose 
and freeform - a non-linear  
sequence where you're free to wander and 
explore in a more meandering fashion.
And then Act 3 is a mix of the two - 
with linear sections like the Abyss,  
and then exploratory parts 
like finding the three hearts.
This concertina structure, which 
dramatically bounces between  
moments of forward propulsion and slower 
discovery, keeps the game interesting.
It's a constant change of pace 
that means Silksong never sings  
on the same note for long enough to get boring.
On top of that, the game constantly offers  
ways for players to break and bend 
the obvious structure of the game.
Act 1 is full of cheeky skips and sequence breaks.
Act 2 has the stuff with the Clawline.
And Act 3 lets you pick 3 
hearts from a total of 4.
This gives players more agency, it makes each 
playthrough different, and it gives options  
for speed-runners and challenge players 
to tackle the game in a different way.
And then on top of that, there's just 
endless optional content to complete.
Wishes, bosses, pick-ups, and secret areas.
This makes each playthrough completely unique.
It lets you modulate the difficulty of the  
game - by giving you a way to 
turn the tables against bosses.
And it lets Team Cherry keep the golden 
path through the game quite simple and  
straightforward - but provide lots of rewards 
for the players who explore, who save up money,  
who poke at suspicious walls, and who 
backtrack to earlier parts of the game.
And then on top of all of THAT, this is 
a world that feels coherent and cohesive.
This is not just a bunch of arbitrary zones 
stitched together for the sake of a Metroidvania.
But the world layout makes sense.
Each location has a reason for being 
- and a reason for being where it is.
And ultimately the grand story of the game 
- about this pilgrimage from the depths of  
Pharloom to the heights of the Citadel - 
is represented on the world map itself.
The level design and the way you transport through  
it tells the story just as 
clearly as any lore dump.
Put all of this together.
A changing pace. Alternative paths. 
Optional goodies. Coherent storytelling.
Put all of this together and we 
get a Metroidvania made with such  
obvious skill and thought - taking it 
to the highest echelons of the genre,  
and making it the new gold standard 
for other developers to aspire to.
Hey! Thanks for watching.
And thanks for watching all my stuff in 2025.
This is my last video of the year because 
I am just about to go on paternity leave!
Yeah, that's right - I'm gonna be a dad! Get  
your "Baby Maker's Toolkit" 
jokes out of your system now.
I'm taking a few months away from YouTube 
to really enjoy this time so I won't be  
around for a bit - but I hope you'll still 
be here when I get back! Thanks so much.
