There aren’t many video game franchises
that have an entire genre of games named after them.
But the sci-fi adventure series Metroid does
indeed hold that honour.
The term Metroidvania is used to describe
games that have a similar structure to the
mainline Metroid games.
Which means the games takes place in a single,
contiguous, interconnected map that spill
off into all different directions: up, down,
left, right.
They double back on themselves, and connect up
through shortcuts.
Until: you hit a dead end, blocked by an insurmountable
obstacle.
Perhaps, an armour-plated baddy who
shrugs off your weak attack.
At which point you must explore somewhere
else, and hunt down a new, permanent power-up,
that gives your character an additional ability.
Like being able to fire a powerful projectile.
Now you can backtrack to those obstacles from
earlier, and use your newfound powers to make
further progress.
It’s a simple set-up, but it creates a potent
game about navigation and exploration.
It tasks you with creating a map of the space
- either mental or physical - and rewards
you when you remember where those dead ends
were, with further progress… or at least
some handy upgrades.
Plus, there’s the thrill of slowly unlocking
the area, bit by bit, until you can go anywhere,
giving you full control over the domain.
I compared this sensation to picking apart
a knot, in the first season of Boss Keys,
which looked at the dungeons in the Legend
of Zelda series.
And so, as more and more developers attempt
to make their own Metroid-style adventure
games, I wanted to take a look at the genre’s
most important titles and figure out how they’re
put together.
I’ll start by looking at some of the major
Metroid titles, including Super Metroid and
Metroid Prime, before branching out to look
at the games that were inspired by this franchise.
And with each title, I want to find out how
developers tackle the biggest challenge of
the genre: making a game that gives players
freedom and choice, but doesn’t leave them
completely lost and frustrated.
And to do so, I’ll be looking to answer
some key questions - inspired by what I learnt
during Boss Keys season one.
I want to know how the world is laid out.
How the player knows where to go at each turn.
How much of the world can be explored at each
step.
How much choice the player has in their path
through the game.
And how much backtracking is needed to finish
the game.
By the end of the project, we should have
a pretty good idea of what makes an effective
Metroidvania title.
But for now, we need to go back to the beginning
and look at the game that started it all:
the very first Metroid.
The world of Metroid 1 takes place in the
bowels of the planet Zebes, which is split
into five chunks.
There’s Brinstar, which holds most of the
power-ups and acts as a central hub.
This connects to Kraid’s lair - home of
the game’s first mini boss.
And also to the fiery depths of Norfair, which
then links up to Ridley’s lair - where you’ll
find the second mini boss.
If you kill both Kraid and Ridley, you can
head on to Tourian, where you’ll finally
face the titular Metroid monsters, fight the
end boss, and then escape.
Each area has a unique design… well, as
much was possible with NES limitations.
Which is useful, as Metroid does not have
a map screen of any kind, so you’ll need
all the orientation help you can get when
exploring Zebes’s same-y looking corridors.
Of course, you won’t get far in this world
without picking up some power-ups.
And Metroid establishes this rule in the first
few moments, with a very elegant introduction
to its overarching structure.
When you enter Zebes, you’ll probably run
right.
It’s an NES platformer, after all, and that’s
what you do.
But you’ll soon hit a dead end: a wall that’s
too low for you to enter.
So you’ll turn around, go left this time,
and find the first power-up: the morph ball.
Now, you can go back to that dead end and
proceed.
So in the first three rooms, Metroid has told
you how to progress through its world: explore
as much of the space as possible, and take
note of obstacles.
Then go find power-ups that let you overcome
those obstacles.
Come back to that point, and continue onwards.
And this continues for much of the game.
There’s an area that’s too high to jump
in Kraid’s lair - so come back with the
high jump boots.
And the entrance to Tourain is clearly marked
with two statues of the two mini bosses - so
remember to come back here once Kraid and
Ridley are toast.
However, this simple structure starts to fall
apart, as Metroid’s designers mix up clear,
memorable obstacles, with obscure, secret
walls.
So to get to Kraid’s lair, you have to bomb
through here: a place with clearly crumbling
blocks, and an obvious route below.
Nice.
But to get the ice beam, you need to bomb
the floor in this random tunnel, and fall
into lava.
In other rooms it hurts you, but here you just fall through it.
And to get the hi jump boots or find Ridley,
you need to bomb through a completely random
block in the corner of Norfair.
At this point, making progress is not about
exploration or memory or map making: its about
poking at brick walls to find obscure hidden
paths.
Sure, bombing through walls would become
a staple of Metroid map design, but only for
secrets and non-essential upgrades: hardly ever in
the way of the critical path.
None of this is helped by the fact that Metroid
1 lets you explore a lot of the world at once.
After you collect the morph ball at the beginning
of the game, you can now explore most of Brinstar,
and even venture into Norfair for a bit.
And once you have the bombs, you can explore
most of Kraid’s lair, check out a whole bunch
of Norfair, and even head off and fight Kraid
or Ridley.
This certainly gives the player a feeling
of grand exploration - but it’s almost too much.
It’s overwhelming, and gives the player
so many areas to check in one go.
Finding those hidden paths wouldn’t be so
hard, if you didn’t have access to such
a large portion of the world.
There are some caveats to this grumbling,
though.
One is that a lot of items are in fact optional.
The Varia Suit, Long Beam, Screw Attack, Hi
Jump Boots, and Wave Beam will prove handy,
but are all completely skippable.
So while it’s a pain that the Varia Suit
is found by shooting through a random ceiling,
at least you can get through the game without
it.
And then there’s the fact that there are
often multiple paths to get to places in Zebes.
Kraid, for example, can be reached by hopping
up here or by finding a secret path down here.
There are also areas where you can use either
the high jump or the ice beam - a rarity in
Metroidvania design, where it’s often strictly
one type of upgrade for one type of obstacle.
And there are two places to find the ice beam,
meaning that obscure location is a little
less grating.
Plus, you can fight Ridley or Kraid in either
order: Metroid 1 is massively non-linear in
its approach.
To borrow my dependency graph designs from
Boss Keys season 1, the overall structure
of Metroid looks like this: short and wide,
which shows there’s tonnes of branching
paths and loads you can do at once.
It will be rare to find a game that looks
like this again.
A Metroidvania is not just about finding the
path forward, of course.
It’s also about finding non-essential upgrades,
in this case: tanks for your missiles and
energy.
Which are extremely important in this game
because bosses need a lot of missiles to go
down, and also it’s just bloody hard.
But Metroid 1 is a bit weird in this regard.
Many power-ups are just sitting out in the
open, including these five easy-to-find missile
tanks in Norfair.
And others are hidden behind obscure walls,
that require random bombing or a subscription
to Nintendo Power to find.
We’ll see secret design improve in future
titles.
Ultimately, Metroid was a bold, inventive
new approach to level design.
It set a bunch of standards we still see today,
and effectively set players loose in a free-roaming,
non-linear, choice-driven world.
But it was not without mistakes.
The extremely hidden items, the indistinguishable
locations, and a world that opens up a tad
too fast, will inevitably lead to players
getting lost and frustrated.
Which means Metroid is important and memorable,
but difficult to enjoy today.
So what would happen if Nintendo got another
shot at it?
A chance to take the original Metroid, and
make it again for a more modern audience?
Well that’s exactly what happened in 2004,
when it released Metroid Zero Mission on Game
Boy Advance.
It’s got new areas, new bosses, new power-ups,
a whole new epilogue, and a snappy control scheme.
But how is the world designed?
Let’s find out.
If Metroid was too hands-off.
If it let you explore too much.
If it let you make too many decisions.
If it hid the path forward too well.
Then Zero Mission is the opposite, with Nintendo
being almost aggressively helpful in leading
you through the game world.
So now, the player’s path through Zebes
is limited at every step, with the world only
opening up a small amount with each new power-up.
Here’s how much you can explore after you’ve
collected the morph ball.
And the long beam.
And the missiles.
And the bombs.
And so on.
And at each stage, there’s maybe only one
or two new locations to check out with your
new power-up.
So, in Metroid 1, when you get the missiles
you can go up here and find the long beam,
or go here and find the entrance to Tourian,
or go here and find the bombs.
But in Zero Mission, there’s just one door
to check: the path towards the bombs.
And, you know, the cool thing about getting
a new power-up in a Metroidvania game, or
a Zelda dungeon, is that it recontextualises
everything you’ve seen before.
Suddenly, all those dead ends are paths you
can now explore.
Maybe you’ll find the next bit of the game,
maybe you’ll find a handy upgrade, maybe
you’ll find another dead end.
Who knows?
It’s exciting!
But when it’s just one path to check, it’s
obviously less interesting.
It’s just rote backtracking to get to the
next bit of the game.
Also, there’s hardly any choices to be made
in Zero Mission.
Unless you’re sequence breaking - more on
that in a bit - you’ll have to fight Kraid
before Ridley, you’ll have to get the power-ups
in the predetermined order, and there are
hardly any optional power-ups.
Zero Mission adds in a bunch more stuff like the speed booster, power grip, and super
missile, but most of them are needed to get
through the game.
And most of the optional items from Metroid
1, like the wave beam and high jump, have
been paired up with obstacles, so they’re
now necessary for making progress.
There’s only a few optional items now, like
the screw attack and charge beam.
A dependency graph for Metroid Zero Mission
is more like this: a tall, thin chart, which
represents a very linear and restricted path
through the game.
But the most obvious way that Nintendo guides
you through Zebes comes in the form of these
Chozo statues.
At the start of the game, you’ll roll into
this statue, and it will add a blinking beacon
to your map, telling you where to go next.
Namely, the room where the long beam is held.
And this sets the tone for the adventure.
There are seven Chozo statues in the game,
and they will lead you from one power-up to
the next, with only a few exceptions.
Now at some points, you will have to make
a detour from the statue’s waypoint.
Like, after getting the bombs it points you
to the ice beam: but you can’t actually
get there until you wander off in the opposite
direction, head into Crateria, and get the
power grip.
So at least you have to pay attention there.
And other statues are skippable.
Like, after you defeat Kraid and return to
Brinstar, a path will open up in the elevator
room and there’s a statue there which points
you towards Norfair - but you can run past
it if you like.
But I think it really changes the way most
players will approach the game.
Instead of venturing out into the unknown,
players simply follow a path, laid out for
them like breadcrumbs.
It’s hard to feel like an explorer when
the path forward is lit up by a flashing beacon.
And this affects backtracking, too.
Because backtracking isn’t necessarily a
dirty word.
When you’re deciding to revisit an area
you saw earlier, because you remember seeing
an obstacle there that you now have the tools
to overcome - it actually feels great.
Like, you make a mental note of this super
heated room in the top of Norfair, and then
once you get the Varia suit you say “aha!
I can go back to that room I saw earlier!”.
And inside is a missile tank.
You made this decision off of your own back,
and you’re rewarded with an upgrade.
That’s when backtracking works.
But when you find a Chozo statue that says
“okay, now just travel all the way back
to Norfair to continue”, it’s a chore.
You’re told where to go and you’re simply
having to make the trek to get back there.
It’s just a task, and that’s when backtracking
feels like meaningless busy work.
Do you see the difference? Hopefully.
Luckily, many of the power-ups in Zero Mission
make travelling faster and more enjoyable,
so it is quite fun to speed boost back through
rooms that gave you trouble earlier.
Plus, having Brinstar as a hub area makes
it quite quick to get between areas.
And there are clever shortcuts, too.
The trip back from Ridley to Tourian in Metroid
1 is a slog: but a tunnel in Zero Mission
makes it effortless to return to Brinstar.
The Chozo statues also affect secrets.
Because you know where the actual path is
(the Chozo statue told you as much) you have
to make the decision to specifically go off
the critical path to get secrets.
It’s not just part of exploring, it’s
this specific task you perform.
Again, it’s a very subtle distinction, but
I think it changes the way the game feels
quite dramatically.
Thankfully, the secret design in Metroid Zero
Mission is really good.
They have interesting puzzles to solve, or
require smart use of Samus’s advanced movement
techniques like shine-sparking, or ask you
to remember and backtrack to obstacles.
And exploring the entirety of Zebes at the
end of the game, with all the power-ups, as
you soak up secrets and upgrades, is pretty
fun.
Now many true blue Metroid fans will be watching
all of this and be saying that actually, if
you know what you’re doing, you can really
open Zero Mission up.
If you find hidden blocks, or use speed running
and sequence breaking tricks like wall jumps,
bomb jumps, and shinesparking, you can bypass
certain areas, skip certain items, and even
fight Ridley before Kraid.
And that’s totally true! And awesome!
But it’s also not what 99% of players will
be experiencing on their first go through.
Instead, the vast majority of players will
be given a guided tour of Zebes.
A limited path, that’s constrained at every
point.
A linear progression, through a bunch of must-have
items.
So, ultimately, Zero Mission feels like an
overcorrection from Metroid 1 - an attempt
to fix a confusing and overwhelming game,
but one that went too far and lost that sense
of exploration.
That sense of venturing into the unknown.
That sense being a lone bounty hunter in a scary,
alien world.
What we really need is a game that learnt
from the mistakes of Metroid 1, but is also
very much its own beast.
And that’s what we’ll see next time on
Boss Keys, when we look at the world design
of the incredible, Super Metroid.
Hey thanks for watching!
A reminder that we’re running a Game Jam
at the end of August.
That I stream every Wednesday over on Twitch.
That GMTK and Boss Keys is paid for by viewers
like you over on Patreon.
And that you’re awesome.
Keep it up.
