The story of the stealth game is a curious
one.
Because for much of gaming’s history, stealth
wasn’t really a thing.
Okay, sure - there were some early games that
incorporated hide-and-seek gameplay.
The Sega arcade game 005 had guards with flashlights,
and you had to wind through a warehouse without
entering those big yellow beams.
Castle Wolfenstein had you putting on disguises
to saunter past SS Stormtroopers.
And the first two Metal Gear games already
had Solid Snake crawling through vents and
hiding in cardboard boxes.
But still, these games were few and far between
- and practically non-existent in the years
after Metal Gear 2’s release in 1990.
Until, 1998 - when three huge stealth games
suddenly appeared all in the same year.
This changed everything, and from then one,
we couldn’t seem to hide from games that
are all about, well, hiding.
You’ve got huge stealth franchises like
Splinter Cell, Hitman and Dishonored.
Indie sneak ‘em ups like The Swindle and
The Marvellous Miss Take.
And stealth bits in most major games like Shadow
of the Tomb Raider and Red Dead Redemption 2.
So, what were these three games - and why
did it take until 1998 for stealth to be taken seriously?
Things kicked off in August of 1998, when
Tenchu: Stealth Assassins was released on
PlayStation.
This is a game about being a ninja who sneaks
through pitch black villages - and, as the
name might suggest, it’s all about staying
unseen and then striking from the shadows.
Then, in October, the PlayStation saw another
critical stealth game.
Metal Gear Solid - subtitled “Tactical Espionage
Action”.
The game stars Solid Snake, a soldier who
prefers to sneak past enemies than take them
on face-to-face.
And he’s got all sorts of skills and gadgets
for doing just that - like being able to crawl
under objects, choke enemies out, or hide
in a cardboard box.
Finally, just as the year was about to finish,
Looking Glass Studios released the first-person
game Thief: The Dark Project on PC, in November
of 1998.
Like these other games, Thief certainly lets
you try and kill enemies - but you’ll likely
end up dead.
You’re better off sticking to the shadows,
and using tools like your trusty blackjack
to knock enemies out.
Amazingly, while these games might have been
early, formative stabs at the genre - they
actually established most of the core tenants
of stealth game design that we still see today.
For starters, and most obviously, all of the
games have you start missions in a neutral,
non-hostile state.
Guards will move around without any knowledge
of your position - or even your existence.
And the goal is, largely, to keep things that
way.
To do this, you’ll need to think about both
sight and sound.
Enemies can spot you, unless you hide behind
cover, stick to the rooftops, or crouch in
the shadows.
And enemies can hear you, so you need to move
quietly and think carefully about the materials
you’re walking on.
In Thief, soft leaves didn’t make much noise,
but running across a hard tiled floor will
certainly alert guards.
To help you with this, all three games saw
fit to give you extra information about whether
you’re safe or spotted.
Tenchu has a Ki Meter, which changes colour
to represent the awareness of nearby guards
and it also has a number telling you how close the
nearest guard is.
Metal Gear Solid offers up the Soliton radar,
which shows the exact vision cone of enemies
as they patrol - but it will jam if you get
spotted, putting you at risk of running directly
into more foes.
And Thief has a Light Gem at the bottom of
the screen which tells you how visible you
are - plus, guards are extremely vocal about
their current state as they will shout out
when they’ve seen something suspicious.
Information like this is critically important
in stealth games, as it removes the ambiguity
of whether or not you’re about to be spotted.
If you are spotted, though, the guards in
these games won’t immediately open fire.
There’s not just a binary switch between
being hidden and being seen - but guards have
a middle state where they’re merely suspicious
and will investigate suspect sights and sounds.
This gives you a bit of leeway to make (and
recover) from a small mistake, without flipping
the entire system into alert mode.
But you can also use this suspicious state
to your own benefit.
All of these games hit on this idea of manipulating
guard AI to your own needs.
In Metal Gear Solid, you can knock on walls
to lure guards one way, while you slip past
the other.
In Tenchu, you can trick enemies into eating
poisoned food.
And in Thief, you can use noisemaker arrows
to distract foes, or deliberately make noise
to lure guards into a trap.
If you do get completely rumbled, guards will
eventually give up their hunt if you manage
to slip away and hide.
In Metal Gear Solid, there’s even a countdown
to show you how long you need to stay hidden
for before the guard’s state is reset.
This allows you to shift the game back to
its original, stealthy state without having
to reload your save game or kill everyone
in sight.
Those core tenants are shared across the three
titles, but the games also had their own,
unique contributions to the genre.
Tenchu had the grappling hook, which could
be freely aimed at rooftops and cause you
to zip up above enemies.
Combine this with a generous jump and
you’ve got a game that was mostly about
using the verticality of levels to stay unseen
- before dropping down to silently dispatch foes.
We’d see this pop up in games like the Arkham
series, where you can use the upper areas
of the level to plan your next move and hide
from sight.
Tenchu also had cinematic stealth kill animations,
which we’d see in a bunch of games going
forward.
Metal Gear Solid’s main contribution was
the radar, which clearly showed where you
would and would not be safe from each enemy’s
line of sight.
Games like The Swindle would also show this
info, though: plastered on the game world
itself, to save you from watching a tiny box
in the corner of the screen for the entire game.
And Thief had lots to add.
This game’s levels are open and interconnected
affairs, giving you multiple pathways to your
goal: which is often to pinch some kind of
sword, sceptre, or jewel from the innermost
sanctum of a well guarded mansion.
Games like Hitmand and Dishonored 
share this level design philosophy.
The game also lets you manipulate the space
to your own liking: using water arrows to
extinguish candles and create areas of darkness,
or use moss arrows to create silent tiles
to walk on.
This is kind of rare, but Splinter Cell does
let you shoot out the lights.
And, on higher difficulties, Thief forces
you to play through missions without killing guards.
Games like Mark of the Ninja would introduce
their own rewards for playing in a non-lethal manner.
So, the question I’m left with, is “why
1998”?
How did the stealth genre go from drips-and-drabs
in the years before 1998, to a full on Cambrian
explosion in the years afterwards?
Well I think it’s down to two things: changing
technology, and the nature of influence.
In terms of technology, this period in the
mid- to late-90s gave us the invention of
3D, polygonal games, and CDs instead of cartridges
and floppy disks.
And this new tech led to all sorts of new
genres, like open-world hi-jinx in Grand Theft
Auto, rhythm action games in Parappa the Rapper,
and survival horror in Alone in the Dark.
Developers were really experimenting with
what games could be in this era - and that
included making games that were primarily
about hiding from enemies, instead of engaging them.
Technology was certainly at the heart of Thief,
as well.
The game relied on CD quality audio to work,
the way sound propagates through the environment
was revolutionary at the time, and the guard
AI was so advanced that it was a broken, buggy
mess up until the last few months of development.
But the design of the game was inspired by
lesser known titles, like the submarine simulator
Silent Service.
On a podcast, Thief’s original designer
Ken Levine talked about the power dynamics
of submarines, saying…
KEN LEVINE: “How powerful you are when you are
unseen, and how weak you are when you are spotted.
When the enemy can’t detect you, you’re
incredibly powerful.
You have these torpedos and you can strike
unseen.
But when you get spotted by the destroyers
there’s this panic because you’re not
going to be able to duke it out with them,
toe to toe.
And that’s so the opposite of what shooters
were”.
But it’s interesting that Levine would need
to go to such a place for inspiration - because
all of the key stealth tenants I’ve talked
about here actually already existed in another game.
Metal Gear 2: Solid Snake was as much a stealth
game as anything released in 1998 - it had
a radar to show enemy locations.
It had loud metal grates that would alert
guards if you ran over them.
It had guards who would become suspicious
and investigate sounds.
You could lure enemies around by knocking
on walls.
And you could reset the game state to be neutral
if you managed to hide.
But it’s not that surprising that it wasn’t
all that influential.
The developers at Looking Glass likely never
played it, seeing as the game was exclusive
to a relatively obscure computer called the
MSX2 and was only released in Japan.
(The worldwide NES sequel to Metal Gear, Snake’s
Revenge, is a completely different game, and
is pretty terrible).
Metal Gear creator Hideo Kojima was basically
done with the series after Solid Snake, preferring
to focus on graphic adventure stuff like Policenauts.
But, again, technology changed things.
3D graphics gave Kojima a reason to revisit
his sneaky roots, saying, “For me, Metal
Gear as a series was complete, but at that
point I thought I would be able do what I
originally intended to do with these polygons
in real time.
For example, if you are hiding under a table
you can change the point of view, or hiding
in a locker you can let the player see how
it looks from inside the locker".
And with this game now being a huge, mainstream,
worldwide success - developers suddenly took note.
Splinter Cell, for example, was made with
the explicit purpose of being a rival to the
in-development Metal Gear Solid 2.
And Volume is directly influenced by MGS.
And Thief is name-checked as the inspiration
behind a bunch of stealth greats, too.
Splinter Cell also took ideas from here, like
the light meter on Sam Fisher’s back.
Mark of the Ninja was Nels Anderson’s attempt
to turn Thief into a side scroller.
And Dishonored is practically a spiritual
successor, even down to getting the voice
actor of Thief’s main character Garrett
to voice Dishonored hero Corvo, in the sequel.
Oh, and Tenchu?
Well, that game was published by FromSoftware
- makers of Dark Souls.
And they were actually going to make a new
Tenchu game this year - but instead, decided
to use the series as inspiration for Miyazaki’s
next game, Sekiro: Shadows Die Twice, which
will feature stealth elements.
So it’s often true that the game that popularised
a genre or mechanic wasn’t the one to actually
invent it - just the first game to do it that
was really successful.
Doom didn’t invent the first-person shooter,
after all, but we still called these games
Doom clones.
So Metal Gear 2 might be the actual grandfather
of stealth games - but with the commercial
success of Metal Gear Solid and the critical
success of Thief - two games that came around
during the technological boom of the late
90s - it’s easy to see why 1998 is seen
as the year that stealth games truly got serious.
