GMTK Game Jam 2022 was massive. More than 22,000 
people signed up to the jam, and within 48 hours  
they had bashed together more than 6,000 games. 
That makes it, once again, our biggest jam yet.
But it also had, perhaps, the most challenging 
theme to date. Participants had to design their  
game around the phrase “Roll of the 
Dice” - and so our brave designers  
had to come up with games about randomness, 
probability, and rolling numbered polygons.
But, I should never doubt these devs. These 
games are clever and creative, inventive  
and imaginative, fun and fiercely unique. 
After players spent a week rating the games,  
I tried out the top 100-rated games. 
And then, chose my 20 favourites.
So, without further ado - and 
in no particular order - these  
are the best games of the GMTK Game Jam for 2022.
One of the main challenges of this jam was  
wrangling with randomness. If the outcome of the 
game is completely driven by the roll of the dice,  
that can rob the player of agency and 
reduces the importance of strategy.
So, a popular solution was to let players design 
their own dice. You’re still at the mercy of RNG…  
but, hey, you’re the one who choose the 
numbers. This my favourite example of the idea
Rolling for Royalty.
The game is a series of simple turn-based battles, 
fought with dice rolls. And in between each bout,  
your dice are unfolded - and 
you can swap out the faces.
Do you want lots of attacks? More shields?  
Perhaps a spell, a modifier, or money 
that can be spent on even more faces?
Then the game adds a further tactical 
layer. After each roll, you can choose to  
re-roll some of your dice. Now we’re adding 
a sense of risk and reward - is it better  
to just keep that weak attack, or will you 
risk rolling it again for something better?
I had a good time with this game - and 
enjoyed the charming untextured 3D art.  
I could definitely see the idea expanded 
further into a full role playing game
There’s always some good neon-lit,  
high-tempo, score-chasing arcade thrills in 
the GMTK Game Jam. This year, the best one was…
Diepound.
You play as a die, and can click the mouse to  
ground pound nearby enemies. The 
dice-y twist is that when you land,  
you get a new number - which dictates how far 
away you’ll land when you do the next jump.
So you could be left with a tiny one-pip  
hop or a massive six-pip leap that sends 
you over to the other side of the screen.
I think it might be fun to have a combo system 
that only ticks up if you kill an enemy with  
your leap - that way you can’t just get rid of 
those rubbish one-pip jumps in favour of something  
better, but are forced to get up close and 
personal with baddies.
But that’s just me backseat designing. What’s 
here is fast, fun, and addictive. Give it a shot.
Perhaps the most common theme in the jam 
was puzzle games where you roll a dice  
on a grid. Whether that’s to spell letters, climb 
structures, or play rock paper scissors.
There are some really clever ones that had me 
thinking, but my favourite of the bunch was…
Roll of the Dice.
In this elegant isometric game, your die acts like 
a stamp, leaving an imprint of its bottom-most  
face whenever you roll over these white paper 
tiles. To finish the level you must shift and  
shimmy around, so you can paint the tiles 
to match this map in the bottom left corner
The puzzles are well made - often 
just teeny tiny grids that are way  
harder than they initially seem. You’ll have 
to think carefully about how to spin your die,  
without spoiling the stamps 
you’ve already placed down
And the game has a simple solution to a 
problem faced by a lot of these games: which is,  
you can’t always see what’s on the other side 
of the dice. Sure, opposite sides always add up  
to seven, but who wants to figure that out? So 
Roll of the Dice uses its camera to always show  
three sides - and then, with a press of a 
button, you can see icons for the other three.
The game’s pretty simple, but I 
think this would be a great base  
to construct an enjoyable puzzle gem.
Randomancer is a highly polished 
tower defence game - where your  
fortifications are provided at the roll of a dice.
Like Plants vs. Zombies, you need to 
plop down towers to fend off enemies who  
march along lanes. But instead of choosing them 
from a list, you must roll a handful of dice.
So whether you get a powerful cannon, a 
handy shield, or a bomb is down to chance.  
After each wave, you get to add 
another die to your collection
That alone would make for a fun game, 
but Randomancer has a spicy little twist  
that adds a lot of fun and charm.
You see, when you lob these dice into the arena, 
they are big, heavy, physical objects - which  
means you can lob them at enemies to do damage. 
This adds an extra layer of strategy - you don’t  
want to throw all your dice immediately, after 
all. And a layer of knockabout physics fun
I’m just left wondering - instead 
of rolling the dice and then  
manually positioning the tower 
that appears - would the game be  
more fun if the towers just popped up wherever 
the dice land? It’d be slightly less tactical,  
but when you’re playing with randomness it’s 
often fun to just lean hard into the chaos.
Another common theme in the jam was twin 
stick shooters where you physically throw  
a big ol’ die at your enemies. I think 
my favourite of the bunch was this one…
GIMMIKO
The juice in this one is just right: 
it feels fab to hike this hefty cube  
at zombie enemies. And the 
game has a nice ebb and flow:  
you’ve got plenty of power when you’re chucking 
the die - but then you’re completely powerless  
as you dodge and weave through baddies 
in order to pick the die back up again.
Of course, there’s more to it than that.  
In between rounds you can spend your cash 
in a shop to add special powers to your die.
Now, every time you throw it, it lands on a 
random number - and plays the corresponding  
power. Maybe shooting out bullets, or launching 
missiles, or spawning mines, or dropping out bees.  
You can also buy more dice and fill them with 
powers, to create an arsenal of magic blocks.
I’m not sure there’s too much strategy 
involved - I found myself just throwing  
dice as often as possible and 
hoping for good effects. But,  
I still had a blast with a game that 
is manic, silly, and a lot of fun.
Not your Pawn! is another die-lobbing game, but 
with a completely different feel.  
Once again, we throw a giant 
die at enemies - this time,  
chess pieces. And every time the die 
lands, it rolls to a random number.
This is important to keep 
track of, because each enemy  
is weak to a certain type of number. 
Some will only take damage if the die  
is odd when it’s thrown. Or even. 
Or above or below a certain number.
Where GIMMIKO is mad and chaotic, 
Not your Pawn! is slow, strategic,  
and thoughtful. I like both vibes, so 
it was impossible to choose just one.
In terms of feedback, i’d perhaps recommend 
making the numbers a bit more readable.  
They’re small and hard to parse, which 
artificially increases the difficulty. I  
wonder if there’s a way to represent these rules 
in a way that could be understood at a glance?
Here’s a fun one: a twin stick shooter 
where time stops between each move
Your character, a die with arms, can roll 
in any direction - but the distance is  
dictated by the random number you 
roll. When you finish your roll,  
you’ll fire out bullets. As long as you have ammo, 
that is - you get more by rolling into enemies.
This simple set-up leads to a 
tense game of cat and mouse,  
of steam-rolling baddies, 
and chaining together moves
Later, you’ll be able to upgrade your 
powers. and then the game adds enemies who  
don’t care that time is supposed to be stood 
still, forcing you to stop being so analytical,  
and start playing on instinct instead.
I liked this one a lot. And, kind of 
like John Wick Hex, it captures the  
quick decision making of fast-paced combat 
- without needing to be superhuman yourself.
It’s always interesting to see 
different ways of doing RPG battles.  
Sometimes an RPG even borrows from other 
games and genres for its fights - like how  
Undertale turns into a bullet-hell shmup, 
or Puzzle Quest borrows from Bejewelled.
So, it was fun to play…
Dice of Fate
This is a game that uses Popcap’s Peggle 
as inspiration for its fight scenes.
On each turn, you place down pins on this 
giant Pachinko board. The blue ones are yours,  
denoting attacks, defence, and heal. The 
red ones are the same, but for the baddies.
You then drop dice into the board, 
and each bounce against a pin  
changes the final actions of the battle. 
There’s a great big dollop of randomness,  
but getting to design the board lets 
you have some control over the outcome
Like Peggle, the game is pretty simple and 
largely devoid of skill - but also, like Peggle,  
it’s addictive and engrossing. I could definitely 
see this idea expanded further in the future
There’s always something fun about games where 
you can just break stuff. Just completely throw  
off the balance. I dunno, it’s just a 
joy. That’s why I liked Dice is the Way.
It’s a pretty simple card-battling RPG, 
with funky graphics and goofy audio. 
But see those numbers in the balloon font?  
Like your health points, your enemy’s 
next attack, or the cost of your card?
Each turn, you can pick one of those numbers 
and randomly roll a new one. Perhaps swapping  
your enemy’s 80 health points for just 2, or 
making one of your cards impossibly expensive.
I’m not sure how well this game holds up to 
scrutiny - I would often get a bad roll and  
ruin my entire game - but I’m not 
expecting anyone to tightly balance  
a game in one weekend. I had just as much 
fun seeing how silly things could get.
A die doesn’t have to be about being 
random. As always, with the GMTK Game Jam,  
the theme is just a starting point 
- how you interpret it is up to you
That’s what leads to great titles like… Berb Hike.
This is a game that uses the unique patterns 
on a die to create interesting puzzles.
So, these snowy tiles have igloos - dotted 
about like dice pips. When you walk off the  
edge of the tile, the die counts down by 
one - changing the layout of the igloos.  
You can keep going until the 
tile is removed entirely.
This can lead to some brilliant spatial-reasoning 
puzzles, like this one that I got totally stuck  
on during a live stream. Sorry about 
that, bet that was a little infuriating.
Later, the game introduces palm 
trees which count up instead of down,  
and volcanos which bounce between two numbers. 
And then puzzles that combine them all
This is just a great game, and 
a wonderful example of how it’s  
important to think outside the box 
when it comes to fitting the theme.
Next up is Fire and Dice. This 
is a charming action puzzle game  
about defending your dragon from attack.
Each turn, the dragon throws out a bunch of 
dice. The colour indicates the attack pattern,  
and the number determines the power. Your 
job is to place the dice on the grid in  
such a way that they’ll do the maximum damage 
to a bunch of incoming peasants and soldiers.
So it’s part tower defence, part number-crunching 
puzzle game, and it looks great too. My only  
suggestion? Add a timer! It’s too easy to 
spend ages rearranging the dice back and forth,  
looking for the perfect solution to do maximum 
damage. But analysis paralysis ain’t fun - I  
had a better time when i played loosey 
goosey and took turns as quick as possible.
You could probably add other types of dice too, 
like ones that push enemies into other lanes.
So, I think there’s more to explore here.
But nonetheless, I thought this was really 
clever, elegant, and is well worth a shot.
One of the more creative twists 
on the theme, was using a die  
as a level or world. Take, for example…
Rolling World.
It’s a room-by-room puzzle game about pushing 
boxes and hitting switches. But the rooms all  
exist on the sides of a die - so go out a 
door, and the whole world twists around.
This is important because depending how 
you leave the room, the entire world can  
spin onto its side or upside down. And because 
elements in the game, like these big heavy doors,  
are affected by gravity, the orientation 
of the world can open new pathways.
So it’s a tricky, brain-busting, Zelda 
dungeon-style spatial reasoning puzzle  
that will have you really thinking about 
this world as a complete, contiguous space.
It’s a little tricky to get your head around 
- I think Holonomy does a better job of  
explaining itself, by virtue of being 
in 3D and using transparent textures.  
But Rolling World’s puzzles just 
eke it out for the top spot, for me.
Next up is a game that comes from a team filled 
with previous GMTK Game Jam winners. But, you  
can see why they’re winners - they just know how 
to squeeze the most out of an idea, in 48 hours.
Introducing… DIEmunition
This is a frantic shooter-platformer, 
where the level is made up of falling dice.  
You’ll need to jump between these 
tumbling blocks to stay above the acid.
But that’s not all: the number on the dice 
also dictates how many bullets you can shoot  
while stood on that block. and once you 
spend them all, the block will disappear.
And so because your ammunition is intricately 
tied to your ability to stay afloat,  
it really makes you think hard 
about every move, every jump,  
and every bullet fired. All while frantically 
bouncing about and blasting away at enemies.
It’s just a great arcade thrill 
ride, which really proves the skill  
of these designers. Give this 
one a go, after the video ends.
In this jam, we saw a lot of games where you do 
dungeon-crawling battles by rolling your dice  
into foes. Like, a lot of them. But I think, 
ultimately, I prefer this take on the idea.
Maces and Dices is a game where, each 
turn, you get a bunch of different dice  
that relate to actions. Like moving, attacking,  
and jumping. So you might randomly roll the 
ability to move down, up, down, and attack
Then, you’ve got to use those powers to move 
through the dungeon and attack enemies. You  
need to be very thoughtful because once 
your dice are done, it’s time of the enemy  
to move. Sometimes, it’s best to get to 
safety if that’s all your roll with allow.
So it makes for tense, tactical, and puzzle-like 
battles. And for an extra twist, the dice are  
also your health bar. Take too much damage and the 
dice will break, giving you fewer options in the  
next tussle. Unless you make your way to another 
die and give yourself more moves. Clever stuff.
Dice are supposed to be random, right? 
There’s no way to influence the outcome. Well,  
there was a bunch of games in the jam that played 
with the idea of fudging rolls, or rigging dice.
I think my favourite, though, was…
Jimmy Blitz and the Rocket Dice.
In this one you use a very subtle method 
to make the dice land how you want.  
Rockets. That’s right: each die is equipped with  
rocket-powered speed boosters which let you 
decide where the die lands, and how it rolls.
All so you can meet criteria like landing 
a four, or getting better than a three.
Okay, maybe not so subtle. But you’ll still have 
to be careful not to twig the attention of the  
dealer. Spin too much and you’ll go from safe to 
sus - and then get a game over if you’re detected.
Later levels have you swapping between dice, 
or landing in super specific zones. It’s all  
done with funny voice acting and a 
charming CCTV-style visual effect.  
Some jam games just put a smile 
on my face - this was one of them.
Another ultra popular theme was “you do 
random actions” - perhaps every time you roll,  
or every time you reload your gun. 
That can lead to a pretty chaotic game.  
But, in terms of pure chaos… it’s this one.
Oddwood.
In this game, your action changes every time you 
fire. Sometimes you’re shooting a single bullet,  
or a spread of shotgun fire, or doing a dash move. 
Oh, and also you’re spinning around in circles.
it is absolute mayhem, especially as the 
arena is tiny and the enemies come in thick  
and fast. But it’s, somehow, still completely 
playable! You’ve got a nice powerful dodge,  
generous health, and regular new upgrades.
That makes this ultra polished game just 
super playable and ultra compelling.  
I had to force myself to put it 
down so I could make this video.
Here’s a really creative puzzle game. The 
screen is split into two halves. On one,  
you’ve got a side-scrolling puzzler about pushing,  
pulling, and rolling a die around to weigh 
down switches and get up to higher platforms.
But you better be careful, because your little 
friend is inside the die - and gravity changes  
every time it rolls. you wouldn’t want to 
send your pal into a spiky trap, would you?
And so thus begins a bunch of puzzles where 
both characters need to collect a star to win  
the level - but actions in one can dramatically 
effect the other. It’s a clever and original  
idea for a puzzle game, with endless ways 
to explore and expand on the core concept.
There’s always one game in the 
jam that basically looks and plays  
like a finished game. This 
year, that honour goes to…
Dice with Kali.
This is a super polished, but also ultra engaging 
puzzle game about placing down dice - while  
following specific rules. Adjacent dice must 
be either the same colour or the same value.
Things start off easy, but you can quickly get 
yourself tangled up in spots where you need a very  
specific die to fill a gap. And because you have 
to use all the randomly provided dice each turn,  
you’re sometimes forced to put 
yourself in a tricky position.
So it’s a game about thinking ahead, 
putting out fires before they get too big,  
and resigning yourself to be eaten by 
the goddess of death, Kali. Who kind  
of looks like a muppet. That would have been 
a weird Sesame Street episode.
Here’s a really odd one. Where 
They Fall is a game about being  
a seer. You know, someone who can 
- apparently - commune with the  
gods and turn their cryptic riddles 
into messages for kings and leaders.
So at the start of the game you tip a 
bunch of dice - coloured stones with  
special runes on them - onto a map. Then, 
a mysterious figure asks you questions.  
You need to divine an answer by 
looking at the runes - where they fall,  
which way up they lie, and so on. A book, 
to your left, helps you figure things out.
Now, this is not easy. The book is as cryptic 
as the gods’ messages, and I was never  
one hundred percent sure that I was giving the 
right advice… and not just a bunch of nonsense.
But… perhaps that’s the point. Communing with the 
gods isn’t an exact, ahem, science - and  
the game does a good job of capturing that mood. 
Just squinting at coloured rocks and using that  
to decide if we should go to battle. Imagine how 
you’ll feel if the soldiers don’t come back alive.
This is a creative take on the theme, 
and makes for an immersive experience.  
I’d like to see where this 
might go with some more time.
Finally - would it be the GMTK Game Jam  
if there wasn’t a platformer with a 
unique twist? Of course not. So, meet…
Roll: The Die.
In this one, you play as a square. You 
can run around and jump like any other  
platforming hero. But, you can also 
spin in 90 degree chunks. With this,  
you can paint each of your 
four sides with coloured paint.
Sticky paint, that is. Touch your blue side to 
a blue wall and you’ll stick like Spider-Man,  
allowing you to jump off to a greater height. 
Eventually you’ll have all sorts of different  
colours, and so will need to twist and 
spin to keep up with the level design.
This creates a really unique game where 
you’re simultaneously positioning yourself  
for a safe jump, and rotating your 
body to match the colour. It’s a  
rub-your-tummy-and-pat-your-head challenge that 
will have your head spinning and your fingers just  
completely confused. But when you get to grips 
with it, it’s a real joy to play. Give it a go.
So that’s my top 20. But, as always, some 
honourable mentions. Roll to Hit (On) is an  
RPG where you can flirt with your team mates, 
leading to different buffs and nerfs. Diced Coffee  
is a manic plate-spinning shop simulator about 
making coffee from dice. And Design By Committee  
is a game where pesky producers keep changing 
the game’s design - while you’re playing it.
There’s loads, loads more. You 
can play all 6000 games over  
on itch.io - and you can also see 
the public's rankings for all the games.  
Have a play through the top 100 and see 
if you agree or disagree with my picks.
Thank you so much to everyone who took 
part in the jam, or just rated some games,  
or chatted with us on Discord, or watched 
my streams. Thanks to my mods on Discord  
and YouTube, and to everyone who 
made our awesome Team Finder app.
An extra huge thank you to my 
Patrons. Remember that GMTK Game Jam  
has no corporate sponsors - it’s 
all funded by viewers like you.
The jam will be back in 2023. So  
subscribe to the channel to receive the 
date announcement… sometime next year.
Thanks, bye!
