In 1986, Nintendo released Metroid on the
NES.
It was nothing like the company’s other
games: it wasn’t cute and colourful and
full of chirpy music.
It was dark, and atmospheric.
Bounty hunter Samus Aran felt truly lost and
alone as she explored an endless sprawl of
dank, alien corridors.
And it was fascinating.
But it was flawed.
It was way too easy to get lost, the world
all looked the same, and many secrets were
hidden behind brick walls.
It was the start of something cool, but it
needed refinement.
The sequel, 1991’s Metroid II: Return of
Samus on the Game Boy, didn’t really help matters.
It was still dark and scary - and it had a
surprisingly
impactful ending for such a formative game.
But the monochrome screen made it even harder
to find your way around - despite the fact
that the game is much more linear than the
first one.
We’d have to wait a few more years for the
real deal.
And then we got it.
In 1994, Nintendo released Super Metroid,
on the Super Nintendo.
Finally, the idea behind Metroid was given
the proper execution.
The game, once again, dropped Samus into a
lonely, alien world - the same planet Zebes
as Metroid 1 - but this time, you could actually
get around without drawing a map, bombing
every wall, or buying an issue of Nintendo
Power.
The structure of the game is much the same:
just like Metroid 1, this game is about making
a mental note of obstacles.
Then finding items.
And then backtracking to those obstacles to
either find goodies or the next bit of the game.
But this time, things are different.
The world is much bigger.
The power-ups are more interesting.
The bosses are more varied.
And the designers take a much more active
role in getting you through Zebes - just,
with far more subtlety than Metroid 1’s
overbearing remake, Zero Mission.
How did they do it?
Well, really, the only way to properly describe
how the game does this is to take you through
it, step by step.
Which is exactly what I’m going to do in
this video.
Let’s touch down on planet Zebes, once again,
and start the second episode of Boss Keys,
Season Two.
Just like Metroid 1, this game wordlessly
explains its set up in the first few screens.
In the very first corridor of Zebes, we walk
past a bunch of doors that we can’t get through.
Pink doors that bounce away our bullets, and
tiny gaps we can’t squeeze through.
Eventually, we’ll find the entrance to Old
Brinstar - which is actually the final and
starting areas of Metroid 1.
And here, we’ll grab the Morph Ball and
Missiles.
With no where to go, we can only go back to
where we came from.
But now, these areas are teeming with space
pirates, letting us know that this is actually
the right way to go.
So in the first few screens, Super Metroid
says: this world will branch out at every
point but many of those routes will be inaccessible
until you have more powers.
And oftentimes, the path forward will actually
be behind you.
So, we use those missiles to grab the bombs
and - woah!
Heh, a good reminder that you can’t rely
on expectations in this game.
Now, with the Torizo dead, it’s time to
use these bombs to explore further.
And if you don’t know where to use them,
you’ll soon learn about the virtues of the
map - oh yeah, Super Metroid finally adds
a map screen to the franchise.
And map terminals.
You’ll find map terminals in the game’s
five major locations - Crateria, Brinstar,
Norfair, Maridia, and the Wrecked Ship - which
reveal some of the rooms around you on the map.
Handy, when it shows you rooms that are hidden
away behind brick walls.
That makes finding map rooms almost as useful
as finding a new power-up - and is one example
of how Super Metroid is way more player friendly
than the obtuse Metroid 1 - but without being
quite so aggressively hand-holding as Zero
Mission.
The newly updated map screen shows a room
over to the left - giving you the hint to
use your bombs and keep going.
Here, we’ll find the last point of interest
in Crateria.
At the far end of an ominous tunnel is a great
golden statue depicting four bizarre monsters
- one of which we faced in the game’s prologue.
I’m sure we’ll be coming back to that,
later.
For now though, let’s hop onto the elevator
and make our way down to Upper Brinstar.
So. Let’s take a break to map out the structure
of Super Metroid, at this early point.
And to do this, we can use a dependency chart
- which is something I came up with during
the first season of Boss Keys.
On this chart, diamonds represent upgrades
that Samus can use, and squares represent
the obstacles that she can overcome with those
upgrades.
For this chart, I’m also using triangles
to represent non-essential pick-ups like missile
tanks and the map room.
Not every single pick-up, mind you: just the
ones that can be found with simple exploration,
or are found behind obvious locked doors and
obstacles.
So these upgrades, locks, and pick-ups cascade
down from this horizontal line, which represents
all the places we can visit right now.
And the locks go below the upgrades.
I’ve also put on some locks we can see,
but can’t overcome - like some high up areas
in Crateria, that will need the space jump.
And a green door, which requires Super Missiles.
I’m going to use dotted lines, until we
can actually reach this stuff.
So here’s what the graph looks like at the
moment.
So far, pretty simple.
Let’s move on.
When we get into Brinstar, we’ll find a
lot of dead ends.
A room that we’re too slow to travel through.
Some weird symbols on the ceiling.
A yellow door, which won’t budge.
A green one, much the same.
And blocks that don’t blow up when bombed
- but instead show us an icon of some power-up
that we’ll need to attain if we want to
break through.
There’s lots to explore here - but it’s
all dead ends.
A stark message that we’re not strong enough
yet, and a reminder that we’ll have to come
back here later.
We can do two things, however.
We can fight the first mini-boss in the game,
Spore Spawn, and get the Super Missile.
And we can get the Charge Beam.
That’s hidden down here.
Well, I say hidden: the game has two very
obviously different blocks, and the slight
hint of a ceiling.
Throughout Super Metroid, hidden areas like
this are pretty well telegraphed, with plenty
of hints.
There’s hardly any random bombing, like
Metroid 1.
The charge beam is also one of many items
in Super Metroid that are completely optional:
extra weapons like the charge beam, spazer
and plasma beam, handy upgrades like the spring
ball, and the very useful x-ray beam - which
makes it even easier to spot hidden walls
- are not needed to finish the game at all.
Their existence is great though, as they can
be found at any time, making the game less
linear.
And they feel like genuine secrets that other
players might completely miss.
Let’s update our graph again.
So we’ve got lots of dead ends, and only
a few things we can actually do.
For now, Super Metroid is staying quite simple.
After you open that green door with a well-placed
super missile, you’ll come into this room.
You’ll shoot this blue button to open this
gate, and exit to the next room.
What you may not have realised, though, is
that the gate shuts behind you, and it’s
impossible to hit the blue button with your
current tool set.
You’ve just completely cut off access to
everything in the game before this point.
This is for two very important reasons.
One is that the next room requires you to
use a skill you might not even know you have:
the run.
And Nintendo doesn’t want you to think you
don’t have the necessary upgrade to get
through this room and have you wander back,
trying to find some alternate route.
No, you’re stuck here until you figure it
out.
Read the manual, maybe.
The other important reason?
Well, soon after this room, the same thing
happens again.
You’ll fall down this shaft and you can’t
get back up.
Again, there’s no access to the world behind
you.
All that stuff in Brinstar, with the yellow
doors and the funny symbols and breakaway floors?
You can’t get there anymore.
And in this way, I think Super Metroid tries
to avoid overwhelming you with options.
Remember that gripe from Metroid 1, where
you have so much access to the world that
finding the way forward is dizzying?
Not so much here.
Because the world closes off behind you, you
only ever have a small chunk of Zebes to explore
at once.
Right. We’re in Lower Brinstar now.
And, first, you might notice that the map
screen has another treat for you: a secret
room, just to the right of this elevator.
Unfortunately, once you’re inside, you’ll
realise that you can’t jump up here yet.
But look at that spooky face.
That’s definitely worth checking out, when
you’re skilled enough.
This is a classic example of using a really
distinct visual as a landmark, to cement it
in your brain and help you remember to come
back once you’ve got the right gear.
The same thing happens with Ridley’s lair,
sort of.
And definitely with the entrance to Tourian.
For now, though, the only other place you can go is down, into Norfair.
Here, you’ll find more dead ends - like
a room that you’re too slow to run through,
and a room too hot to be in.
And you’ll also find another power-up: the
hi jump boots.
Oh hey, now you can go back up here, kill
the first boss - Kraid - and get the heatproof
Varia Suit.
Yes, that’s just how I pronounce it now.
Oh hey, now you can go back to that superheated
room, and get the speed booster.
Oh hey, now you can get through that first
room, and get the Ice Beam.
By bouncing you back and forth between Norfair
and Lower Brinstar, Super Metroid is training
you to know that your goal isn’t always
in the immediate vicinity, like it was earlier
in the game.
Sometimes you’ll have to backtrack a fair
bit, to a previous zone even, to find the
next step forward.
It’s graph time, again!
So here’s Lower Brinstar and Norfair.
You might remember that there are some obstacles
back in Upper Brinstar that we could now overcome
with our new items, like the speed booster,
but - remember - they’re up an impossibly
high shaft, and behind a one-way door.
We just can’t get to them, meaning that
they stay as dotted lines on our graph.
Once again, Super Metroid is reasonably straightforward
in its structure, and pretty compact in its
world size.
But here’s the thing: Super Metroid is a
game that will hold your hand tight, when
it wants to.
And let it free, when it wants to.
And at the beginning, the game holds a pretty
firm grip: this early part of the game keeps
you stuck in a very small location, and uses
one-way paths to keep you locked into just
a handful of rooms at once.
And with each power-up you get, there’s
a very limited number of places to actually
use it.
After you get the Varia Suit, there’s only
one superheated room to explore.
After you get the speed booster, there’s
only one room where you can use it.
After you get the bombs and super missiles,
there’s just a couple obstacles that you
can now overcome. And so on.
If Super Metroid kept up like this, I think
it would grow tiresome and be way too easy.
But that’s not the case.
Because, now, this is the moment that Super
Metroid shifts.
So you’ve just got the ice beam.
And almost every time you get a power-up in
Super Metroid, you’ll be trapped until you
use that power-up to get back out, giving
you a handy tutorial on how to use it.
But, also, that room will give you hints about
where that power-up can be used next.
Like, after getting the ice beam you’ll
need to freeze this enemy to get out.
And where else have you seen these enemies?
Oh yeah, right here on that shaft you fell
down into Norfair.
So now, you can get back up, use your hi-jump
to hop up here, and grab the power bomb.
And it’s here that Nintendo lets go of your
hand.
if you follow the path forward, you’ll head
up here, jump off this ledge, and realise
that - hey, you’re back at the start of
the game!
You just did a full circle of Zebes.
But things are very different now.
The spooky, ambient music… has been replaced
with a bombastic, heroic tune….
Samus is now kitted out in her iconic orange
varia suit.
And the path forward is… uh, well, I don’t
know.
Because at this point, you can now explore
a huge amount of Zebes - including all those
old areas that were previously locked off
by one-way paths.
And there’s a massive number of obstacles
you can now overcome.
By my count, there are about seven places
you can power bomb, two places you can use
your speed booster, and one place you can
use your high jump.
And none of them are calling out to you as
the obvious next step.
So after a very straightforward and somewhat
guided route through the game, Super Metroid
says it’s now time to explore for yourself.
Sometimes you’ll find handy upgrade.
Like, remember this speed booster room in
Brinstar?
You can now go in there and get a reserve
tank.
Sometimes you’ll find dead ends, like a
room where you won’t be able to advance
without the grapple beam.
Sometimes you’ll find some weird animals
- more on them, later.
And eventually, you’ll find the path forward
- it’s actually down here, in Norfair.
I really like this.
Remember that end game item hunt from Zero
Mission?
It was fun, but kind of awkward: you basically
leave the intended path at the very end of
the game and take a huge detour to do a victory
lap of Zebes.
but in Super Metroid it’s slap bang in the
middle of the game.
You don’t know where to go, so you just
have a wander and see what you can find.
The game takes a break from linearity, to
let you just explore for a while.
And then there’s that sensation of simply
stumbling upon the next area.
That’s a really potent feeling that some
Metroidvanias do well - this feeling of organically
discovering some massive new area filled with
unseen stuff.
It’s a feeling we’ve seen in previous
episodes of Boss Keys, and it’s a sensation
that we’ll definitely come back to in a
future episode of this season.
Oh, and during this exploration of Zebes you
might revisit this room and find that one
of the statues has turned grey - reminding
your that your ultimate goal is to kill four
bosses - well, three now - and then come back
here to finish the game.
The next step is to kill Crocomire, who has
the most metal death in all of video games,
and get the grappling hook.
This is a really fun item to use.
And the game has a really nice loop in the
level design, after you get it: instead of
asking you to just boringly backtrack to the
start of the area, there’s a whole bunch
of rooms that bend back on themselves and
bring you right back to the elevator in Norfair.
From here, Super Metroid again asks you to
explore.
There are about seven spots where you can
use the grappling hook, and they’re dotted
all over Zebes.
Some lead you to new power-ups like the wave
beam, and x-ray beam.
Others lead you to upgrades like missiles
and energy tanks.
And one leads you to the wrecked ship, where
you’ll continue your adventure.
Here, you’ll face the second boss of the
game: Phantoon.
And after this, Super Metroid starts getting
a bit cheeky, and introduces more of those
obtuse brick walls from Metroid 1.
Like, to get to the gravity suit, you need
to bomb through here.
To get through maridia, you need to get into
this little hole.
And to get into Maridia proper, you need to
drop a power bomb in this glass tube.
To be fair, all of these things are telegraphed.
Before getting the gravity suit you can see
a room here, so it’s a case of looking for
some way of getting in there.
You can see enemies coming out of this hole,
letting you know it exists.
And the smashed tube here should give you
a clue that you can smash this tube, over here.
But in all of these cases - as well as some
other easy-to-miss passages later in the game,
it can be a huge issue if the player thinks
they’ve hit a dead end and goes off looking
elsewhere.
This is when players can start getting lost
- and frustrated - in Super Metroid.
Anyway.
The underwater world of Maridia is a bit of
a maze, but it’s also very contained.
After exploring all of zebes with the power
bombs and grappling hook, you’ll likely
stick to this one zone until you’ve finished
off the third boss of the game: Draygon.
Lke Zelda: A Link to the Past and Dark Souls,
Super Metroid has a changing structure - with
some bits that have you making quick forward
progression, and other bits that have you
exploring in a more open fashion.
And that’s what happens now.
After getting the space jump.
there’s a bunch of places where you can
use it - like for getting the spring ball
and plasma beam in Maridia.
Or getting some goodies in Crateria.
But the place you actually need to use it
is down in Norfair, to get to Ridley’s lair.
The entrance to Ridley’s Lair is a bit weird,
actually.
So for one, it’s got three locks in a row.
You need a power bomb to get in.
Then the gravity suit to withstand the lava.
And then the space jump to get up to Ridley.
If you come all the way back here after getting
each power up, you’re gonna leave disappointed.
Twice.
Also, this imposing head would be a very distinct
landmark to put in your noggin if you just
found it while exploring Norfair.
But because it’s behind an unremarkable
yellow power-bomb door, you’re less likely
to file this in your brain under “very important
rooms”.
But back to the adventure.
So you explore Lower Norfair, find some more
cheeky areas - oh, we can just walk through
walls now, can we?
okay - get the final power-up, the screw attack,
and kill off Ridley.
With the fourth boss of the game finished
off, we should hopefully know it’s time
to return to that ominous room in Crateria,
and enter the final zone of the game.
This is almost identical to Metroid 1, only
with four bosses instead of two.
And the rest of the game is pretty familiar,
too: we kill off Metroids with the ice beam
and missiles.
We fight Mother Brain in a jar.
We - oh my.
That’s a bit different.
We have an escape sequence.
Don’t forget to save the animals!
And we escape an exploding planet Zebes in
our spaceship.
The end.
Mission complete.
Job done.
Genre… defined.
So let’s look at that dependency graph again.
If we put in a red line for where the game
lets us pass back over that point of no return,
we can see a pretty sizeable shift.
Suddenly, the game gets very wide, as there
are loads of places where we can use items,
and we can backtrack to every point in Zebes.
And I think splitting Super Metroid into two
distinct acts like this is a really good idea.
We get almost a tutorial at the start.
And then - once the game is satisfied that
we get how things work - the reins are removed,
and we’re asked to fend for ourselves.
But I do think the game struggles a little
in this second half.
Super Metroid’s Zebes is actually quite
tricky to navigate, with spindly corridors
and a somewhat confusing layout, making it
slightly tedious to get from one end to the other.
Plus, Norfair only has one entrance - this
elevator - despite the fact that you’ll
need to repeatedly return there.
That makes getting around more difficult than
it needs to be.
Oh!
And until you find the wave beam, which lets
you open those blue-button gates from the
other side, the world has some annoying one-way
paths that will need to be circumnavigated.
In its favour, though, is that each elevator
room branches off into a bunch of different
zones: effectively a hub and spoke system,
that makes for easy transport.
And also, almost every single room in this
game looks completely unique in some way,
making it easier to remember their layout
- especially compared to the very samey Zebes
from Metroid 1.
Another way the game struggles is that the
map screen is pretty unhelpful at times.
You can’t see doorways between rooms, so
two connecting areas might not actually join up.
There are no icons for coloured doors.
Secrets have the same icon whether you’ve
found them or not.
And, you can’t see the map for an area that
you’re not currently stood in.
All of this would thankfully be fixed up in
the GBA games.
Also, I think it’s a shame that Super Metroid
is still completely linear in this part of
the game.
I feel like this would be a great time to
let players go off and kill the remaining
three bosses in any order you like: but the
game still makes you fight Phantoon before
Draygon, and Draygon before Ridley.
This is not the end of the world - despite
what some people seem to think, I don’t
think linearity is necessarily a bad thing.
But maybe a missed opportunity.
And it would help players who got lost if
they could go off, explore another part of
the map, and make progress there instead.
Then again, you can break this sequence.
You can fight bosses in a different order,
get items before you’re supposed to, and
skip some upgrades entirely.
How?
Well, when you’re exploring the world in
act two, you very well might come across these
guys - a bunch of animals who will teach Samus
how to do advanced manoeuvres.
One lets you bounce off walls.
The other lets you build up speed with the
speed booster, and turn that kinetic energy
into a massive jump.
And this is really interesting because they’re
not actually upgrades, like the ice beam or
morph ball.
These are just advanced manoeuvres that samus
can do - and could always do, you just didn’t
know about them.
So next time you play the game you can use
these tricks to, say, get up here without
the hi jump boots.
Or to get over here without the grappling
hook.
Unfortunately, you can’t break the game
apart too much unless you start using glitches
and speedrunning techniques that aren’t
taught to you, like the mockball and bomb
jumping.
But it’s still something to make the game
more interesting on later playthroughs.
This is something Metroid does well, but many
other Metroidvanias don’t really incorporate.
If the goal of a Metroidvania designer is
to find a balance between letting the player
explore on their own, but also not letting
them get too lost and frustrated, then Super
Metroid does a pretty stellar job.
The game eases you in with a simple structure
and one-way paths, before letting you run
loose when you’re more familiar with how
things work.
It uses strong visual landmarks to help you
build a mental map of zebes. and there are
plenty of tiny techniques to subtly guide
you forward.
And it also nails one of the most exciting
sensations of a Metroidvania: by not always
making the path forward obvious, you get the
thrill of organically stumbling into an interesting
new area.
You can really see why this game has been
so massively influential.
But while it’s been copied by a million
indie devs, critically acclaimed by reviewers,
and held up as one of the best games ever
made, it wasn’t a huge hit at the time.
And the Metroid franchise was essentially
put on ice.
We’d have to wait eight years for the series
to finally return, on GameCube.
Luckily for us, though, something quite similar
came out in the intervening years.
That's right!
Next time on Boss Keys, we're putting the "vania" back
in Metroidvania, heading to Dracula’s Castle,
and exploring the world design of Castlevania:
Symphony of the Night.
