In the mid seventies, a game was released
that could arguably be described as the single
most influential game of all time.
But it's not a video game.
I'm talking about the unstoppable tabletop
roleplaying game, Dungeons & Dragons.
Reporter: "The idea of the game, which is played by
highly imaginative and intelligent kids
is to assume the role of one of the characters".
D&D was designed by Gary Gygax & Dave Arneson,
as a combination of miniature wargames and
epic fantasy novels.
In play, one person is the dungeon master
who dreams up a vivid storyline of quests
and creatures - for a group of other players
to work through.
The first edition of Dungeons & Dragons was
published in 1974 - which was around the same
time that the first games were being written
for ancient mainframe computers like the PLATO,
teletype terminals, and super early operating
systems like UNIX.
And if you were a big enough geek to be messing
around with those things, you were probably
also a big enough geek to be playing D&D.
And so it’s not surprising that many of
these early computer games were an attempt
to translate the famous pen-and-paper game
into programming code.
And turn the computer into a digital dungeon
master.
These games brazenly emulated D&D staples
like setting up a character and picking your
initial stats.
Having probability-based actions, but using
a random number generator in place of a 20-sided die.
And using numbers to track a character's experience
and hit points.
And these early games were not as primitive
as you might assume.
Some even had story-based quests, the option
to recruit monsters, and even the ability
to team up with dozens of other players on
the same network of machines.
And there were inventive, experimental takes
on the idea, too.
Colossal Cave Adventure stripped out combat
and focused on D&D's story-telling, and ended
up influencing the entire adventure game genre
and kickstarting companies like
Sierra and Infocom.
Rogue used procedural generation to make an
infinite supply of new dungeons, and will
show up later on in our story.
But role-playing games wouldn't find a huge
audience until computers entered the home.
Which they did, in 1977 when the first successful
home computers were released in America.
That's the Apple II, the Commodore PET, and
the TRS-80.
Commercial: "The TRS-80: The Biggest Name
in Little Computers"
There were a few early attempts to translate
RPGs to these devices like Beneath Apple Manor
and Temple of Apshai - but it took two games,
both released in 1981, to really spark people's interest.
One of those games was Wizardry, by Robert
Woodhead and Andrew Greenberg.
It was made - according to Woodhead - ”to
see if we could write a single-player game
as cool as the PLATO dungeon games and cram
it into a tiny machine like the Apple II”.
You start Wizardry by collecting together
a party of adventurers and equipping them
with weapons and armour.
Then, you drop down into a ten-storey underground
maze - presented as a tiny 3D wireframe in
the corner of the display.
Before long, you encounter a monster and face
off in a turn-based battle.
Now, you’re presented with a list of options
- allowing you to attack, cast a spell, use
an item, and so on.
Successfully beating a monster will earn you
experience points, which go towards levelling up.
The other game was Ultima, published that
same year and on the same platform, but developed
by Richard Garriott - who was also inspired
by Dungeons & Dragons, but was seemingly not
exposed to those early mainframe games.
He had made some early attempts at RPGs on
teletype terminals and the Apple II game Akalabeth:
World of Doom, but Ultima was his standout
creation.
You play as a single character who ventures
out to do story-based quests for Lord British.
The underground dungeons look like Wizardry,
with wireframe walls and monster encounters.
But the outside looked very different: where
Wizardry was confined to a claustrophobic
subterranean crypt, the sprawling land of
Sosaria stretched out in every direction,
with mountains, rivers, and castles.
The game also had a hunger system, forcing
you to buy and eat food to stay alive.
These games and their immediate sequels, which
were released once a year, really set the
world on fire.
Not just gaining fans - but immediately inspiring
rivals and similar games from other developers.
So Michael Cranford released the very Wizardry-inspired
Maze Master in 1983, and followed up with
The Bard's Tale in 1985.
That game’s studio, Interplay, would go
on to make Wasteland and Fallout, and publish
Bioware’s first RPGs.
Might and Magic, released in 1986, and Dungeon
Master, released in 1987, both count Ultima
and Wizardry as inspirations.
And the spin-off Ultima Underworld would inspire
games like Deus Ex and The Elder Scrolls.
Almost every computer RPG franchise can be
traced back to this pair of games.
But the influence actually stretched much
further afield than that.
In the early 1980s, the Japanese also got
their first home computers, with devices like
the NEC PC-8001 and Fujitsu’s FM-7.
But the coolest kids were playing imported
games on Western systems - like the late Nintendo
president Satoru Iwata who famously had a
Commodore PET.
So in Computer Gaming World’s September
1985 issue, a dispatch from the NEC show in
Tokyo says “as much as the Japanese enjoy
hi-res graphic adventures, the pinnacle of
their admiration is reserved for the fantasy
role-playing games.
Both Wizardry and Ultima have huge followings
in Japan”.
And so, of course, there were attempts to
make original, Japanese-language games in
this style, for Japanese computers - such
as Dungeon, and Mugen no Shinzou.
Plus, The Black Onyx - made by westerner in
Japan, Henk Rogers (the man who would one
day introduce Nintendo to a little game called
Tetris).
There were also RPG hybrids and twists on
the formula, like the strategy RPG Bokosuka Wars.
And in 1984 we saw an explosion of action
RPGs, with real-time combat - like Dragon
Slayer and Tower of Druaga, both of which
count Ultima and/or Wizardry as influences.
1986 gave us The Legend of Zelda, which creator
Shigeru Miyamoto said was influenced by The
Black Onyx and Ultima, in a 2003 interview
with Enterbrain.
But, going back to more standard RPGs - just
like how it took the Apple II to make RPGs
more popular in the west - the RPG wouldn't
really take off in Japan until the nascent
genre came to a more popular and accessible
system.
Meet Yuji Horii.
He was also playing imported games, and counted
himself as a fan of Western games and genres.
His first major release for publisher Enix
was Portopia Serial Murder Case, and it was
made after reading about western text adventures
- including Deadline by Infocom.
Portopia is actually seen as the defining
game in the visual novel genre, and it famously
inspired Hideo Kojima to start making games
- including the visual novels Snatcher and
Policenauts.
Portopia gained even more popularity, though,
when Horii teamed up with Koichi Nakamura
to port the game to Nintendo's popular new
system, the Famicom.
It involved squeezing a computer game into
the much more limited hardware and input device
of a console, but the duo managed to pull
it off - with clever techniques like a command
list instead of a text parser.
For their next project, the pair would do
the same for another western genre: the RPG.
And together, they made Dragon Quest, released
on Famicom in the spring of 1986.
Horii was a big fan of Wizardy - saying "the
idea of building up experience and getting
stronger and buying new weapons.
I really love all that stuff”.
And Nakamura was really into Ultima.
And so the final game combines the best of
both.
The combat sequences were all Wizardry, with
that familiar menu of options to pick from,
and large, colourful sprites.
But the overworld was more like Ultima, with
small characters walking around, and castles
and towns as single tiles on an overworld
map.
Dragon Quest is simplified and streamlined
compared to the influential American games.
The only character choice you have is your
name, and there are simple pre-determined
stats and a straightforward levelling system.
This was partly due to the Famicom's technical
limitations - but also due to accessibility.
Horii saw that RPGs were niche and complex
and so he wanted to make them engaging to
all, including the Famicom's younger players.
The developers also wanted to make the game
more approachable to a native Japanese audience.
So the dialogue is funny, irreverent, and
inspired by manga.
And the art is famously provided by manga
artist Akira Toriyama - who had just started
working on Dragon Ball, at the time.
Look at how Toriyama took Horii's slime sketch
- a simple retread of Wizardry's boring blob
- and made it funny, characterful, and mascot-like.
All of these factors made the game a success.
Maybe not quite as successful as the developers
expected - but it did do well enough to warrant
a sequel or two.
Which is when Dragon Quest fever really took
off.
Each game sold millions of copies.
The release of Dragon Quest III was a cultural
event.
There is even a story that the Japanese government
created a law, forcing Enix to release new
games on a Saturday or public holiday - because
so many kids were skipping school to binge
the latest Dragon Quest game.
That's a myth. 
No law was enacted.
But Enix did independently agree to not release
these games on a school day - and that's still
true today.
Dragon Quest XI was released on a Saturday
in Japan.
This monster success precipitated a wave of
Japanese RPGs for consoles like the Famicom
and Master System.
That includes huge games Phantasy Star by
Sega, Digital Devil Story by Atlus, and of
course Final Fantasy by Square.
Now the developers of these three games were
also inspired by Ultima and Wizardry.
And other Western games: Phantasy Star creator
Yuji Naka was a big Amiga fan.
But it was the success of Dragon Quest that
pushed them to release their own takes on
the genre.
Final Fantasy designer Hironobu Sakaguchi,
for example, was inspired by Ultima and Wizardry
but he couldn't get Square to green-light
an RPG… until Enix proved the genre was
popular with Dragon Quest.
Final Fantasy was also the game that really
proved that JPRGs could be popular outside
of Japan, and the series has been massively
successful in the west - much more so than
Dragon Quest.
There were also games that were directly influenced
by Dragon Quest itself, of course.
After binging the first two games in the series,
Shigesato Itoi has said "I found myself thinking
about what kind of things I’d do if I made
the same sort of game.
I wondered why all the role-playing games
that were popular at the time had swords and magic".
So he worked with Nintendo to make Mother
- the prequel to Earthbound, and a light parody
of RPG tropes - something which became a whole
sub genre of games in Japan.
You could also make the case for Sweet Home
- which closely follows the Dragon Quest formula
with its command list and turn-based battles.
Many years later, that game was to be remade
in 3D, but eventually Capcom decided to make
it into a whole new franchise: Resident Evil.
Despite their similar origins, we still delineate
between Western and Japanese RPGs.
That's not something we do with any other
genre.
There's no such thing as a Japanese platformer
or a Western racing game.
But I think we only need to look at Dragon
Quest to see why RPGs went on such a different
path in Japan.
Console limitations and a desire for accessibility
lead to Dragon Quest being a simplified experience.
While in the west, RPGs continued to be primarily
made for computers, and largely focused on
a more hardcore audience.
And Dragon Quest's focus on story with a predefined
character has been the mould for RPGs in the
east - whereas western RPGs have typically
had less of a defined narrative - and are
more about role-playing a character that you
design yourself.
And maybe that's because Dragon Quest was
a twist on games like Wizardry - which was
inspired by mainframe games, which were inspired
by Dungeons & Dragons.
So Dragon Quest is like a distillation of
a distillation of a distillation of
Dungeons & Dragons.
No wonder it's the most simplified and concentrated
version of the idea.
Whereas, Western RPG creators were still playing
D&D in great numbers, and so they could go
straight to the original source and take that
in whatever direction they saw fit.
Though, while it would be convenient to say
that Japanese RPGs were simply games made
in a world where D&D never existed - that's
not true.
Dungeons & Dragons was officially translated
and released in Japan in 1985 - and it was
influential on games such as the first Final
Fantasy, inspiring the elemental attacks and
character classes.
Plus, some Japanese developers got access
even before then, like the maker of Tower
of Druaga, who picked up D&D on a business
trip to America.
So, nothing is ever that cut and dry.
Really, the story of the RPG video game genre
is a complicated, tangled, web of influences
and inspirations - leading to all sorts of
different paths.
I mean - just look at the story of Yuji Horii's
one-time Dragon Quest partner, Koichi Nakamura.
Around the time the Super Famicom was released,
Nakamura left the Dragon Quest team to do
his own thing.
And noting that he and Horii once struck gold
by making a Japanese version of a popular
Western game - he sought to do the same thing
again.
This time he used a weird, indecipherable
PC game from America that one of his colleagues
was obsessed with.
That game was called Rogue.
And so we get the Mystery Dungeon series.
A whole bunch of games - more than 30 in total
- that have random generation and permadeath.
You might not know the original series, but
have probably seen the spin-offs that feature
other RPG franchises like Final Fantasy, Pokemon,
Etrian Odyssey, and of course, Dragon Quest.
Meanwhile in the west, Rogue inspired a whole
subgenre of games - before its core ideas
were remixed and reinvented by a clever bunch
of indie game designers.
Like I said: it's a tangled web.
And this YouTube series, Design Icons, is supposed
to be about picking out the key individual
games that have influenced game design over
the past 40 years.
But I can't really do that for RPGs without
inducting a whole bunch of games as design
icons: including Dungeons & Dragons.
Ultima. Wizardry. Dragon Quest. 
And Rogue.
And so, I guess I'll have to do just that.
As Wizardry’s Robert Woodhead explains it,
these games are "nothing but rings in the
chain that bind all games together".
Thanks for watching. I'll see you soon.
