Given the success of Metroid Prime, a follow-up
was inevitable.
But developer Retro Studios didn’t want to
just make a simple sequel: they wanted to
make something completely new.
So Metroid Prime 2: Echoes, released two years
later in 2004, has all new areas, fresh abilities,
brand new characters, and even brings in old
Metroid features that got cut from Prime,
like wall jumps and the Screw Attack.
But some of the biggest changes to the game
are in relation to exploration of the game’s
interconnected world.
Which is exactly what Boss Keys is all about:
looking at how Metroidvanias get made, by
breaking down the world design of some of
the genre’s landmark titles.
So, perhaps the most fundamental change from
Metroid Prime 1 to 2, is the fact that the
game’s world, Aether, is split up into distinct
chunks.
Agon Wastes is a rocky, semi-industrialised
desert.
Torvus Bog is a soggy wetland, with a secret
flooded basement.
And Sanctuary Fortress is a striking sci-fi
stronghold, built high up among the cliffs.
They all connect to the Great Temple, which
acts as a sort of hub world.
And the areas eventually connect to each other,
as well.
And, sure, Metroid games have had distinct
zones before.
Like Norfair and Brinstar in Super Metroid.
Or Phendrana Drifts and Chozo Ruins in Metroid
Prime.
But Prime 2 really commits to this idea.
The game asks you to go to each area in turn.
Then you’ll stay there for a few hours as
you explore, find power-ups, collect keys,
and fight a boss.
Then you leave and, for the most part, you
don’t come back.
All of which makes these areas feel a lot
more like Zelda dungeons than Metroid areas.
They’re even referred to as temples, just
like Zelda.
And, you know, I think this is actually quite
a good idea.
One of the biggest challenges of Metroidvania
design is that it’s simply not very fair
to ask players to remember an entire world
map, across a ten, twenty-hour experience.
By the end of a game like Super Metroid, the
explorable space has grown so enormous that
finding the way forward is a truly daunting
task.
And if you leave the game for a couple days,
you’ll be completely lost by the time you
go back to your SNES.
And so by busting Aether up into self-contained
bits, the player can focus on one area at
a time.
You just need to think about Agon Wastes.
Then you can offload that entire area from
your memory and focus on Torvus Bog.
Then you can forget all of that and just think
about Sanctuary Fortress.
Or, you would, if it weren’t for two annoying
moments where Prime 2 breaks this pattern.
So, after getting the Boost Ball in Torvus
Bog, you actually need to leave the bog
and go back to the front door of the dungeon,
which is in the great temple.
Now you can use the boost ball to rocket up
this half pipe and find a path to the Seeker
Missiles.
There’s something more annnoying in Sanctuary
Fortress, though.
The first item we get is the Spider Ball and
while there are a few places to use it in
the Sanctuary itself, they all lead to dead
ends: maybe a useful upgrade, but nothing
to actually progress our adventure.
That’s because the path forward, to get
the Power Bomb, is actually back in the Torvus Bog.
Right down at the bottom of the temple, in
a room just off from where we fought a boss,
there’s a forgettable Spider Ball track
that leads to that all important new power up.
To continue the Zelda metaphor, that’s like
getting the hammer in the Fire Temple, and
then realising that you now need to leave
the dungeon, travel across Hyrule Field, and
go back to the boss room for the Forest Temple
to actually use your hammer.
It wouldn’t make any sense.
So that item order chart actually looks like
this.
And these were the only two times in Prime
2 that I got stuck.
And bear in mind, that I’m playing these
games with the hint systems turned off.
Because for the most part, Prime 2 doesn’t
ask you to revisit old areas.
Sure, the game would reward players who did
remember those previous temples. For example:
After you get the seeker missiles from Torvus
Bog, you can use them to open
a door in Agon Wastes and unlock the Darkburst:
a powerful, and completely optional weapon.
But the Seeker Missiles and Power Bombs are
the only mandatory items in the game that
are found outside of the current area.
And I feel like that breaks a fundamental
promise that Metroid Prime 2 is making.
Suddenly it goes from asking you to remember
a single zone - to asking you to recall hundreds
of rooms across an entire map.
Okay.
So one other advantage of breaking the world
up into smaller chunks, is that it would theoretically
allow Retro to make these areas more complex
- because they’re only asking players to
get their heads around a single area instead
of a whole map.
And, in some ways, that’s what happened.
For example, the areas are still very linear
in how you finish them, with a predetermined
order to the power-ups.
However, there are also these three keys,
which open the boss door, and you can get
them out of order.
That adds a bit of extra challenge and non-linearity to your exploration.
And then there’s the other massive change
for Prime 2: the Dark World.
So, again taking cues from Zelda, Prime 2’s
Aether is split into two, with each area in
the game having a corresponding “Dark World”
variant.
Light Aether is bright and relatively safe,
but hop into a portal to Dark Aether and you’ll
find a world that is claustrophobic, crawling
with enemies, and teeming with low level radiation
that will eat away at your health bar unless
you’re standing in these bubbles of light
energy.
It’s seriously quite spooky, and before
you’ve got the Dark Suit, which makes you
way more resilient to the radiation, there’s
a real experiential shift when you jump between
the two zones.
But how does it affect exploration?
Well the main thing is that often your path
through the Light World will be blocked.
so you enter a portal into the Dark World,
make some headway there, and the find another
portal, back to the Light World, taking you
past the blockade.
Ehh, it’s kinda cool - but rarely a big
head-scratcher.
But then there’s this.
Soon after the portals are introduced, we
find this locked door, and see that the controls
to open it are only present in one version
of the world.
We need to activate the lock in Dark Aether,
to unlock the door in both versions of the world.
So this sets up interesting possibilities
for puzzles, where affecting one version of
the planet has ramifications for the other
half.
Stuff we’ve seen in Zelda dungeons, like
the Mermaid’s Cave in Oracle of Ages: where
the past version affects the present.
Sadly, though, those puzzles in Prime 2 don’t
really come to much.
Take this bit down in the basement of Torvus
Bog.
You need to move a laser beam in Dark Aether,
so it activates a mechanism over in the Light
Aether equivalent of the same room.
I assumed the puzzle would be about having
to remember the layout of the Light room,
and then moving the laser blind in Dark Aether.
Then hopping back to Light Aether, and hoping
that I put the laser in the correct location.
But nope.
You just hit the button in Dark Aether and
it moves the beam into the right place, automatically.
That’s all there is to it.
You just press a button, basically.
Or, how about this puzzle upstairs in Torvus
Bog.
So this gate is locked in both the Light World
and the Dark World, and the only way to open
it is in the Light World.
So perhaps there’s a puzzle where you have
to open it in the Light World, and then, like,
remember it’s location, and navigate back
to this room in the Dark World and, oh, nope.
You just drop down here and there’s a portal
to the Dark World right here.
And after that, the idea is pretty much dropped:
there are no real puzzles in Sanctuary Fortress
where the Dark World affects the Light World,
or vice versa.
And so what could be a collection of interesting
puzzles that arise from having access to a
mirror version of the world, just becomes
a slightly annoying maze of portals between
two largely disconnected areas.
That’s a shame.
So, in the last episode of Boss Keys, about Prime 1, 
I talked about the Chozo Artefact hunt.
Essentially, the game stopped just before
the end, and asked you to go on one final
victory lap of the world to collect a bunch
of Artefacts to unlock the door to the big
final boss.
Unfortunately, it kinda killed the pace, and
by having most of the Artefacts only accessible
at the very end of the game, it stopped you
from naturally picking up Artefacts as you
explored.
Metroid Prime 2 does the same thing, again.
So after finishing Agon Wastes, Torvus Bog,
and Sanctuary Fortress, you return to the Great
Temple… only to be told that you can’t
fight the final boss unless you find 9 Sky
Temple Keys, which are scattered across the
entirety of Dark Aether.
There’s three in the Sky Temple grounds,
two in Dark Agon Wastes, two in Dark Torvus
Bog, and two in the Ing Hive, which is the
dark version of Sanctuary Fortress.
As before, this is a bit of a pace killer.
At this point you feel ready to take on the
final boss and finish the game and yet, the
game’s asking you to faff around for a good
few more hours.
All that drive and forward propulsion stops
dead as you’re asked to look for keys across
the entire map.
You do get some help, of course.
Certain dead bodies in the world are referred
to as keybearers and when you scan them in,
you get a clue as to where their key is.
And, I’ll admit, it is quite fun to translate
that to a place name on the map, head over
there, and find the key.
But what’s annoying is how the game makes
you wait until the end of the game to do this
key hunt.
Because, first, you need the Dark Visor just
to see these gross jellyfish critters who
are holding the keys.
So even though you can get to, say, the Defiled
Shrine, which holds one of the keys, as soon
as you have the Super Missile, it will just
look like a completely empty and pointless
room until you come back much later with the
Dark Visor.
That doesn’t reward exploration, does it?
So that means you need to have picked up about
13 power-ups before you can even start hunting
for the keys.
And from there, while you can get three of
them immediately, and another after
getting the Power Bomb - the remaining
five keys all require the very
last item in the game: the Light Suit.
So while careful exploration will net you
a few keys ahead of time, most are simply
impossible to collect until the very end,
forcing that last minute victory lap.
Why not just let people collect those keys
across the entirety of the game?
At the very least, you do unlock fast travel
between the three zones, and the hub world,
to help with this final key hunt.
Okay, some stray thoughts:
As always, the world of Prime 2 is littered
with optional goodies to pick up like energy
tanks, missile upgrades, beam ammo upgrades,
power bomb slots, and secret charge beams.
These reward exploration, returning to old
areas with new power ups, and general poking around.
And most of them are behind interesting little
puzzles, or platforming sections, or feats
of strength.
Very rarely do you just open a door and find
an energy tank inside: the game makes you
work for them, and that’s cool.
The game does have some annoying bits of backtracking.
After beating each main boss, you need to
power up the energy reactor in the Dark World,
walk all the way to the Light World and do
the same thing, and then walk all the way
to the main temple to get your next mission.
The one thing Retro forgot to borrow from
Zelda is the fact that you can instantly teleport
out of the dungeon after defeating the boss.
So, Like Metroid Prime, there’s a lot to
love about Prime 2.
The atmosphere is top notch, jumping into
the dark world genuinely makes you feel tense,
and splitting the world into pieces makes
the game easier to digest.
And, to be honest, most of the issues with
the game are small.
The ammo system, some annoying bosses, those
two pattern-busting items, the late game key
hunt, and the missed potential of the dark
world.
Because overall, Prime 2 is really fun, and
I think it deserves more love than it gets.
And it shows a really interesting route that
Metroidvanias could take: somewhere in-between
Metroid and Zelda: with smaller areas that
allow for more focused exploration, and more
complex puzzle solving.
So Next time on Boss Keys, we’ll see where
the developers took it in the next Prime game…
Metroid Prime Pinball. Uh sorry, Metroid Prime 3: Corruption.
