Hi! My name's Mark and I am 
making a video game about magnets.
So, one of my goals with this series 
is to show you a true, transparent,  
and unvarnished look at what it takes to make 
your very own video game. And part of that means  
I can't just show you the stuff that's fun and 
exciting and makes for good video footage, like  
prototyping game mechanics, designing 
levels, or doing surprise demo drops.
And, as it turns out, there's a lot of stuff in 
game development that just isn't very glamorous.  
Stuff like menus, the heads-up display, saving 
and loading data, supporting different controller  
types, syncing options, tracking progress, doing 
level transitions, and more. This is stuff that  
doesn't really get shown in dev diaries and 
documentaries because, in truth, it's very dry.
But someone's got to make this stuff. And in this 
game… that someone is… well it's me, isn't it?
Okay, so last time on this series I 
completely overhauled my character controller.  
And part of that meant giving the player 
some options about how the character works:  
like letting you change from holding the 
button to aim, to toggling it on and off.  
Or letting the player remap all of the keys 
and controller buttons. Or letting the player  
change the colour of the magnet. And this was 
all well and good for a throwaway test level,  
but if I want these options to work across an 
entire game I'm going to need to find some way to  
sync these options from level to level, let 
the player save and load these options from  
their hard drive, and provide some kind of 
UI to let the player set these… settings.
And so after a bit of fiddling 
around, here's what I came up with.
When you first load the [game] to the title 
screen, I spawn in an options manager. This is  
an invisible game object with a bunch of scripts 
to track the player's options and save and load  
those options to the hard drive. And the object 
is tagged “Don't Destroy On Load”, which means  
when the player starts the game, the title screen 
is deleted from memory and replaced with a level  
but, the options manager hangs around like a bad 
fart. And because it's still there in memory,  
the new level can find the options 
manager and essentially… ask it questions.
Like the character can say ‘should 
I have low sensitivity aiming right  
now?’ and the magnet can say ‘what 
colour am I supposed to be?’ and  
this panel can ask ‘should I have 
accessibility symbols on right now?’
What I've essentially done here is decouple the 
meta level game logic from the moment to moment  
level design. Which might seem kind of obvious 
in retrospect, but I definitely didn't have this  
during the MVP. There, every level had 
its own duplicated version of the code  
for saving and loading progress, transitioning 
between levels, and there was even a duplicated  
version of the pause menu in every level in 
the game. It was wildly inefficient, it made  
testing levels slow, it added all this extra 
junk to my hierarchy, it made it difficult  
to change any of these options, and it 
was hard to track stuff between levels.
This new system is much, much smarter. So 
I decided to create a bunch more of these  
invisible managers. Now, you can send a level 
name to the transition manager and it will wipe  
away the current level and wipe into the new 
level. That's paired nicely with the music  
manager which takes the non-existent soundtrack 
and fades out and in with the level load. There's  
also the HUD manager which draws stuff on top of 
the screen, like these tutorial prompts and these  
context sensitive button icons. Which, yes, 
do change if you change your controller. And  
I made a UI manager to hold the pause menu and 
the options menu. Which, yes, is hideously ugly  
right now. I'm just focused on the functionality 
- I’ll make it pretty in the future.
Just like sound design, UI design is a Future Mark  
problem. And, yes, I realise that Future 
Mark problems are starting to stack up a bit.
But there was one more manager I wanted to build. 
So, back in the MVP, the game moves from level one  
to level two to level three and so on. And I'm 
not sure if such a linear progression of levels  
is the best for a puzzle game. Sure, 
some puzzle games do have this like  
Portal and Inside. But others, like Braid, 
Stephen's Sausage Roll, and Baba Is You,  
have a more open-ended structure. You can 
skip levels, play puzzles out of order, and  
come back later to puzzles you skipped in 
the past. And I kind of like this. I'm not  
keen on giving the player a big brick wall just 
because they got stumped on one of the puzzles.
So I wanted to build a non-linear level structure 
into my game, and here's how I did it. In each  
level the goal is to find and collect a key, and 
I have a new progression manager that has a list  
of all the keys in the game and it ticks them off 
when you find one, and it saves that data to the  
hard drive. I built a really simple hub level with 
doors that go between the different puzzles and a  
special door at the end that is only unlocked 
after the player has a certain number of keys.  
A number that I can very easily change 
as I tweak the balance of the game.
And speaking of tweaking and balancing I 
wanted to make it really easy on myself to  
change the order of the levels 
based on players feedback  
about the relative difficulty of the puzzles. So 
the whole system is essentially routed through  
the level's file name. The levels are named 
something like 01 Lift 02, with the first two  
characters denoting which hub the level belongs 
to, and the last two characters denoting which key  
is found in that level. And then all of the 
relevant systems just read the level name  
and pull out the strings they need, to find 
out where the level belongs. And this means  
I can change the order of the levels just by 
renaming the files, which is super efficient.
And while we're on this efficiency kick, let's 
talk about tools. So another thing I found in  
my MVP was that it was really kind of frustrating 
to build and especially iterate on level designs.
Like let me give you an example: if I want to 
take this electromagnet and make it a bit shorter  
and change it to be red, I need 
to resize the area effector,  
resize the visual for the beam, move the 
particle system and reduce its lifetime,  
change the particle colours, change the beam’s 
colour, change the sprite’s colour, change the  
magnet’s layer, change the buffer zone’s tag, 
and change the area effector's collider mask.  
And now imagine doing this for pretty much every 
mechanic in the game just because you want to  
move something one tile up or you want to start 
the level with a door open rather than closed.
And what I came to realise is that Unity is a tool 
for making games, but it's not a tool for making  
my game - because that's on me. I have to put 
in place the tools and systems that will allow  
me to generate content for my specific game. 
And so with that in mind, the new version of  
the electromagnetic panel has a simple slider in 
the inspector for the height, and as I move this  
slider up and down it's automatically updating all 
of those variables I talked about earlier. Same  
for these buttons to change it from red to blue, 
or on to off. Basically, if there's something  
in my game that I want to change a lot and the 
process of doing it is just a rote sequence of  
steps, I might as well build a simple script 
that can do it all in a single button press.
And so I updated more and more of the stuff from 
my MVP to be more easy and efficient to use. Like  
this moving box: I now use Unity's gizmos to show 
me exactly where the box will move from and to,  
and the path it will take. I also set 
up a dedicated window just for my prefab  
game mechanics so I can drag and drop them into 
the scene like I'm playing Super Magnet Maker.
Oh, and another thing that annoyed me in the 
MVP was Unity Events. Not the events themselves,  
they are amazing. They basically work like 
this: in, say, the code for this green button  
I can say when the button is pressed just ‘invoke 
a Unity Event’. And then, back in the editor,  
in the inspector I have a really simple field 
where I can just drag in any object from the scene  
and have it run basically any function on 
it. So, now, when I press the green button  
it turns off the electromagnetic panel. 
Really powerful stuff for a puzzle game. But  
it's a bit frustrating that I have to find the 
relevant thing in the hierarchy. It would be  
super amazing if I just had a Photoshop-style 
pipette to click on the object in the scene.
And so I abused my internet fame to get 
someone much smarter than me to just  
build that exact thing I described, and it is 
amazing, and I use it all the time. There's  
a link to the GitHub page for this Unity 
asset in the description for this video.
So now that I've built a bunch of 
tools that should hopefully make it  
easier and more efficient to design 
puzzles, I decided I might as well  
test it by building a puzzle. And, yeah, it was 
a lot more efficient. But there were still a few  
annoyances and bottlenecks to the process, so 
I fixed them and tested it again by building  
another level. And then another level. And 
another level, before realising something…
I now have a whole fleet of system level managers 
working in the background. I have this whole  
hub structure built. And I've made 
four or five brand new puzzles. Did  
I just accidentally make a video game? Whoops!
It's funny, I genuinely wasn't planning 
on making a new demo for my game,  
but I've got like 90 percent 
of one on my hard drive now.
I think it just goes to show how powerful 
it can be to have efficient tools.  
They can make building the game so 
fast and easy that you can build stuff  
without even realising it. So I think it's 
worth putting in a little bit of extra effort  
and a bit of extra pain at the beginning of 
the process, because it will just save you  
so much time and effort and heartache for 
the main part of the game's development.
But whatever the case, this is awesome 
because, again, back in the MVP,  
there was a lot of feedback I needed to 
address. Stuff that people didn't really  
like about the game: like the character feels 
incredibly crummy to control, there's lots of  
annoying inconsistencies in the visual language, 
the mix between platforming and puzzles had some  
players confused about how to play, most of the 
puzzles fell short of that ‘aha!’ eureka moment,  
many of the levels were messy and buggy and 
had you waiting around for cycles to reset,  
and the game didn't truly feel like it 
was built around this magnet mechanic.
So this new demo, Untitled Magnet Game 
version 2.0, is a chance for me to  
fix all of those problems and see what people 
think of the game now. And so I would love it  
if you could pop over to itch.io and play 
this brand new… surprise demo drop. Yes,  
I had to do it. It's available to everyone, 
not just patrons. It works on PC and Mac,  
you can play it with keyboard and mouse, or with 
various different controllers. Please give it a go  
and drop me some feedback either in the comments 
on this video or over on Itch.io. And then I will  
come back discuss the new round of feedback 
and see where I should take the game next.  
Thank you so much for watching, have fun 
with the game, and I'll talk to you soon…
Oh, before I go the GMTK Game Jam is 
back for 2022. It starts on July 15th,  
so while you're over on Itch.io just sign up for 
the game jam there as well. I'll see you soon.
