Deep in the forest of Mistwood, there's 
an unassuming stone building. Inside is  
an elevator that goes down. And down. 
And down. And down further still, until  
it finally hits the bottom, revealing a secret, 
underground city with an impossible night sky.
It's one of those moments that makes 
you ask... wait, how big is this game?
The answer: pretty damn big. FromSoftware 
has always made epic adventures that cover  
a lot of ground, but in Elden Ring, the 
studio has been more ambitious than ever.
The twisty, interconnected worlds of Dark Souls 
and Bloodborne are microscopic when compared to  
the monster open world of The Lands Between. 
This humongous continent will take you from  
the deepest depths to the highest mountain and 
the map just seems to get bigger, and bigger.
So, what's it like to actually explore 
this giant fantasy kingdom? And how did  
going open world change the Soulsborne formula?
Well, I'm Mark Brown, and this is 
the world design of Elden Ring.
Let's start with a recap.
Our goal at the beginning of the game is to 
explore The Lands Between and find our way to  
the Leyndell Royal Capital. However, the front 
door stays locked until we‘ve got a handful of  
great runes - which we can collect by toppling 
key boss monsters within the surrounding regions.
So, the game begins in Limgrave 
- a lush, woodland region,  
pockmarked by ruins and underground caves. Up 
on the hill we'll find Stormveil Castle - the  
game's first "legacy dungeon" - aka "a bit 
of Dark Souls stuck into the open world".  
And at the end we can beat up Godrick 
the Grafted to get the first Great Rune.
Godrick's throne room backs on to Liurnia of 
the Lakes, a foggy swamp land that surrounds  
The Academy of Raya Lucaria: legacy dungeon number 
two. We'll need a Glintstone Key to get inside,  
and then we can lay the smackdown on Rennala, 
Queen of the Full Moon, for another Great Rune.
The Academy's rear leads to Bellum 
Highway, and the Grand Lift of Dectus  
which is... not operational. We'll need 
two halves of a medallion to make it work.
One is back in Limgrave, in Fort Haight.
And the other is in Limgrave's neighbouring 
land, Caelid... a nightmare hell hole with a  
blood red sky, poisonous swamps, and 
desolate ruins. A bit like England,  
really. Plus, it's the stomping grounds of 
another Great Rune holder, General Radahn.
With the Dectus Medallion sellotaped back 
together, we can take the elevator up to the  
Altus Plateau - an autumnal highland with a golden 
sky, and, finally, the entrance to Leyndell.
However, before we head inside, we can swing a  
left and scale up Mt. Gelmir. Here 
we'll find another legacy dungeon,  
Volcano Manor, and can wreck another 
Rune Holder, Rykard, Lord of Blasphemy.
We can now head back to the Plateau, 
enter the biggest legacy dungeon of them  
all - the staggeringly massive Leyndell Royal 
Capital, and face down Morgott, The Omen King.
So that's the layout of The Lands Between thus 
far: we've got Limgrave, Caelid, Liurnia of  
the Lakes, Altus Plateau, and Mt. Gelmir. All of 
them, bar Caelid, have a legacy dungeon to fight  
our way through. And all of them bar the Altus 
Plateau have a great rune holder to beat up.
Now unlike, say, Hyrule in Zelda: 
Breath of the Wild, or Skyrim in,  
well, Skyrim, these areas don't all border 
each other in single giant landmass. Instead,  
they lead from one to the next, like so. 
Which means you can't go from Limgrave  
to Mt. Gelmir without first trekking 
through Liurnia and the Altus Plateau.
This dot-to-dot world layout is just one 
way that Elden Ring is constructed to help  
players navigate this world. To stop 
them from getting lost or overwhelmed.
There's also the way NPCs suggest the way 
to go. The way the first vista in Liurnia  
of the Lakes neatly frames Raya Lucaria 
in the centre of your screen. And the way  
certain sites of grace have a wispy golden 
line that points you in the right direction.
FromSoftware's creative director Hidetaka Miyazaki 
says these were put in to help out players who  
felt stressed by the game's open design, and 
just wanted to know where to go. But he also  
says that refusing to follow the guidance is 
supposed to feel, in of itself, like a choice.
Because, despite Elden Ring having more order 
and structure than some other open worlds,  
this is definitely not a linear game.
For one, you can often reach areas in an 
alternative way, and bypass bosses in the process.
So, while Stormveil Castle quite naturally leads 
on to Liurnia of the Lakes, there's actually  
a semi-secret path that circumvents 
the castle, and goes around Godrick.
Caelid is on the border of Limgrave, 
so you can just wander in at any  
time. Though, you might face some... 
resistance. More on that in a bit.
And you don't actually need the Dectus Medallion 
to reach the Altus Plateau. There's a hidden path  
through the ruin-strewn precipice that skips 
the lift and routes around Rennala. Or, you  
can get eaten by this one specific baddy in Raya 
Lucaria, and get burped back out in Volcano Manor.
NPC quests can also open up 
other avenues. So, typically,  
Radahn's festival is inaccessible 
until we've touched at least one site  
of grace on the Altus Plateau. But doing 
Ranni's quest can grant us earlier access.
Fia's quest lets us enter Leyndell without 
fighting the Draconic Tree Sentinel roaming  
around outside. And doing a quest for Varré 
will grant us access to Mohgwyn Palace,  
so we can fight a surprise fifth great 
rune holder, Mohg, Lord of Blood.
All of this means that pretty much 
everything up to the front door of  
the Leyndell Royal Capital can be tackled 
how you see fit, and all of the areas,  
legacy dungeons, and bosses in these zones 
can be done in whatever order you like.
Or, not at all, as the case may be. Getting 
into Leyndell actually only requires you  
to hold two Great Runes, out of a possible 
five. That means Godrick, Renalla, Radahn,  
Rykard, and Mohg can each be skipped, as 
long as you've beaten two of their mates.
And so if we look at the achievements on Steam,  
we'll see that while 50% of Elden Ring 
players made it to the Leyndell Capital,  
only 43% lifted the great rune from Rykard 
in Volcano Manor, and just 38% defeated Mohg.
But, I mean, this is a game with over 150 
bosses... and you only need to fight 12 of  
them to see the credits. You don't even need 
to fight the chick from all the trailers!
Then again, FromSoft has never worried too much 
about players missing content - they know full  
well that it just makes it so much better 
for those who do stumble across this stuff.
And that certainly carries over 
into exploring the individual areas.
Set out on your trusty spectral steed and 
you might discover underground catacombs,  
crumbling ruins, mages' towers, dusty 
mining tunnels, and ailing villages.  
There are also mini dungeons, like Castle 
Morne, Caria Manor, and the Shaded Castle.
Oh, and there's even a pretty massive underground. 
That includes Siofra River beneath Limgrave,  
Ainsel River below Liurnia, and if we kill 
Radahn, a star will literally fall out of the  
sky and punch a hole through Limgrave's surface - 
revealing a secret path to Nokron, Eternal City.
And there's always something exciting 
to discover around each corner. Whether  
that's some handy loot, an NPC quest, 
a surprise boss fight in the field,  
or something else to give you pause. You won't 
soon forget the time you saw a titanic stone  
turtle with a building on its back, or 
the time you opened this unassuming chest,  
only to be knocked out and woken up 
in a mining tunnel in central Caelid.
But, unlike most open world games, these 
points of interest aren't exhaustively  
catalogued for you. There are 
no question marks on your map,  
no towers to climb, no quest logs to 
follow, no checklists to check off.
Instead, you're left to explore by following your 
curiosity, and that innate sense of intrigue about  
what's over the next hill. Like Breath of the Wild 
- and Miyazaki has listed Zelda as an influence on  
Elden Ring - you mainly explore by scanning the 
horizon for interesting landmarks and structures.
And so by trusting that the 
player will want to explore,  
and being okay with the fact that huge amounts 
of stuff will be missed in the process,  
Elden Ring allows for a more organic style of 
exploration, and a true sense of discovery.  
You’re actually investigating a world - not just 
cleaning up a messy map filled with activities.
So, the Soulsborne games have always had a lot 
of freedom in how you tackle things. They've  
always had optional bosses and non-compulsory 
zones, to make your playthrough unique. And  
they've always offered a sense of mystery and 
discovery about what's around the next corner.
But in going open world, Elden Ring can 
really capitalise on that experience - on  
that grand fantasy of going on an epic adventure.
In fact, Miyazaki has said that 
Elden Ring is pretty close to the  
dream game he's been trying to make since, well,  
Demon's Souls - "the open world enriches this 
ideal experience I'm trying to achieve," he says.
But, that being said... I think there are 
other ways that the open world actually  
diminishes the Souls experience. Where 
the size and scope of the world - and  
the way you consume it - doesn't gel 
so nicely with what has come before.
So, for starters... most of the Souls 
games have been more or less linear  
in how you approach them. At least when 
compared to an open world like Elden Ring.
And so in those games, the player tends to level 
up their character in line with each new area,  
providing a pretty consistent level 
of challenge throughout the game.
But an open world is a very different story.
Each area in Elden Ring has a predetermined level 
of difficulty - dictated by the power of the  
enemies and bosses in each zone. Something you'll 
know all too well if you wandered, early on,  
from Limgrave into Caelid and got bodied by 
basic enemies who hit like a freight train.
And this static set-up can have some 
negative effects on how you tackle the game.
For one, this does ultimately 
constrain the game's sense of freedom.
Like, if we take those five key bosses. And 
if we rank them by the number of runes they  
drop - a pretty representative guide to their 
relative strength - we'll see that while they  
can indeed be fought in any order, the game 
certainly does seem to suggest one for you.
Luckily, in practice, it's not too 
egregious. The different enemy levels  
aren’t so spiky as to make out-of-order progress 
impossible. And because it's only a soft gate,  
you can absolutely - say - sneak 
into these dangerous zones early on,  
scoop up a few handy items, and 
then fast travel back to safety.
Plus, having some bits with ridiculously 
overpowered bosses can actually add to that  
adventurous feeling. This makes the world 
feel dangerous, menacing, and inhospitable.
And it provides a goal to come 
back to when you've got more power.
I mean, typically in a Souls game, if you 
can't beat a boss you just have to... try  
again until you do it. "Git gud scrub", 
and all that silly billy nonsense. But with  
Elden Ring you can pop a marker on your map and 
explore elsewhere. Maybe find a better weapon,  
level up a few times, improve your 
armour, power up your health flask,  
get some more friends to summon, and then 
come back and show that boss who's boss.
But... you might find that you've actually 
explored too much, and are now over levelled.  
You can find yourself heading back to a 
boss, hoping for a fair fight - only to  
find that you can now knock him out with 
little more than a fart and a light shove.
This makes the world feel far less menacing, 
it can spoil the satisfaction of certain  
boss encounters, and it makes going 
back to earlier areas kinda boring.
Ultimately, Elden Ring puts the 
onus on the player to, essentially,  
balance the game themselves. 
To make sure they're always at  
the perfect level to keep the game at a 
satisfying level of challenge. Except,  
without ever telling you what level the enemies 
actually are, like you might see in other games.
And, look - other games have found 
ways to keep enemies challenging,  
even if you do things out of order or come 
back to an early zone later on in the game.
RPGs like Skyrim and Assassin's Creed use 
a level scaling system to make certain  
enemies beef up in tandem with your 
own personal power growth. Likewise,  
in Breath of the Wild, after you 
kill a certain number of enemies,  
more powerful baddies will be dropped 
into Hyrule to keep you on your toes.
And in Hollow Knight, the first area - The 
Forgotten Crossroads - later transforms  
into The Infected Crossroads, and is now filled 
with more difficult enemies and new obstacles.
And FromSoft itself has experimented 
with ways to change a game's world  
in relation to the player's actions and 
progress - like the cryptic karma system  
of world tendency in Demon's Souls, the way your 
level of Insight changes the land of Bloodborne,  
and how enemies can stop spawning in Dark Souls 2 
if you kill them too often, to prohibit grinding.
In this instance, though, Elden Ring 
has doggedly stuck to the same-old  
Soulsborne formula - despite completely 
changing the way you explore its world.
Now, sure, you can certainly find ways that 
From has changed the formula to better fit  
an open world - like the addition of 
a map and the introduction of a horse,  
having a dedicated jump button, and offering 
infinite stamina when you're not in combat.
But when it comes to something as 
fundamental as enemy balancing,  
I reckon more could have been done 
to suit this supersized world layout.
The first time you discover a catacomb 
in Elden Ring is a really cool experience.  
Here's an underground area with living 
gargoyles, fire-breathing totem poles,  
and ghostly flowers. There's an imposing stone 
door, locked up tight, and you'll need to find  
a lever to make it budge. Inside is some 
terrifying boss monster, and a handy reward.
But then you'll find another catacomb. And 
another. Stormfoot Catacombs, Murkwater Catacombs,  
Deathtouched Catacombs, Impaler's Catacombs. And 
so on. And much like the shrines in Breath of the  
Wild... while each one has its own gimmick 
or puzzle, they do feel remarkably similar.
This is another example of how Elden Ring suffers  
as a result of going open world - 
the sheer amount of reused content.
Elsewhere, there are multiple tunnels with miners 
digging out smithing stones. Loads of ruins,  
each with a secret basement. Every 
mage's tower has a memory stone.  
Every church has a sacred tear. Every 
Erdtree Avatar has a crystal tear.
Plus, iconic, zone-specific enemies 
start to show up again later on in  
the game. Those bonkers walking 
mausoleums reappear. And even the  
bosses repeat. You might first fight 
this spooky weirdo, the Godskin Apostle,  
in the Divine Tower of Caelid. But then he shows 
up again in the windmill village on Altus Plateau,  
and again in a cave later in the game, and again 
as a mandatory boss in a later legacy dungeon.
Now, to be fair, it's not like previous 
Souls games are completely immune to  
copy-and-paste content. And Elden Ring has 
better variety in its loot and enemies than,  
basically any other game of this scale.
But this level of repetition 
really hurts the game's sense  
of mystery and discovery - which 
I praised so highly a minute ago.
Because as soon as you start to see the 
patterns and formulas that make up a world,  
the artifice is shattered, and the game is 
revealed. A catacomb is not a mysterious  
archaeological find but a formulaic chunk of video 
game. It becomes predictable, familiar, content.
Perhaps FromSoft simply bit off 
more than it could chew. Because,  
going back to our recap... well, the game 
certainly ain't over once we reach the centre  
of Leyndell. In fact, we’re only about 
half way through the game at this point.
So, with Morgott dead we can take a 
quick hike through the Forbidden Lands,  
and then it's up the Grand Lift of Rold 
to reach the Mountaintops of the Giants.
This is... technically another open world zone, 
like Limgrave or Caelid. But your path is a lot  
more constrained, and there's a lot less to 
explore here. If we go by the number of sites  
of grace, the Mountaintops of the Giants 
has half as many as Liurnia of the Lakes,  
simply because there are fewer catacombs, 
graves, and other interesting landmarks to find.
Okay, so there is one big thing to discover. 
With another medallion - one half can be found  
on the Mountaintops, and the other's back 
in Liurnia - we can ride Rold to another,  
secret stop: the Consecrated Snowfields. 
Here we'll find a teleporter to Mohg's  
palace, and a hidden path to Miquella's 
Haligtree - another legacy dungeon,  
and headquarters of Malenia, Blade 
of Miquella. Have fun with her.
So, it's cool that the game still 
has significant secrets to find in  
this late game zone. But, beyond 
this, the game really closes in.
After toppling the Fire Giant, and setting 
this lady on fire for some reason - sorry,  
I'm bad at following the stories in these games - 
we can pop to the last legacy dungeon - Crumbling  
Farum Azula. At the end of this, we can 
then thrash Maliketh, The Black Blade,  
and we're back to Leyndell for a conveyer belt 
queue of big boss bastards: Sir Gideon Ofnir;  
Godfrey, First Elden Lord; Radagon of the 
Golden Order; and the Elden Beast. Phew!
So Elden Ring's extremely freeform first half 
folds in for a much more linear and constrained  
second half. There's less to explore, we're 
given far less freedom in how we tackle things,  
and we're back to just beating our head against 
the wall in order to fight these bosses.
Now it's only natural for an open game to pinch 
in tight at some point - but that's either right  
at the very end, or perhaps a mid-game moment 
before the game opens back up again. Elden Ring,  
instead, feels more like a funnel, where half the 
game is an open world adventure, and the other  
half is... well, it's just Dark Souls. Which 
is... you know, still better than most games.
When Miyazaki was asked why Elden 
Ring has such a massive landmass,  
he said that he wanted to give 
players a “sense of adventure”.
That giant world was essential to delivering 
the fantasy of being able to hop on a horse,  
and freely explore a complete 
continent of titanic boss monsters,  
secret dungeons, and towering mountains.
And, in many ways - and especially at 
the beginning of the adventure - Elden  
Ring absolutely delivers on Miyazaki's goal.
You can see it in the way players get near 
total freedom in how they roam the Lands  
Between. In the way only a tiny amount of 
content is mandatory, so every play-through  
is unique. And how From eschews typical open 
world design, to make exploration more organic.
But there are other ways that going open world 
actually hampered the Soulsborne experience.
Static enemy levels don't work 
so well when you give the player  
complete freedom to explore - and 
From did nothing to address this.
And that oversized ambition forced From 
to repeat and reuse content - which makes  
every subsequent discovery feel less 
special. And it may be the reason why  
the end game ends up feeling 
rather rushed and restrictive.
Thanks very much for watching. If you're 
still jonesing for Souls-like stuff,  
then check out this video for a 
look at the world design of Lordran:  
the twisty world of Dark Souls 
1. Until next time, see ya.
