ALARM CLOCK: Good Morning Morgan. 
Today is Monday March 15th, 2032
Prey is packed
with good ideas.
Like, the Mimic.
This spindly, black, spider-like alien can
disguise itself as any object in the room
- making you suspicious of everything you
see.
See that health-pack?
Surprise! It’s a Mimic.
But, you can also take that power for yourself.
You can use these painful looking Neuromods
to give yourself alien powers - one of which
lets you turn yourself into a coffee mug,
roll through a gap in a door, and then turn
back into a human on the other side. 
Handy.
However, collecting these powers comes at
a cost.
Install too many and the friendly robots aboard
Talos I will read your DNA as alien, and start
targeting you as an enemy.
Like I said, Prey is stuffed with smart ideas.
But perhaps the best of all is found right
at very the start of the game: the Gelifoam
Lattice Organism Obstructor - or, as it’s
better known, the Gloo cannon.
It’s the game’s signature weapon and like
Kratos’ Leviathan Axe or Mario’s cap,
this thing serves so many purposes that you’ll
always want to have it on quick-select.
So, as soon as you snatch it, you’re invaded
by an army of Mimics.
And when you hit them with the Gloo cannon’s
big blobs of insta-dry adhesive, you’ll
immediately figure out its first major use:
freezing enemies in place.
Kinda like the electric bolt in Bioshock or
the ice missiles in Metroid, the Gloo cannon
temporarily stops enemies in their tracks
and lowers their defence, giving you a chance
to swap to another weapon for a decisive blow.
Or, scan them with your psychoscope to boost
your research.
Or just run away.
Another use for the Gloo cannon is to deal
with environmental hazards.
You can use it to plug up gas leaks and stop
flames spewing out.
Or patch up a malfunctioning electrical circuit,
to give you time to fix it.
Or use a blob of Gloo to sponge up toxic spills
left by nuisance enemies.
Or exploit the physics system to move hefty
objects that Morgan can’t lift by hand.
But it’s the third and final use of the
Gloo cannon that takes this thing from a handy
gadget to an essential piece of equipment:
Gloo blobs stick to practically any surface, bar glass,
and then stay there indefinitely
- allowing you to clamber on top of them and
reach high-up zones.
So right next to you when you get the Gloo
cannon there’s a half-finished staircase
which leads you up to this roof, and nets
you few goodies.
But then you might notice that this whole
area is actually comprised of multiple floors
and the grav shaft elevator is out of action.
So, if you use the Gloo cannon to build a
makeshift staircase you’ll be able to reach
the next floor and grab some extra stuff - including
early access to a new weapon.
If you didn’t quite figure that out for yourself, 
later in the game you’ll watch
a character create a Gloo staircase right
in front of you to reach an escape route.
Staircases aren’t the only thing you can
make, though: later in the game you can unlock
a Neuromod called Lift, which creates a blast
of antigravity and sends hefty objects high
into the air.
You can then Gloo them to walls, to create
floating platforms.
Theoretically you could then destroy the Gloo
and have the object crash down on an enemy’s
head, but I think that would be more luck
than anything.
I spent about 30 minutes trying to get this
to work and this was the best I could manage.
So the Gloo cannon can be used to get up to
all sorts of high places, allowing you to
find secret stashes of items.
It feels like a more intentional version of
the classic Deus Ex trick of using LAM mines
to climb up walls - and a natural expansion
of the movement options in Arkane’s other
immersive sim, Dishonored.
That game had to limit the player’s movement
with high-reaching walls, to keep them in
one small part of a much larger world.
but a space station is very different.
In an interview with PC Gamer, Prey’s lead
system designer Seth Shain said
“Because you're on the space station Talos
I and outside of that is space, everything
has a ceiling.
With that, we knew that the bounds of the
player were already set by the ceiling, [so]
we could just let the player move through
that space as fluidly as they could”.
And, naturally, that means Gloo can also be
used to let you skip past sections of the
game or get to places earlier than you’re
supposed to.
Take, for example, the Arboretum.
When you first get there, you’ll find that
Alex’s office is completely off limits,
thanks to a locked down grav shaft.
You won’t get the key code until much later
in the game, and while you can bypass the
lock you probably haven’t spent enough Neuromods
on hacking by this point.
However, when I got to this part of the game
I used a whole bunch of Gloo (plus a fair amount
of patience) to scramble up the inside of
the elevator shaft and reach his office hours
before I was supposed to.
And Arkane probably didn’t intend players to
use the Gloo gun to clip through walls, completely
break the game’s progression, and finish
the whole adventure in less than 7 minutes time.
Collision breaking aside, though, the Gloo
gun is actually something of a technical marvel.
Games are great at letting players remove
stuff from a world - you know, enemies, objects,
sometimes entire walls and chunks of planets
- but adding new things is something entirely
more difficult.
Having to draw too many objects can tank the
game’s frame rate.
Even my PC struggles to keep up with 2,000
cheese wheels in the same street.
And saving all this additional stuff in memory
isn’t always possible, which is why bullet
holes disappear after you’ve created too
many.
And that’s not to mention that Prey’s
Gloo blobs are physical objects that you can
stand on - hence, the collision issue.
Of course, adding objects is totally possible,
but usually with restrictions.
Minecraft has simple voxel-based graphics
and is constrained to a grid.
Dreams has a creation budget that you can’t
exceed.
And Shadow Complex - which has a similar gadget
to the Gloo cannon in its Foam gun - is saved
by being in only two dimensions.
So, to that end, the Gloo cannon also has
some restraints.
There is a limit to the number of blobs in
one area, but unless you're cheating,
your ammo will surely run out 
before you ever see it.
The most obvious limitation, though, is that
while Gloo can stick to most things, it can’t
stick to other blobs of Gloo.
So you can’t make big towers or bridges.
Shain says “that's something that we couldn't
do because it created this technical problem
- this chain of constraints that added to
the computation time [of] the whole chain.
There was no way we could do this and have
it perform on console”.
So while the Gloo gun went through lots of
iterations and prototypes, lead designer Ricardo
Bare told PCGamesN that “the version we
ended up with was the best intersection of:
performs well enough to ship and is the most
fun”.
So, Prey is a game that is all is about choice.
Male or female?
Human or alien?
Save or sacrifice?
Which Neuromods do you pick?
How do you explore the space station?
Who do you trust?
At every turn, the game gives you the power
to choose your own way to play.
And the Gloo cannon is a potent symbol of
that player empowerment because it can serve
you no matter how you choose to play - from
combat to pacifism to exploration
to problem solving to sequence breaking silliness.
It’s that multi-purpose design that makes
the Gloo cannon
one of gaming’s most ingenious gadgets.
Thanks for watching!
It’s always fun to go really deep on a single
idea from a game.
To that end, check out these similar videos
on two more multipurpose game mechanics,
the Leviathan Axe from God of War, 
and Cappy from Super Mario Odyssey.
Cheers. See you soon.
