When I played Deathloop - the latest game from 
the makers of Dishonored and Prey - I got a  
strange sense of deja vu. And not just because 
the game features a Groundhog Day-style time loop.
Yeah, you see - in this game you’re trapped on 
an island that’s stuck repeating the same day  
over and over again. And so whether you die,  
or make it to midnight, you’ll wake up on 
the same beach, on the exact same morning.
The only way to break the loop is to track 
down and assassinate seven elusive baddies.  
Oh, and for it to count, you’ve got 
to kill them all in the same loop.
So, no - the real reason I got deja vu is 
that the whole premise strongly reminded me  
of another game - one of Arkane’s 
own, actually. You see back in 2018,  
they released a wonderful piece of 
DLC for Prey, called Prey: Mooncrash.
Mooncrash takes place in an infinitely-repeating 
simulation of a lunar base. And so whether you  
die, or the simulation runs its course, 
you’ll start the whole thing over again.
The only way to complete the 
simulation is for each of the  
five characters to track down and use 
the five different escape methods. Oh,  
and for it to count, you’ve got 
to do them all in the same loop.
Yeah - sounds a lot like Deathloop, right? 
Sure, they couldn’t be much further apart in  
terms of tone, and style, and story - but the 
underlying gameplay structure is very similar.
And that’s no bad thing, of 
course. All games are built  
on what came before - especially 
games made by the same company.  
And I think bonus content like this can be a great 
way to experiment with new ideas and concepts.
And if they’re good enough, they can be improved,  
expanded, and fleshed out 
for a fully featured release.
But… that’s not quite what 
happened with Deathloop.
Sure, the game builds on the main idea 
on Mooncrash - but there’s more to Prey:  
Mooncrash than a clever concept. 
This DLC is, in fact, jam packed  
with super smart design decisions that 
patch up problems with the underlying  
concept - and also address some issues that Arkane 
identified with the wider immersive sim genre.
But Deathloop seems to ignore… 
pretty much all of them. Which,  
actually, leads to some of my biggest gripes, 
frustrations, and disappointments with the game.
So in this video I’m gonna go through all 
the smart stuff in Mooncrash - and look at  
how Deathloop failed to learn those same lessons. 
I’m Mark Brown, and this is Game Maker’s Toolkit.
Part 1 - Roll of the Dice
Okay, so according to a GDC Talk, Prey: 
Mooncrash came about because the team at Arkane  
was obsessed with roguelikes. Games 
like Darkest Dungeon, Risk of Rain,  
and Dead Cells. And so they wanted to 
make something with a similar vibe.
Now, one of the key aspects of a roguelike is 
having randomly generated levels. Even though  
you’re repeating the same game over and over 
again, the jumbled up level layouts keep things  
fresh and surprising. But this is something that’s 
a lot easier to do in 2D than 3D. Especially when  
you want to make highly detailed environments with 
the same level of quality as a game like Prey.
So, the moonbase isn’t randomly generated:  
it’s the exact same layout every time. 
There’s a giant crater hub, a crew annex,  
a mining quarry, and a lab - all with the same 
floor plan and room locations from loop to loop.
But, that doesn’t mean every run is identical. 
Because while the overall layout is the same,  
there are many smaller elements which are, indeed,  
randomised from run to run. The biggest one is 
environmental hazards that can affect those areas,  
which includes raging fires, a radiation 
spill, and electrical failure.
You might also see changes in the architecture, 
so a tunnel could be destroyed, or a staircase  
might have fallen down. And the tram network 
may be perfectly functional on one loop,  
but then a specific station 
is inaccessible on another.
Plus, escape pods and service closets 
may be found in different places,  
enemies can spawn in different locations, items 
might be in different spots. The list goes on.
And this is actually… really cool. You should 
know by now that I really like revisiting a space  
and gaining familiarity with it - and you get 
that in spades in Mooncrash. You learn shortcuts,  
and safe spots, and the best place to track 
down a Medkit. But the randomised elements  
keep you guessing, they stop things from becoming 
stale, and they force you to think on your feet.
So, a favourite shortcut might not work on 
this run. An easy escape route now needs  
a new solution. Your perfect plan… 
is scuppered by a broken-down tram.  
Some of my favourite moments from Mooncrash came 
from these random elements ruining my plans. But,  
I could then use my familiarity with 
the space to find a novel solution.
Now, back to Deathloop. And this 
game really is the same from loop  
to loop. If you revisit an area at the 
same time of day, you’ll find that it’s  
almost identical - down to the placement 
of enemies, security turrets, and Fiz-Pops.
So you do get the fun familiarity of revisiting 
a well-known space. By the 6th time you come back  
to Updaam in the afternoon you’ll know the perfect 
route to zip by enemies undetected. But you don’t  
get the surprise of an unexpected change. You 
don’t get the think-on-your-feet problem solving  
of a broken shortcut or unpredicted turret. 
And after many hours in the game, it’s entirely  
possible that you’ll be getting bored of seeing 
the exact same patterns, events, and layouts.
There is, however, one big caveat to this. and 
that’s Juliana. Deathloop lets players “do a  
Dark Souls” and invade another player’s game 
as a multiversal malevolence who can hunt down  
Colt with a massive arsenal of weapons. 
And when Juliana spawns into your game,  
these moments do provide some of 
those feelings I got in Mooncrash.
The surprise. The sudden change 
of plans. The problem solving.  
Juliana can even place down traps 
that will catch you off guard  
simply because in the last 5 times you played 
this level… there weren’t any mines there!
*Boom*
*Colt screams*
So, Juliana does make sure that Deathloop is never 
perfectly predictable - but, whenever she  
wasn’t invading my game, I missed the clever, 
fine-grained randomisation from Mooncrash.
Part 2 - Power Creep
So Mooncrash really bent the roguelike 
rule of random levels. And it does the  
same for the other key directive: permadeath. 
The idea that when you die in a roguelike  
you’re sent back to the start of the game, 
and all your progress is reset to zero.
Here, the designers took inspiration from more 
friendly entries in the genre like Rogue Legacy,  
and actually let you keep some stuff between runs. 
So, any skill tree unlocks you make are permanent.  
Finding blueprints for items means you 
can buy a new copy at the start of your  
next loop. And you can stash a permanent 
currency that you can spend on those items.
Now I’ve talked before about my, uh, displeasure 
with such permanent progression in roguelikes. In  
short, if you let the player 
make the game easier over time,  
then you get a weird curve where the game starts 
off way too hard for the player’s current skill…  
and then as the difficulty decreases, and their 
skill rises, you end up with a game where the  
player is completely overpowered. And so the 
sweet spot exists for, like, a handful of runs.
And that could have absolutely 
been the case in Prey: Mooncrash,  
but the developers do something 
really clever to account for it.
You see, the game has a list of objectives 
to complete, like unlocking different escape  
routes and completing story missions. And when 
you finish a certain number of these challenges,  
the game amps up the difficulty level. 
Finish about 25 percent of the missions,  
and you’ll start seeing radiation and fire 
hazards. At 50 percent completion, the time  
limit will shrink. And at 75 percent you’ll 
start seeing random dust storms in the crater.
And so while you are making permanent 
progress that absolutely makes the game  
easier for yourself - the game is fighting 
back, and making things harder. There’s  
a sort of balancing act where the game isn’t 
crushingly difficult at the start of the game,  
but isn’t a complete pushover at the 
end either. And if works perfectly,  
it should keep you in an ideal flow state 
of difficulty for the entire experience.
Of course, it doesn’t work perfectly. 
It’s still very easy to get overpowered,  
and by the end of the game I had 
so many sim points I could go on a  
superweapon shopping spree before every 
run. That final mission to escape with  
all five characters in a single loop was 
so easy it was completely anticlimactic.
But for a lot of the game, it was ratcheting up 
the difficulty in a neat counterbalance to my own  
skills, familiarity and unlocks. And, I mean, it 
certainly did a better job of it than Deathloop.
So, just like Mooncrash - the majority of stuff 
you find in a run of Deathloop will vanish when  
you wake up again in the morning. Weapons, 
stat boosts, and even those Dishonored-style  
superpowers will leave your inventory and need to 
be replaced. But, you’ll soon get the ability to  
“infuse” your goodies, which makes the item 
permanently stay in your arsenal between loops.
And so, pretty quickly, you’ll find yourself 
with a really powerful collection of guns,  
trinkets, and slabs that you 
can use on every single loop.
But unlike Mooncrash, there’s no 
obvious counterbalancing system  
here. The game does not seem to get more 
challenging or complicated over time  
and so the baddies you fight at the beginning 
of the game are the same ones you’ll fight  
at the end. Only you now have an entire rack 
of weapons and magic powers at your disposal.
There is a simple system called “Loop Stress” 
where visionaries get more powerful when  
you defeat their pals. And according to the 
tutorial, it does have some residual impact  
across multiple loops. But it must be 
minimal because I never felt its effect.
In fact, I personally found 
myself to be an overpowered,  
nearly-invincible killing machine rather early 
into the game. And that final mission to kill  
all seven visionaries in a single loop was… 
again, anticlimactic. I did it on my first  
attempt and it was laughably easy because 
I just had so much power at my disposal.
And that was actually… kinda fun. It 
was, admittedly enjoyable to be an  
overpowered super soldier just wiping out 
all seven baddies in a cathartic finale  
of death and destruction. But… there was 
also the rest of the game and after about  
7 or 8 hours I lost all sense of challenge. 
With almost no way to counteract the player’s  
ever-growing power creep, the game rapidly 
loses its balance - and topples onto its face.
Part 3 - Under Pressure
So this one is gonna be a bit 
more… contentious. There’s one  
more thing that Mooncrash took from 
roguelikes, and that’s pressure.
You see, if you stick around in a Spelunky level 
for too long, you’ll face an invincible ghost who  
will either kill you - or chase you out of the 
level. Designer Derek Yu says he added the ghost  
because he wanted to force players to “make 
difficult decisions and experience both the  
satisfaction of choosing correctly 
and the regret of choosing poorly”.
And almost every roguelike has a system like this 
- from the fleet chasing you in FTL, to the hunger  
system in Don’t Starve, to the timed doors in Dead 
Cells. And I think it’s pretty apparent why it’s  
needed when it’s not there - like last year’s 
Returnal, which gives you no incentive to hurry  
up… and so you can end up spending hours joylessly 
scouring every level for the perfect gear.
Anyway - Prey: Mooncrash has its own take 
on this: the corruption meter. Over time,  
the simulation becomes more and more 
corrupt, which makes tougher enemies spawn,  
and makes computers harder to hack, and so on. And 
when it bottoms out, the loop is forcefully reset.
Now, this feature did get a 
lot of pushback from players.  
Just like every time limit, a portion of 
players found the pressure frustrating and  
anxiety inducing. And I will admit - it’s 
not the best implementation of the idea.
Having the game just unceremoniously 
kill you when the timer runs out  
is too harsh of a punishment. I mean, having to 
play on corruption level 5 is reason enough to  
speed up. It doesn’t fit perfectly with a game 
that has much slower elements like stealth,  
exploration, and environmental storytelling. And 
it kinda breaks a system I’ll talk about in a sec.  
But, I do think a certain level 
of pressure is worthwhile.
Because if we look at Deathloop, which doesn’t 
have anything like the corruption meter,  
you can often find yourself in situations 
where you have just killed absolutely  
everyone in the level - and you’re wandering 
around by yourself picking up Residuum,  
and item clues, and trinkets, and more. Which 
- isn’t the most exciting way to play the game.
Again, there are small features that 
go in this direction - there’s the  
Wake Up Challenge at The Complex, where you 
have a couple minutes to find four boxes  
before they go boom. That’s a nice 
reward for putting pressure on yourself.
And, overall, this wasn’t my biggest 
gripe with Deathloop. I wasn’t  
yelling out for a time limit. But, I do think the 
corruption meter added some really interesting  
wrinkles to Mooncrash - and it’s a shame 
that Deathloop didn’t iterate on the idea.
Part 4 - Split Personality
While Prey: Mooncrash was made 
with an eye toward roguelikes,  
the designers were also thinking about 
their own genre, the immersive sim,  
and the problems they face there. In that 
GDC talk I mentioned earlier, Arkane’s Rich  
Wilson points to the way that players can get 
into comfortable patterns with these games.
That could be a way of playing - like being 
stealthy. Or a way of engaging with the  
world - like deciding to never kill humans. And 
while it’s awesome that players get to choose  
how they play - it can also mean that they 
only engage with a small part of the game.  
Or they never explore certain parts of the 
skill tree. Or they play in restrictive,  
and potentially frustrating ways - like 
reloading a save game the second you get spotted.
So Arkane wanted to challenge 
this in Mooncrash. Here,  
you play as five characters instead of one 
- and they basically take Morgan from Prey  
and split them into five parts. 
A stealth expert, a repair woman,  
a heavy weapons tank, someone with loads of PSI 
skills, and someone with loads of Typhon skills.
This means that when you’re 
playing as certain characters,  
your preferred play-style might be discouraged 
or even impossible. (In fact, I wish they went  
further and made it so the psychic characters 
can’t use guns at all - but, nevermind).
The idea is that you’ll end up trying different 
gameplay styles - and it totally worked. I used  
abilities in Mooncrash that I never tried in the 
real Prey. And sometimes I would need to find new  
solutions to a problem because my go-to answer 
was simply not viable with the current character.
I was forced out of my comfort zone,  
and had to think about the world in a 
different way each time I spawned in.
That’s not what happened in Deathloop, though. So 
this game is very much built in the same vein as  
other immersive sims like Prey, Dishonored, 
and Deus Ex - you play as a single character,  
with complete access to a large array 
of items, powers, and play styles.
And, yeah, I went straight back to my old ways.
For some reason, I really love hacking 
turrets in games - and so I did that for about  
30 hours straight in Deathloop. And there were 
slab powers and weapons that I never tried  
simply because the ones I had were really working 
well for me. I mean, I don’t think I swapped  
out blink - sorry, shift - after I unlocked it 
because I like zipping around levels too much.
And so, yeah. I wasn’t expecting Deathloop 
to be split into multiple characters like  
Mooncrash. But there are problems 
with immersive sims - I mean Arkane  
themselves acknowledge them - and yet 
Deathloop does nothing to fix them.
And the frustrating thing is that there is 
a potential solution to this in the game.  
Losing your tools every loop should 
force you to find and try new ones.  
Like how your favourite weapons shatter in 
Breath of the Wild. But, alas, as I’ve said,  
infusing your weapons stops that 
from happening to any real degree.
But shaking you out of your 
comfort zone isn’t the only  
advantage to having multiple heroes in Mooncrash.
Part 5 - Playing with Yourself
So here’s how the game works. You try 
to escape as one character. If they  
pull it off or they die - you then switch to 
another character: and go in on the same loop.
And this leads to some interesting outcomes. Like, 
the first character can perhaps make life easier  
for the second character. Perhaps patch up a 
hazard, or make progress towards an escape method,  
or clear out enemies. Perhaps the most clear 
take on this comes from how the volunteer  
needs to escape via a portal to 
unlock his story mission - but  
the machine needs to be repaired 
and hacked: and he can do neither.
So you’ll need to repair it as the 
engineer. Then, in the same run,  
hack the computer as the custodian. And 
then, in the same run still, enter the portal  
as the volunteer. It’s clever - and has the 
feeling of playing a co-op game with yourself.
But, you also get the feeling of playing 
against yourself. Take an escape pod,  
and now no other character can use it. Die 
mid-run, and you might come back as a powerful  
phantom enemy in the next character’s game. And 
any items you’ve scavenged as one character…  
will be gone for the next character. So you have to think ahead 
and leave stuff behind for future heroes.
Unfortunately, that idea is quickly undercut by 
the way you can just buy all the items you need.  
And the system is also spoiled by the 
corruption meter I spoke about a minute  
ago - it’s often better to just reset 
the simulation when switching characters,  
unless you specifically need to 
use multiple heroes for something.  
But, again, it’s a clever idea that just 
needed a little more time in the oven.
Deathloop, of course, doesn’t have this by 
virtue of only having a single character.  
But it does have something along these lines.
You see, each day is split into four time periods: 
morning, noon, afternoon, and evening. And so you  
might visit Updaam in the afternoon, when Charlie 
Montague’s real-life video game is accessible…  
only to come back later on in the evening 
when Alexis Dorsey’s party is in full swing.
And so making changes early on in the day 
can have a knock on effect later. Turn off  
the power in Otto’s workshop in the morning 
and it will be accessible later on - rather  
than a sizzling heap of ash. It’s along the same 
lines as that portal-fixing relay from earlier.
But, unfortunately, it’s pretty limited to 
some specific story beats and puzzles. So that  
feeling of playing with or against yourself 
is not quite the same as Mooncrash. Like,  
loot all the Fiz-Pops in the morning at Karl’s 
Bay, and they’ll be back in the afternoon. Kill  
every single baddie at noon, and there’ll be a 
fresh army to kill in the evening. And so on.
I mean, it makes sense. The system for tracking 
all this stuff would be maddeningly complicated.  
But, still, it’s a little disappointing 
when you consider the absurd cleverness  
of Mooncrash’s multiple characters.
Part 6 - Ending It
Finally, there’s the “ultimate 
challenge”. Both games have  
largely the same structure - kill the seven 
visionaries or find the five escape methods.  
And to actually complete either game, 
you need to do the lot in a single loop.
The ultimate challenge.
Now in Mooncrash, how you do this 
is - almost - entirely up to you.  
For the most part you can send whoever you like,  
to whichever escape route you want. And so 
you really have to plan it out for yourself.
Maybe you want to send the weakest character 
first, so your strongest heroes are there  
when the corruption meter will be highest. 
Maybe you want to use the easiest escape  
method with a character you don’t really like 
using, and brave the hardest route with a hero  
you’re more comfortable with. It takes 
planning, forethought, and cleverness.
But with Deathloop, it turns out there’s actually 
only one way to do it. Outside of how you choose  
to unearth Alexis at his party, there is a 
set-in-stone route, order, and method. And it’s  
all laid out for you in a glitzy animated 
cutscene and point-to-point quest log.
And that’s just… a lot less exciting. This 
has been a completely non-linear game thus  
far - but now its rigidly formulaic. And 
while most Arkane games trust players to  
figure stuff out for themselves, Deathloop 
tells you exactly what to do. It’s a shame.
The entire time I played Deathloop I 
was excitedly planning this final murder  
spree - and so was pretty disappointed 
when it was not only laughably easy,  
but also strictly controlled by the designers.
Part 7 - Deja Vu
Now, there are some ways that Deathloop does 
indeed learn from Mooncrash. For example,  
both games are - for the most part - very 
non-linear in how you approach them. Which is  
fantastic - but it can make storytelling a 
challenge. How do you make sure the player  
gets the narrative in a compelling 
order, and at a satisfying frequency?
Well, Mooncrash stuffs some of its plot into 
the simulation, through narrative missions  
and environmental storytelling. But the main 
story is told outside of the loop. Basically,  
when you do a certain amount of the Kasma 
orders, it boots you back out to your spaceship  
for the next chunk of the overarching narrative. 
So, you’re always getting a bit more of the plot.
And Deathloop has something similar. There’s the 
story of the visionaries, and you’ll discover  
that through tracking them down, reading their 
computers, finding notes, and so on. But the  
main story of the game is with Juliana. And so 
every time you enter a level, Juliana and Colt  
will have a quick chat on the phone - usually in 
a way that extends their story and relationship.  
JULIANA: "Colt."
COLT:"Julie."
JULIANA: "I'll take it. Better than
some of the other names you've called me".
COLT: "Jules?"
JULIANA: "Yuck."
COLT:"Yeah, not a huge fan of that one either."
JULIANA: "Good."
So you get little snippets of narrative 
all the time - in a way that’s ordered  
and frequent - even though the rest 
of the story is wildly non-linear.
There are also ways that Deathloop exceeds 
Mooncrash, largely by virtue of being a  
complete game rather than a low-budget DLC. 
So while Mooncrash’s tiny layout can make it  
quite repetitive, Deathloop is a far bigger 
game. And there’s an awful lot to do - with  
seven mainline missions, and lots of secrets and 
sidequests all zig-zagging through each other.
There’s always something new to do in Deathloop,  
which certainly helps relieve the boredom 
of repeating the exact same locations.
And so, ultimately, I did really enjoy Deathloop. 
But I also found it repetitive, unchallenging, and  
restrictively hand-holding. It didn’t do anything 
to get me out of my turret-hacking comfort zone,  
and I don’t think it really explored the 
full extent of its underlying concept.
These are all things that 
Mooncrash fixed. Or, at least,  
attempted to fix. As I’ve shown in the 
video, Mooncrash is far from perfect. But  
Deathloop would have been the time to expand and 
iterate on those ideas - not drop them entirely.
And, look, there are probably some 
very good reasons why Deathloop  
skipped the design decisions from Mooncrash. 
I mean, the games do have different vibes:  
Mooncrash is more of a score-chasing, 
highly replayable roguelike - whereas  
Deathloop is far more singular and story focused.
And, admittedly, the biggest reason for their 
design departure is that while both games  
are developed by Arkane - Mooncrash was made at 
their studio in Austin, Texas - and Deathloop was  
built in Lyon, France. There’s actually hardly any 
overlap in the people who worked on the two games.  
Plus, it’s entirely possible that development on 
Deathloop began before Mooncrash was released.
But I can’t shake this feeling of 
deja vu - that Deathloop is just Prey:  
Mooncrash - but not as good. There 
was amazing potential to take this  
kernel of an idea and expand it into something 
bigger - which Deathloop totally tried to do.  
But by missing the finer details, the 
game failed to reach that potential.
But there’s one final twist to this story. 
The next game from Arkane, Austin is called  
Redfall. And this one isn’t on a time loop - 
but it is split up into multiple characters.  
Kinda like Prey: Mooncrash. So, it will be very 
interesting to see how that game takes, expands,  
and iterates on the concepts of Prey’s criminally 
under-appreciated gem of an expansion pack.
Thanks for watching.
