Hi, my name's Mark and I 
am making Mind Over Magnet,  
a cute puzzle platformer 
about, yes, it's true, magnets.
Okay, so in the previous episode of Developing, 
I talked about getting my game ready for  
the Steam Next Fest, which is a week-long 
showcase of demos for upcoming indie games.
So I put together a polished demo 
featuring the first world of my game,  
and also a Steam store page with screenshots 
and animated gifs, and a snazzy teaser trailer.
However, with just two months to 
go before Next Fest kicked off,  
I realised that there was a pretty 
big problem with each of these things.
Both the demo and the store page featured 
a massive placeholder - an unfinished asset  
that really needed to be changed before I could 
confidently show Mind Over Magnet to the world.
However, there's a good reason why 
those assets were still placeholders,  
and it's because I could not 
make the final asset myself.
And so, for the first time in my game dev career, 
it was time to hire someone to help me out.
Here's how that went.
♫ Music ♫
Okay, so basically everything in 
Mind Over Magnet is made by me.
I've done all the writing and programming code,  
all the artwork and animation, and all 
of the game design and level design.
Okay, sure, some stuff has 
been made by other people.
Some super smart folk on the 
GMTK Discord have contributed  
chunks of code when I've gotten 
stuck on a programming problem.
I got my dad to create a 3D animation 
of a giant robot arm so I could trace  
over it in pixel art and pop it 
in the background of World 4.
Oh, and all of the sound effects are from 
- still not a sponsor - Epidemic Sound.
Plus, I could not make this game 
without the help, advice, feedback,  
and bug reports from my many playtesters, 
nor the financial backing of my Patrons.
Here's a shoutout to the 180 new people who have  
joined the campaign since the 
last episode of developing.
You're amazing.
Anyway, everything else is made by me.
But please do not take this 
as some gross brag about me  
being a multi-talented auteur genius 
who can turn his hand to anything.
In truth, I'm a pretty average 
programmer, writer, designer, and artist.
And the game would frankly be much 
better if I hired someone to make,  
well, pretty much every part of the game.
Which makes me wonder why I exist.
What am I contributing to this?
Uh, let's park that 
existential crisis to one side.
Anyway, the whole point of developing was  
for me to see every part of this 
process up close and first hand.
To see what it's like to code a 
jump arc, or to draw out a tile map,  
or to film and edit a trailer, 
or to design a bunch of puzzles.
All so that I can share that 
experience with you fine folk.
However, there are two major things that 
I just do not have the skills to make,  
and they are way too important for me to muddle 
on through, or to cobble something crap together.
I need to hire someone to make these things.
And that starts with the soundtrack.
Because yes, music is so important to a game.
Music can be the beating 
heart, or the soul, of a game.
Some of my favourite titles, my 
memory of that game is as much  
tied to the music as it is to 
the storyline, or the gameplay.
Music can elevate an experience.
But I do not have any musical 
ability or talent whatsoever.
I cannot string together a single line of notes.
So I'm going to need someone 
else to make this music.
Now, sure, I could use some pre-existing 
tracks from a music library, or an album.
And in fact, some amazing games like Braid, 
Her Story, and Hotline Miami use pre-existing  
music rather than getting a 
wholly original soundtrack.
But that can be a little bit risky.
You run the risk of your audience getting a 
copyright strike if they stream your game.
And your music can just show up 
in the weirdest places imaginable.
So I decided that I wanted to get 
all new music for Mind Over Magnet,  
to hire someone to make original tracks.
But I had one hesitation.
Because I know so little about music - I mean,  
I don't know the difference between 
an octave and a treble clef.
I thought quavers were just 
really delicious crisps.
So how do I even talk to a composer?
Do I have to hum the music I want them to make?
Do I tell them what tempo 
or BPM the music should be?
I really needed some advice.
So I called upon probably the biggest 
expert in this field, Austin Wintory.
Austin is an award-winning composer behind 
the soundtracks for games like Journey,  
The Pathless, and Stray Gods, plus 
loads of other games and movies.
And I asked Austin, "Does it matter that 
I don't know how to talk about music?"
AUSTIN: "It's all good.
None of your cohorts in the directing side 
of the table know how to talk about music.
The common response to that has become,  
'Just try to articulate the 
emotion that you're interested in.
Don't question how we get there.
That's my job to figure out.
That's the burden I'm taking off of your 
shoulders by being part of the project.
That's the whole idea.'"
MARK: Ah, that really put my 
mind at ease, to be honest.
I realised that I don't need to 
talk in the language of music.
I just need to talk about the 
creative vision for my game.
The feeling, the emotion, the vibe I'm going for,  
and then let the composer translate 
that into beeps and boops.
And so it was time to hire a composer.
Now in a previous episode of Developing,  
I put out a call for composers and 
received over 850 submissions to my form.
Which is amazing, but also completely 
overwhelming, and let's be honest,  
it was impossible for me to 
look at every single one.
But I did read through a lot of bios,  
I listened to a lot of samples, and 
I looked at a lot of proposed fees.
Though, let's talk about money in 
a future episode of Developing.
Now among all of those people, one 
person really did catch my eye.
Zach Jones is a game designer 
and composer living in New York.
And not only did he give me lots of great samples,  
but he picked out some specific songs 
that he thought would fit my game.
And so I was able to grab them from Bandcamp,  
chuck them into the game itself, 
and just see how it felt.
♫ Music ♫
Yeah, not perfect, but 
definitely along the right lines.
And it gave me confidence that Zach would be 
able to make great music for Mind Over Magnet.
Now I'll fast forward through the next bit.
We got on Zoom, we decided to work together, 
and then I had to write a contract.
Comment down below if you want a 
three hour spin-off video about  
the exhilarating fun of writing a legal document.
And then we were finally able 
to work on the project together.
And I started by telling Zach what 
I wanted for the music for World 1.
I said, "World 1 is a sewer system.
The vibe is slightly mysterious and spooky, 
but with an air of hope and excitement.
Perhaps you could incorporate or take 
inspiration from sounds of running water,  
dripping water, rats, chains, etc."
And then, a little while 
later, he came back with this.
♫ Music ♫
Mmm. I like it.
I do like it, but it's not quite right.
But then I remembered something 
else that Austin told me.
That making music is actually 
a very iterative process.
AUSTIN: "I often will say, 'Assume that what 
I send you first is not going to be it.'
Because how we'll get it is in the iterative 
process of you reacting to a piece of music.
And I just come up with 
literally anything, and then  
that becomes our flag on the map that you can 
go, 'Actually, two clicks west and one south.'
So we start to build up data on what that means.
That's the iterative process."
MARK: So with that in mind, I wrote back to Zach  
and told him exactly what I 
didn't like about that song.
I told him that it was a bit too clubby,  
like high tempo and energetic 
with these loud and harsh drums.
Those are kind of distracting 
and cognitively overwhelming,  
which is not good when you're trying to 
learn game mechanics or solve puzzles.
I also thought it was still a bit too dark 
and moody, and I wanted something more light  
and optimistic to fit the cartoony 
characters and kid-friendly gameplay.
And so Zach said, "Okay, on it," and 
came back a little while later with this.
♫ Music ♫
Yes. That is perfect.
That, as they say, slaps.
I mean, these headphones aren't even plugged 
in and I can tell you this music is great.
This is exactly what I was looking for.
It's moody and evocative, but there's still 
an air of hope and fun and playfulness.
And it has a great beat, but 
that blends into the background,  
letting you focus your mind on the puzzles.
This version was just great.
I had, as they say, no notes, and so 
it just went straight into the game.
And now I simply could not imagine 
this game without this wonderful music.
I feel like this music makes the game better 
than it actually is, if that makes sense.
And so this process was a huge lesson for me.
I learnt so much about 
collaborating with other people.
I mean, for one, I realised that I 
don't have to make everything myself.
It's okay to let other people 
into the creative process,  
and they will surely contribute something 
better than I could ever make for myself.
Number two, I don't need to be able to speak 
the same creative language as an artist.
I can just tell them what vibe I'm going for,  
and it's up to them to translate that 
into music or artwork or whatever.
And three, they're probably 
not going to get it perfect  
the first time they do it, and that is just okay.
Make sure you bake revisions into your contract, 
give as clear feedback as possible about what you  
don't like, and then hope that they'll get it 
on the second, third, fourth, or fifth time.
And so this experience was invaluable, 
and it really helped me when I was trying  
to commission something for my other 
placeholder, the Steam Capsule Art.
Yes, I am more of an artist than I am a musician,  
but the Steam Capsule Art is 
so important to get right.
This is the YouTube thumbnail of game development.
It has to stand out in a crowd of other games.
It has to look fantastic and 
appealing and exciting, and I  
just didn't feel like I could do that myself.
This time I called upon a great 
3D artist called Grayson Evans,  
who makes these utterly adorable, 
toy-like, Funko Pop models in Blender.
And he's also done promo artwork for Devolver 
and box arts for games like Love 3 and Skatebird.
So I reached out and we agreed to work together.
This time I had a much clearer 
vision of what I wanted.
I wanted the cover to be exciting and dynamic,  
and to show off the two main 
characters, Uni and Magnus.
And I was also able to share some things that 
were inspirational to me, including the box art  
for Super Mario Bros. 2, the Fez box by Brian Lee 
O'Malley, and the box for the new Braid remaster.
Just like before, the first 
stab wasn't quite right for me.
The proportions felt off and 
the design wasn't quite right.
Uni's head is supposed to 
be like an old CRT monitor,  
and Magnus is supposed to be a real chunky boy.
But as I learnt from my dealing with Zack,  
all I had to do was offer my 
feedback and ask for another stab.
And so we went through a few different 
iterations, with Grayson making drafts in  
Blender and me pointing out changes, until 
we got something I was pretty happy with.
Now unlike the music, I was able to take 
the artwork and kind of work on it myself.
There were things I wanted to change 
just to put my own personal spin on it.
So I pulled the character away from the 
background with some more contrasting colours,  
I moved some elements around and 
I added some smoke and sparks to  
Uni's wheel to make it look a 
bit more dynamic and exciting.
These are all things that 
Grayson could totally have done,  
but I was happy to do them myself 
to put my own personal spin on it.
And so overall I think it 
turned out really nicely.
Definitely a lot better than 
the original capsule art.
I think it makes the game 
pop, it makes it stand out,  
and I'm excited to put it on the Steam 
store page and have it shown to the world.
So now I really am ready for Steam Next Fest.
I've got a demo with some professional music, 
and a store page with a professional capsule art.
Now I wanted to make sure the demo was 
all grand before putting it on Steam,  
so about a month before the Next Fest I put it 
on itch.io to get it in front of a few people.
Unfortunately itch decided to feature the 
game on the home page for about a week,  
and so the game received 10,000 downloads.
Which is definitely more than 
I was bargaining for. Oopsie!
So I got a lot of feedback and bugs before 
Next Fest even began, but crucially I found  
out that the Mac version just did not work 
and crashed in all sorts of bizarre ways.
I don't quite know how to fix it and so decided 
to just focus exclusively on Windows for the  
Next Fest launch, and I'll look into Mac and 
Linux versions for the actual game launch.
Sorry about that.
And so now I really am ready,  
and with four weeks to go before Next Fest 
I submitted the game to Steam and Valve...
rejected it.
Okay so there are game files in the depot, 
but they're not live on the default branch.
Right. Sorry. Confusing.
Let me try again.
Three weeks to go, I submitted the game 
again, and Valve rejected it again.
Okay this time I accidentally uploaded the 
Mac version instead of the Windows build.
Dumb, dumb, dumb.
Okay let me change that.
Two weeks to go, I submitted 
the build again, and...
failed.
Again.
Three times in a row? Is Valve gonna 
send me a t-shirt or something for that?
Okay so this time I had set the launch option to 
be mindovermagnet.exe, but I didn't mention that  
the exe is in a subfolder called momdemo 
and so the Steam client can't find it.
Urgh. Okay.
One week to go.
Holy moly this is getting close.
I submitted for the fourth time 
and this time it was accepted.
Thank god.
That was a bit squeaky bum time there.
Phew, I'm not messing with that thing again.
Even though there are things I would like to 
change in the demo, I'm just keeping it as it is.
I'm not changing that again.
And so now all I have to do is 
wait for Next Fest to begin.
So it's a week later, June 10th at 6pm.
Next Fest has officially started.
I loaded up the website, hit refresh, 
and then found a massive list of games.
I scrolled down, and down, and down.
Okay, where is my game? Let 
me check the puzzle tab.
Okay, puzzle platformers? Not here.
Nope.
Ah, finally.
Magnus, hello.
Yes, this is the thing about Next Fest.
I mean, for June's event there 
were around 1,800 demos to play,  
and more than 300 of them 
were tagged as puzzle games.
And so in a crowd of Tactical Breach 
Wizards, I Am Your Beast, a Riven remake,  
Arranger, and a new Crashlands 
game, it's pretty hard to stand out.
And it can feel pretty demoralising to see 
your game hidden underneath a massive stack of,  
let's be honest, much, much better games.
So did anyone play my game? Well, actually, yes.
Despite all of the competition, a 
whopping 9,640 people played the demo,  
which I'm really pleased with, and that resulted 
in an extra 3,961 wishlists, which is fantastic.
I'm now heading into launch 
with over 40,000 wishlists,  
mostly thanks to all of you watching this video.
The game even got picked up by some websites and 
YouTube videos, which was really cool to see.
But even more important than all 
of that, I got loads of feedback.
Across Twitter, YouTube comments, emails, Discord 
messages, Steam forum posts, and itch.io comments,  
I received hundreds of pieces of feedback, as well 
as bug reports, and ideas, and feature requests.
The overall sentiment is that people generally 
liked the game, but just felt like the demo  
was a bit too short, and the puzzles 
on offer were overall a bit too easy.
But I'm fine with that, because I know that the  
full game will just naturally 
address both of those problems.
Now in terms of the more nitty gritty feedback,  
well, I created a spreadsheet where I could 
list every piece of feedback that I received.
I could then file it into a category 
like bug, or idea, or accessibility.
I could give it a description.
I could decide how much I agreed 
with the feedback from one to five.
And then, perhaps most importantly of all,  
I counted the number of instances 
of seeing this feedback.
Now, sure, there were probably 
much better ways to do this,  
like a form or a subreddit where 
people can vote things up and down.
But the one thing I did like about 
this is that people were generally  
not biased by seeing feedback from other people.
So if twenty people told me the exact same thing, 
they were saying it independently of each other.
So I kinda knew that it was 
something worth addressing.
So what were the most common 
pieces of feedback? Well,  
the number one piece of feedback is that 
Uni, the main character, moves too slowly.
In some levels that require running 
back and forth across the screen,  
it can be pretty boring to just slowly 
perambulate from left to right and back again.
And you know what? I do agree.
I mean, it's no coincidence that I have a 
secret run button when playing in debug mode.
I've just hesitated to change it because 
changing Uni's speed would break several puzzles.
But I learnt this lesson in the previous video.
Sometimes you just have to take the difficult 
decision, put in the work, and fix the thing.
So I upped Uni's max speed 
from nine to about eleven.
That's pixels per second, maybe? I 
don't actually know what that number is.
But that's a 20% speed increase, 
and I think it does the job.
I just now need to go through the 
whole game and tweak things to stop  
you from breaking puzzles with your new max speed.
Up next, a large number of people 
were confused about whether or not  
they needed to take Magnus with 
them at the end of this puzzle.
Fair enough.
So I changed his dialogue and had 
Uni squeeze through a small gap,  
which I've previously telegraphed as 
being too tight to take Magnus through.
So this level, which I've talked 
about a lot in a previous video,  
actually just does not make 
sense anymore, I don't think.
It has gone from being surprisingly difficult to  
being so simple that multiple people 
said it breaks the flow of the game.
So I'm gonna either move it, or 
just pull it from the game entirely.
But then, you know what the next most 
common piece of feedback was about?  
This completely trivial, unimportant, 
background water dropping animation.
So many people thought that the 
low framerate animation looked off.
Like a lot of people.
Same with these completely 
pointless nuts and bolts.
I got a lot of feedback about them, like how 
they should make a sound when they hit things.
And while both of these would normally be  
extremely low down on my list 
of things to fix, go on then.
I've changed the water dropping animation, 
and now the nuts and bolts make sound.
And look, maybe this is because when 
you ask people to provide feedback,  
it's sometimes just a lot easier to point at 
and describe trivial background things like  
water dropping rather than more general high 
concept stuff like level flow or difficulty.
Or maybe it's because the demo is just at a level 
where it is overall fine, maybe even kinda good,  
and that the only thing to really talk about 
now is tiny trivial background animations.
I will happily take that.
And so, with that said, that was 
my Steam Next Fest experience.
And the question is, would I recommend it? Yes.
Because even though it was pretty 
demoralising to see my game hidden  
under a pile of hundreds and 
hundreds of amazing indie games
- and let's be honest, my game 
would be hidden even more if I  
wasn't a YouTube guy with a million subscribers -
despite that, Next Fest still was worth it.
Because for one thing, I got loads 
of fantastic feedback from a wide  
range of people, all of which 
will help improve the game.
Plus submitting the game to Next Fest felt 
like a practice launch for the actual game.
I got to figure out all of the 
weird quirks of Steamworks,  
and so the actual real launch 
should be a lot more smooth.
And perhaps most importantly of all, it just 
gave me a really strict deadline to hit.
It forced me to get a big chunk of the 
game ready, polished, and presentable.
And so I'm actually in a pretty good place.
I'm not going to hit the July or August 
deadline I mentioned in the previous video,  
sorry, but the game really will 
be done in the next few months.
So hopefully on the next episode of 
Developing we will talk about the final,  
final stages of game development.
I hope you will join me.
Subscribe to this YouTube channel 
so you don't miss an episode,  
and of course, please wish list the game on Steam.
Thank you so much for watching, I'll see you soon.
