On the last episode of Game Dev 101 - my 
series about the indie game production  
pipeline - I shared a whole bunch of 
tips for coming up with ideas for games.
So, now you know what sort of game you want 
to make - it's time to start building it,  
right? You know, make the art, 
write the code, hire the composer...
Wrong!
In fact, rushing straight into production is one  
of the biggest mistakes that 
new game developers can make.
But check this out: before studio 
MDHR drew thousands of hand drawn  
animation frames for Cuphead, it made 
a version that looked like this...
And before Nintendo built the enormous open 
world of Hyrule for Breath of the Wild,  
it made a simple top-down 2D version, 
using sprites borrowed from Zelda 1.
These are prototypes - scrappy,  
sample versions of games, built to test 
the idea before starting development.
It's the game dev equivalent 
of building a bridge...
by first making it out of 
wood, string, and zip ties.
Now you might be thinking - oh man, 
I have to make a whole other game,  
before I get to make the game itself?
That seems like a lot of work! What's 
the point of doing a prototype, anyway?
And, well, that's what this video is all about.
And to help me out, I chatted to Luke 
Muscat - the superstar designer behind  
games like Fruit Ninja, Jetpack Joyride, and 
Feed the Deep - to offer some expert advice.
LUKE MUSCAT: I have made literally 
hundreds of prototypes at this point  
in my career and I would say like at 
least half of them weren't fun at all.
So, this is Game Dev 101, and this is episode two:
what's the point of prototyping?
Okay, so basically...
a prototype lets you answer a question.
And perhaps the most important 
question of all is...
"is this game fun"?
Because, as it turns out, our brains 
are terrible video game simulators.
Almost any idea can sound good in our head.
But it's only when you actually get to  
play something that you can 
see whether or not it works.
That's why Nintendo designers have 
the mantra "make before we talk".
Whether its splatting ink in Splatoon or 
making vehicles in Tears of the Kingdom  
or coming up with wonder transformations in Mario,
they always make something, to test 
and prove that the game will be fun,  
before pitching the idea to the higher ups.
LUKE MUSCAT: It's just so hard 
to conceptualise whether things  
are going to work or not once 
it becomes a complete system.
We can't know whether something's going 
to be fun without actually playing it  
and experiencing it, even when we think we 
have a pretty good imagination for that.
There's just too many nuances, too 
many things that are unexpected.
A relatively recent example for me was: 
I had this idea for like a one-button  
shooting game and the idea was 
was like you would shoot like a  
Uzi and it would push you back at the same time so 
shooting became your locomotion and your attack.
And it is just really like not fun 
to move in a backwards position,  
like always getting pushed away from 
something didn't feel assertive in the  
way that a game about shooting heaps 
of people felt like it should be.
That one's so simple, right? 
Like there's very little to it,  
but there is a feeling when 
playing it that just isn't right.
But perhaps "fun" is a little restrictive.
Because, in truth, a prototype can be used 
to test almost any aspect of the game.
So when Jonas Tyroller and 
co were making Thronefall,  
they certainly made plenty of different gameplay 
prototypes to see if it was fun - but they also  
made prototypes exclusively for testing 
different art styles and camera angles.
You could even a prototype 
to test out the narrative.
At Pixar, the studio will often make the 
entire film as a scrappy comic book animatic,  
with stand-in voices from the animators, 
to they see if the narrative makes sense.
And all before they ever make a single 3D model.
Another question a prototype can help answer is...
"is this idea viable?"
The act of making a prototype will give you 
a lot of insight into what it would be like  
to make the whole game, and give you a preview of 
how easy or difficult production is going to be.
LUKE MUSCAT: I think puzzle 
games are a really good example.
Like if you're prototyping a puzzle 
game, if it's really easy to make  
puzzles for the puzzle game, you 
know you're somewhere fertile.
If it's really hard, it's like, well, okay,  
this is Clearly, going to be 
an uphill battle the whole way.
And as Jonas explained in the previous 
episode - you can make a pretty good guess  
for how long a project will take, based 
on how long the prototype takes to build.
Like, I was working on a prototype for a game 
about running your own video rental store,  
where you'd decide how to stock the 
shelves and answer customer queries.
But even that small sample took 
weeks of work - and showed me  
that this project would take much more 
time than I have to spare right now.
And, besides, a few months later,  
the game Tiny Bookshop launched which is 
basically the exact same thing but better.
So, dodged a bullet there.
And then the other important question 
a prototype can help answer is...
"will other people like it?"
A prototype lets you share your vision with 
other people - but not as a pitch or a concept.
But as something actually playable.
Like, when Rare was trying to get Microsoft to 
green-light the pirate party game Sea of Thieves,  
the studio got Phil Spencer and co to play 
a scrappy prototype version of the game,  
and filmed their session - to prove 
the point that this game would lead  
to cooperation, conversation, and banter.
And so, ultimately, you can use 
a prototype to help figure out if  
this game is going to be a hit, once it comes out.
For my roguelike spelling game Word Play 
I was able to build a simple version of  
the concept in just two days for a game jam 
- and then immediately got strong feedback  
that people liked the game and would play, 
and buy it, if there was a full version.
That enthusiasm basically kept me going 
through the rest of the development.
And, I should say, it proved 
true - the game has already  
sold more than twice the number 
of copies as my previous game.
But, of course, it can also go the other way.
LUKE MUSCAT: I was working on a prototype called 
Luck of the Draw, which was Luke Be a Landlord  
meets Super Auto Pets, so, kind of like a 
roulette wheel, deck builder, versus mode.
And when I was making that prototype, I'm like, 
this might be the smartest thing I've ever made.
This is such a, I can't wait for everyone to 
play this, and this is just gonna blow up.
This is it, this is like THE game.
And I released it, and no one cared.
It was like complete crickets.
And that was perfect.
That's exactly what you want from a prototype.
It gave me so much information 
and it told me this isn't it.
Especially, this isn't it in 
a way that I thought it was.
I would have gone and spent two years 
on that game based on me playing it.
But that's the thing - this failed prototype 
meant Luke was able to can that game after a  
few weeks of work - rather than 
after two years of development.
And so to complete that definition from before - 
a prototype lets you answer a question, quickly.
Prototypes let you try out 
ideas, and then throw them away,  
before spending a lot of 
time and resources on them.
A prototype lets you pivot, 
tweak, or completely nope  
out of a project before you've invested 
any actual resources into its creation.
That's what makes prototypes 
so powerful, and so important.
You want to learn whether your bridge design works 
now - not when you're halfway across the river.
So, if a prototype is about 
making something quickly...
here are four tips for getting to 
the point, as fast as possible.
Tip number one is...
don't make it flashy.
If you're making a gameplay prototype, avoid 
the temptation to make it look and sound good.
Instead, use ugly programmer 
art made in Microsoft Paint.
Use grey boxes and the 
default Unreal Engine dummy.
Use sprites stolen from other games.
Use free assets from the store.
You don't need music.
You don't need UI.
You don't need hyper extensible, 
clean, commented code.
All of this stuff will slow you 
down and lead to wasted work.
A prototype is designed to be disposable,  
after all, so don't spend time on stuff 
that's only going to be thrown away.
And, besides, it can distract from the point 
of the prototype - it's hard to evaluate if a  
gameplay mechanic is fun if your playtesters 
are caught up on the story or the art style.
The only caveat here...
is when it comes to game feel and juice.
LUKE MUSCAT: The juice can be part of the 
fun, especially if it is a visceral game.
And so if you're just like, no,  
we can't do any particle effects, 
we can't do any kind of feedback.
It's completely possible that you're missing 
part of what's going to help it be fun.
Fruit Ninja.
Super good example of that.
The prototype for that was really, really 
simple, but even that just had the splatters.
The prototype had some particles to at least be:  
yes, this is going to be like a 
viscerally satisfying experience.
On the other hand, it's very easy to be like,  
well, okay, all I need to 
do is add these 20 things.
And then the game will be fun.
And so you spend like a month.
Adding these like extra juice, like, and 
you what you're doing then is you're kind  
of bandaiding over the problem 
that the core game isn't fun.
So, I think when you're creating a game,  
you kind of have to be the judge of that, 
but you have to judge it very honestly.
Tip number two is...
use other mediums.
You don't have to make your prototype in the same  
engine that you're planning 
to make the final game in.
Thatgamecompany made a prototype of 
Journey in Macromedia Flash before  
ever making something that 
would run on a PlayStation 3.
So use whatever tools let 
you get to the idea quickly.
In fact - you don't need to 
make it in a game engine at all.
Paper prototyping is the art of 
planning a game out on, well, paper.
When designing the puzzles 
for the game Storyteller,  
the developers created cardboard mock-ups of the 
assets to try out levels outside of the game.
And when I was making Word Play and 
trying to imagine the gameplay loop,  
I used Scrabble tiles, and wrote the modifiers  
on a deck of hand-made cards to help 
inspire ideas for different upgrades.
In fact, you can use all sorts of materials.
For the upcoming detective game Locator, the 
developer played a prototype over Discord by  
sharing sketches of the current viewpoint and then 
asking his players what they'd choose to do next -
kind of like running a D&D 
campaign to simulate the gameplay.
Meanwhile, Hideo Kojima planned 
out levels for Metal Gear Solid  
by making them out of Lego and then 
looking at them through a tiny camera.
And for a complex simulation game with lots 
of interlocking systems, you could make that  
in a spreadsheet, or as a tabletop board 
game, before writing a single line of code.
And while a prototype is 
technically something payable...
it doesn't have to be.
Ori and the Blind Forest 
started as simple animations,  
so the devs could play around 
with ideas for moves and attacks.
And Arnt Jensen used this 
cinematic concept video to  
hire the team and raise the funds to make Limbo.
Tip number three is to keep your 
prototypes small and specific.
A prototype is not just a crap 
version of the whole game.
It's not supposed to contain every system.
Instead, it's a tiny sample of a specific feature,  
mechanic, or idea to prove its viability, 
before you go on to make it for real.
So keep your prototypes small.
And also keep them separated, with distinctly 
different project files for your gameplay,  
art, technical, and audio prototypes.
Keeping your prototypes small also 
allows you to make way more prototypes.
Developer Dinosaur Polo Club made almost 20 
different versions of Mini Motorways before  
entering production - with each one offering some 
new insight into the best way to make the game.
More prototypes means more questions are answered,  
more decisions are made, 
and more risks are removed.
And you might find that, through this 
fast and iterative process - you'll  
stumble upon new ideas that you couldn't 
have come up with just by brainstorming.
Sometimes, the process of 
writing code and fiddling  
with numbers and noodling in your 
engine can spark incredible ideas.
I actually made a whole video 
about this phenomenon - so  
check out "The games that designed 
themselves" for more inspiration.
And then - tip number four is realising 
that you don't need to prototype everything.
LUKE MUSCAT: I think there's a misconception that  
once you create the prototype 
you'll have all the answers.
I think really it just gives you confidence that 
you're heading out into hopefully fertile soil.
But that doesn't mean you know 
what You're gonna plant out there.
You know, I would say most of my games, 
like, the prototypes are pretty thin,  
and then we just go, like, okay, I feel 
like we're heading out into a place  
that has good possibilities and we'll 
figure out the rest of it out there.
The prototype for Jetpack Joyride was Literally, 
just getting the machine gun jetpack in Monster  
Dash and kind of just removing the level, 
adding a roof, and then adding some obstacles.
And we were like, okay, this is pretty fun.
There's something here.
But we never prototyped like.
the challenge system, the mission system, you 
know, the vehicles all came after the prototype.
Realistically, the meat of 
that game and what made it  
stand out came well after we were into production.
Because here's the thing.
Making prototypes can be really fun.
In fact, it's pretty addictive.
You're constantly trying new 
things, starting new projects,  
and you're free from the constraints 
of good code and polished assets.
Plus, there's always that 
nagging voice that says...
what if the next prototype is even better?
But if you never stop making 
prototypes, you won't make a video game.
So an important skill you have 
to learn is knowing when enough  
is enough, and when it's time to 
actually start making the game.
Which means - these initial prototypes should 
help answer the biggest and most risky questions.
Is this fun? Is it viable? Will people like it?
But as for the hundreds of thousands of small 
questions you must answer as a game designer...
well they can be figured out as you go along.
But, the thing is - you can use 
prototypes for those questions too.
Because prototyping is not 
some one-and-done process  
that must be buttoned up before production.
It's not something you leave behind 
once you start making the game for real.
Prototyping is simply a cost-effective 
way to test an idea or answer a question.
And so under that definition...
well, it can be used at any point of the process.
Want to add a new feature? Prototype it.
Want to add a boss fight? Prototype it.
Want to add a new level? Prototype it!
Can't decide whether the game should 
have a double jump or a dash? Make quick  
prototypes for both, put them in front 
of playtesters, and go with the winner.
Thanks to Luke Muscat for his help on this one.
Check him out on YouTube and watch him 
prototype an overly complicated golf game,  
a Vampire Survivors-like with cars, and more.
Plus thanks to all the other designers who 
shared footage of their prototypes with me.
But okay.
We've picked a game idea.
We've made a bunch of prototypes 
to prove that it's fun and viable.
Now... we can actually make the game, right?
Well, I'm sorry, but not quite yet.
Because we should take a moment 
to do something really important,  
often forgotten, and not at all fun or sexy...
I'm talking about planning.
So click here for a video about how 
to plan out your game's production.
