In 1978, Space Invaders was a monster hit.
But while the games industry at large was
laser focused on copying Taito’s success,
one designer decided to try something completely
different...
Toru Iwatani joined Namco in 1977.
He was obsessed with pinball machines, and
so he made pinball-style arcade games like
Gee Bee and Cutie Q.
But the young game designer was dispirited
when he saw that the arcades where his games
were played, were dingy, smelly places that
seemingly only attracted boys and men.
He said, “all the computer games available
at the time were of the violent type - war
games and space invader types.
There were no games that everyone could enjoy”.
And so, he thought he could make a game that
would appeal to women and couples, by using
cute graphics, bright colours, and a non-violent
theme.
And so, in the Summer of 1980, Iwatani and
Namco would give the world Pac-Man.
Toru Iwatani started the project with the
concept of eating.
Pac-Man is an amalgamation of the Japanese
word for mouth turned on its side, a pizza
with a slice missing, and the term Pakku Pakku
- which is an onomatopoeic word for eating something.
In the game, Pac-Man explores a maze and eats
dots, giant cookies, and even bonus fruit
pick-ups which appear in the centre of the
screen at certain intervals - similar to the
UFO in Space Invaders.
Then, Iwatani introduced enemies.
They were ghosts, but friendly, colourful, 
and full of personality.
The goal, now, is to simultaneously eat dots,
while avoiding ghosts.
Until, that is, you get the power pellet and
turn the tide in your favour.
The ghosts are probably Pac-Man’s most inventive
feature.
In play, they seem like they’re really intent
on chasing you down.
They don’t just simply follow Pac-Man, but
they’re not moving randomly either.
They’re smart enough to work in teams, and
unleash tactical manoeuvres.
This was because Pac-Man had a remarkably
sophisticated artificial intelligence system
for the time.
Consider the simple side-step movement of
Space Invaders, or the predictable movement
of the butterflies in Frogs.
These ghosts were something else.
For starters, the ghosts shift between three
different modes: they’re either in chase
mode, where they hunt Pac-Man down.
Scatter mode, where they give up and head
to a corner of the screen.
Or frightened mode, where they run away from
Pac-Man when he has the power pellet.
We’d now call this a finite state machine,
which is when an AI character shifts between
distinct states of behaviour.
Think of Batman Arkham Asylum, where enemy
guards are either idle, reacting to suspicious
behaviour, actively engaging Batman, or nervously
hunting for him.
It’s the same basic idea.
Looking at these three states more closely,
though, gives up a greater understanding of
Pac-Man’s ultra intelligent design.
Let’s start with chase mode.
Here, each ghost has a unique way of chasing
Pac-Man.
All four ghosts have their own target, and
they are continuously trying to find the shortest
route to their goal, by making decisions at
every intersection.
To help us visualise it, let me show you the
grid system that Pac-Man’s code operates on.
So, the red ghost, Blinky, targets Pac-Man
himself - making it the most aggressive and
predictable enemy.
Pinky tries to get in front of Pac-Man, by
targeting the spot four tiles in front of
where Pac-Man is heading.
The blue ghost, Inky, targets a special spot
that can be found by extending a line from
Blinky, to a spot two tiles in front of Pac-Man,
and then extending the line again, the same length.
And finally, there’s Clyde, the orange ghost.
This shy spectre heads towards Pac-Man, but
when it gets within an eight tile radius,
it gets scared and scatters away to its corner
in the bottom left.
It’s a fascinating system that ensures the
ghosts are hard to read and predict, but not
impossibly random: you can still learn the
ghosts’ behaviour over time and create strategies
and tactics.
It also makes the game endlessly replayable
because, unlike Space Invaders, the game is
completely different every time you play.
What’s most clever, though, is the way the
ghosts seem to work together, with the red
and pink ghosts appearing to create a pincer
movement as they come up behind, and pop up
in front of Pac-Man.
And then the blue and orange ghosts operate
on the periphery.
AI actors in games still struggle to convincingly
work together, and either use a complex blackboard
system to share information between units,
or create a special entity to distribute commands
to an entire squad of foes.
Pac-Man achieved an effective illusion of
cooperation decades earlier, with really simple rules.
Next, there’s frightened mode.
When Pac-Man grabs one of the four power pellets
on the map, he’s suddenly able to defend
himself - and the ghosts become scared.
Pac-Man can now touch a ghost to eat it - sending
the enemy back to the central pen, and rewarding
the player with points.
The idea of finally being able to defeat an
invincible and unstoppable opponent is a potent
one, and is still seen in games like Resident
Evil 2, where the joy of finally downing Mr
X after a game’s worth of running away,
feels magnificent.
Today, the power pellet might seem quite standard.
But at the time, it was a revelation - because
this was one of the earliest power-ups in games.
It might even be the very first one.
Defined as a collectible object that adds
temporary benefits or abilities to a player
character, the power-up quickly became a staple
of game design.
We’d see it in Donkey Kong, where grabbing
the hammer
momentarily turned you into a barrel-bashing maniac.
And Super Mario Bros., where the mushroom
and fire flower gave Mario more power, until
he got hit.
We get temporary buffs when smashing computer
screens in Sonic the Hedgehog, and collecting
the Beserk sphere in Doom 2016.
There’s only four power pellets on each
map, so they must be munched judiciously to
maximise their effectiveness, and point gain.
And the pellet also gives the game a wonderful
back-and-forth rhythm, of power and powerlessness.
A constant shift of pace, that we also see
when looking at the ghost’s final state: scatter.
Every now and again, the ghosts are told to
stop their incessant chasing of Pac-Man, turn
on their heels, and scatter into the corners
of the board.
The idea here was to ensure that the game
gave you a chance to rest, and broke up the
constant feeling of tension, with welcome
moments of relief.
“I felt it would be too stressful for a
human being like Pac Man to be continually
surrounded and hunted down,” says Iwatani.
“So I created the monsters’ invasions
to come in waves.
They’d attack and then they’d retreat.
As time went by they would regroup, attack,
and disperse again.
It seemed more natural than having constant
attack.”
This sort of modulation would be seen much
later in Left 4 Dead, where an AI director
decides when to bombard the human players
with zombies, and when to let off, to create
an undulating wave of tension and relief.
It’s also one of the ways that Iwatani tried
to make Pac-Man more forgiving.
In another case, the player can turn a corner,
even if they move the control stick when Pac-Man
is a few pixels past the intersection.
It’s similar to coyote time, where platformer
heroes can still jump, even if they’ve just
run off the edge of a platform.
“Creating a fun game is not about satisfying
yourself as a developer,” explains Iwatani.
“It’s all about the people that actually
play the game.
The most important thing to think about when
designing a game, is to understand that person
who plays this game, and how that person will
feel, how they will react.
It’s really understanding how their mind
works”.
Combine the dynamic of chase and scatter,
with the back-and-forth of power and powerlessness,
and Pac-Man has an endlessly changing pace
of play that stops the game from ever feeling repetitive.
And that’s not taking into account the difficulty
curve.
Just like Space Invaders, Pac-Man’s challenge
rises throughout the course of a level.
The red ghost, Blinky, increases its speed
after you eat a certain number of pellets.
And when just 20 dots are remaining, it no
longer enters scatter mode, and instead always
chases you.
All of the other enemies scatter for 7 seconds
the first two times they enter this mode,
then 5 seconds the next two times, and then
stick to chasing indefinitely.
And, again, like Space Invaders, each level
is more demanding than the one before it.
The ghosts are frightened for shorter and
shorter periods of time.
Pac-Man moves faster, making him harder to
control.
And the ghosts leave the central pen more
quickly.
In this way, Pac-Man perfectly captures the
difficulty curve we explored earlier in this series.
Between stages, Pac-Man gives us another revolutionary
feature: the cutscene.
These charming animatics were one of first
times that a developer had put non-interactive
movies in the middle of gameplay, and would
be the precursor to every story segment in
video games thereafter.
Despite grumblings from his colleagues that
this was a waste of time and resources, Iwatani
was certain that Pac-Man needed these moments
of downtime, which he called coffee breaks
- they gave you a chance to rest your hands,
provided a moment of calm after a tense level
and, most critically of all, added a sense
of character and story to proceedings.
You see, you could argue that Pac-Man’s
real legacy is that he was truly the first
video game character.
Before this game, you played as lifeless space
ships and cars, geometric pong paddles, and
random, nameless humans.
But now, here was a main character with a
name, a face, and a personality.
He was gaming’s first ever mascot, long
before Q*Bert, Mario, or Crash Bandicoot.
Ultimately, it’s not that surprising that
a studio from Japan was responsible for adding
a character into games, given the country’s
obsession with mascots, inhuman proportions,
and animation - both from Japan and abroad.
So the knockabout antics of Pac-Man and the
ghosts was inspired by Tom and Jerry.
Eating a power pellet and turning the tables
on the enemy was inspired by Pop-Eye downing
spinach and becoming super strong.
And the ghosts were inspired by the manga
Little Ghost Q-Taro and the American cartoon, Casper.
Iwatani has said “In North America at the
time, the games were about car races or warfare.
They wanted games that simulated the real
world, whereas Japan wanted fairy tales.”
The game was first released on May 22nd, 1980,
in a movie theatre in Tokyo’s Shibuya district.
It was called Puck-Man at release, and was
met with a pretty lukewarm reception in Japan.
Gamers there mostly preferred Namco’s other
game: the familiar, Space Invaders-inspired
shooter, Galaxian.
Over in the US, Midway was looking for a new
arcade game to publish after the success of
licensing Taito’s Space Invaders, and so
picked up both Galaxian and Puck-Man.
Though, they changed the name of the latter
to Pac-Man, to avoid brats vandalising the machine.
A piece of trivia that literally everyone
in the world knows, but I had to include it
to stop people saying that I forgot to mention
it, in the comments.
You’ve been on YouTube, you know how it
works.
RAMONA: Yeah, that's amazing
Pac-Man, then, was released in American arcades
in October of 1980 - and it quickly became
a tremendous success.
Over 100,000 Pac-Man arcade cabinets were
sold within the first year, and players plonked
a billion dollars worth of quarters into those
machines.
There was a Pac-Man song on the billboard
charts, Pac-Man merchandise in shops, and
he even had his own TV show.
And just like Space Invaders, Atari scooped
up the rights to make a Pac-Man port for the
2600 - though, this one was pretty abysmal.
It’s hard to know whether Iwatani was truly
successful in his quest to make games more
gender neutral, but the book How to Win at
Video Games puts the gender split for the
game at 60% female, 40% male, and Iwatani
himself says the game was popular with women.
That’s probably why Midway made Ms. Pac-Man
- a semi-sequel to the game, possibly made
without Namco’s approval, that gave Pac-Man
new gameplay and even better AI - but also
a bow, lipstick, rosy cheeks, high heels,
and eyelashes.
MS. PAC-MAN: I'm more than Pac-Man with a bow…
Many other sequels appeared, including the
platformer Pac-Land, which actually predates
Super Mario Bros.
The 3D-ish Pac-Mania.
Bizarre story-based Pac-Man adventures on
consoles.
The addictive Pac-Man 256.
And the awesome neon-dipped overhaul, Pac-Man
Championship Edition, which was overseen by
Iwatani himself.
And just like with Space Invaders, there were
certainly plenty of Pac-Man-style games released
in the ensuing months and years.
Look at Ali Baba and 40 Thieves by Sega, Nibbler
by Rock-Ola, Lock 'N' Chase by Data East,
and Lady Bug by Universal Games.
There was also the strikingly familiar K.C.
Munchkin! for the Magnavox Odyssey, for which
Midway and Atari won a lawsuit for copyright
infringement - one of the first in games.
So maze-based games did have a brief surge
of popularity: but Pac-Man didn’t establish
a lasting genre like Space Invaders and its
shoot ‘em ups.
That being said, its legacy can be found in
surprising locations - Namco’s The Tower
of Druaga was as a fantasy Pac-Man that ran
on the same hardware - and was a critical
influence on The Legend of Zelda.
John Romero cites Pac-Man as an influence
on the level design of Wolfenstein 3D and
Doom.
And Hideo Kojima has noted the similarities
between Pac-Man and his game about evading
threats, Metal Gear.
Looking back at Pac-Man, one of the things
it really had going for it was its simplicity.
Iwatani says, when talking about good arcade
game design, “The player should immediately
get the point.
When you watch golf for the first time, you
know that the ball is supposed to go into
the hole.
It’s the same with Nintendo’s Super Mario
Brothers or a pinball machine: You know what to do.”
And so it’s the same with Pac-Man.
Eat the dots, and avoid the monsters.
It was immediately obvious when looking over
someone’s shoulder, and didn’t require
words or cultural iconography.
So the game lured in players - male and female
- with its cartoon artwork, colourful graphics,
and funny cutscenes.
These people felt confident that they could
play, because the rules were obvious and the
controls were simple.
But once they started, they became hooked
- thanks to a revolutionary artificial intelligence,
push-pull dynamics, and a pitch-perfect difficulty
curve, that all made the game hard to put down.
This led to Pac-Man becoming a worldwide phenomena,
one of of the most recognisable video game
characters of all time, and quite easily,
a design icon.
