The other day, I was watching this movie called
Mystic River.
It’s about the murder of a young woman,
called Katie Markum, and the two detectives
who find her killer.
And it’s fascinating to see these guys do
their job.
The movie goes into quite considerable detail
about how these detectives crack the case,
and so we see them conducting interviews,
chasing down leads, and figuring things out
by going through the facts.
POWERS: What makes her swerve without hitting
the breaks?
DEVINE: I dunno, maybe something in the street.
POWERS: Maybe, maybe
And as I was watching, I started to think
about how you could turn this into a video game.
Of course, there have already been plenty
of detective games, from classic point and
click adventures like KGB, to murder mystery
side-quests for Assassin’s Creed, to full-blown
detective adventures like Murdered: Soul Suspect.
But few of them have really scratched that
itch for me.
It’s very rare that I’ll get completely
involved in one of these games - you, know,
really, turning the clues and witness statements
around in my brain as I work towards that
all important “eureka” moment, that defines
so much of detective fiction.
It just doesn’t really happen.
So in this video, I want to try and figure
out what makes a good detective game.
How do developers come up with interesting
mechanics that really let players unleash
their inner Sherlock?
But to achieve this, I think we first need
to go back to Mystic River and look at how
these two detectives crack the case, so we can
figure out the best way to turn these investigation
processes into video game mechanics.
First, the detectives gather information.
They get clues from the crime scene, like
the slug from the bullet that killed Katie,
a list of phone numbers for hotels, from her
backpack, and the 911 call to the police.
911 TAPE: Son what’s your name?
He wants to know her name!
Your name son, what’s your name?
Plus, they question people, like Katie’s parents, her friends, and a woman who witnessed the crime.
PRIOR: Then it stalled, and someone said hi.
DEVINE: Someone said hi?
PRIOR: Hi.
Okay, so this stuff is pretty easy to pull
off in a game, right?
LA Noire, for example, managed evidence collection
just fine, with 3D objects that you can spin
and manipulate.
And Condemned had some cool gadgets to reveal
fingerprints and bloodstains in the crime scene.
Plus, loads of games have dialogue trees for
talking to people - and we see those crop
up in detective games all the time.
So, that’s no issue either.
It’s the next bit that’s really tricky.
So, the movie then shows the real detective
work, as the two cops work the case.
We see them expose people’s lies.
When Katie’s friends say she wasn’t dating
anyone, Devine brings up the hotel phone numbers.
DEVINE: A 19 year old girl isn’t going to
Las Vegas alone, so who was she going with?
PIGEON: Brendan
DEVINE: Brendan Harris?
PIGEON: Brendan Harris, yeah.
So, the information also lets them follow
leads.
They can now talk to Brendan Harris, for one
thing.
Plus, the ballistics on the slug match a gun
that was used in a liquor store hold-up during
the 80s. So let's go check that out.
LOONIE: I know who did it! Name, was Ray Harris. Used to call him ‘Just Ray’.
Next, the cops can find connections between
the evidence.
Ray Harris is obviously related to Brendan
Harris.
Time to call him in for further questioning.
HARRIS: Why do you keep asking me if my father
had a gun?
DEVINE: The gun that killed your girlfriend
is the same gun your father used in a robbery
18 years go.
And finally, the detectives can make deductions.
By looking at the current information from
a different perspective…
POWERS: She doesn’t hear a scream she hears
a gunshot, before that a hi, which tells me
the Markum girl is either very friendly
or she knew ‘em.
…or by making logical arguments.
DEVINE: He said her name.
POWERS: She’s a dead girl, you refer to
her as a she.
DEVINE: Yeah but, how does the kid know that?
The girl is dead in the park, how does he
know that the blood in the car came from a
woman.
Now, detective games have tried to turn all
of this stuff into gameplay.
But one of the most common ways of representing
it is through simple multiple choice questions.
Look at this bit in Telltale’s The Wolf
Among Us, where Bigby picks up evidence and
then the player gets to answer a question
about the clue’s significance.
BEAUTY: What? What are you thinking?
BIGBY: This is the same dress as the one in
the book about Snow.
I think Smith was dressing Lily up in it.
A similar thing happens in Sherlock Holmes: Crimes and Punishments when you’re questioning people.
At specific points, a button will appear on
screen allowing you to uncover a lie in the
witnesses’s statement, and pick the response
that’ll reveal their mistruth.
I don’t think this works at all because
the player is completely prompted by the potential
answers.
They’re not coming up with their own thought,
so much as simply looking for the answer that
sounds most sensible.
Or, in some cases, just guessing.
Get the answer wrong in Sherlock Holmes and
you’ll be told to give it another try.
But I think this shows the real game design
challenge of making a detective game.
Because the very act of testing whether the
player has figured stuff out, can inadvertently
give away the answer - which removes pretty
much any sense of satisfaction when you get
it right.
“You connected the evidence,” says Telltale.
Woo, go me, I’m awesome.
Anyway. One way that games have fixed this multiple
choice problem is by simply giving way more
potential answers.
Look at this deduction screen in the game
Detective Grimoire.
It’s very similar to the one in The Wolf
Among Us, really: at a specific point in the
game, Grimoire will need you to answer a question
about the events at hand.
GRIMOIRE: Have I uncovered a secret in here?
But instead of picking a single answer, you
have to create a thought by smushing together
a number of disparate ideas.
And with eight different pictures to put in
two slots, and two pickers with four statements
each, thanks to the magic of “combinatorial
explosion”, there are a whopping 896 possible
combinations meaning that while it still prompts
you a fair bit, at least randomly guessing
is out of the equation.
GRIMOIRE: That little girl isn’t warm enough
for my beard to have happened.
Uhhhh… no.
Another example can be found in the Android
game The Trace, where you answer questions
by dragging on the clues and observations
you have picked up.
Because you often need multiple answers for
each question, it’s much harder to simply
guess your way through the game.
For lies, the Ace Attorney games have a good
system where witnesses give testimony and
you can present evidence that contradicts
one of their statements.
So here, Gumshoe says that the thief only
goes after the most valuable art pieces in
a heist, but we know that the item that was
nabbed - a sacred urn - has no monetary value.
So if we present this evidence in response
to this statement, we absolutely dunk on the
poor fella because we just found a huge error
in his testimony.
Being able to choose from any of roughly five
statements, and able to present from a huge
list of clues and profiles, makes guessing
near impossible.
Especially because the game has a life bar
that is diminished if you make a misplaced
objection.
So you’ll really need to think hard about
which piece of evidence to present during
each cross examination.
Okay, so this is much better. Obviously.
And it can lead to great detective bits like
this section from Life is Strange, where you
need to pick the right clues from an evidence
board, to figure out where Nathan Prescott
took someone after a party.
The huge number of things you can pick from
largely gets rid of guesswork.
And it encourages you to look for actual connections
like dates and times, or the fact that this
dude’s car has a broken taillight so this
must be a photo of his number plate.
Plus, the game has some nice feedback for when
you offer the wrong answer, with a small hint
that will help you along.
MAX: If I can match one of the text messages
and transactions with Frank, then I can find
the exact location.
But this set-up is still kinda giving the
game away.
Because while the player is no longer being
completely prompted by the answers, they’re
still being prompted by the text of the question,
and it can give away that there’s even a
question to be asked in the first place.
Not to mention the fact that the game can
come across as some condescending jerk who
has already worked everything out and is just
making sure that you are paying attention,
making the player feel less like Sherlock,
and more like Watson.
WATSON: How did I do?
SHERLOCK: Well, John. Really well.
I mean you missed almost everything of importance
but, you know.
So perhaps we can go one step further, and
just give the player the tools to point out contradictions
and connections, without first prompting them
with a question.
That’s how it works in the aptly titled
Contradiction.
In this campy FMV game you interview suspects,
and gather a big list of statements.
You can then bump together any two statements
that contradict each other to catch your interviewee
in a lie.
This is very different to Ace Attorney because
in Ace Attorney you always know that you need
to find a flaw in the current testimony.
The game won’t move on until you do.
But in Contradiction you can leave witnesses
and come back later, which means you can have
loads of different conversations on the go
at once and never know exactly who is lying,
or which group of statements contain a lie.
It means the player really needs to follow
the case to know who is telling porkies.
By the way, the most contradictory thing about
this game is the ever changing colour of Inspector
Jenk’s trousers.
They’re grey!
He walks a few yards.
They’re blue!
What are you hiding, Jenks?
Sorry. Sorry. Off topic. Where was I? Oh, yes.
This works great for connecting two pieces
of evidence, as well.
I particularly like the system in Papers,
Please which isn’t a detective game at all!
It’s about working at a border patrol.
But this system would work great in a murder mystery game.
So in this game, you can’t just reject people
from entering the country without providing
a good reason, so you’ll first need to flag
up a discrepancy between their dialogue or
documents, and your rule book.
So you press the big red button,
and can then highlight two things that are
in contradiction.
Perhaps, the expiry date on a person’s passport
and the current date.
Only then, will you be able to make your discrepancy.
These systems are both great because the player
is no longer responding to the game, as such,
but instead telling the game that they have
spotted something interesting.
And in the case of Papers, Please, the ability
to choose any two bits of text on screen is
really awesome.
There are simply too many combinations for
the player to just brute force a solution.
The player has to get really specific about
the connection for the game to accept that
they’re on the right track.
And it means that any piece of evidence can
be used, not just the ones that the game deems
worthy of putting into your inventory.
So this is a good solution for connecting
evidence and exposing lies.
But it doesn’t really hold up for making
deductions.
Lemme explain, using this puzzle from Discworld
Noir.
In this game, Lewton automatically jots down
useful information in a handy notebook and
you can combine two notes to make a deduction.
And here, we connect a strange phrase that
has been written on the wall of a crime scene,
with the fact that the deceased was hung upside
down.
LEWTON: If Mundy was hung upside down, and
if Mundy wrote the message, then the message
was upside down…
And that’s a pretty good puzzle, right?
But for it to work, the game needs to give
you notes for the strange phrase, Azile, and
also “Mundy Hung Upside Down”.
And that last note can really give the puzzle
away.
Because turning thoughts into puzzle pieces,
means that you’re not using your own logic
but simply using the logic provided by the
game.
But to get any better than this, we’d need
a system that has no questions and nothing
for the player to give as an answer.
Which is impossible, right?
Well I’m glad you asked!
So, compare the Discworld thing to this puzzle
in the lovely teeny-tiny rabbi detective game,
The Shivah.
Okay, so you’re reading the emails of this
guy who died, Jack Lauder.
And you see these concerning messages from
a dude called Ethan G. Maybe he’s someone
to track down?
But we can’t do anything without a surname.
He might be the Goldwater that Jack’s wife
mentions in this email.
But Ethan G also talks about money, so maybe
he’s from the accounting firm - Goldberg
& Weiselbaum - mentioned in Jack’s ledger.
Now here’s how we test our deduction.
We load up a computer and log on to a fictional
search engine.
We type in Ethan Goldwater.
No hits.
Ethan Goldberg?
Bingo.
“With a warm rush of triumph”, the game
says, “I knew I found my man”.
Too right, Rabbi Stone, when I first played
the game that puzzle just felt electric.
If the game had given us Ethan G and Goldberg
or Goldwater as clues, it would be effortless
to just snap them together and get the right
name.
But, instead, we have to take the information
out of the game world - and into our heads,
or perhaps into a notepad - and work on it,
before slapping it back into the game and
seeing if we’re right.
So, to take it back to Discworld Noir, if
the player had to type that phrase in somewhere,
they would have to do the logical work in
their head, of spinning the phrase upside
down to reveal that it is actually “3712V”.
Personally, I think that would be an even
better puzzle.
Of course, no game did the search bar
better than Her Story.
This is very different to the other games
in this video.
Instead of wandering around, picking up clues
and visiting different locations, you simply
sit in front of a computer and watch video
clips.
And yet, it is the best detective game I’ve
ever played.
By far.
Hands down.
A quick primer for those who haven’t played
it.
Her Story is - ostensibly - about figuring
out who killed a man called Simon Smith.
But all you’ve got to go on is a bunch of
old interviews with his wife, Hannah.
These interviews are split up into about 300
video clips, but the only way to watch them
is to type search terms into this box.
And then, only the first five results, chronologically
speaking, will be shown to you.
So, you’re essentially given nothing tangible
in this game.
No clues, no statements, no observations written
down in an in-game notepad.
But you will make deductions - and the only
way to check if you’re correct is to type
in some kind of search term to see if you
get some new clips and can move the case forward.
And when you do… it feels amazing.
There’s nothing like it.
No game comes as close to that “eureka”
moment as this funny little game about searching
for videos.
These systems are also great for following
leads, which is something that most detective
games just outright ignore.
New locations and witnesses are automatically
added as places and people of interest when
you find evidence or talk to people.
But in Blackwell, which is another game by
the creators of The Shivah, you can type interesting
place names you’ve heard or seen written
down into the internet to get addresses - before
they’re added to your map as locations you
can visit.
So the magic of the search bar is that these
people and place names are only acknowledged
by the game as useful clues when the player
has proven that they know they’re useful
clues… by typing them in.
To a less observant player, it’s just another
random bit of text in the game world - but
it really rewards those who pay close attention
to the game.
A similar system can be found in Sherlock
Holmes: Consulting Detective, which is the
computer game version of the board game of
the same name.
And yeah, I know there are more up to date
remasters than this shabby ol’ DOS version
but I just love that lo-fi full-motion video
aesthetic.
You can’t beat it.
So in this game, you actually get a newspaper
in the box, and have to scan through it for
articles that might be relevant to your investigation
- in this case, I’m looking for information
on the mysterious deaths of three archeologists
and this article right here might have some
useful info - like, how the investigation
of the second death was handled by a chap
called Captain Herman Ramsey.
Then, in the game itself, you open up a directory
of every person and business in London…
okay, not really, but there’s roughly 200
entries in here, at least, so you’ll have
to rifle through it to find the right person.
The idea is to hide the relevant names in
a sea of red herrings.
So instead of just being presented with a
list of locations you’ll need to visit,
you need to figure out for yourself which
locations are relevant by reading the newspaper
carefully, and listening closely to the names
and businesses mentioned during the video
clips.
And if you’re wondering, if you go to a
building that isn’t pertinent to the case
it just plays a canned video like this.
WATSON: How unfortunate, there’s not a soul
in sight.
SHERLOCK: Pity.
At this point, I think we’ve got pretty good systems
to choose from for gathering information,
exposing lies, finding connections, following
leads, and making deductions.
But, back to Mystic River.
Now that the cops have all the information
they need, they can use this to make an accusation.
Don’t worry, I’m not going to completely
spoil the film.
So, what sort of system could we use to capture
this in a detective video game?
Well, the one to avoid is Assassin’s Creed
where you just walk up to people and accuse them.
If you get it wrong, you lose some points
and can try someone else.
ALTON: I just lost my life’s love.
How can you accuse me?
If you get it right, hooray, a winner is you!
It’s not very satisfying, either way.
So we need some way of having the player really
prove that they know who the suspect is, or
how the murder went down. You know, do the proper Poirot reveal.
One approach I like can be found in Eagle
Eye Mysteries - which is a surprisingly good
kids game for DOS.
Here, you go through the game by talking to
people and looking at stuff and gathering
loads and loads of statements.
And then, when you feel ready to solve the
case, you get to pick out the five most important
statements in your log - and also the suspect’s
profile.
Like, the person who pinched the pizza recipe.
This is a kids’ game, after all.
This is pretty simple, but it actually works
quite well.
The sheer number of statements you have and
the need to present five of them, means you’ll
need to have truly understood the crime to
be able to input the right answer.
Plus, it’s near impossible to just guess
your way through.
A similar take can be found in Lucas Pope’s
upcoming tribute to old school Mac games,
Return of the Obra Dinn.
In this game, you get this pocket watch that
you can use on skeletons to flash back in
time to the moment that person died.
You can now walk around this freeze-frame
vignette and try and figure out who is who,
and how they got killed.
And then - this is the important bit - you
can write down your deduction in the Crew
Muster Roll.
You just get a list of names, and for each
person you can use a few drop-down boxes to
note that person’s fate.
There are far too many combinations to guess
your way to victory.
You really have to know the answer or the
game just won’t budge.
Maybe another way to prove your knowledge
of the crime is through creating a timeline
of what happened.
In The Vanishing of Ethan Carter, you need
to number these different ghostly images to
piece together the correct order of events
that transpired during the murder.
And even multiple choice questionnaires are
slightly more fun when presented at the end
of the game.
You’ve got feel really confident in your
knowledge before you go into the courtroom
at the end of a Consulting Detective case
and pick the murderer and their motive for
the crime at hand.
So, ultimately, a detective game is this fascinating game
design challenge for anyone
who wants to take it on.
We admire detectives because they’re
smart, right?
They know the right questions to ask a witness,
and they know how to chase down a lead.
They can connect the dots to reveal the truth
and use deductive reasoning to see things
from a different perspective.
Detective video games promise to let the player
feel like that - in a way that no other medium
really allows.
And yet, so many of these games just bungle
the execution by holding the player’s hand
and practically giving away the answer.
But there is still hope.
Ingenious developers have come up with all
sorts of clever ways to test the player’s
intelligence without accidentally prompting
them, and I bet more systems will be made.
In the mean time, let me know about games
that really put your skills of deduction to
the test, in the comments below.
Hey!  Thanks for watching.
GMTK is funded exclusively through Patreon.com,
where the show’s biggest fans support the
show and get cool goodies in return like early
access, bonus videos, written articles, and
Discord access.
Come join us!
