Hi. Hi. Hi. Hi. Hi.
My name's Mark, and I made a video game about...
Magnets. Magnets. Magnets. Magnets.
So, this is it.
The final episode of Developing.
Mind Over Magnet has been on 
sale for three or four weeks now,  
and so now I can tell you everything.
I'll tell you what it was like 
to launch a game on Steam.
I'll tell you exactly how many 
copies of the game I sold.
I'll tell you about all of the bugs 
that came up in the first week.
I'll tell you what the most negative reviews 
of the game said, and I'll tell you what I  
learned from making this game that will 
help me if I ever make another video game.
I will tell you it all.
But before we get into that, it's time 
to talk about the elephant in the room.
♫ Music ♫
Okay, so a big goal with Developing was to give  
you a super transparent look at what 
it's like to make your own video game.
And so I've tried to show you every step of 
the process, from learning the game engine,  
to making your first prototypes, 
from running feedback sessions,  
to wrangling with design problems, from hiring 
a composer, to releasing the game on Steam.
I've tried to show you everything 
so that you can see what it might  
be like if you too were to make your 
own game and release it on Steam.
Except there's a few aspects of my development  
story which simply aren't going to be 
applicable to the average game dev.
And that's because by virtue of having 
a rather popular YouTube channel,  
I've been afforded a number of advantages that 
probably aren't going to be applicable to you.
For instance, if you run into a programming 
problem when you're working on your game,  
you probably don't have a huge 
Discord full of people willing  
to help you out at the drop of a hat, 
or direct access to the devs at Unity.
And if you need playtesters for 
your game, you probably can't  
summon hundreds of them with a single tweet.
And most pertinently for the discussion today,  
if you were to make a bog-standard 2D puzzle 
platformer with basically zero external marketing,  
you can't be expected to sell the 
same number of copies that I have.
I say none of this to put you 
off from making your own game.
In fact, I really hope that you are 
inspired and influenced by my story  
to go out there and try and make your own games.
But I think before we dive 
into how the game actually did,  
I think it's worth putting 
that asterisk on these numbers.
Putting a caveat on these results 
to say that some, if not most,  
of the sales come by virtue of me having this 
channel, and not the quality of the game itself.
And so if you were to make your own game, you 
need to set your expectations realistically.
Is that cool?
Cool.
Let's get into it.
So in the last episode of Developing, 
I hovered my mouse cursor over that  
big green release app button, and then 
on November 13th at 5pm, I clicked it.
Now a thing about Steam is that Valve can 
be a little bit slow with the numbers.
For instance, the wishlist stats 
are only updated once per day.
So sometimes you have to wait an 
agonising 24 hours before you know  
whether your Next Fest demo or your YouTube 
devlog have had any impact on the numbers.
But Valve does give you a real-time look at  
exactly how many people are online 
and playing your game right now.
Which, while they're not exact sales numbers, 
does give you an idea of how popular your game is.
So I decided to park my bum on that 
screen and watch as the numbers changed.
And so I saw 12 people were playing 
Mind Over Magnet, and then 50 people,  
100 people, 200 people, uh, 150 people.
Yeah, like I say, this is not the 
sales numbers, this is just how many  
people are online and playing and so that 
number is going to fluctuate up and down.
However, I then accidentally pressed the back 
button on my browser and went back to the main  
Steam stats and realised that - oh, right, 
unlike the super delayed wishlist numbers,  
Valve does actually tell you pretty much up 
to date how many people have bought the game.
And so I could see that 800 people had 
bought the game in the first couple hours.
And then 1000 people.
And 2000 people.
And then the rest of the evening 
was just a bit of a blur.
The game ended up on the 
New & Trending tab on Steam.
It was in the top 25 of the top 
selling games on the platform.
Because Valve had OK'd the game as Steam 
Deck verified the day before launch,  
it had a prominent position 
on the handheld's front page.
And most mind-boggling of all, the 
game was in that massive carousel of  
big images at the very top on 
the very front page of Steam.
Netting the game hundreds of thousands, 
perhaps millions of eyeballs.
And so by the time I went to sleep, the game had 
sold 5000 copies, or 10% of its 50,000 wishlists.
And by the end of the first week, the game had 
sold 10,000 copies, or 20% of those wishlists.
And by the recording of this video, 
the game has sold 12,446 units.
Which is absolutely incredible.
Like beyond anything I was expecting 
or dreaming of, to be honest.
So thank you so much.
If you were one of those 12,446 people,  
thank you so much for showing the 
game an enormous amount of support.
You are truly amazing.
Now wait a second.
Hold up a minute.
Because it might be tempting to take that 
sales number, and take the game's price tag,  
do a quick calculation, and think "holy 
moly Mark, that is a lot of money!"
And yeah, it is a lot of money.
But it's also not the full story.
So let me explain where that money actually goes.
Now it's a little bit gauche to 
talk in actual dollar values,  
I think, so perhaps we could do it with this.
And let's say that the game 
made 100 Monopoly monies.
So 1, 2, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43,  
62, 63, I've dropped one, 76, 
77, 78, 79, 97, 98, 99, 100.
100 Monopoly monies.
Not too bad.
I'm gonna buy myself a hotel on Mayfair.
However, this is not the full story.
Now, the first stuff comes at the point of sale.
Stuff like sales taxes in various countries,  
credit card fees and chargebacks, and 
refunds, which I'll talk about later.
That for me ended up being about 10% of the 
income, so that's 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
Then Valve would like its cut.
The company wants 30% of your revenue as a 
little thank you gift for directing millions  
of people to your game and running all the 
infrastructure and all of that good stuff.
So that's 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 
25, 26, 27 to Valve, leaving us with a slightly  
lighter load right here, but still enough to 
get a couple houses on Piccadilly, I reckon.
Now this money will end up in the GMTK 
business bank account at some point, I imagine.
It's not in there yet, but fingers crossed.
But that's also not the full story, because 
we do need to think about operating costs.
You know, how much did this 
game actually cost to make?
Now GMTK and Mind Over Magnet 
is a bit of a strange beast  
in that the game didn't really cost me anything.
The game was funded by the incredible 
GMTK backers over on Patreon.
You could make the argument that spending time 
making this game meant I had less time to work on  
YouTube videos and thus less YouTube ad revenue 
and fewer opportunities to recruit new Patrons.
That is certainly true, that is what happened,  
but it's a little hard to calculate and a 
little murky, so I'm just going to ignore that.
But what I can't ignore is that I had 
to pay my contractors, including Zach,  
who made the amazing soundtrack for the game, 
and Grayson, who made the dope 3D promo artwork,  
plus there were some other fees here 
and there like some Unity assets.
And so without revealing exactly 
how much I spent on these chaps,  
I can say that I need to lose another one, 
two, three, four, five Monopoly monies.
And then if you are lucky enough to 
have made a small chunk of change,  
well, you know what's going to happen.
The tax man is coming.
Again it's hard to calculate exactly, but 
living in the UK and paying corporation tax,  
that's going to be another, 
I reckon, one, two, three,  
four, thirteen, fourteen, fifteen to 
His Majesty's Revenue and Customs.
And so we are left with, I think if my 
calculations are correct, 43 Monopoly monies.
Which is still an incredible amount of cash.
I could buy a very nice dog kennel on 
Old Kent Road with this, or in reality  
fund some more video games perhaps, 
or just pay a few mortgage repayments.
Still a huge amount of money, 
but it is a little shocking and  
a little sad to see this compared 
to the 100 that we started with.
And so if you take nothing else from this 
whole Developing series, I'd say this.
Consider all of these hidden costs and taxes  
before you put a holiday to 
Barbados on your credit card.
Not that you're going to be 
going anywhere anytime soon,  
because an influx of new players 
means an influx of new bugs.
And as soon as Mind Over Magnet was out, 
people were swarming onto the Steam forums,  
onto the GMTK Discord, which has a public 
room for Mind Over Magnet bug reports,  
and into my email inbox to tell 
me all of the bugs, problems,  
and glitches that I had missed with my QA team 
during our last few months of checking the game.
Now fortunately there were no 
massive game-breaking problems  
that affected great swathes 
of the game's sales base.
I mean, probably the worst thing that happened 
was that achievements didn't unlock on the  
Mac version of the game, which was a bit of a 
boo-boo, but not the biggest deal in the world.
So I could take the first four days 
of the game's launch to just relax,  
recover, digest, and celebrate the game's launch.
But come Monday morning, it was time to fire up  
the old spreadsheet and start listing 
out those bugs and start fixing them.
So first on the chopping board was 
to get Mac achievements working.
They're now all good.
There were about 20 levels that people 
had found various problems with.
Most of those could be fixed by just 
slightly moving things around to avoid  
cheesing and unintentional solutions, 
though one level, 3-11-Spiky, I actually  
ended up completely redesigning simply 
because by the time I was back in Unity  
with a fresh perspective I thought of a 
much better way to design that puzzle.
I mean I could probably redesign 
every level in the game to be honest,  
but that would be ridiculous.
Some people were also having trouble with 
the game not showing the right controller  
symbols if they were playing with a 
PlayStation or a Switch controller,  
so I just put in an option where 
you can just pick exactly which  
controller glyphs should be showing if the 
automatic picker isn't working properly.
And I also added in another feature which was to  
replace the world select screen 
with a level select screen.
So once you finish the game you can 
go back and play any level from the  
game without having to start a world from scratch.
But there were a few bugs that 
I actually decided not to fix,  
simply because they were being 
used as speedrun techniques.
These were the sort of things that 99% of normal 
game players would probably never run into,  
but speedrunners could use physics glitches and 
bugs and my poor programming skills to make Uni  
run faster or jump higher or to bypass 
puzzles or to skip past bits of the game.
I decided that it wouldn't really hurt 
the game to keep those bugs in and it  
would make the speedrunning community 
much, much happier and more interesting.
And so while I was tempted to watch the 
speedruns to look for bugs that I could fix,  
I decided in the end to leave those things be.
And even beyond that I decided to keep 
the release version of the game available,  
thanks to Steam's beta drop-down doohickey, 
so that it's always available for speedrunners  
and also for preservation so you can always 
see what the game was like when it launched.
And so with a patch, and then a much smaller patch 
to fix the problems I made in the first patch,  
the launch window support for Mind 
Over Magnet is now, I think, done.
Which is a relief.
Though I know that my time with 
Mind Over Magnet is not over yet.
There will be more bugs to fix.
I would like to do a console version 
next year, at least on the Switch,  
but no immediate plans so please don't 
hesitate to go buy the Steam version right now.
And maybe one day I will wake up and 
think "You know what I want to do today?
I want to make some Mind Over Magnet levels."
Or perhaps I want to make the, perhaps, 
inevitable level editor for the game.
Oh, and speaking of inevitable, did you 
know that like every YouTuber and game  
dev on the internet, I too have my 
own plush toy to try and sell you.
I worked with Makeship to make 
a super soft, super plushy,  
super cute version of Magnus from the game.
It is currently crowdfunding, there are a few 
days left, we need to sell 200 of these things  
for them to complete their print run, so 
if you would do me a solid and order one  
that would be fantastic, otherwise I'm 
going to have to buy about 100 magnets.
I will do it.
I have the funds, but um, please don't make me.
Okay, back to the video.
So we've talked about the launch, 
we've talked about the numbers,  
we've talked about the money, we've talked 
about the bugs, let's talk about the reviews.
Now Mind Over Magnet has actually 
had pretty darn good reviews.
The game is sitting at about 88% recommended 
on Steam, with about 700 reviews, which  
is pretty awesome, though I admit also 
probably slightly biased by my fanbase,  
though also biased in the opposite 
way, thanks to the few GMTK haters  
who will never pass up an opportunity 
to tell me how much of a phony I am.
Love you guys.
The game has also had a few professional 
reviews in the press, including an 8 out  
of 10 from DualShockers, and an 8 out of 
10 from Sports Illustrated, of all places.
Those are very kind.
And on Backlogged, the game is 
sitting at 3.3 out of 5 stars,  
so somewhere between 6 and 7 out of 10, which 
I think is probably a bit more realistic.
But all of those reviews are amazing.
Really, really happy with them, to be honest.
In terms of positive sentiment, I think people 
just generally thought it was a fun video game  
to play, which is nice, and found that 
at least some of the puzzles produced  
that satisfying "aha" moment I've been 
chasing this entire development process.
People also praised the general feel, 
the polish, the presentation, the juice,  
the controls, the sound design, just 
how it feels to play as a video game.
And of course, there was no end of 
praise for Zach's awesome soundtrack,  
which by time of release will be available 
to purchase on both Bandcamp and on Steam.
And all of the proceeds for the 
soundtrack go directly to Zach,  
so please do support him as well.
Now in terms of the more negative reviews,  
the biggest issue was definitely 
the length of the game.
Mind Over Magnet is about two hours long,  
and for some people that just left them wanting 
more, for others it left them wanting a refund.
And a few people did take that opportunity, but 
nowhere near as many as I was worried about.
Only about 2% of people have 
refunded the game on Steam,  
and of course some of those will be technical 
issues, others just didn't vibe with the game.
So the number of people who actually 
played through the whole game and said  
"That's too short, I want my money 
back" is actually very, very small.
So that's fine.
Now there's nothing wrong with a short 
game, of course some of the best games  
ever made are very short, but it's 
all about getting that price right.
And price is something I went back and forth 
on a lot throughout this game's development.
In fact, I was changing the price and tweaking the  
launch day discount within the last 
few hours before the game went live.
Ultimately I decided to just look at other games  
of a similar length and price 
the game in line with those.
Though I made sure to always give myself enough 
wiggle room for all of the inevitable sales,  
including the launch day discount, the various 
Steam sales they have throughout the year,  
and just about any other event where 
I can drop the price of the game.
Burn's Night in Scotland?
10% off.
The King's Birthday?
50% off.
You know, we can just keep dropping that price.
That's built in to the game's cost.
But whatever the case, money, value, 
these things are all very subjective and  
personal so I have no qualms about reviews 
criticising the game's length or price.
Totally get it.
Another frequent criticism is that the game 
is too easy, simple, and straightforward.
Now as you've probably seen in the 
previous episodes of this series,  
that is something I have struggled with 
and wrangled with throughout development.
In the end, I am proud that the 
game is playable and enjoyable  
for a very general and casual audience of people.
It's great that I can just 
give the game to anybody,  
and they'll probably be able to play 
at least the first couple worlds.
And it's been great to see so many 
people send me photos of their kids.
No, that does not sound good at all.
It has been great for people to tell me that 
their children have been enjoying the game.
That is just really heartwarming and 
life-affirming, and so that does feel good.
However, I do regret that I didn't 
have time to put in content that was  
better suited to a more hardcore gaming audience.
And while I certainly played with some 
of that stuff throughout development,  
it just didn't end up in the final game, 
and that does make me a little bit sad.
And then the other criticism I got 
was that the game is a bit bland,  
safe, uninspiring, unimaginative.
Which that one did kinda catch me by 
surprise, but the more I think about it,  
the more I can kinda see where 
those people are coming from.
I mean, this game is not 
gonna blow your socks off.
It is not the most innovative game 
of the year, or even of November.
It is a pretty bog-standard, by 
the numbers, my first video game.
And also as a solo developed project for the 
most part, it's not a very personal experience.
You don't get a lot of me in this game.
So while I'm a little sad that 
people saw it in that way,  
I can at least understand 
where they're coming from.
And you know what, that is kind of the thing 
with all of these more negative reviews.
That I agree with all of them, and I 
saw pretty much all of them coming.
And to be honest, that was perhaps the 
hardest thing about releasing this game.
Knowing full well that I wasn't 100% 
happy or confident with the game,  
but still putting it out there for people 
to buy, and play, and rate, and review.
It's like that bit in The Great British Bake Off 
where someone gives Paul Hollywood a raw cake,  
knowing full well that it's a raw cake, but still 
having to watch him eat it and complain about it.
It just... the cringe is real,  
and that's how I felt for most of 
the first week of the game's launch.
But ultimately I came to the realisation 
that this was never the point of Developing.
It was not about trying to 
make the best game ever made.
Though if I had done that by accident 
that would have also been fine.
But no, this was about trying to find 
out what it takes to make a game.
And it turns out it takes a lot.
Making this game, releasing this game, was hard.
It was hard to make it look good.
It was hard to make it feel good.
It was hard to design all of the puzzles.
It was hard to write all of the code and fix all  
of the bugs that I am aware 
of and have decided to fix.
As someone who typically works on 
a YouTube video for three weeks,  
it was hard to work on the same project and 
keep that motivation going for three years.
As someone who typically likes 
to work alone and not show their  
stuff to anyone until it's absolutely 
fully done, it was hard to let others  
into the creative process and to show the 
game off at various stages of completion.
Basically, it is a miracle 
that this game even exists,  
and so the fact that it doesn't completely suck 
is just a nice bonus on top, if you ask me.
But okay, if the point of Mind Over Magnet was to 
learn about game development, what did I learn?
Well, let's take the classic Game 
Developer post-mortem layout and  
look at what went right and what went wrong.
Starting with what went right.
The first thing that comes to mind is the tools.
This is basically anything I built that 
doesn't actually end up in the game,  
but helped me to make the game more quickly.
I'm specifically thinking about 
all of the mechanics in the game,  
like the drill and the 
block and the electromagnet.
I can just drag them into a scene 
in Unity, they snap to a grid,  
and then I've got sliders and 
checkboxes to edit their statistics.
By the end of development, it 
was basically effortless to put  
together or to change or to iterate 
on one of the levels in this game.
And so while this stuff certainly took 
time to produce, it saved so much time  
down the line and I don't regret any of 
the time I spent building these tools.
Another good use of my time, I 
think, was working on the juice,  
the presentation, the polish, the game feel.
I don't think it's too big-headed of me to 
say that this game feels pretty good to play,  
and it's got nice animations 
and the sound design is good,  
and it all just comes together and 
feels like a polished, real video game.
I think these elements really tie 
the game together and make it feel  
better than it actually is, if that makes sense.
So again, I do not regret the time I 
spent working on particle effects and  
transition shaders and sound 
effects and stuff like that.
Another big win was playtesting.
Now I'll admit it took me a long time before 
I was able to show the game to anybody,  
but once I did, I didn't really stop.
Over the course of several years, I 
constantly and consistently showed the  
game to friends and family members and strangers 
on Twitter and people at events and meetups.
And basically no aspect of the game was  
not improved by listening to 
feedback from other people.
Mind Over Magnet would simply be significantly  
worse if I just ignored what 
everyone thought of the game.
That should be obvious, but bears repeating.
I'm also pretty happy with 
accessibility in the game.
Of course there's more I could do, but the 
game does have good colourblind support.
It has full controller and keyboard remapping.
You can play the whole game 
with a keyboard and mouse or  
with a controller and they both feel good.
And it's got that simple backgrounds option 
where you can swap out the detailed and  
distracting visual backgrounds 
with a simplistic grid pattern.
The real smart move was getting this 
stuff into the game at the right point.
Because while I think a lot of game devs get 
to the very end of the process and then think,  
we should probably put some accessibility options 
in here and then have to retrofit those ideas  
into a spaghetti nightmare mess of finished game 
code, I put it in as soon as those features were  
first being developed so it was always there, 
baked into the code from basically day one.
I'm also really happy with 
the hint system in this game.
I've seen so many playtesters 
and other players get a hint  
for a puzzle and then kind of go, 
"Oh wait wait wait, I get it now.
Yeah yeah yeah, I know what to do."
And kind of still feel that thrill 
of satisfaction and eureka moment  
despite the fact that I just 
kind of told you what to do.
And I think that's because 
the hints are actually hints.
They just kind of push you in the right direction 
without ever telling you exactly what to do.
Okay, some of the hints do tell you 
exactly what to do, but most of them don't.
And if you are still stuck, you can 
just skip any level in the game as  
long as you've been stuck on it 
for about three or four minutes.
So the game never has a total brick wall  
and there's no reason to look up a 
guide, leave the game, or stop playing.
Now in terms of things that went wrong,  
I think the biggest one was 
rushing too fast into production.
You see, game dev is split into two aspects.
You've got pre-production where you're 
figuring out what the game is going to  
be and running all sorts of experimentations 
and explorations with prototypes and art tests.
You're basically deciding all of the major 
answers to the questions you have about your game.
You know, what is this game?
What does the player do?
What does a level look like in this game?
What is the overarching structure?
What's the core loop?
What does the artwork look like?
So on and so forth.
And then you transition into production 
where you actually make the thing.
Now the nice thing about pre-production 
is that you can be really fast and nimble  
about making changes because 
they're easy and fast and cheap.
You can try ten different solutions 
to a design problem and it doesn't  
matter because you're just going 
to throw everything away anyway.
You're not committed to anything.
But if you do what I did and move too 
quickly into actually producing the  
game before deciding the answers to those 
most fundamental questions, you're going  
to end up repeating yourself, spinning your 
wheels, having to throw away lots of work.
Basically, what I'm trying to say is 
you shouldn't have to change all of  
the art assets in your game within the 
last few months of development because  
you hadn't previously figured out how 
far the camera is going to zoom out.
That is, and I believe this is a 
technical term, a dumb dumb decision.
Another thing that went wrong, and this 
is after actually entering production,  
is that I never really had a good 
plan for how to make the game.
No roadmap, no milestones, nothing like that.
I had a vague idea of what the game looked like 
in my head but I just ultimately kept working  
on the game with the vague hope that it might by 
itself coalesce into a final finished video game.
Spoiler alert, it didn't.
Until I finally sat down with a notepad or  
with a Trello board and planned out 
what is this game going to be like?
How many worlds does this game have?
How many levels per world?
What are the main story beats?
Stuff like that.
It was only when I put together that plan that I  
could actually start moving in a good 
direction towards the finish line.
I also focused a lot of time on 
stuff that really didn't matter.
Like okay, in Mind Over Magnet, if you put the 
mouse cursor over one of the options in the  
menu and then switch to a controller, it will 
continue moving from where that highlight was.
That took like a day to figure out and is not 
that important in the grand scheme of things,  
and I wish I had spent time that I spent 
on doing stuff like that on improving the  
underlying gameplay or making better 
puzzles or making the game feel good.
Stuff that actually does have a real 
impact on what people think of the game.
Another thing that went wrong is that I picked a  
surprisingly difficult genre 
for my very first proper game.
Now a 2D puzzle platformer might seem quite 
simple, but it's actually deceptively challenging.
A 2D platformer is already pretty 
hard, because making that character  
feel good to control is an engineering feat 
of animation and programming and other skills.
But it's the puzzle design 
part that was really difficult.
It's just hard to make puzzles.
Puzzles are like a craft in of themselves, and 
I started to realise that some of the world's  
greatest puzzle game designers like Jonathan 
Blow and Alan Hazelden and Stephen Lavelle  
have spent years, like their whole careers, 
just learning the craft of puzzle design.
And then I come in and I'm like, "Yeah,  
I could probably do that in a couple months while 
also working on every other aspect of the game.
No problem."
And so it shouldn't be a surprise that the puzzles 
in the game took a long time to come together,  
and I'm still not really that happy with 
basically all of the puzzles in the game.
Oh, and on that note, it was 
probably a dumb idea to also  
have a heavy physics element in a puzzle game.
Puzzles are very much about the designer having 
real control over every aspect of the game,  
and then when you throw in the chaotic 
nature of the universe into your game,  
suddenly there are a lot 
more problems to worry about.
And then there's the thing that 
I'm not going to put under what  
went right or what went wrong because 
I'm not quite sure how I feel about it.
And that's the whole concept of working solo.
I made pretty much all of Mind Over Magnet by 
myself, but that meant that I had to stretch a  
pretty limited skillset, let's be honest, across 
a really wide spectrum of different disciplines.
I had to spread myself across animation, sound 
design, art, writing, game design, level design,  
production, marketing, and probably a 
hundred other jobs I've forgotten about.
And then if you compare that to Zach, who made the 
soundtrack, all he had to focus on was the music.
Putting aside the fact that he's also making his 
own video game, but that's neither here nor there.
In the context of Mind Over Magnet,  
Zach could focus a hundred percent of his 
energy and efforts on just making the music.
And so I was left wondering, like, 
what would Mind Over Magnet be like  
if I could just spend three years 
exclusively working on puzzles or  
game design and let somebody else focus 
on programming or artwork or writing?
The game would definitely be better.
It would almost certainly 
have come out more quickly.
But I'm not sure if I would have 
enjoyed the experience as much.
I like working by myself.
I like having full creative 
control over the process.
I like being able to work 
on the game whenever I want,  
and I wouldn't want to have 
to split this any further.
Still, if I do ever make another game,  
I will think about which aspects 
of the game I can delegate.
But will I make another game?
That is a question I've been 
thinking about a lot lately,  
and it's the question that people keep asking me.
"Mark, are you going to make another video game?"
Now, I am definitely going to enter Game Jams.
I am certainly going to make more interactive 
video essays like Platformer Toolkit.
But the thought of making another 
full, big, multi-year Steam release...
I'm not sure I've got that in me.
I'm not sure if I'm ever going to do that.
But if Mind Over Magnet is the only 
game I ever make, I'm okay with that.
I would be okay with that, because 
despite its flaws and its shortcomings,  
despite the missed opportunities I had with 
it, despite all of the problems I can see,  
despite the bugs and all of the stuff I wish 
I'd done differently, I am still... Magnus.
I'm proud of you, buddy.
I'm proud of it.
It is a cool video game.
And when I look at the game, 
I don't see the flaws anymore.
I see a video game, a real game that went 
from idea to release, and has now been  
played by thousands of people, most of which 
did not refund the game, and the game has made  
significant amounts of money for me, which is, you 
know, part of why we do this as game devs, right?
And it is now the objective truth of 
the universe that for the rest of time,  
I made a video game, and that 
cannot be taken away from me.
So Magnus, you're all I need.
But here's the thing.
I could not have done it without you.
So I want to say a massive thank you to 
everyone who has watched this series,  
has watched me slowly lose my 
mind, and have supported the game.
I want to thank you if you were there in 2021 when 
I announced my intention to make a video game,  
if you were there in 2022 when I released 
the first really bad minimum viable product  
for the game and started getting 
feedback from you for the first time,  
if you were there in 2023 when I took the 
game to the Game Developers Conference  
in San Francisco and got real encouragement 
and a real motivation to get this game done,  
or if you were there in 2024 when I hit that 
big green button and released the game on Steam.
And as for 2025, I do not know, but I'm 
excited to find out along with all of you.
Thank you so much for watching.
Don't forget about Magnus on Makeship.
Don't forget about buying the game.
You can still put the game on your Steam wishlist,  
and you will be notified the next 
time it goes on sale, which is soon.
And have a good Christmas.
Have a good New Year's.
Have a good life.
Next time you see me, it will 
just be my disembodied voice,  
and that means it is time to dismantle 
the developing studio, aka my spare room.
That was the secret to the 
perfect green screen, by the way.
It wasn't a green screen.
It was a blue wall.
Turn off that light.
Turn off this light.
Let's get rid of this.
And turn off this light.
Thank you and goodbye.
Nope, that's stuck.
Thank you and goodbye.
God, that is not ideal.
Thank you and goodbye.
