Hi, my name's Mark and I am 
making a video game about magnets.
So in the last episode of this series, I 
released a minimum viable product: a super short,  
30 minute game demo, made in order to see 
how my game feels as a complete product,  
and to get some feedback. And 
boy did I get some feedback.
I got detailed Discord messages. I got comments 
on Patreon and Itch.io. I got loads of survey  
responses and endless bug reports. I got full 
Let's Play walkthroughs over on Youtube and  
people played the game over screen share on Zoom. 
I was also lucky enough to have the game played by  
the designers of some kick-ass games like The End 
is Nigh, Room to Grow, Celeste, and It Takes Two.
Plus I also got some fan art, there 
was a 10 minute speed run of the game,  
and Untitled Magnet Game is now on How 
Long to Beat, which is pretty hilarious.
But what did people actually think of the 
demo, and what's next for the development  
of the game? Stick around to find out.
So the very first thing that 
pretty much everybody commented on  
was the feeling of the character. How does 
it feel to move and jump and pick up carry  
and throw the magnet? And the answer 
is… not great! Not great at all.
There were lots of complaints about the slow 
acceleration, the floaty jump, that weird  
annoying little hitch of inertia whenever you hit 
the ground, the over complexity of the aiming and  
throwing system, and the complete lack of options 
in terms of rebinding controls and accessibility.
I think the only thing people actually 
liked about the character was how it looks  
and the satisfying snap of the magnet 
when it hits a metallic surface.
Now I wasn't exactly blindsided by this feedback. 
I knew for most of the development that the  
character just didn't feel that great to control. 
But I kind of had myself in a bit of a bind:  
I had made a bunch of levels and so 
if I radically changed the character  
I'd need to go back and change all of 
those levels, and I had neither the  
time nor the energy to do it. Not a great 
excuse, but that's just what happened.
But whatever the case this does give me 
a very good, let's call it… action point  
for future development. I need to radically  
overhaul and improve the character controller. 
Basically throw out pretty much all of that code  
and start from scratch. I just need to make 
a character who feels really good to control.
The next subject of feedback is what I'll call 
design language. This is how I, as the designer,  
communicate to you, the player. 
Perhaps how to play the game or the  
rules and logic of the game world. 
And the feedback here was also  
not terrific. There's a lot of stuff 
in the game that is a bit unclear.
These look like platforms, but they're actually 
screens on the background layer. The complex  
aiming system is hard to explain with just simple 
icons. And, perhaps worst of all, the green and  
orange buttons are basically indistinguishable 
with certain types of colour blindness. Ah,  
sorry about that one. There's also a lot of 
stuff in this game that is kind of inconsistent:  
for example these one-way platforms block the 
magnet, until later they don’t. And how come  
you can stand on the magnet when it's attached to 
a wall, but not when it's on the floor? And these  
green buttons seem to change their functionality 
from level to level with no good reason.
And this is just kind of bad design. You see, 
when people play games they build up a mental  
model of how the world works. Like, okay, if 
I jump on a Goomba it dies. And if those rules  
are then randomly, arbitrarily changed 
the player has to throw out their mental  
model and can no longer confidently 
predict how the world is going to react  
to their actions. Which just doesn't feel 
good. So that is another action point:  
I need to focus on clarity and consistency. I 
need to put myself in the shoes of someone who  
doesn't know how the game works under the hood 
and design the game with that viewpoint in mind.
Next up, let's talk about the levels - which 
were kind of a mixed bag. The stages that I  
spent a long time working on were generally well 
received, and the stages that I threw together  
in a rush at the end of the deadline were 
seen in a less favourable light. Fair enough.  
Now, I'm not going to go into every individual 
stage in the game, but there were some key  
universal takeaways that I saw in pretty 
much all of the playthroughs of these levels.
Let's start with the most important one:  
in a previous episode of this series I 
talked about my challenge of defining  
the game's genre. Should this be a primarily 
puzzle based game like Braid or The Swapper,  
or more of a platformer like Super Meat Boy or 
Celeste? In the end I decided to go for a game  
that is primarily about puzzle solving, so you 
get levels like this one which are all about using  
logic and deduction to solve the problem at hand. 
But then I could throw in some light platforming  
levels like this one, that's all about speed 
and dexterity, as a sort of palette cleanser.
Now this seemed like a good idea at the time, but 
then when I actually watched people play through  
the game I realised that this had some pretty 
dire consequences. Perhaps the best way to sum  
it up is with this piece of feedback from Matthew 
of the YouTube channel Video Game Story Time:
MATTHEW: “My instinct is, because there's 
puzzles where sometimes it's just dash through,  
and sometimes there's puzzles where I need 
to actually think and engage my brain,  
I'm having a hard time spotting when a 
puzzle involves me thinking things through  
and when it just needs me to dash 
in and try my best first time”.
And he's not wrong, and he's not the 
only person who fell into this trap.  
I saw a number of players try to solve puzzles 
using their platforming skills, thinking that  
the solution was just to run a bit 
faster, or jump a bit higher - not  
realising that they actually needed to 
use logic, deduction, thinky skills.
And, look, I do think it is possible to marry 
action and puzzle gameplay. As I saw in a lot  
of the comments for that earlier video, there's a 
game like Portal which is primarily a puzzle game,  
but you need to have FPS smarts, skills, and 
fluency to get by. But I'm not Valve, I’m Mark,  
and this is my first ever proper game 
- so I think what I'm gonna do is just  
try and focus on doing one thing well. 
I want to focus on the puzzle design,  
I don't want players to have any doubts in their 
mind about what sort of skills they need to bring  
from level to level. So I'm going to ramp up the 
puzzles and cut down on the skill and execution  
side of the game. I'm also going 
to massively restrict the player's  
jump distance because right now he's 
giving Super Mario a run for his money.
And here's the thing: when people did 
actually come at these puzzles as puzzles,  
and solve them, it was really fun to watch. 
Especially when they made a noise like this:
DOTWO: “Ah! Okay…”
That is the “a-ha moment” that every puzzle 
game designer is striving to hear. That moment  
when the player stumbles upon the clever lateral 
thinking twist at the core of the puzzle. It is  
a great feeling to be able to give the player and 
I want to give it over, and over, and over again.
Unfortunately I didn't always achieve this in my 
MVP. Levels like this one were just a bit too easy  
and players just kind of stumbled into solving 
it without even really thinking about the  
solution. And some levels were just way too 
hard: a lot of people bowed out of the game  
before ever finishing this one, and so 
they never got that cool a-ha moment.
But this does give me, at least, something to 
focus on. Another action point: make players say  
a-ha. And I think I'm going to get 
there over time as I get more experience  
building puzzles. Plus, as I do more play testing. 
What I've realised is that puzzles are essentially  
impossible for me, the designer, to test: I  
already know the solution. Plus puzzles are often 
about luring players into assumptions and traps  
and you can only see if those work if you 
give the level to someone else to play. So  
going forward I'm going to be using my Discord to 
let players try out puzzles and give me feedback,  
so I can iterate and evolve those designs. 
More information on that in the future.
Now there were a few things that 
were really holding my puzzles back  
from true greatness. One of which is an 
over abundance of stuff on the screen.  
It is not uncommon in Untitled Magnet Game 
to go into a room and just be bombarded with  
lasers and moving boxes and electromagnets and 
more. It makes for puzzles that are messy and  
convoluted and a game that 
just feels a bit overwhelming.
Now I know exactly why this happens: I would 
always start the puzzle with a really simple  
and elegant design, but then I'd start to 
find ways that the player could very easily  
skip and bypass the puzzle. So I need to put 
in an extra door here and then a laser there,  
and before long things have gotten completely 
out of hand and the puzzle now looks like this.
Now I did get some really good feedback 
on this from Oliver Granlund over at  
Hazelight. He says that when situations like 
this emerge, often the problem is a gap in your  
toolbox as a designer. There is some kind of 
game mechanic that you are missing that would  
solve that problem in a very elegant and 
simple way, so you just need to go off  
and build it. He also suggested using the camera 
to frame small parts of the puzzle at once  
to avoid overwhelming the player with too 
much information on screen all at once.
So that's another action point: focus 
on puzzles that are simple and elegant,  
and use more tools and perhaps camera framing 
to help cut down on information overload.
Another source of frustration was times 
in the game where you just kind of have to  
wait for the game to align itself. It's 
especially common with these moving blocks,  
where you just have to wait for the cycle 
to reset before you can even try solving  
the puzzle again. That's just kind of tedious 
and annoying and it discourages experimentation  
with puzzle solutions. So there's 
another action point: don't do that.
And finally on the level design: well 
for pretty much every puzzle in the game,  
it turns out that there was a way for players 
to essentially skip or bypass the whole puzzle  
by using some kind of bug, glitch, or oversight.
And I want to state that I think it's fine for 
there to be ways to overcome a problem in a game  
in a way that the designer did not necessarily 
intend. In fact I think it can be cool. That is,  
provided the solution is interesting, 
it should require some level of  
skill and mastery, and it should be 
made perfectly obvious that this is  
not the intended solution, but a clever 
way of getting one over on the designer.
For example, there were a few players who managed 
to throw the magnet up into the air and then  
at the moment where it blocks the laser they 
could whip past and get out of danger. That is  
really cool, so I'm happy to leave stuff like 
that in the game. But if the player is kind  
of fudging into the edge of a collision zone to 
grab a magnet on the other side of the block and  
sailing across the level in a really 
glitched and awkward way… that's got to go.
PLAYTESTER: “That doesn’t… yeah 
that doesn't seem right…”
So another action point is that I need to improve 
my bug testing and bug fixing processes. Going  
forward I kind of have this philosophy that 
I'm calling the airlock, where you can kind  
of imagine a workshop where you make the new 
game mechanics and ideas - and then there's the  
game itself. And in between there is an imaginary 
airlock, and nothing can pass through that lock  
until it has gone through really rigorous 
testing in different scenarios and stuff.  
I'm never gonna catch all of the bugs, 
but the idea is that nothing can go  
into the game unless I'm reasonably confident 
that it can withstand a high level of scrutiny.
So all of this feedback is stuff that, in 
general, I was expecting or anticipating. I knew  
the game had plenty of bugs, I knew the character 
controller didn't feel that great, I knew some of  
the puzzles were a bit rushed, I knew that I broke 
some of my own rules. This was all stuff that I  
was aware of but just didn't really have the time 
to fix. But there was one piece of feedback that  
I received that I was not expecting and it did 
give me pause. It first came from the user YK on  
my Discord who said “it doesn't feel to me like 
the magnet is the core of the game”, and for a  
game that is supposed to be literally entirely 
about magnetism, that's probably not good.
So I made sure to talk to people who were 
giving me this feedback to get to the  
root of the problem and it turns out 
there were a few different sources.
So some people thought the game felt 
like a pretty standard puzzle game  
with a bunch of different game 
mechanics: like lasers, moving boxes…  
magnets. When really the magnet should be the 
core of the game, not just one other game element!
And to their credit there are some scenarios in 
this MVP where the magnet is not involved at all,  
which is a pretty huge oversight on my part. So 
to fix this I think we need to install a big core  
pillar of the design: this is a game where you 
overcome problems through clever use of magnetism.  
And pretty much every single scenario in the game 
should involve you using the magnet in some way.
Others thought the magnet felt a bit 
rudimentary, a bit too simple to be  
a core mechanic. And this is something I had 
always planned to address. Right now in this  
MVP there's one simple type of magnet: a 
red one. But eventually I wanted to add  
a red one and a blue one, and a way to switch 
between those two different polarities.  
Giant magnets that can attract stuff towards 
you. A magnet you can recall back to yourself.  
And perhaps other ones as well. So maybe I need 
to introduce those ideas a little bit sooner so  
players can quickly understand that this game has 
more to it than just throwing a red magnet around.
And also some players thought that the magnet 
was a bit boring: like just a standard inanimate  
object. And perhaps the solution to this 
is something that Nintendo does a lot,  
where it makes its game mechanics more 
crucial by turning them into characters.  
Think about Cappy and Navi and Ezlo and Fi 
and the Baby Luma, and loads more. Perhaps  
I could do something similar for my game give 
the magnet a face, a personality, perhaps even  
dialogue and little cut scenes? I don't know, but 
anything to make it feel more like a character.
Whatever the case, that is my final action point 
from the MVP: make the game way more magnet-y.
So this was my first time getting real  
feedback on a game that I had personally designed 
and the experience was… okay, pretty interesting!
For one thing it was just super valuable. I 
learned so much about what to do next from all  
of this feedback. I know what works what doesn’t, 
and where I should be putting my attention next.  
Seeing people enjoy the game gave me 
huge motivation to make more of it,  
and seeing people get frustrated at certain 
things told me exactly what I should cut  
out. And with these action points I have a 
really strong direction for where to take the  
game next - far stronger than anything I had 
when I was working on the game in isolation.
It also wasn't as painful as I was perhaps 
expecting. Sure it was a bit cringe-worthy  
at times to watch some of the videos, and 
it was a bit of a hit to the old ego also.  
But I think because I was expecting a lot of the 
feedback that I saw, and pretty much agreed with  
everything people said, it wasn't 
as painful as it could have been.
I guess the worst parts were seeing people glitch 
their way through some of those puzzles, which is  
why I released a quick version 1.2 release with 
a few bug fixes. And hearing the same piece of  
feedback over and over again., which is nobody's 
fault - nobody knows what other people have  
already said. But to me, I just end up hearing the 
same thing repeatedly, and it is a bit tiresome.
But more than any of that, it just felt really 
cool to see people playing this thing that I  
had made. When I wasn't cringing myself inside 
out I had this huge smile locked on my face as  
I watched the playthroughs of people enjoying the 
game. It's an amazing feeling: like I have made  
a game, and it's on the internet, and I've 
got hundreds of players. That's not nothing!
Here's what Oliver, the guy who sent me this  
MVP challenge several months ago, 
had to say about the outcome:
OLIVER: “It’s super impressive. 
Like, that you got this far  
and released it that in itself is a huge 
accomplishment. Like, seriously, you should  
you should feel that. And try to ride that for a 
while, right? It's out there and you made a game!”
But, okay, enough patting 
myself on the back. What's next?
Well for starters I'm going to essentially scrap 
the whole MVP. Like, it's served its purpose.  
I can perhaps salvage some code, some art, some 
level layouts. But it's kind of like a Jenga  
tower of bugs and mistakes, so it's gotta go. I'm 
gonna essentially start the game from scratch.
That being said I have now released the MVP on 
Itch.io to the public if you'd like to check  
it out, as a sort of historical artifact of this 
developing process. But now I'm gonna move on to  
making the game for real. I guess starting 
with that first crucial action point:  
the character controller. It's time 
to make a robot who actually feels  
nice to play. I will show 
you that in the next episode.
Oh before you go, this whole developing series 
has been nominated for a Unity award, which is  
hilarious. It would be beyond amazing 
if you could take the time to log into  
the site and vote for this series. 
How about this: if GMTK wins this  
Unity award, I will finally make that 
“basics of Unity” video I teased in the  
first episode of this series. Sound good? 
Thanks for watching see you next time. Beep.
Why did I do that?
