Hi, I’m Mark Brown and this… is not a 
usual episode of Game Maker's Toolkit.
It's been a while since my last video on this 
channel. Sorry about that: I've been taking some  
time off to, well, get married, have a holiday, 
play some video games (they're pretty fun),  
and most importantly… Well, not 
more important than my marriage.  
But second most importantly I've been thinking 
about what I want to do next on this channel.
And so without beating around the bush, this 
is what I've decided. I’m starting a new series  
where I make a video game. A very small video 
game. A very bad video game. But a video  
game. And I want to share with you the entire 
process, from being an absolute numpty who knows  
nothing, to being someone who has released 
their own very small game on, say, itch.io.
And in this quick update video I want to share 
three reasons why I'm doing this right now.
So, reason one. For the past seven years 
I've been making videos about game design  
concepts and ideas and principles, 
without ever actually applying them.  
Which is a bit like having a cooking YouTube 
channel and making videos about eggs and flour  
and butter and sugar, without 
ever actually baking a cake.
Which is perfectly fine! I think 
it's absolutely okay to say,  
talk about screenwriting without making movies. 
Everyone has a valuable insight. But I do think  
there might be something wonderfully interesting 
about taking these ideas that have been,  
so far, academic and just sort of 
in the air, and trying to actually,  
physically, literally apply them to game 
development, and seeing what happens.
And so yes this series will look at every 
aspect of game development, at least from a  
very small indie perspective. So art, audio, 
code, you know, learning game development,  
collaboration perhaps. We'll see. But most 
importantly I'm going to be focusing on  
design and what actually happens when I try to 
take these ideas and design a game around them.
What challenges do I face? What limitations 
do I hit up against? What surprising things  
happen that you wouldn't think of as just 
someone who plays games? We’ll find out.
Reason two is that I want to show you that it's 
entirely possible to make your own game from scratch.
If you watch GMTK there's a good chance 
that you are at least interested in making your  
own game someday but you've probably 
got some good excuses for not doing it.  
Like you don't know how to start or you don't know 
how much time it will take. And so you just sort  
of put it off and put it off and put it off. 
Trust me: I've been there. I mean I am there.  
Currently. 
But hopefully by showing you my 
entire journey in the most transparent way  
possible - which is why I'm on camera for the 
first time, to uh you know show you that I am  
a real human being doing this and not just a 
weird floating omnipotent voice. By sharing  
with you my journey you can hopefully take away 
some ideas for how you might do this yourself.
So no this is not a tutorial. This is not a 
step-by-step guide to making your own game.  
It is not a complete overview of the indie game 
development sphere. This is just one person's  
experience of making games. But hopefully 
there's something you can take away from this  
if you're interested in making games yourself. 
Perhaps where to start, what steps to take, what  
tools to use: I don't know we'll figure it 
out as we go along. And so maybe one day  
you can make your own stuff and perhaps even 
take part in the GMTK Game Jam? Who knows.
And reason three is that, well, I need a new 
challenge. Back in November I hit 1 million  
subscribers which is absolutely amazing - but it 
did leave me feeling a little bit restless. I feel  
like I've been making the same videos over and 
over again for the best part of a decade now, and  
I'm pretty good at it, and now I need to 
do something new. I need to push myself,  
challenge myself, get out of my comfort zone, 
and try something I've never done before.  
And boy this is all very new: I'm having to 
figure out how cameras work, and buy lights  
and lights and lights and mics and cameras and 
lenses. I just bought the wrong lens! Turns out  
lenses are, like, more complicated 
than computer components. Ack.
I’m also having to learn about how to make games,  
how to learn game engines and code, 
and how to work with other people,  
and all this crazy stuff that I've never done 
before. And that's really really exciting!
Now don't be alarmed: this does not mean 
that classic episodes of GMTK are going away.  
That is definitely not the case. I've 
got new episodes of GMTK in the works,  
I just did an interview with a level designer 
for a new episode in my On the Level series,  
Metroid Dread is coming out next month which means 
Boss Keys is probably coming back, and actually  
this series that I'm working on will almost 
certainly directly lead to new episodes of GMTK.
Because let's say I want to add a boss fight to 
my game… well I need to research boss fights,  
play a bunch of games with good boss 
fights, talk to developers, read interviews,  
do all that sort of stuff. Hey! That's 
just the research process for a GMTK episode!  
I might as well turn it into an episode, make 
some money- I mean provide information to you!
But right this second, this is what I want 
to work on. This is the thing that's really  
exciting me. This is the thing that 
gets me out of bed in the morning.  
This is what I want to do right now. So 
I'd appreciate a little bit of patience  
while I work through this and then we'll get 
back to normal GMTK episodes very very soon.
And so this is a video series about 
me developing a video game. But this  
is also me developing Game Maker’s 
Toolkit from a channel that simply  
analyses games to a channel that also makes games. 
And this process is also about me developing from  
someone who just plays and enjoys games, to 
someone who analyses and breaks down games,  
to someone who designs games. And so, as such, 
this series is going to be called… Developing.
Now I'm sure you have plenty 
of questions about this whole  
process like: what engine are you going to 
use? What genre is the game going to be?  
Can I compose the music for your game? When 
can I play it? How many guns does it have?  
And those will all be answered in 
the upcoming episodes of this series.
So for now I just want to say a huge 
thank you to everyone who has stuck  
around and given me a bit of time and 
support while I work on this stuff.  
And of course an extra big special thank 
you to my Patrons who have been backing  
me financially and have been really patient and 
supportive of me while I work on this new stuff.
If you want to support me on this journey you can  
pledge a few dollars per month over on 
Patreon.com, and you'll also get loads  
of new updates about what I'm working on. Plus 
you'll also get access to the GMTK Discord where  
I'll be posting updates about my development 
journey before the main videos come out.
And so for now that's it. I’ll be back soon 
with the first episode of this series and then  
we'll get started on making this damn game. 
Thanks for watching and I'll see you soon.
It is very hot in here. I’ve 
got lots of lights on me.  
I've got way too many clothes on 
for this time of year. I'm gonna go.
