Many games come with the promise of letting 
the player live out some kind of awesome,  
aspirational fantasy.
Maybe that's to become a comic book 
superhero. Perhaps it's the opportunity  
to wield a lightsaber. Or become the 
member of a secretive assassin's guild.  
To be rock god, a samurai, a rally 
car driver, or a no-nonsense yakuza.
And from my experience of 
playing this sort of game,  
it feels like there's two, distinctly 
different ways of delivering this fantasy.
The first way is to simply give the fantasy 
to the player. Easily and immediately.  
Which is something we see in a 
number of recent super hero games:  
in the Batman Arkham games, the free-flow combat 
system makes it effortless to beat up baddies. And  
in Spider-Man, we don't need a lengthy tutorial 
to swing around the city with ease and grace.
This is usually achieved by providing 
the sensation of being powerful,  
which happens through simple inputs that 
get translated into big, flashy animations.  
Cinematic set-pieces with pop-up buttons. 
Lenient systems that subtly fix your mistakes.  
Magnetic snapping towards enemies. Big, 
obvious indicators that tell you when  
to counter. Dopey AI that waits 
patiently to attack. And so on.
These games work really hard 
to make you feel awesome,  
by translating your simple intentions 
into impressive feats on screen.
Troy Skinner, producer at Batman-publisher WB 
Games, explains it like this:
TROY SKINNER: When people come in they 
spam the punch-in-the-face button.
In a lot of games you get punished for that. 
It makes you look bad. You fail.
In this game you spam the 
punch-in-the-face button and you look awesome!
You are in fact Batman 
effectively punching people in the face".
The second way is to make 
the player earn the fantasy.  
Through skill and mastery. Which is the 
approach of this year's DOOM Eternal.
That game has a very stiff learning curve with 
all sorts of mechanics and systems to figure  
out - including resource management, 
enemy weak points, weapon switching,  
lighting-fast movement, the flame belch, 
the chainsaw, the blood punch, and more.
And until you master all of them,  
you're going to fail - and you certainly 
won't feel like the bad-ass demon slayer  
in the game's marketing. Which means that 
the opportunity to live out the power fantasy  
is withheld until you've proven that you have real 
skill and mastery over a complex set of mechanics.
Hugo Martin, is the creative director on 
DOOM Eternal, and explains it like so:  
HUGO MARTIN: "Hey man I'm dying to these characters because 
I'm not doing certain things. I don't feel  
strong. It's like yeah: but you're gonna feel 
strong when you master how to beat them".
So we can give the fantasy to the player, or  
we can make them earn it. But why would 
a developer choose one over the other?
Well, Hugo Martin puts it 
very succinctly when he says:  
HUGO MARTIN: "We wanna give you something to master. 
Because the power fantasy that is  
earned is far more satisfying than 
the one that is just handed to you".
By making the player actually overcome challenge,  
failure, and frustration, the end result 
will be way more rewarding. He compares the  
experience of mastering DOOM Eternal to that of 
climbing a mountain - it's much more satisfying,  
he says, to climb it yourself than to 
simply take an elevator to the top.
It's a fair point. And many of these 
superhero games do end up feeling  
shallow and patronising because they 
give the fantasy away too easily.
But - when designers tie the attainment of a 
power fantasy to a certain level of skill - they  
ultimately end up having to ask who gets to 
live out the fantasy, and who gets left behind?
As Troy Skinner explains...
TROY SKINNER: "Because we are expert gamers, 
we say that mastery should come from overcoming challenge.
You earn it. 
But remember everyone paid $60
and the majority of them aren't going to push 
through those barriers to get to the mastery. And  
mastery is tied to motivation so if they're not 
masterful, they're demotivated, they walk away".
He argues that there are plenty of players who 
simply aren't willing to suffer through failure  
and frustration in order to experience 
the game's core fantasy. For example,  
Troy points to the bro gamer - casual players who 
have a very low threshold for suffering and want  
to feel competent immediately. And because they 
make up 60% of the console market, you ignore them at a cost.
More importantly, however, there are players 
who simply aren't able to reach that level.
In the book Glued to Games, behavioural 
scientist Scott Rigby talks about "control  
mastery" - which is the time and energy needed 
to learn a game's inputs and be able to turn  
intention into action. He compares this to to 
paying for admission to get into a theme park:  
both are necessary steps in order 
to access the actual fun inside.
  
But, Scott says, "when people are discouraged 
by a game’s controls, they don’t have the chance  
to feel competent at gameplay, because they 
can’t even get to the real game. For them,  
the price of admission to the fun of games is 
so high, they often stay outside the turnstile".
And that's not even mentioning those with 
disabilities who may be physically unable  
to reach that level of skill. Shouldn't they 
get to experience the power fantasy, too?
Ultimately, then, we end up with a conundrum. 
If we make the power fantasy easily attainable,  
the game is accessible to all but can end 
up feeling shallow to more seasoned players.  
And if we force the player to earn 
the fantasy, the experience might  
be significantly more satisfying - but we 
lock out a considerable number of people.  
By making one type of player 
feel awesome, we lose the other.
But, maybe, it doesn't have to be a choice.  
And so, I'm going to explore a number of ways that 
games can make both types of player feel awesome.
The first solution is to provide options.
But not the type you might 
be thinking about. Because,  
yes, difficulty options will allow players 
to tune the game to their ability level.  
But they rarely fix the actual issue: the inherent 
complexity of the game. Making DOOM Eternal easier  
will let you make a few more mistakes, but 
it doesn't reduce the number of buttons you  
need to remember - and making Spider-Man harder 
doesn't actually change the web-swinging at all.
So more important are gameplay and 
accessibility options. And for a strong example,  
take Forza Horizon 4. Here, you can enable 
things like assisted brakes and steering,  
automated gear shifting, and a racing line. 
With these options turned on, the game helps  
players reach the fantasy of being a racing 
driver - by reducing the need for precision,  
limiting the number of things you need to 
juggle, and providing lots of information.
With these options, you can essentially switch the 
game from being a rather hardcore simulation racer  
to a fun and casual arcade romp. And best of all,  
this is all independent from the difficulty 
level of your rival racers - so you can reduce  
the complexity of controlling the car, but 
without also dumbing down the competition.
Other examples of gameplay options include the automatic 
combo mode in Devil May Cry,
the way Jedi Fallen Order makes parry timing windows bigger 
on easy mode,
and how some of the Arkham games 
let you turn off those counter indicators so you
have to pay attention to the enemy animations.
A second solution is to reward 
mastery - but not actually require it.
For this one, let's look at Bayonetta. 
This is a game where you almost immediately  
feel empowered and awesome: thanks to 
great animation, absurd finishing moves,  
a very forgiving dodge, and a reasonably low 
level of challenge. You can basically just  
mash the controller against your face and 
Bayonetta will pull off a huge variety of  
awesome-looking attacks. It's easy to feel 
fluid, cool, and competent in this game.
But there's so much hidden mastery in this game 
for those who are willing to put in the work.  
Things like the dodge offset system, and the 
huge number of possible moves - means that  
those who want to get combo mad can express 
their skill and mastery. That ends up being  
the real power fantasy which is, indeed, 
more satisfying… because it's earned.
If we think about this by borrowing 
terms from e-sports: there's skill floor,  
which describes the base-line level of skill 
needed to be effective with that character.  
And skill ceiling, which describes the highest 
level of skill you can potentially express. If  
Spider-Man has a low skill floor, but 
low skill ceiling - and DOOM Eternal  
has a high skill ceiling and a high skill 
floor to match, something like Bayonetta  
strikes a better balance by having a low 
skill floor and a high skill ceiling.
Solution three is to layer 
on complexity over time.
In a lot of Metroidvanias, such as the Ori 
games, you start the game with a very simple  
set of controls. You can really just focus 
on movement and jumping, so players who  
are unfamiliar with platformers only need to 
wrestle with the absolute basics at this point.
As you play on, the game gives you upgrades - like 
additional jumps, new attacks, more complex moves,  
and so on. By the end of the game, Ori has 
become a complex game with a huge moveset:  
but without overwhelming anyone in the process. 
By stretching the learning curve out to encompass  
pretty much the entire game, players can gradually 
get used to more and more complex gameplay.
We do see some of this in DOOM Eternal, 
with weapons and enemy types being  
introduced throughout the campaign. And in 
Spider-Man, where the skill tree lets you add  
new mechanics that let you swing faster - but 
also increase the complexity of the controls.
Solution four is to simply prime 
players for failure and learning  
through the narrative and marketing.
One of the issues with DOOM Eternal is that the 
game suggests that you are the most powerful,  
demon slaying bad-ass in the universe. I mean, 
you just ripped your way through hell in the  
previous game. And now, you're falling at 
the feet of the game's most basic demons?
Ultimately, when games promise to 
let you play as Batman or Spider-Man,  
or the Dragon of Dojima, or the God of War it's 
priming us to be powerful and skilful: and so it  
does make sense that we immediately get to feel 
awesome. Anything else would just be discordant.
And so if a game wants to make us earn the 
fantasy, it needs to explain that up front.  
A good example of this is Skate: a skateboard 
simulation game with a significant learning  
curve just to do a kickflip. But it doesn't 
suggest that you'll immediately start playing  
as a pro skater - instead, you're just a 
lowly amateur trying to get their photo  
on the 37th page of a magazine. The game's 
narrative - which is about slowly becoming  
more successful as a skater, neatly mirrors 
the game's challenging learning curve.
And finally, solution five, is 
to provide multiple ways to win.
I've been playing a lot of Hades lately. And 
in each run of this mythological roguelite,  
you pick a weapon - perhaps a 
sword, or maybe a bow and arrow.  
Some of these weapons are far easier to use than 
others: the shield, for example, lets you absorb  
enemy attacks and play in a very defensive 
and reactionary manner. Whereas the fists  
force you to get up close and personal with your 
enemies, which puts you at a significant risk.
By having different ways to succeed, 
players can gravitate towards the weapon,  
the character, or the build - that works for them.
Hades also lets you unlock additional power, 
health, and help - so it's possible to succeed  
not by getting better - but by simply playing 
the game for a long time. That's not my personal  
preference for how roguelikes should work: 
but I can see the advantage in giving players  
a different way to succeed. Through time 
and effort, rather than skill and mastery.
Most of these solutions are 
about the same exact thing:  
letting players find their 
own way to feel powerful.
That might mean using accessibility 
options and tuning down the difficulty,  
or it might mean ramping the game up to hard,  
playing with the most challenging character, 
and exploring the game's most complex rules.  
Both of those might be the optimum challenge 
for two completely different people.
And something else that a lot of 
these solutions have in common  
is that they encourage players to 
always be pushing themselves to be  
better. To be moving towards more 
challenging and complex gameplay.
In Forza, using those assist options 
reduces the amount of XP you gain,  
so you're encouraged to eventually turn them 
off as you get better at the game. In Bayonetta,  
scrappy play leads to rubbish trophies, so you're 
motivated to be more thoughtful with your actions.  
In Hades, there are rewards for trying 
out weapons you haven't used in a while.  
And in Ori, the game just naturally 
gets more complex, the further you go.
Because the power fantasy, it turns out, is 
not one specific point on the learning curve:  
it's something more dynamic, that can move 
and grow as you do. You might feel the power  
fantasy immediately, and then feel it even more 
strongly as you challenge yourself to do better,  
to explore more of the game's systems, 
and to increase the challenge of the game.
So ultimately, if the question is: who 
gets to be powerful? My answer would be:  
everyone. Not just those who are skilful. 
And not just those who want to feel immediate  
empowerment. But games should use design and 
systems to ensure that at every skill level,  
the player feels powerful and masterful. 
But always with room to grow and improve.
Hey - don't click away just yet! I know, YouTube  
end screens are boring. I've seen the 
stats. So I'm gonna make them more  
interesting by using this time to recommend 
a different game at the end of each video.
These will be recently-released indie games, 
and entirely based on my own preferences - so,  
it's definitely not an ad spot. Are you ready? 
Because I only get twenty seconds to do this! Let's go.
Disc Room is a juicy arcade romp about 
dodging a bullet-hell spread of deadly  
saw blades. The masterstroke is the way it 
entices you to keep playing with bitesize  
goals and challenges, surprising abilities,  
and best of all - Fez-like puzzles and 
mysteries. It's out now on Steam and Switch.
