In the past few years, we have seen 
an unbearable number of layoffs and  
studio shutdowns across the games industry.
It's estimated that 14,000 game 
developers lost their jobs in 2024,  
and this year isn't looking any better.
In February alone - just February - we've 
seen cuts and redundancies at Sumo Digital,  
Iron Galaxy, N Dreams, Hi-Rez, Unity, 
Crytek, NetEase, Night School, Bossa Games,  
Striking Distance, and more.
Each one of these layoffs is 
someone's life being upended.
And it's another talented individual 
who may be forced to leave the games  
industry altogether if they're 
unable to find another posting.
It just all sucks.
But this newest one, announced 
yesterday - man, this one really stings.
Warner Bros just announced that it's closing 
three of its studios - Player First Games,  
which made Multiversus, WB Games 
San Diego, which was working on some  
unannounced project, and - here's 
the big one - Monolith Productions.
Monolith is a studio I have long respected.
It's been in business since 1994, and while it may 
not be as famous or storied as developers like id,  
or Valve, or Infinity Ward, its gameography 
is… man, it's just banger after banger.
Its back catalogue is filled with games 
that are wildly inventive, ever so stylish,  
and almost always pushing the industry forward 
with some new technology or design innovation.
So I wanted to take a moment to 
acknowledge this studio's passing,  
as it moves from an is to a was on Wikipedia.
And I want to do that by reminiscing on 
my five favourite games made by Monolith.
Is that okay? Can we do that? No deep design 
analysis? I just want to take a moment  
to pour one out for a criminally underrated 
developer that deserved far better than this.
Okay.
So, back in the late 90s, I was 
obsessed with the Build Engine,  
which was the 3D game-making 
tool that powered Duke Nukem 3D.
And that meant I wanted to play 
any and all games that used Build.
And that's how I stumbled upon 
Monolith's first major game, Blood.
This is a fast-paced boomer shooter with 
inventive weapons like a spray can and lighter,  
a voodoo doll, sticks of dynamite, and a 
pokey little pitchfork as your melee weapon.
Now this is a weird and often anachronistic game.
It's part Wild West, part occult fantasy,  
and there's a little sci-fi 
thrown in there for good measure.
You play as an undead gunslinger fighting 
zombies and demons, and it's all rendered with  
a crazy claymation aesthetic that comes from the 
sprites being low-res photos of clay sculptures.
It is 100% a game of its time.
It's very 90s, which means it's packed 
with secrets and movie references,  
and it's ridiculously hard, and 
the levels are complete mazes.
But it's also a lot of fun.
I played a lot of janky first-person shooters 
in this era, but Blood is one I fondly remember.
Then in 2000, we got The 
Operative - No One Lives Forever.
This was a sassy 60s spy adventure 
and obvious James Bond spoof,  
featuring one of gaming's coolest 
female characters, Kate Archer.
She's a badass secret agent whose make-up bag and  
wardrobe is secretly a stash of 
lockpicks, lasers, and grenades.
Now, while Blood was a simple "shoot 
everything that moves" kind of game,  
NOLF - and its excellent sequel 
- was a lot more cerebral.
Levels were open-ended and could 
be solved in multiple ways.
So you could use gadgets and stealth to avoid 
danger altogether, or just go in guns blazing.
Up to you.
And the stealth was solid, taking 
cues from top games like Thief - so  
enemies could notice dead bodies, 
or even your footprints in the snow.
And on top of that, the game had bombastic 
scenarios with vehicles and chase sequences,  
it had a brilliant sense of style, 
and - best of all - tons of humour.
My favourite touch? If you sneak 
up on enemies and don't kill them,  
you can listen in on their conversations - which 
were usually packed with jokes and references.
ENEMY: People don't realise how an unhappy 
family life can turn a man to crime.
This game, and its sequel, were among 
the best of their respective years.
They won loads of Game of 
the Year awards, and were  
often compared positively to peers like Half-Life.
But unlike Half-Life, the NOLF 
games are often entirely forgotten  
in conversations about genre-defining shooters.
Though that's probably due 
to a lack of preservation.
You can't easily revisit this 
one on Steam or GOG or whatever.
And that's because the game's IP rights are tied  
up between multiple companies and 
no one really knows who owns it.
So don't expect a remaster any time soon.
But if you can't be bothered to get 
this thing working on Windows 11,  
well, take it from me - this one was brilliant.
In 2005, Monolith returned to first-person 
shooters with F.E.A.R. - a crunchy,  
grizzly action thriller that mixes military 
firefights with, well, Japanese horror movies.
Which means that the breathless shootouts 
are interspersed with spooky corridors,  
jump scares, and a creepy little girl called Alma.
But perhaps the game's most notable 
legacy was its envelope-pushing use of AI.
No, not that AI.
I mean enemy behaviour AI.
So building on work from the NOLF games,  
FEAR featured a type of enemy behaviour 
that's legendary among AI developers.
It's called goal-oriented action planning.
So in more traditional AI systems, enemies 
swap between distinct states - you know,  
like idle, alert, in combat, moving to cover.
That can make them pretty stiff and predictable.
But with GOAP, an enemy has a goal - like 
kill the player or investigate a sound - and  
then formulates a plan based on a series 
of actions that should fulfil that goal.
And then it constantly readjusts 
its plan based on the world state.
This made enemy encounters feel 
more organic and erratic - more  
like fighting real players than 
simplistic whack-a-mole baddies.
And the same tech was used in STALKER, as part 
of that game's much-loved A-Life NPC system.
So you know what? Perhaps it's time for 
game makers to give this tech another look.
I'll put a link in the description 
to AI and Games' video on the topic.
We're still in 2005, because in that same 
year Monolith released another banger,  
Condemned: Criminal Origins.
So this is a gritty, psychological 
thriller inspired by serial killer  
movies like Se7en and The Silence of the Lambs.
And it's another first-person 
shooter, right? Well maybe not.
Because while it starts that way, with FBI agent 
Ethan Thomas wandering around with a pistol,  
you're quickly disarmed and forced into 
brutal melee tussles with your enemies.
So you'll have to create improvised 
weapons from the environment,  
like lead pipes, planks of wood, and so on.
A bit like the new Indiana Jones game.
It becomes a game about messy, scrappy, sweaty 
brawls in disgusting run-down tenements.
The fights feel visceral and in-your-face.
And the enemies are unpredictable.
Some storm towards you aggressively,  
while others flee or hide in the 
shadows, waiting to strike later.
It's harrowing stuff.
You just kinda want to get out 
of there and take a shower.
It's a shame the game didn't make better  
use of its forensic tools - it's no 
detective game - but the atmosphere?
Man, that was unmatched.
And then in 2014, we got Monolith's most 
ambitious game yet, Middle-Earth Shadow of Mordor.
What could have been a totally forgettable Lord 
of the Rings tie-in, turned out to be one of  
the most bold and forward-thinking games ever 
created, thanks to its prized nemesis system.
So among the cannon fodder orcs roaming the 
soggy marshlands of Mordor, you've got a  
number of orc captains - each with a unique 
name, look, personality, and set of skills.
But most importantly, they also have a 
memory of their run-ins with you, the player.
So if you run away from an orc, you 
might stumble upon that same ugly  
bugger an hour later and they'll 
call you out for being a coward.
Or you might kill an orc by chopping off 
their leg, only to find they secretly  
survived that encounter and they've now 
got a prosthetic leg and a score to settle.
It made for an incredibly rich and 
dynamic story generation system,  
with every player getting a unique narrative.
And the sequel, Shadow of War, 
expanded on the idea even further,  
letting you create your own team of orcs and deal 
with backstabbing soldiers, enemy spies, and more.
Sadly, the system was locked under a patent,  
so no other developers have been able to use 
a similar system for fear of getting sued.
Boo.
So that's Monolith.
Or at least, Monolith to me.
The studio made other games too, like Shogo,  
a Tron game, a Matrix MMO, and 
a Middle-Earth MOBA, I guess.
I didn't play any of those.
But to me, of the games I played, Monolith's 
games all had something in common.
Each one took some interesting inspiration,  
usually from movies - whether that's James 
Bond, or Ring, or Se7en, or Lord of the Rings.
And then it mashed it up with some 
forward-thinking design or technology,  
like stealth, complex AI, frantic melee 
combat, or the impressive Nemesis system.
This made for games that succeeded 
on both style and substance.
You could enjoy these games for 
their story and their style,  
or study them for their 
design and their technology.
And look, I'm not trying to tell you that every 
game was some greatest of all time classic.
Monolith's games were often ugly and a little 
janky, and outside of No One Lives Forever,  
the environments often felt pretty 
same-y throughout the whole game.
A whole lot of shipping 
containers and office blocks.
But these were those 
quintessential 8 out of 10 games.
Games that were swinging for the fences,  
trying something different and 
new, and mostly succeeding.
And I think we need that, right?
But now, it's gone.
It's in progress, Wonder Woman game 
is dead, and Monolith is no more.
Shut down so Warner Brothers can focus exclusively 
on the franchises that make the most money.
Except when they don't.
But I'll leave the industry 
commentary to someone else.
I just want to say thanks and 
goodbye to an underrated and  
underappreciated studio that has 
made some truly brilliant games.
Thanks, Monolith.
If you want to know more about the Nemesis 
system, click here for my video on that.
