Hi, my name is Mark and I am 
making a video game about magnets.
Now, in the last episode of this series, I talked 
about the power of prototypes. I talked about the  
original idea for my game: which is to have a 
game where your character is magnetic. But then,  
as I prototyped that idea, I stumbled upon an even 
better one: the character is not magnetic, but  
they can pick up and throw these giant horseshoe 
magnets. That felt a lot more interesting.
But here's the thing: I didn't just change the 
game's main mechanic. I think I also ended up  
changing the game's genre. And that has caused 
me nothing but problems for these last few weeks.
Let me show you what happened.
Okay, so the original idea for this game was 
very much for it to be a platformer. I was  
taking influence from Mario and Super Meat 
Boy and Celeste and N++. I wanted to have  
speed running and mid-air manoeuvres and button 
combos and precision input… all that fun stuff.
But as soon as I separated the character and 
the magnet, the game started to veer away from  
being a platformer. And it's mostly down to 
this: when you have to babysit this magnet,  
it really slows down your progression 
through the world, because you have to stop,  
go back, pick up the magnet, and bring it with 
you. Repeat over and over again. The only real  
way to fix this is to be able to instantly recall 
the magnet to you from anywhere in the world,  
through any surface. Which is basically how the 
cap works in Super Mario Odyssey or the axe in God  
of War. And it's fine for those games, but my game 
is 2D so I think it would look a bit weird. Plus  
I think players might be wondering why the magnet 
is ignoring magnetic fields or metallic surfaces.
But it's not just that, it's that the game is 
also veering closer towards a different genre.  
It feels like this game wants to be a puzzle game. 
That's because when you have these two elements,  
you end up with these interesting problems to 
solve that you can overcome by thinking about  
the unique position and abilities of these two 
objects. Maybe you put the magnet down here,  
then manoeuvre the character up 
there, do something with the magnet,  
do something with the character, 
work together to solve this problem.
So it feels very much like this game should be 
a puzzle game. And I'm a little bit cautious  
about that because a few years back I made a video 
about puzzle game design and I talked to a number  
of game designers, and asked them “how do you make 
puzzles?”. And was kind of hoping for a nice easy  
formula or template to follow, 
but they kind of just gave me a  
slow confused shrug, because as it turns out… 
puzzles are really hard to make. They're also  
very time consuming. I mean, platformers can 
reuse the same setups over and over again  
with just very slight twists. I mean, 
you can randomly generate platformers  
at this point. But puzzle games have to be 
hand crafted and unique and they can't be  
repeated because once you know the 
solution they're no longer that much fun.
So that doesn't fill me with a lot of 
confidence. I mean I'm very much a newbie  
game designer and it feels like that's a lot 
to bite off. But I'll give it my best shot.
I started by drawing some puzzle ideas in 
my, uh, Hyrule Warriors: Age of Calamity  
notebook. It's actually quite useful because 
it's got grid paper. I drew out puzzles with  
all sorts of different elements like conveyor 
belts and pistons and spinning saw blades.  
You know, the classics! But, also, at this point 
I realised something quite important. You see,  
in my prototype I have given the player a lot 
of abilities: they can pick up the magnet,  
throw it, change its polarity, and 
recall the magnet back to them.  
That's a lot of abilities and it 
makes puzzles really hard to design.
You see, puzzles are often about constraining the 
player within walls, and then they have to think  
critically about how to get around those walls. 
But if you give them way too many abilities,  
it's really hard to make walls that can hold 
the player in. Especially that recall power-up:  
it's just way too powerful. It reminds me of the 
souped-up gravity gun at the end of Half-Life  
2. Like, it's really fun and satisfying 
but it has to be at the end of the game,  
otherwise it would make all of the puzzles and 
combat encounters… uh, you know, pointless.
And, besides, if I start the player off 
with all of these different abilities,  
it's going to make the game very difficult to 
learn. So maybe I should take a leaf out of, say,  
Portal’s book and slowly introduce these abilities 
over time. Maybe at the start the player can just  
pick up the magnet. And then later I give them 
the ability to change its polarity. And then  
later still, give them the ability to recall it.
Okay, so now that I've got some puzzles drawn out 
it was time to remake my prototype in a new Unity  
project. That's because the prototype was built 
to platformer spec: you know, a big zoomed out  
camera, fast movement, organic level design, stuff 
like that. This new one had to be made for puzzle  
game conventions, so I zoomed the camera right 
in. Slowed down my character and reduced its jump  
height. I scrapped the organic level design and 
used Unity's tile map system to put everything on  
a nice, neat, and orderly grid system. And I also 
made it so that each level was basically a single  
screen in the game. Partly because I like puzzle 
games where you can see all of the elements on  
screen at once. Partly because I was drawing each 
puzzle on a page of this notebook, which certainly  
influenced how big the levels would be. And partly 
because it meant I didn't need to make a camera  
system to follow the player if the camera never 
moves. So, you know, laziness always wins out.
I made one more change to this project 
that the prototype desperately needed,  
which is a trajectory arc showing you 
where the magnet will go when you throw it.  
I followed this great tutorial which basically 
just uses this mathematical equation, which can  
produce an arc based on things like the 
gravity, force, and mass of the object.  
It doesn't account for things like magnetic 
fields, but it's it's good enough for now.
So now that I've got the fundamentals coded 
into the game, it was time to build some game  
mechanics and level elements that I would 
need in order to recreate the puzzles in  
this notebook. So I made a big magnetic 
block which can move left and right. And  
then I made a button you can jump on in order 
to move that block to different positions.  
I made a tractor beam that can draw the magnet up, 
and you can use that to get to higher platforms. I  
made a weight and pulley system for creating doors 
and platforms. And I made a one-way platform.
Which actually led to a really interesting game 
development discovery. You see, this platform  
allows the player to pass through it, but it 
blocks the magnet. Which is good for puzzle  
design. But what happens if the player is holding 
the magnet when they pass through it? Well,  
the answer is that I have to decide what the 
answer is! You see, game development has all  
of these kind of unforeseen interactions 
between different elements in the game.  
And a lot of the time you have to actually decide 
what the outcome should be. Now if you're lucky,  
the outcome will be kind of designed for you, and 
that's interesting. That's kind of how a lot of,  
like, immersive sims work. But a lot of the 
time it will just lead to, like, a glitch,  
and you have to code in what the actual solution 
should be. Like, should I block the player from  
moving through a platform if they're holding 
a magnet? Or should I rip the magnet out of  
the player's hands? I went with that one. that 
seemed like the neatest way of doing it. But it  
turns out that game development is just full of 
these tiny, unforeseen, micro decisions to make.
Anyway, at this point I had 
built myself a number of small,  
single room puzzles and I thought perhaps I 
could string these together in order to make  
a demo to give to some people to get some 
feedback on what they think about the game.  
So I started putting it together and added in some 
elements I would need in order to make a demo.  
Like being able to pause the game, mouse control 
if they don't have a controller, a title screen,  
scene management for moving between levels, 
and, you know, clean up some bugs and bad code.
At this point I was almost ready to compile a 
demo to give to people. But then… there's always  
a but then in these videos. But then I woke up 
at one o'clock in the morning, unable to get  
back to sleep because I was panicking about 
my game. The truth is, the thought of giving  
these levels to people to play… to say that “this 
is what I have made” was just giving me anxiety.  
Because it wasn't good enough. These puzzles were 
just bad and uninteresting, the levels felt small  
and claustrophobic, and it had just gotten so 
far away from what I originally wanted to make.
Remember: I wanted to make a game about 
speedrunning. About speed and precision  
and fluidity. And I made this game that was 
claustrophobic and small and plodding and slow.  
Is this really what I wanted to be making? So I 
went downstairs at, like, 3 a.m. Opened up Unity,  
and tried to make a level that would show me what 
would this game look like if I had made it be  
more like a platformer. So I combined the tractor 
beam and the one-way platform into one thing so  
that you can ride the tractor beam up, let go of 
the magnet just before it hits the platform, that  
allows you to rock it out the top. Then you can 
recall the magnet through the platform, manoeuvre  
yourself into another magnetic field, and repeat 
this until you get to the top of the level.
That was pretty cool, so I decided to 
iterate on it a bit further and ended up with  
this crazy level. So you grab the magnet, ride 
up this tractor beam, let go, recall the magnet,  
throw it at this weight to open this 
door, thread through this needle,  
press this button, ride this block up, 
jump, recall the magnet into your hand,  
sail over into this other tractor beam, 
ride it up, let go, and land at the exit.
This felt really cool! This 
was fun. This was a lot closer  
to what I wanted to make in the first 
place. So maybe I'm not making a puzzle  
game? Maybe I am making a platformer. Scrap 
all those old levels, we're doing this now!
Now this level does have a problem, which 
is that it's very difficult. You need to  
understand all of these different mechanics in 
order to be able to do it, and also it revolves  
around the recall which, as I said, does have to 
be a late game ability. So I also need to unlock  
that for the player. So how about this: this 
platforming level is the last level in the game,  
and then I make a bunch of small platforming 
levels that lead up to it, and in each one  
I'm teaching you the mechanics and button presses 
and unlocking the abilities that you will need in  
order to ace this final level when you get 
to it. That sounds like something I can do.  
Time to head back into Unity and start making it.
So the first game mechanic I wanted to introduce 
the player is the tractor beam. So how about this:  
you start in a room with a magnet that's already 
stuck to a tractor beam. You press a button and  
the tractor beam turns off, and the magnet drops 
down to the floor. You can then grab the magnet,  
press the button again, and ride the tractor 
beam up, drop down onto the higher level. That is  
cool… but the magnet is stuck. Remember, we can't 
change its polarity or recall it yet, because I'm  
going to unlock those abilities in later levels. 
So how am I going to get the magnet back down?
Well I could add another button up here for 
the tractor beam, but that's a bit inelegant.  
I don't like having two buttons do the same 
thing. And, besides, the magnet will just  
drop all the way down to the bottom anyway. So 
perhaps this top button actually sends across  
a cover. Okay that's cool. But I'm a bit stuck 
up here now. Okay, if I add a ladder here I can  
go down, press the button, the magnet will drop 
onto the cover, and then go back up the ladder.
And that does work, but I'm not sure I really like 
it because if you can just take the ladder up,  
why would you need the tractor beam? 
Okay, so maybe the cover starts  
over the ladder, and then moves across to give 
you access… but this is actually kind of cool:  
I can slip through here while the cover is moving.
Actually, that's really cool… what if that was the 
solution to this puzzle? Wait. Puzzle?! I didn't  
think we're making a puzzle game anymore! 
I thought we were making a platformer.  
Ugh! And now I'm more confused than ever because 
I iterated on this puzzle game level for a while,  
and added in some new elements, and made 
it into this really cool puzzle where you  
have to manipulate and exploit this slow 
moving block to solve the puzzle at hand.
But on the other hand I really like this 
platforming level that feels fun and fast  
and fluid and fits all of the ideas 
I had at the beginning of the game.
And so I've got this awesome platforming 
level and this awesome puzzle level  
and I've come to this realisation that they 
can't both be in the game. I mean, look,  
you can have multiple genres in a game. You know, 
Persona 5 is a life simulator and a JRPG. But this  
is going too far. This is asking the player to 
jump between two distinctly different games. This  
is like playing Super Meat Boy and then suddenly 
having a level where you have to play a round  
of chess. It just doesn't work. I'm going to have 
people who want to play this game for the puzzles,  
who then get put off by the harsh demands 
of the platforming levels. I'm going to  
have people who want to speed run through the 
platforming levels, and then get stuck and slowed  
down by these puzzle levels. It just doesn't 
really work. And, sure, I could probably find  
some way to keep them both in the game, like 
making the puzzles optional. But, at this point,  
I'm just deluding myself and I have to ask the 
question: what genre is this game gonna be?
Now it kind of reminds me of this interesting 
phrase: ‘kill your darlings’. It comes from the  
world of writing books, and it's this idea that 
sometimes you have to make the hard decision to  
remove an element from your work, even if 
it's something you really like. Even if it's  
something you worked really hard on. Because 
its very existence is to the detriment of the  
overall work. And I think this is what's happened 
with the platforming parts of my game. You know,  
I think I want the game to be a platformer: I 
really like playing them, it was my original  
idea for the game, I've made a really cool 
platforming level that I want in the game,  
and I feel more confident about making lots 
of platforming levels than I do about making  
lots of puzzle levels. But the game is 
desperately telling me something else.
If this game was a giant magnet, it would be 
constantly pulling towards a block that says  
puzzle on it. And I am pulling it away 
and trying to move it towards platformer,  
to no avail. It keeps snapping back. And at this 
point I need to be real with myself. Because does  
it really matter what I want to make? Surely the 
most important thing is what's best for the game,  
and the game is best when it's a puzzle game.
But I feel a lot better about this now than I 
did during my 1 am freakout session, because  
I have proven that I can make a cool puzzle. And 
I feel like I might have hit on some interesting  
formulas and techniques for making good 
puzzles. More on that in the future.  
Plus, the more I wrangled and wrestled with these 
ideas about genres, I realised I was being perhaps  
a bit myopic about what a puzzle game is. If 
I move away from these tight, single screen,  
grid-based puzzle games, and go towards 
more of the puzzle platformer type thing,  
we can see games like Limbo, which does have 
these long continuous worlds to explore. Or  
Portal, which does require platforming 
prowess to solve some of the puzzles.
So perhaps I can keep some platforming 
elements in my game… I can have enemies,  
I can have long continuous levels, I can have 
platforming sections. As long as they always run  
secondary to the puzzles, which have 
to be the dominant part of the genre.
Now I could end the video there 
and say that this was a video about  
being indecisive about the genre, before 
finally coming to the realisation that  
it has to be a puzzle game. And then, 
you know, next episode I make a bunch  
more puzzles. But I think that might 
be missing the wood for the trees.
You see, this is actually just one small symptom  
of a much larger problem. I've talked about how 
I'm being indecisive about the game's genre, but  
if you watched me making the game in Unity these 
last few weeks you'd see me being indecisive about  
everything. I'm constantly trying and changing and 
messing around with different elements and ideas,  
as I struggle to understand 
the identity of this game.
I keep asking myself questions like: what if the 
magnet was attached to the player by a rope and  
you can swing around with it? What if this game 
was more physics based and you could attach the  
magnet to things to make them topple over? What 
if this game had enemy encounters or even boss  
fights? What if, instead of the magnet going to 
objects, objects come to the magnet and I can  
move blocks around like that? what if I make a 
trajectory arc that is affected by the magnetic  
field? And, of course, what if this game was a 
platformer? What if this game was a puzzle game?
I just can't make decisions.
Now some of this may be related to scope 
creep. This is when we have a small idea  
for a game, but we get excited about it so 
we start adding on new content and mechanics  
and ideas and it balloons to the point where we 
can never actually finish the game. Scope creep  
is when you are moving along the path of game 
development, but you keep extending that path  
further and further to the point 
where you never reach the destination.
But I think I'm doing something a bit different 
here. I'm not moving along that path! Instead,  
I'm making small, tentative steps into lots of 
different paths but never making the decision  
to go down in any one direction. And so ultimately 
I never move away from the start line. This  
is analysis paralysis: the inability to make a 
decision because you're overthinking the problem.
It comes down to me never being 
able to commit to any ideas  
because I worry that it will block me from 
being able to explore other ideas that might  
be amazing and interesting and cool. But, 
obviously, if I never commit to anything,  
this game will never be finished. 
In fact, I'll never even start it!
I've got to find a way to fix this analysis  
paralysis. So at this point, 
I decided to get some help.
So I've been doing this series called On The 
Level, where I talk to game designers while  
playing the levels that they've made. The last one 
I did, I talked to a guy called Oliver Granlund,  
who worked on It Takes Two's The Tree level. But 
as we were talking about it, I found out that  
he had also worked on the snow globe level, which 
has the main mechanic of… magnets! So if there was  
anyone I was going to talk to about my game 
design woes, it was going to be Oliver.
So I hit him up on Zoom and we chatted 
for a long time about all things magnetic,  
and I just dumped all my problems on him 
like a sort of impromptu therapy session.  
And in the end I just asked him, like, “dude 
what should I do?”. And here's what he said.
OLIVER GRANLUND: “So you're you're both  
lucky, but also unlucky where you have infinite 
time. You're not doing it in a game jam.  
I would try to adapt the game jam mindset, because 
this happens in game jams too, right? Where  
you're like this mechanic… I could do so much 
with it! But if I had to make it in one week,  
what would I do? And I would set an arbitrary 
time limit (that you're probably gonna overshoot),  
but set a an arbitrary time limit of “I’m 
gonna try to finish this in one month”.
I'd look at like what are the core 
things you need to make this game  
that you're envisioning. Maybe it's just 
you carrying a magnet, you can drop it,  
and you can switch polarity. Maybe those are 
the only things. And then make, like, I don't  
know how many levels. Like make five levels 
that uses this mechanic in an interesting way.
We usually talk about a an MVP, right? A minimum 
viable product. And I would recommend you to,  
like, focus on shipping this. If you want to 
continue, like, for example, for the sake of  
the series. Or because you're passionate about 
the game. Then I would do that from there. But  
then you made kind of like a small dent into the 
game to make it real. And you could ship that.
MARK BROWN: And you know what? I think that's 
pretty awesome advice. By setting myself a  
deadline and blocking myself from doing anything 
but the bare minimum that this game needs,  
I will force myself to start moving 
along that game development path.  
I will no longer be able to be 
indecisive about things because  
I've got this deadline to hit. Even if 
it is kind of made up and arbitrary.
And so I don't know if Oliver was being 100% 
serious with those numbers, but I'm going to  
take them. 30 days to make five levels, using 
the basic mechanics for this game. Not 30 days  
in a row: I've got to take breaks, I've got to 
make other types of videos, there's Christmas  
coming up. But 30 days in total. How much game 
can I make in that time? Will I hit my target  
of five levels? What will Oliver think of my 
game? We'll find out… sometime in January.  
Thanks for watching, and I'll see you then
Hey, so before I go I wanted to give a quick 
shout out to GMTK Patron verysoftwares,  
who took on the challenge of actually making 
my Picross RPG from the last episode. The  
resulting game is ROWBYROW. In this one 
you have these spells which you can cast,  
as long as you can plot down the appropriate 
number of tiles on the Picross board.  
It's pretty clever and it does indeed make you 
think very tactically about how you're going  
to solve the puzzle, and asks you to change 
your strategy based on things like the number  
of enemies or your own dwindling health. It's 
a smart game made by a smart person. You can  
try the game for yourself over on itch.io 
and there's a link in the description.
