Lately, I've been obsessed with 
a game called... Rollerdrome.
It's a white-knuckle, lightning-fast 
arena shooter on rollerskates. So  
you're trying to blast bad guys, while moving 
non-stop. And when you run out of bullets,  
you'll need to do tricks - like grabs 
and grinds - to refill your ammo.
It's a gem - a game that merges the arcade 
thrills of the Tony Hawk's Pro Skater games,  
with the chaotic combat chess of DOOM 2016.
It's a combination of two of my favourite games of  
all time. It's like, was this 
game made specifically for me?
Well... in a way... yeah.
You see, shortly after the game was released, 
I received a tweet that said "I just found  
out that Rollerdrome was originally conceived in 
GMTK's first game jam" and I was like... 
"what".
But it's true! Check the Itch.io archive 
for the first Jam and you'll find The  
Roller Dome - a top-down, twin-stick 
shooter on rollerskates. Effectively  
a playable 2D prototype for this year's 
coolest game. Well, second coolest game.
PAUL: "I think I was kind of in the headspace 
of making a shooter or a movement shooter and  
trying to come up with a unique premise 
around that but a lot of the ones I had  
seemed a little forced or they weren't 
really connecting in a natural way".
That's Paul Rabbitte, creator of The 
Roller Dome. He was a freelance dev,  
but working on solo projects and game 
jams in his spare time. Including the  
GMTK Game Jam for 2017, which had 
the theme of "Dual Purpose Design".
PAUL: "I think that's where the kind of 
aha moment kind of came from it's like  
what if it was Tony Hawk style movements 
but doing tricks gave you ammo to link  
into the shooting side of it and it was those two 
things together it just felt like a natural fit.
And it felt like it linked the two sides of the game
together really nicely.
Of course, there's only so much you can do in 
48 hours - so the jam entry is a little fiddly,  
crazy hard, and didn't make it into my top 20.
But the idea stuck, and soon Paul was 
remaking the game - this time in 3D. He  
posted GIFs of the project on Twitter and the 
whole thing just blew up. The videos racked  
up thousands of likes and retweets - and 
got the attention of different publishers.
Soon, Paul was chatting to Roll7 - the devs 
behind the side-scrolling skate gem OlliOlli,  
which seemed like a natural fit. And so now he  
had a whole team of artists and 
designers to make this game real.
Which is beyond rad.
A number of GMTK Game Jam games 
have been polished up, expanded,  
and released as awesome games on Steam 
and Switch and elsewhere. (I actually  
have a Steam curator list of such games 
- find a link in the description.) But  
to have a jam game go onto become a full-fat 
indie hit with cracking reviews and a launch  
party and all that jazz - well, I just had 
to hit up the developers to find out more.
So, as it turns out - it's not all 
that easy to take a pithy proposal  
like "Tony Hawk's meets DOOM", and then turn 
it into an actual, fully fleshed out game.
Like, in the beginning, the devs had a 
pretty literal take on that mix - with  
most of the features from skating games, 
plus most of the mechanics from an arena  
shooter. And the result was... an overwhelming 
mess. A game that was impossible to learn,  
too much to take in, and like two games 
competing for your attention at once.
So they had to start chipping away at unnecessary 
features, from both sides of the equation.
From the skating side of things - moving 
forward is now completely automated, it's  
impossible to bail, and you don't need to play a 
teeny balancing mini-game while grinding. And to  
help make shooting more simple, there's a shared 
ammo pool, snappy auto-aim on the early weapons,  
and a massive injection of slow mo at 
the touch of a button - aka, reflex mode.
PAUL: "Bailing is sort of fine in Tony Hawk's 
because all you're thinking about is skating.  
And in DOOM, all you're thinking about is 
shooting and kind of dodging and stuff. So  
that's all you have to think about, that's 
fine. But when you put them together and  
players think about all these different 
things, it made sense to simply and iterate  
until we found the kind of most natural 
combination of the two sides of the game".
The designers found other ways to keep things 
simple and streamlined, too. So, while enemies  
used to chase you around, most of them now stay 
in place - letting you make a pretty effective  
mental model of where each bad guy is standing. 
And by surrounding the level with quarter pipes,  
you'll always be shoved back into the arena - 
even if you're not looking where you're going.
Now, that might sound like the 
game has been stripped of all  
challenge - but it just lets the 
devs put the difficulty elsewhere.
So each Rollerdrome level is a non-stop onslaught 
of bloodthirsty bad guys. There are enemies,  
laser beams, puddles of poison, and 
stomping mech walkers. All of them  
ruthlessly out to get out. Just like 
Doom, you finish each encounter with  
your eyes watering from not blinking enough. 
If you finish the encounter at all, that is.
And so we end up with a game 
about just trying to survive.
PAUL: "We were after a certain feeling. 
This super high intensity thing. We wanted  
to feel like a bloodsport so we wanted 
it to feel really dangerous and so even  
when we were pulling out mechanics 
we knew the focus was on creating a  
certain feeling for the player and so 
everything could guide towards that".
But what's really cool about Rollerdrome, is 
that - over time - your experience with the  
game changes. While it might start out as a game 
about surviving - eventually, as you get better  
at the game, learn more skills, and unlock more 
weapons - it becomes a game about dominating.
Perhaps the best example of this shift can be 
found in the game's "super reflex" mechanic.
So, a useful move in Rollerdrome is the 
dodge, which lets you bounce away from  
enemies or swerve past snipers to make them lose 
their tracking. It's a key tactic for survival.
But, if you dodge at the very last moment before 
taking damage, you'll get a "perfect dodge".  
And if you enter the slow-mo reflex 
mode now, you'll go into "super reflex",  
which massively amps up your attack power 
and lets you rinse through bad guys.
This changes the dodge from a defensive 
move, into an offensive move. You're  
now taunting enemies like a bullfighter 
and juking baddies like a quarterback.
DREW: "It's a big pivot in in the gameplay 
because all the enemy attacks that you're  
previously terrified of and that you've been 
killed with multiple times... all of a sudden  
they become like an asset to you and a thing 
that you can exploit. And go from defensive  
or maybe evasive to actually like 'bring 
it on, I'm gonna skate into that landmine  
or that rocket'. It's a gameplay moment but 
narratively, for me, it's when Kara really  
starts to believe in herself. And starts to 
feel like 'I'm not running away from these  
enemies anymore. I'm gonna turn their attacks 
against them. I'm gonna take the fight to them'.
It's also a great example of hiding 
additional depth and mastery within  
a game's core mechanics. Super reflex doesn't 
ask you to learn new combos or buttons - just  
to use the game's basic verbs - dodge and 
reflex - but now with more risky timing.
Plus, it's an example of a game mechanic 
evolving organically throughout development.  
While prototyping, the devs discovered that they 
could actually clip through enemies unharmed if  
they dodged with just the right timing. So this 
was fleshed out, and turned into perfect dodge.
And then, taking inspiration 
from Bayonetta's witch time,  
it was decided that players should 
be rewarded for taking this risk.  
And the easiest way to do this was to add 
a bonus to an existing mechanic: reflex.  
These serendipitous discoveries became the 
backbone of Rollerdrome's high level play.
DRE: "You know it's early doors yet. 
The game's only been out a couple of  
weeks. But I've seen some people doing 
that kind of stuff and I was like 'wow,  
people have already got real deep on the 
system'. And it's just really heartening  
to see people just connect with our game on 
the way that we really hoped they would".
Now here's the really clever part: 
Rollerdrome actually facilitates this  
shift, from survival to domination, 
through its meta-level progression.
You see, the only way to unlock new levels is 
to finish these bonus challenges. And they push  
you to play better. The high score challenges 
require you to play with skill and intention - to  
go beyond just trying to survive. Other 
challenges subtly teach you high level tactics,  
like enemy weakness toward certain guns, 
or the super reflex I just talked about.
And when you return to earlier stages to mop up 
unfinished challenges, you'll likely find that  
where you once scraped through and barely survived 
- you're now blitzing your old high score,  
dominating the competition, and revelling in 
your transformation from prey, to predator.
DRE: "Your increase in skill is really 
evident. And you are whooping ass in  
those earlier levels. And you feel 
more powerful and you actually get  
to see how much you've progressed from some 
of the struggle to where you are now. And I  
think that is a powerful feeling 
too, it makes people feel good".
So, a game jam game is usually just the kernel 
of an idea. A seed. And it takes time, skill,  
and care to cultivate it into a full release. 
But Rollerdrome goes to show that this can  
have great results. This is a game with 
a wonderful core experience - supported  
by clever design where players subtly morph 
from scared survivors into predatory pros.
Some incredible games have been made 
during game jams - like Superhot for  
7 Day FPS. Titan Souls for Ludum Dare. Baba 
is You for Nordic Game Jam. And Keep Talking  
And Nobody Explodes for Global Game Jam. 
And so now, I'm really proud for the GMTK  
Game Jam to have had a teeny tiny role in the 
creation of an awesome game like Rollerdrome.
GMTK Patrons on the bonus video tier can check 
out an extended cut of my conversation with the  
developers at Roll7. And if you want to 
see more incredible game jam creations,  
then take a look at this video, where 
I reveal the 20 best games made for  
this year's jam, which had 
the theme "Roll of the Dice".
See you soon.
