Hey everyone! We thought we’d end the 
year with something a little different.
Normally when we make an episode, we start 
with a topic, and backfill it with games that  
help us discuss it. SOMEtimes a new game will 
force a new topic to the front of the line,  
but most likely any brand new game we 
love has to wait a while to show up  
in a video. NOT TODAY! We’re speeding up 
that process. We’re Doing Design Doc’s ‘A  
Lot Of Games Of The Year’ 2024. They’re 
all exactly equally Game of the Year.
This is kind of like a Game of the Year roundup 
that most gaming media outlets do, but we aren’t  
going for near their level of completeness. We’ve 
skipped over plenty of the big releases this year,  
sorry FF7,
so this won’t be directly comparable. These 
are just a bunch of games, big and small, that  
we liked a lot, that we think would be worth your 
time, and our pitch for why they’re cool. There’s  
a good chance some of these games will be new 
to you, and I bet a couple will catch your eye.
So let me pitch you on my 
18 of the Games of the Year,  
brought to you by today’s sponsor, Skillshare!
Skillshare has more class than the floor of 
Monte Carlo. It’s the largest online learning  
community for creatives. If there’s 
a hobby you’ve been curious about,  
Skillshare can hook you up with what you 
need to know. Illustration, graphic design,  
creative writing, photography, music, marketing, 
business skills, productivity, and way more.  
Each class is taught by industry professionals, 
with lessons ranging from beginner to advanced.
I’ve been itching to jump into a new 
hobby lately. Replace doom scrolling  
with something else. I picked music 
composition. If Toby Fox can do it,  
I think I could too. I’m gonna try, at least. 
Besides, I’m having a lot of fun with it.
You get unlimited access to the 
whole thing with your membership,  
so you can jump around and find what exactly 
suits you this winter. New Years is coming up,  
and Skillshare is a great way to get a jump 
start on your resolutions for personal growth.
The first 500 people to use my link 
in the description get a one month  
free trial of Skillshare. Get started today! Thanks, Skillshare.
OK, first up is my Speedrunning Game of 
the Year - Sonic X Shadow Generations.
The new Shadow Generations campaign is straight 
up one of the all time best Sonic games,  
period. I should know, I’ve played them 
all. Except Free Riders. And Sonic Blast  
on the Game Gear. But do those really count? I 
don’t think so. This game is an excellent blend  
of a couple of the series’s lineages, mixing the 
speed-of-sound feel of games like Sonic Unleashed,  
with the better platforming precision of the Sonic 
Adventure style, in the same game. Sonic Frontiers  
started down this path but Shadow Generations 
might be perfecting it. Combine that with the new  
Doom and Chaos Control powers that let Shadow take 
more efficient routes in more interesting ways,  
and that gives the game the most fun movement I 
think the series has ever had. It’s actually hard for me  
to go back to Sonic Generations after this. I hope 
this is the shape of what’s to come going forward, but you never know.
What’s really got me hooked though are the speed 
running features. After getting goaded by a friend  
of mine into submitting leaderboard times, I’ve 
been locked in a speed running arms race with him for weeks.
Once I figured out the tech for Spear 
Gliding, that let me cut… SEVERALS of  
seconds off of runs. Tevy and I keep 
one-upping each other and improving  
our records. Chaos Control lets you stop the 
timer but it requires energy from enemies,  
which opens up more strategic paths 
to cut even more time if you get the  
route down just right. It’s got that same 
fun-to-speedrun design that Neon White has.
The level designs let you take tons of different 
paths to the end, and the more fun move set makes  
each of them feel like a challenge and 
an achievement once you find a new route.
If you’ve ever loved a Sonic game before, FOR 
ANY REASON, this one is worth giving a chance.
Plus you get the full remaster of  
Sonic Generations in the same 
package for free! What a deal!
You know, Shadow’s got the attitude, 
but he doesn’t quite have the vibes.  
Unlike my Vibes Speedrunning 
Game of the Year: Phantom Spark.
Phantom Spark is pure arcade racing. It’s 
really minimalistic. All you do is steer,  
accelerate, and brake - no power ups, no 
crazy drifting, nothing but you and the  
track and the other car ship things. 
It might sound a little underwhelming,  
but this game gets a lot out of very little. 
Its core is simple time trial ghost racing,  
where you’re competing with NPCs and your past 
runs to shave down seconds. This, combined with  
the lo-fi futuristic aesthetic and soundtrack make 
it a very meditative game. Once you get going,  
you can enter that zen-like flow state really 
easily, as you try to perfect your racing lines  
with great precision and well-timed braking. The 
color palettes and character design remind me a  
lot of C2C’s Delta music video, which is like one 
of my favorite aesthetics, so that’s pretty cool.
If you like Time Trials, and want 
a vibes game, this is for you.
If you want more Beach Vibes, try the Beach 
Vibes Game of the Year: Isles of Sea and Sky.
Do you like the Game Boy Color era 
of Zelda? And Sokoban block pushing  
puzzles? I got this after seeing Mark 
Brown sing its praises a few months ago,  
and I fell in love immediately. It’s hammering 
that Chrono Cross aesthetic button in my  
brain - especially with the world map theme 
‘Turtle Rider.’
This is a free-form puzzle game,  
less stage-based than most.where you’re pushing 
blocks as you explore elemental islands,  
collect keys, gems, and stars, and unlock 
areas to reveal more of the island’s secrets.
The game has an excellent mechanical 
ramp - slowly introducing and teaching  
new mechanics. The puzzles are tough - 
I kept thinking ‘Oh, I got it!’ only to  
realize I’d forgotten an important step 
and was set back to the drawing board,  
This happens over and over
until something eventually clicks. But that cycle's great! The puzzles 
aren’t monotonous, with a nice variation in  
challenge and scale. It’s not just complicated 
block pushing all the way through. Environmental  
puzzles can span entire islands, rewarding 
your observational skills. Unfolding each  
major mystery is very satisfying, both when you 
discover it, and then again when you solve it.
The Metroidvania bit tangles the game a 
little, where you might not know whether  
you are capable of solving a puzzle right 
when you find it with the mechanics you have,  
but even so, the game is more than good 
enough to be worth taking the trip.
Now if you want HARD puzzles, try my ‘Way Harder 
Puzzles, But ALSO A Rewarding Unfolding Box  
of Mystery With A Five Word Title’ Game 
of the Year: Lorelei and the Laser Eyes
I do love an escape room. But I’ve thought for a 
while that videogame escape room-style experiences  
can be a little underwhelming. Maybe it was too 
many easy puzzles, or too many obvious clues,  
or too abstract of a theme, but they weren’t 
hitting me very hard. There should be a  
game that’s like a HARD escape room. Then 
Simogo did it grander than I’ve ever seen.
Lorelei and the Laser Eyes is a carefully built 
puzzle box, full of style.   
This creepy mansion is full of ghosts, secrets, and a thousand locked doors.
The game doesn’t explicitly walk 
you through puzzle to puzzle. It just puts all the  
pieces out for you to browse, and you can put them all  
together as you figure out what they are and what  
they’re helping you solve. The house unlocks and 
unfolds, with tons of environmental storytelling  
along the way about the movie director owner of this mansion hotel.
It’s extremely chill, and if not for one glaring menu navigation problem, I’d call this one a perfect 10/10 puzzle game. Just put in 
an exit button, Simogo, c’mon! Just one quick fix! As  
it is, if you like Myst-era adventure puzzle 
design, this one’s absolutely worth playing.
Lorelei did lose a category, though. ‘Protag  
Sunglasses Game of the Year’. That 
goes to Tactical Breach Wizards.
Lots of my favorite games have a unique high 
concept, and Tactical Breach Wizards checks  
that box for sure. It’s a tactics game, wrapped in 
a police procedural, wrapped in an urban fantasy  
world where teams of wizards that function 
as a combo of a SWAT team and the Marines,  
use magic to breach buildings, tactically 
take out bad guys, and predict the future.
Your team has an arsenal of magic 
powers, and should use them to  
set traps, and blast people. Out of windows.
Every opponent behaves in 100% predictable ways,  
so the process on each level becomes 
figuring out how to combine all of your  
character’s attacks at max efficiency, so 
you never get hit yourself. One of your  
main characters is a time wizard, so you get 
the power to see events before committing,  
and rewind the fight as much as you 
want to set it all up perfectly.
This is a lot like Into The Breach, but more 
expansive, and with much more of a narrative  
to tell. The game’s story is really fun - it’s 
pretty much a full on parody of an 80s cop drama,  
but it’s not taking itself seriously at all. It’s 
worth a look just for its unique combination of  
tone and tactics, but it has more than enough 
tactical depth for you to sink your teeth into. If  
you’re looking for another game to push that Into 
The Breach idea a little further, check this out.
My Shenanigans Game of the Year 
is Tiny Terry’s Turbo Trip.
Quadruple T is kind of like mixing A 
Short Hike, The Simpsons Hit and Run,  
and Homestar Runner, into one short, goofy 
game. You’re Terry, and you want to go to  
space in your impossibly tiny taxi cab. 
They already built the space highway,  
so Terry’s goal isn’t delusional. It’s 
right there! Your cab sucks though. For now.
It’s a collect-a-thon, where you’re 
driving around an island town gathering  
literal junk so you can power up your 
car’s turbo engine and blast onto the  
space highway. Upgrading your car works 
a lot like the feathers in A Short Hike,  
where you’re just trying to improve your mobility 
to make it easier to boost up the highway.
The game’s really about the characters, though. 
It’s filled with charming little side quests,  
like helping this beach food stand guy come up 
with a new hit food, or checking in on this jerk  
getting a tan, or selling stolen cars to your 
neighbor. It’s a low key, mess around experience  
with lots of secrets and a goofy sense of humor. 
And bumper car battles. What’s not to love?
Now on the opposite end of shenanigans,  
my Way Too Intense Game Of The 
Year is Yellow Taxi Goes Vroom.
Yellow Taxi Goes Vroom is an unhinged platformer, 
but maybe only the second best car-themed 3D  
Collect-a-thon platformer of the year. You 
and your wind-up taxi go around weird levels  
collecting these green gears for progression. 
Your helper is off-brand Mario - Morio - and  
you’re fighting an off-brand Tesla - Tosla. 
The whole thing has the vibe of a fever dream,  
with flashing neon, super energetic 
music, and lots of weird crude humor.
The gameplay is interesting. Another one of 
those platformers with no traditional jump  
button. Your taxi has a tight turning radius, 
and you’ve got a few abilities to get around,  
with a powerful dash, a short hop, a super boost, 
and a larger hop kinda like Mario 64’s backwards  
somersault. The controls are super unorthodox, 
but I think that’s the main appeal. You can do  
some crazy tricks with this moveset, and I think 
speedrunners can have a lot of fun with this thing  
once they get a handle on it. This game has a 
lot of levels to explore, and of course, since  
you’re a taxi, a lot of Crazy Taxi homages too, 
with passengers to ferry around in a time limit.
It’s weird, it’s not for everyone,  
but it might be for you. There’s a 
demo available now, so check it out!
Green gears are fine I guess but what if 
they were dressed as beloved characters  
from your past? Best Most Collectibles 
Game of the Year goes to Astro Bot
Astro Bot is fantastic. It’s an 
unbelievably polished platformer,  
and fun the whole way through. It’s 
on the level as a mainline Mario game,  
but I think the best parts are its collectibles.
It’s nice to have a game that knows how to 
make a smooth and satisfying completionist  
experience. It’s not that common. 
Astro Bot has over 300 bots to rescue,  
and they’re some of the most satisfying 
collectibles I’ve ever seen. Each stage  
has around 5 to 10 of them to find. 
About half are nothing special,  
but the other half are dressed as characters from 
the Playstation back catalogue. These are some  
DEEP cuts too. The Incredible Crisis guy. Devil 
Dice. Intelligent Qube! No Eggs of Steel though,  
someone dropped the ball there. The hub is extra fun to 
come back to, as all your little guys are hanging  
out and messing around. You can even use the 
coins you’ve earned to buy them accessories, with  
even more deep cut references. I’m not sure how 
Ulala is a Playstation character, but whatever!
These cameos are perfect breadcrumb trails 
to the end - intrinsically rewarding every  
time you get one, and great at keeping the 
excitement up as you wonder who will show  
up next. It’s great in the same way the 
Trophy Galleries in Smash Bros have been  
great. A fun reminder of Sony’s history, 
for a company that could use more of that.
Now let’s get Sega to let someone do 
a new Monkey Ball Oh Wait They Did  
It’s The Monkey Ball of the Year: Banana Rumble.
This is one of those games I always hoped 
for but never expected. An amazing return to  
form for a series that lost its way years ago. 
Banana Slamma is the real Super Monkey Ball 3.
Banana Mania was a solid remake of the first 
two, but Rumble is a true sequel. All new  
levels. Tons of tough stages, properly using 
the modern Monkey Ball physics engine. And  
there’s new tech! The Spin Dash is a perfect 
addition that gives you a whole new dimension  
to use - drifting around turns, braking hard, or 
gaining a burst of speed to dash past gaps. The  
levels are about as good as they were in 2, and 
the extra missions do give you a real challenge,  
to master the physics engine and the 
spin dash to find the right route.
On top of all that, you get lots of cosmetics 
to unlock! And multiplayer…’s there too. It’s  
fine. But the single player is borderline perfect. 
It’s what you wanted in the return of Monkey Ball.
My Spatial Awareness Game of 
the Year is Backpack Battles.
Do you want to make the Resident Evil 
4 Attache Case a full-on game? Where  
you fight other people in asynchronous 
battles to see whose backpack has the  
right stuff in the right places to 
come out victorious? Where putting  
this potion not HERE, but… HERE can be 
the difference between life and death?
Backpack Battles is a very unusual autobattling 
combat puzzler, where you build yourself  
up through a Roguelike-style shop system, 
unlocking tons of combos and secret synergies  
with the items you hold, and fight increasingly 
tough enemies until you lose a few times.
These fights are very tough to parse while 
they’re happening, but the game also gives  
you tools so you can watch a replay and slow 
it down to study exactly what’s going on.
It’s an engine-building game in a quirky 
format, and is complex in a way that you  
might not expect from how it looks, and I think 
you know right away if this game’s for you.
Spiritual successors of neglected games are 
all the rage in the indie scene, but it’s  
kinda rare to get one from a big studio. This 
year, Vanillaware brought Ogre Battle back  
from the dead with Unicorn Overlord, our ‘Mike 
Actually Beat A Game This Year’ Game of the Year
Unicorn Overlord is a tactical RPG, but it’s 
not the usual grid-based fare you find in most  
of those. You’re in charge of a BUNCH of 
story characters - you get a new one or…  
three on almost every map. Each has their 
own class, inventory, skills, and whatnot,  
but they don’t fight alone. You have to put these 
characters into a coherent squad, where the team  
can accentuate the character’s positives, and 
positate the negatives. You send them out under  
your banner to fight enemy squads and free this 
country from Evil McSuper Evil. Your squads will  
have to physically bump into the enemy squads to 
fight, and the movement and positioning plays a  
major role in keeping enemies out of important 
places like forts and bridges. It’s a unique  
game type. It’s complex. It can get super deep 
if you want it to be, but it’s a style of game  
without many other comparables. Except for Ogre 
Battle, and the last Ogre Battle was ages ago.
The style wasn’t overdone, or too simple, 
or too old. It was just lost to time,  
waiting for someone to find it on a dusty 
shelf and clean it up. Vanillaware took  
what was great about Ogre Battle and mixed 
it with mechanical influences from games  
like Final Fantasy XII and Fire Emblem, and 
let this new package find a new audience.
They put their studio on the line for a passion 
project. A 10 year love letter to the old tactical  
RPGs the devs grew up with, and thanks to a 
commitment of polish, the studio’s gorgeous art  
style, and their willingness to put in the work, 
they’ve brought a whole type of game back to life.
Vanillaware swung for the fences 
and connected. … Like Pablo Sanchez  
in Game of the Year 2024: Backyard Baseball ‘97.
Alright, we’re stretching the definition 
of ‘released this year’ a bit,  
but it’s been a long time since Backyard 
Baseball was easy to play on a modern PC.  
This one’s from the same studio that did all 
the kid-friendly late ‘90s adventure games,  
like Putt-Putt and Freddi Fish, 
that I also loved growing up.
It’s shocking how well this game 
actually holds up. Each kid has  
a distinct personality. The game is absolutely  
loaded with hand-drawn animation - 
custom walk-ups for every player,  
lots of unique voice lines for each kid, all 
the different fields have their own quirks,  
and all of the animation still looks really good 
for being created for a 25-year-old kids game.
This isn’t a game done on the cheap, the 
devs put a lot of work in to make this a  
surprisingly deep game for what it’s trying 
to be. The baseball is very arcade-focused,  
but there’s plenty of fun here to pick up on 
a casual playthrough. The game has lots of fun  
secrets to find, and lots of real baseball 
strategy to discover. If you’re a parent,  
this is a great game to play together with 
your kid, and is a great way to introduce  
them to the game of baseball if they’re 
just starting to get interested in it.
And they re-released the soccer one too,  
if that’s more YOUR personal 
nostalgic anchor. Same praise applies.
We’re going from a real ‘90s throwback to 
more of a ‘90s… enthusiast. That’s right,  
it’s the Feels Bad Game of the Year: Mouthwashing.
Are you in the mood for psychological 
horror on a stranded spaceship? It’s a  
tight couple hours of an experience, 
weaving back and forth in time,  
exploring the psychological disaster 
unfolding on the Tulpar. Play through  
set piece after set piece with some great 
art direction with a PS1 demake flavor.
It’s not quite a movie, but it is movie-like, 
and you can treat it like one. Mouthwashing is  
a demanding game, with challenging subject matter, 
and a story told with nuance, foreshadowing,  
symbolism, and misdirection. It’s full of detail 
to absorb on repeat playthroughs. The character  
development is outstanding, and this game would 
not hold up if it wasn’t written this well.
It’s not breezy stuff, it’s not for kids, but 
if you want a serious psychological horror that  
you can complete in an afternoon, you can’t do 
better this year. Mouthwashing will surprise ya.
And now, the Smallest Data Footprint Game of the 
Year: Animal Well. Seriously, this thing is tiny.
This has my favorite atmosphere in a Metroidvania 
since Hollow Knight. This well of animals keeps  
that balance of eerie, mystical, and beautiful 
throughout the whole game. You know how in Super  
Metroid, there were a couple rooms with some 
weird non-hostile animals you could find and  
interact with to do some optional stuff or 
get a new technique? This is if the whole  
game was that. To solve most puzzles, 
you get the animals to do your bidding.
It’s an open-ended game, with no set order for 
obtaining all your tools to travel around. Yo-yos,  
bubble wands, or the frisbee - you get 
access to all these new toys plus more,  
but you have to figure out all the ways 
you can use them, and it’s going to take  
you a bit. The game’s level design is great at 
pushing players to experiment with different  
possibilities and to try to discover 
these secret functions. It’s short,  
but sweet - minus the Ghost Dog - and a 
great game to talk over with your friends.
And Now The Second Best Yo-Yo of 
the Year: Penny’s Big Breakaway
OK, I didn’t feel it until editing this 
video, but 2024 was a REALLY good year  
for 3D platformers. I was keeping an eye on this 
one after several of the Sonic Mania developers  
had formed their own studio, Evening Star, and 
I couldn’t wait for this, their first project.
Penny’s Big Breakaway is more 
movement-focused than the team’s  
Sonic pedigree would make you expect. It’s an 
excellent 3D platformer with great momentum,  
a cool combo system that reminds me of 
Tony Hawk, and a bouncy soundtrack headed  
by Tee Lopes. And the UI looks really 
nice. I love these little penguin guys.
This game’s got charm, and a high skill ceiling, 
but you’re gonna have to be into the game’s  
style. There are issues with the levels being 
a bit same-y, and a bit glitchy, and the bosses  
aren’t amazing, but the movement feels so good 
that I can overlook a LOT. Using your magic  
yo-yo to chain together maneuvers like swinging, 
dashing or riding down slopes feels amazing when  
you get it down. MAN this movement’s good. I 
bet Evening Star’s next game will be killer.
Minishoot Adventures is two great 
games that work great together:  
The Reese’s Peanut Butter Cup Game of the 
Year.
It’s a classic Zelda and Metroidvania combo - 
boy there’s a lot of those lately actually - but  
how many are also a twin stick shooter? 
It’s not wildly inventive for the genre,  
other than the combo, but it more than 
makes up for that in polish, and, I mean,  
just LOOK at this! Very nice. Very pleasant. 
Your ship is fast and nimble from the start,  
and every shot has a satisfying ping whenever they 
hit. The character progression is a constant ramp  
as you level up your ship. Once the difficulty 
ramps up, it veers into Bullet Hell, but it’s  
more Bullet Heck - it doesn’t go TOO far. And 
yes, there are dungeons, and exploration, and a  
Metroidvania structure. If watching this is doing 
anything for you, I think you’ll have a good time.
Now our ‘Oops I Have To Finish This In 
January’ Game of the Year is Metaphor:  
ReFantazio. I have not finished it yet.
It’s good. I’ve got more thoughts over in this 
video. I’m running out of time to finish editing  
this before the end of the year. So, moving 
on. Speaking of losing track of time…
You ever feel like you’re trapped in 
Reno, awake for 40 hours straight,  
hallucinating, and chained to a video 
poker machine at 3AM? That’s Balatro!
I’ve never gotten in on the ground floor 
of a smash hit indie game earlier than I  
did with this one. It was a little 
Steam NextFest demo thing late last  
year that I found out from a friend, and 
now it’s exploded. Top of the App Stores.  
Awards from every corner of gaming 
media. A little genre of its own.
YOU know what Balatro is. You don’t 
need a full rundown at this point,  
but If you haven’t tried it yet, go 
do that. What gets me every time is Balatro’s soundtrack. 
WHAT A LOOP. WHAT 
A VIBE. LouisF took a FIVERR PROJECT and  
earned his way into the pantheon of 
game music composers with a single  
song and four variations. How is that possible? 
Balatro is the Game of the Year… of the Year.
And that’s the year! So many games of the 
year. That’s gotta be a new record. Anyway,  
go check ‘em out, I hope you spotted one 
you hadn’t heard of, and I hope you like it!
Head to the comments and tell everyone 
about your personal secret faves from this  
year. There are so many games out now that 
it’s helpful to flag down the hidden gems.
We’re gonna take a week off, then be back 
in the new year for more normal analysis  
episodes. I think we’ve got another boss video 
brewing next. Thanks for watching, and being a  
fan of the channel, and here’s to making the 
most out of the year ahead. Happy New Year!
*chill vibes from Balatro*