BOSSES. In video games. You love ‘em. But... 
do you really KNOW them? Their deepest,  
darkest secrets? Their social security number? Or 
just how to turn them into a pile of goo faster?
Boss fights are a cornerstone of game design, 
but it’s easy to make a boss fight that just  
goes through the motions. A fight where 
a boss runs out of health, and you move  
on without thinking about it ever again. Boss 
fight SECRETS give a game dev the chance to add  
layers. They can take a flat boss and spice 
it up. To add nuance, and depth of flavor.
But there’s tons of ways to go about putting 
secrets into a boss fight. What CAN you do  
with a boss secret, anyway? That’s today’s 
episode! Let’s talk about boss secrets!
*doorbell* *gasp* YES. Oh my god my package 
is finally here. This is gonna be so good…
I got the hottest product of the 
month, today’s sponsor, Manta Sleep!
They make comfortable sleep masks! You like to 
sleep, right? Some of their masks, like this one,  
have WiFi speakers built in too, so you can 
fall asleep to music or podcasts. What a world!
Mike: This does feel pretty nice.
Dan: Longer, brighter days in the summer 
can affect your sleep without you even  
realizing it. Sleeping with a mask 
on can help keep the earlier sun from  
disrupting your circadian rhythms, 
and that can help you sleep better.
It fits every head, and it’s comfortable no 
matter how you sleep. Side, stomach, or back.
Actually, this would also be kinda perfect 
for blindfolded speedruns of games,  
as an all-in-one headphones and blindfold 
thing. Perfect vision blocking and it connects  
to any audio you want via BlueTooth. It is 
really comfortable to wear for a long time.
Actually, this would also be kinda perfect for blindfolded speedruns of games, as an all-in-one headphones and blindfold thing.
Click the link in the description 
and use code ‘DESIGNDOC’ to get  
10% off a Manta Sleep mask. Thanks, Manta Sleep!
Secrets can come in many forms. Boss secrets 
are no different. And these secrets aren’t all  
just there for funsies. Well… some of them 
are. The right secret in the right place  
can completely change how you think about 
a boss. Let’s break this up into parts. OK.
Probably the most common way to implement a boss 
secret is the Quick Kill. Any secret that lets  
you take care of a boss without going through 
the normal path - to make the boss easier,  
shorter, more attractive. Maybe not that one.
The devs of Super Metroid designed its major 
bosses with blatant weaknesses in mind.
Most of them are fairly traditional, like a big 
eyeball as a weak spot, or an open mouth. Draygon,  
the third major boss, normally gets bodied 
with missiles. But he has a much cooler  
secret weakness. If you break open one 
of these armored turrets on the walls,  
you’ll reveal an open electrical current. Now 
all you gotta do is get grabbed. As Draygon  
flies around with you in tow, switch to your 
grapple beam and hit the current. Bzzzzt. You  
fry the boss, instantly killing it. It’s very 
efficient, and it’s a cool out-of-the-box  
thinking moment that pays big rewards to a 
player trying to creatively use their tools.
One of the programmers, Yasuhiko Fujii, had 
this to say about the Draygon quick kill:
“[That] was part of our overall 
design philosophy for the bosses:  
that they all needed to have a weakness 
somewhere. With that in mind, we wanted to  
add something surprising for players. It was also 
done for people who keep dying to that annoying  
“W” swoop attack of his… we wanted it to be this 
eye-opening moment, like “whoa, you can do that?”’
These quick kills don’t happen ALL the time 
in the series, but they do show up a lot.
Metroid Dread’s second boss is Kraid, who you 
fight in a superheated room while wearing your  
newly acquired, heat-resistant Varia suit. 
In the second phase, you have to shoot his  
belly to bring down a magnetic panel to get a 
clear shot at his head for some real damage.
But there’s a nagging detail in this room. 
There’s a Morph Ball launcher in the corner,  
which requires a powerup that you don’t 
normally have yet. If you come back here  
AFTER the Kraid fight, the launcher 
doesn’t do much of anything. But it’s  
not here by accident. That should get 
a player thinking: ‘What am I missing?’
The placement of the Morph Ball launcher is  
hinting at one of the most fun elements 
of Metroidvania design: a sequence break.
After getting the Varia suit, instead of heading 
towards the Kraid fight, you could have chosen to  
backtrack to Dairon and see what your new suit can 
do back there. There is a superheated area you can  
walk into now, and a couple secret blocks you can 
shoot, then a long hallway you can traverse early  
with some tricky coyote jumps. You do all that, 
and you get the grapple beam early, use that to  
clear out yet ANOTHER block in Dairon, and make 
your way up to the Morph Ball bombs. NOW take  
on Kraid. Activate the launcher, bomb Kraid from 
the inside, and you’ve got yourself a quick kill!
One block in one standard room suggested the 
presence of an entire chain of side areas to  
explore. It’s a pretty cool way to sidestep a 
boss fight. Not as an exploit or an oversight,  
but as a hint at a secret alternate path. It’s 
not meant to be done on your first run through,  
but it should get a first-time player to 
think harder about what secrets are out there,  
and look around for details beyond 
the simple path in front of them.
It’s also important that it’s not 
a one-time thing in Dread. There  
are other sequence breaker moments that can 
spice up playthroughs for curious players.
Even in just the Kraid fight. The grapple 
beam without the bombs gets you up to the  
head easier. Another sequence breaker powerup, 
the Flash Shift, gets you yet another way to  
inflict massive damage. Or the quick kills 
that you can pull off with the Shinespark,  
if you have enough room to run. Even if a 
game only puts in a small handful of secrets,  
players searching for them will feel like 
there are far more. ‘What else can I do?’  
is one of the most powerful questions you can get 
a player to ask themselves. All the secret ways  
to approach bosses in Metroid Dread help make 
the game feel much richer, and more complex.
But what’s quicker than a quick kill? What if you 
didn’t need to fight the boss at all? Next up:  
The Boss Skip. Being able to completely pass 
a boss without fighting it can be a big reward  
for players in the know. I can’t think of a 
boss with more ways to skip it than The End.
The End is a legendary fight in Metal Gear Solid 
3, full of rich details and a shocking number of  
hidden features, from his pet parrot, to time 
shenanigans you can do, to all the distinct  
ways you can go about finding the guy in this 
dense forest. There are SO many secrets in  
this. I only JUST learned about the Konami Code 
one. If you open the map and input the code,  
you can straight up reveal The End’s location on 
the map and completely cheese the fight. But if  
you hate fun, and know one weird trick, you can 
make sure the fight never needs to happen at all.
After a cutscene that builds up the game’s gallery 
of villains, including The End, the characters  
stick around the area when you regain character 
control. If you want to skip the fight, I’ve got a  
secret for you. It’s called… A GUN. Pull out your 
sniper rifle, and you can *end* him right there.
Congratulations, hero, you did it. Later, with 
The End out of the way, instead of fighting him,  
you get a boring fight against a bunch 
of mooks in the same arena. You won!
Even though killing The End early is the least 
dramatic way to do it, I love it for its sheer  
audacity. A quiet, post-cutscene moment 
broken by you thinking outside the box,  
him still doing the dramatic ‘END-D-D’, 
and an exploding wheelchair makes up  
for its lack of complex gameplay by 
just being really, really memorable.
I think it’s really satisfying when you can 
take care of a boss before it becomes a problem.  
You could think of it as anticlimactic, but 
since you almost always need to already know  
what’s about to happen to pull off the trick, 
I don’t think there’s actually a downside.
Yoshi’s Island has a great one with Naval 
Piranha. Most of the game’s bosses are  
normal enemies that get enhanced by Kamek’s 
magic. After you catch on to the pattern,  
and see Kamek show up again, you might start 
to think ‘maybe I should be stopping this’.  
Often you don’t get the opportunity, 
but for the third world boss, you can!
The Naval Piranha has a very small 
window where it’s still just a lil’  
guy. If you can fire an egg and hit him 
before hitting the cutscene trigger,  
you just kill it right there. You 
even get the light show for winning,  
and Kamek is not quite sure of how to handle it. 
The boss is a bit tricky to deal with normally,  
so it can be really satisfying to sidestep 
the fight when you know what you’re doing.
It’s not that dramatic, it’s not that weird, 
but it is a little satisfying, and a smattering  
of these little extra, optional details can 
be just the thing to help round out a game.
A great boss secret doesn’t have 
to be about an elaborate sidequest,  
or quick reflexes. Sometimes the secret was 
in you… all along. Or in your pocket. You  
can make a secret out of a game’s existing 
items, by giving them surprising behaviors.
Zelda often likes to let you use a 
joke weapon to fight off or distract  
its bosses. Ganondorf’s projectiles 
in Ocarina of Time can be reflected  
by an empty bottle. He can get distracted 
by a fishing rod in Twilight Princess,  
and you can get a cheap shot in. Demise in Skyward 
Sword can’t resist a bug net. The series isn’t  
afraid to undercut the intimidation 
factor of their most imposing bosses,  
by adding some surprise function to impractical, 
or straight up useless tools. It’s pretty funny.
Other secret Zelda boss takedown 
strats are a lot more obtuse,  
though. Like in Wind Waker. The boss 
of the Forbidden Woods is Kalle Demos,  
and it’s not that weird of a fight, normally. 
Use the Boomerang you just got to expose the boss  
and wail on it for 2 or 3 cycles and you’re 
done. But there IS one way to do it faster.
Before facing the boss, go back to the 
Forest Haven, right outside the dungeon,  
and scoop up some forest fresh magic water. It’s 
normally meant for a side quest that you can’t do  
until much later to bring a bunch of trees back to 
life, but we’re using it now. There’s a 20 minute  
timer before this delicious vitamin water turns 
into gross regular water, so hurry up and go fight  
the boss now. No one knew about this trick for 
a decade after the game’s original release, but  
if you can dump the magic water on the boss, you 
win! The forest freshness was both acid and C4.
It’s not really practical to do, or any faster in 
a casual playthrough, really. The boss is easy,  
and the walk to get the water takes a bit, 
and the timer keeps you from getting the  
water BEFORE starting the dungeon, but it’s fun 
for its own sake. If you love Wind Waker, like  
a lot of people do, it can be satisfying just to 
see something new in a game you thought you knew  
everything about. No other boss in Wind Waker has 
a secret like this, so people finding it 10 years  
later was a treat. And really, without it, was 
anyone ever going to talk about Kalle Demos again?
Resident Evil 4 Remake has its own goofy 
item quick kill. In chapter 4 and chapter 12,  
there are hidden golden eggs you can find. 
You COULD sell these for a lot of money,  
or eat them for a heal, but 
there’s a more fun option.
Bring one to the fight against Ramon Salazar. 
You’ve found his Achilles heel. Toss an egg  
onto his human body when it’s exposed, and 
you’ll do a whopping 70% of his health,  
plus send him into a stun locked state. 
If you happen to bring both eggs with you,  
you can take him out right there. Doing this 
fight normally is actually a little tough,  
so this is a funny backdoor option to get 
you past this fight, if you really want it.
There isn’t really much of a hint as 
to why he’s allergic to golden eggs,  
other than a sidequest that has you throwing 
a normal egg at a portrait of Ramon,  
so maybe it could have been improved a bit 
by mentioning an egg allergy, or something  
to sort of point you in the right direction to be 
a little less random. But this is another example  
of one small secret item tweak being able to 
create a new boss behavior that can pay off big.
Alright, I do love ‘em, but secret item behaviors 
don’t have to be random easter eggs. They can  
be deep, meaningful references, and can be 
great ways to tie together lore and gameplay.
One of the earliest bosses of Bloodborne does 
this with a tragic twist. Father Gascoigne is a  
veteran hunter you can fight alongside early on. 
However, he soon will fall victim to bloodlust,  
becoming no different than the beasts he hunted, 
and must be put down. Since he’s a fellow hunter,  
this fight feels like a fast and tense PvP match. 
It’s an early game wall and a skill check before  
you get too much deeper into the game. It’s not an 
easy fight, but if you’ve been paying attention to  
the story, and doing a bit of sidequesting, 
you might be able to get the upper hand.
Before fighting Gascoigne, 
you can run into his daughter,  
who will give you a tiny 
music box with a description.
"A small music box received from a young 
Yharnam girl. Plays a song shared by her  
mother and father. Inside the lid is a small 
scrap of paper, perhaps an old message.  
Two names can be made out, however faintly, 
Viola and Gascoigne." That’s that guy!
You can use the tiny music box during the boss 
fight. Gascoigne will reel back and stagger,  
as the fading version of the 
man he was surfaces again,  
just briefly. You can’t use the music box 
to bring him all the way back. … but you  
can get some good hits in at least. 
Don’t get too carried away with it,  
though. If you use it too much, you’ll skip to 
the more feral second stage of the fight early.
The tiny music box is a very 
simple and easy to find secret,  
but it does help Gascoigne stick out both 
as a character and an early game boss.
Muffet in Undertale is another 
cheeky one. Originally added as  
a Kickstarter backer reward, she wound up 
with some secret item hooks all the same.
Going through Hotland, you’ll eventually get to 
this room full of spiders. You’ve seen spiders  
around before at a bake sale or two, but 
maybe you gave them the wrong impression.
Muffet is all too happy to fight you, and 
assumes that you’ve got some anti-spider agenda,  
so she’s going to… bake you? I guess? I don’t 
even know where she got the idea that you hated  
her bake sale stuff. You bought some… right? Maybe 
now would be a good time to pull out a receipt.
If you bought an item in the Ruins bake 
sale, kept it, and then use it mid-fight,  
the telegram that ends the fight will show 
up immediately, with some unique dialogue.
If you bought the RIDICULOUSLY expensive stuff at  
Muffet’s bake sale table, 
she won’t even fight you.
It’s not a huge skip, but it’s not like this 
sequence is out of place in this game. It fits  
perfectly, in there, and in this very section 
of my script. It’s a secret item behavior,  
that causes a boss skip, and has story 
hooks, all in one! What a savings!
When designing a game, the story and gameplay 
can sometimes behave like oil and water. They  
don’t always want to mix naturally. That’s where 
you get the dreaded ‘LUDONARRATIVE DISSONANCE’.  
The right boss secret in the right place can 
be used like an emulsifier - an ingredient that  
helps keep the two mixed, to try to head off 
ludonarrative dissonance before it takes hold.
In Final Fantasy XIV Endwalker’s Myths 
of the Realm Alliance Raid series,  
there's a pretty funny easter egg.
This raid basically pits you against every divine 
member of The Twelve, effectively the FFXIV  
version of the Greek Pantheon. As you can imagine, 
each of these gods and goddesses have a very  
strong background presence in the lore, with a 
wide array of mythological stories putting them in  
the middle of a LOT of what's going on in the land 
of Eorzea. That lore isn't just window dressing.  
If you're paying attention, you'll see plenty 
of nods in many of the boss fights themselves.
One of the last fights is 
against Llym... Ly... Ll.. hang  
on. *clip of how to pronounce* Llym-la-en, 
an unpronounceable Watcher of the Seas,  
and the Goddess of Navigation. The fight's 
pretty standard. She'll throw tide- and  
wind-based attacks your way, but she also houses 
one of the very few moments where you can impact  
combat with a player emote. If you dare blow her a 
kiss, you'll get smited - struck with her trident  
down to one HP, and she tells you to cut it out. 
The easter egg is a nod to the in-lore story where  
she threw a knife at a peeping Tom, which was 
one of the other gods. It’s very Greek Pantheon.
There's no good reason to do this, it's 
just a funny easter egg. But of course,  
since this is a big 24-person raid, there's 
going to be someone in the group who just can't  
help themselves. It almost never fails where 
some wise guy nearly gets killed for the bit.  
The lore is an obscure corner of XIV's 
greater setting, but this small mid-fight  
mechanical change helps make the game's 
worldbuilding just a little bit richer,  
and makes it feel like the devs are paying close 
attention to the minute corners of their own work.
Secrets can be the mechanism to reward 
players who go above and beyond. And  
what could be a bigger reward than 
unlocking a game’s true ending?
The Castlevania games that Koji Igarashi directed 
do this all the time. Secret win conditions in key  
bosses lead to the True Ending. If you don’t 
know about it, and you just fight these guys  
head on like normal, you’ll get basically no 
story resolution. The dreaded ‘Bad Ending.’
You’re supposed to first acquire special items 
or abilities while exploring. If you use them in  
the right way, you’ll reveal the true secret 
actual real final boss for real, who’s been  
pulling the strings this whole time, and THEN 
you can kill him and get the proper finale.
Symphony of the Night is the classic case. One 
of your primary goals as Alucard is to find out  
what happened to Richter Belmont. However, 
once you find him in Dracula’s throne room,  
you’ll find that he’s turned against you. Fight 
him normally, and get the bad ending. Obviously,  
there’s more going on with Richter here, and 
it’ll take a bit of a detour to figure it out.
In the castle there are special 
areas to explore that hold a  
Gold and a Silver Ring. Those let you 
open a secret path in the clock room,  
where you can reach the center of the Castle. 
THAT’S where the Holy X-ray Spex live,  
and THOSE let you spot the power controlling 
Richter - the Dark Priest Orb, and his shaft.
Kick ‘em in the orbs, and not only do you get 
to save Richter and unlock the better ending,  
but there’s a whole inverted castle you get to 
fight through, and even more bosses to take out.
That secret win condition on the fight takes 
full advantage of the Metroidvania structure.  
The game’s supposed to be about exploration 
and discovery. Combing through every part of  
the castle is what’s supposed to be fun, 
and doing it faithfully will lead you to  
the most satisfying outcome. Not just the 
better ending, but tons of more places to  
explore and things to fight. Igarashi loves the 
pattern so much, he put it in the Sorrow Duology,  
and the Castlevania spiritual successor, 
Bloodstained. Turns out it’s fun in those, too!
Boss secrets fit perfectly 
with criteria for true endings.  
It’s a big reward coming into play at what 
should be the most climactic moment of a game,  
granted for being perceptive, clever, resourceful,  
or just plain dedicated enough to gain hidden 
knowledge. What player wouldn’t love that?
I know we haven’t mentioned your favorite boss 
secret. I might’ve never heard about it. It’s  
a secret. But you can right this wrong by 
pouring your heart out in the comments.  
I’m looking for anything interesting. From the 
kinds of secrets that make dramatic changes to  
their game, to the small little easter 
eggs that are just fun to talk about.
Boss secrets seem like small details, but high 
quality is BUILT from small details. Any secrets  
that tie your boss to the world, make your 
players think a little harder about motivations  
or mechanics, or even just show off a little more 
personality can make any game boss worth fighting.
*chill vibes from Castlevania: 
Symphony of The Night*