Today’s episode is sponsored by Privacy.com.
Privacy.com lets you make online purchases
using virtual credit cards, which helps keep
your real identity and bank info safe.
Hey, I like good boss fights and I like...
uhh... talking about bad boss fights.
I've got a few more to talk about, good and
bad, that I think are great examples of the
design challenges that go into making interesting
and memorable boss fights.
Like last time this won’t be a ranking of
the best bosses or anything, this is just
a broad look at a few ways developers approach
the infinitely open-ended challenge of boss
design.
Okay, let’s go!
Oh, and you’d better believe we’re driving
into spoiler town
*Costa del Sol from FF7 plays*
When you're designing a boss, you can get
caught up in thinking about the boss' difficulty
and length.
But if you're just thinking, 'is this boss
too easy or too hard?
too long or too short?', you're going to overlook
something.
The most important thing a boss battle needs
is engagement.
Easy bosses can be fun too, if they draw you
in with a fun scenario.
Or they can be a pointless roadblock.
Difficult bosses can leave you fighting desperately
to survive, or be a frustrating mess.
Short bosses can be do-or-die tests of skill,
or disappointingly brief.
Long bosses can be unforgettable tests of
endurance, or painful slogs.
The deciding factor is engagement.
And you can find some very engaging bosses
in A Hat in Time.
A Hat in Time is a delight from start to finish.
It’s full of memorable levels, humor, and
characters, it controls like a dream, is super
well-paced and, oh hey guess what, it’s
got some killer boss fights.
The Mafia Leader, The Snatcher, Mustache Girl,
that haunted Outhouse.
There aren't that many bosses, but each of
them is a great test of reflexes that acts
as a high point in their respective chapters
- just as all great bosses should be.
But out of all of Hat in Time's bosses, I
especially love The Conductor.
No wait...
DJ Grooves.
Hat in Time’s 2nd chapter takes place in
a movie studio.
You meet two directors - DJ Grooves, a funky
fresh emperor penguin, and The Conductor,
who’s very Scottish and is an owl?
Maybe?
I'm going with owl.
The two are bitter rivals competing in a film
festival, and they're using Time Pieces, the
game's macguffin, as movie props.
You need the Time Pieces yourself, so you
sneak in and get hired by both directors.
You then star in each of the birds' movies.
Solving a train murder, becoming a diva on
the moon, platforming across a chaotic train
to defuse a time bomb, and marching in the
world's deadliest parade.
You rack up points for each director's movies,
and then when you feel you've delivered an
award-worthy performance, you can start the
finale.
Whichever director has the most points when
you start the finale is declared the winner
of the film festival.
Then the chapter just kinda ends.
You’re given another time piece and you’re
brought back to the main hub...kind of an
anti-climax...or is it?
Someone suddenly calls you.
The festival was rigged.
The winner is hiding something from you.
You head back into the movie studio at night
and after some solid platforming, you find
that the winner betrayed you and is hiding
another time piece.
Time to fight.
The battle goes through tons of different
attack phases, with callbacks to every movie
you just performed in.
They’ll drop stage lights, come at you with
a body slam, drop the disco ball from the
parade level.
They'll cut the lights and charge you with
a knife from the murder mystery level.
The cars from the diva stage will run you
over.
The photographs will multiply all of the attacks
as the phases go on, keeping the difficulty
of the fight increasing throughout.
But suddenly someone cuts the lights, a piano
starts to play, and the directors will...try
to have a nice heart to heart chat with you?
Just negotiating, bringing the action to a
halt, right in the middle of the fight.
Of course, the negotiations fail, and the
second half begins.
The director straps the train time bomb on
you and everything gets faster and more intense
as the timer ticks down.
Keep chipping away, and then the losing director
will come to your aid.
He defuses the bomb with big scissors
and we start the final phase.
Now cue the marching band!
And they've got knives!
By now the screen is so full of stuff it gets
extremely frenetic and tense until you finally
finish off the boss.
It's an amazing fight for its theming and
pacing.
All of the different attack elements make
the boss a real climactic moment that ties
the whole chapter together.
Each phase shift feels like a natural escalation
of tension - each new ridiculous attack and
the ever increasing demands the overlapping
attacks put on your platforming skill brings
you deeper into the drama of the fight.
And that heart to heart in the middle of it
all to subvert expectations, develop the boss'
character a little more, and give a much-needed
breather in the middle of the chaos is just
perfect.
In a game full of memorable ones, the Battle
of the Birds' theming and pacing cap off a
fantastic chapter.
Ok, now we need a game with some bosses with
bad engagement… hmmm…
Oh.
I know.
Would you be shocked if I told you that Sonic
06 has one?
Iblis from Sonic 06 is... not engaging.
My God, is it not engaging.
You start the fight on rows of stalactites
above a pool of lava.
At the center of the arena are 3 elevated
platforms, each with a glowing purple rock.
You hit the rock to bait Iblis in.
He drops more stalactites so you can reach
the rocks, because why wouldn’t he.
Hit the rock, Iblis will dive for it, and
you hit him in the eye.
That's it.
Rinse and repeat.
Cmon, repeat.
Ok, here comes the ground a... ugh.
Thank you.
Like a lot of other platformer bosses, this
is one where you have to wait for a boss to
become vulnerable to attack.
What you do in between these vulnerable moments
is key to whether the fight is engaging or
not.
Usually the player is given... y'know... something
to do.
A variety of attack patterns, something to
keep you on your toes while you wait for your
moment to strike.
The boss fights in A Hat in Time will introduce
an attack, then ramp it up as the fight goes
on.
You’re always dealing with not only new
attacks but old attacks with some extra oomph
added in.
The Iblis fight...doesn’t do that.
His few attacks don’t get any faster, become
more complex or even more frequent.
There's a desperation attack at the very end,
but that's the ONLY change.
Every phase is the same, maybe with some minor
platform changes.
That doesn't make the player make a choice,
or think through a new strategy, or change
their approach.
It's just an incredibly static fight.
But you know what, that's not even a dealbreaker
for a good boss.
Mario bosses often take a very similar structure,
with waves of attacks and vulnerability.
Those bosses aren’t always super exciting,
but they’re not nearly this bad.
The difference is in the pacing.
The Iblis fight is glacial.
This entire fight is actually shorter than
the Hat in Time fight, but it feels 3 times
longer in practice because there’s so little
for the player to do.
You’re still waiting for the boss to do
something most of the time and nothing he
does makes the fight more challenging or engaging.
His attacks are slow enough to be inconsequential.
If you do take a hit, you can just regain
your lost rings very easily.
The only real risk for dying is stepping into
the lava but that’s more of an issue with
the game’s camera.
The camera is a better boss than Iblis.
You have no micro-goals, there’s nothing
to learn, barely anything to avoid, so the
battle slowly ticks away.
Slowly.
The fight against Iblis is a low point in
a game full of low points, but at least it's
a great example of what it can look like when
a boss completely fails to give players engaging
goals.
Boss battles in turn-based JRPGs are strategic
affairs.
Yes, the best ones are part fashion show.
Part set piece.
Part symphony and part narrative climax.
But at their heart, the best boss fights are
great FIGHTS.
A puzzling battle of endurance to exercise
your strategic muscles while you take in a
monologue, an aria, and a runway walk all
at the same time.
Good late game bosses in JRPGs challenge your
preparation and tactical skills.
Players usually develop a certain cadence
to their attacks when getting through encounters.
They create cycles, built from a well-oiled
machine made to deal damage, buff and heal.
One way to design a great JRPG boss is to
throw wrenches into those strategic cycles.
Leave the player scrambling to put the pieces
of their machine back together while they're
getting punched in the face by a dad whale,
or an evil pope or whatever.
Some of my favorites come out of Final Fantasy
X.
The boss battles in FFX are pretty well varied.
Most of them have little gimmicks to surprise
you, and they mix well with the game's turn
and party member swapping systems.
Some bosses have multiple body parts with
different functions.
Some bosses play with airship positioning,
where your location and the attack types of
your party are factors.
But one of the most challenging fights is
with Lady Yunalesca.
Lady Yunalesca is divided into 3 different
phases, each with their own separate HP pool.
The first phase is straightforward.
She alternates between physical attacks that
remove buffs and an Absorb attack that takes
half of your character's HP.
The second phase is trickier.
She starts attacking with 'Hellbiter', which
inflicts the Zombie status effect on whoever
it hits.
Zombie characters can't heal - any healing
item or spell will do damage instead.
After Hellbiter she casts a heal spell on
a random target.
If it hits a Zombie character, the heal does
a pretty serious amount of damage.
You can use Holy Water to remove Zombie, but
hold up a sec.
The third phase is coming.
Yunalesca melts down in the way all evil Final
Fantasy bosses can and turns into this...
medusa head.
Oooooooo.
She gets two new big moves, too.
Mind Blast can hit everyone and inflict Confuse.
The other is Mega-Death, which just one hit
kills everyone.
UNLESS!
They're a zombie!
She casts it instantly when the third phase
begins, which will very likely blindside players
on their first run.
It's a little cheap, but once you understand
how it works you can see a balancing act unfold
in front of you.
Now you have a reason to KEEP a crippling
status ailment.
You need at least one zombie at the end of
phase two, but you can't heal zombies.
Reviving a zombie who died will also remove
zombie, so you need to goad out Hellbiter
in phase 2 on as many party members as you
can while still keeping their HP high enough
so they won't die to a standard attack.
And she KEEPS casting Mega-Death occasionally
in phase 3, so you need to keep at least one
zombie around to the end of the fight.
It’s not just a simple cycle of attack and
full party healing, you have to be deliberate
with your heals and take calculated risks.
Yunalesca is not only a good mechanical challenge,
but her fight is the turning point of the
whole story, so you get a double dose of engagement
- pride in beating a tricky, tough boss, and
the satisfaction that comes with the game's
turn into its final act.
Yunalesca is challenging but fair.
Tricky, but unique.
Above all, she's an encounter exquisitely
designed.
A great boss fight knows how not to outstay
its welcome.
Once a player figures out the patterns and
can properly execute a counter-attack, the
best boss fights do one of two things: Add
additional hooks, or End.
If it doesn't do either, if it keeps going
well past the point where anything new happens,
it can turn an interesting encounter into
a Damage Sponge.
Most damage sponges aren't very compelling
fights.
It's tough to get a lot of interesting hooks
into a JRPG boss, which is why JRPG bosses
are so prone to becoming damage sponges.
The hook in the Yunalesca fight is 'Survive
when the normal means of survival don't function
properly.’
But once you've found a way to dodge the wrenches
she's thrown at you and are doing good damage
to the boss, the fight ends a few minutes
later.
Now Final Fantasy XII, that one's different.
We have to talk about Yiazmat, the optional
final superboss.
Yunalesca's fight is over in maybe 5 minutes
once you have it figured out.
Once you've figured out how to deal with Yiazmat,
his fight is over in maybe 5... hours..
And it’s all thanks to this little bar right
here.
Yes, it's a special case, and not nearly as
much of a problem since it's completely optional,
but come on.
That’s 50 million HP.
The fast forward feature in FFXII's updated
release, The Zodiac Age, is worth adding for
the fight with Yiazmat alone.
But at least Yiazmat is interesting because
of how audacious it is.
Go big or go home, I guess.
The Destroyer and the Rakk Hive in Borderlands
don't even have that going for them.
They're gigantic stationary targets, no more
complicated to fight than take out your best
weapon and open fire.
Maybe strafe around a little to avoid some
basic attacks.
They’re more of a measuring stick for your
character’s build than they are an actual
fight.
What can make a damage sponge boss even worse
is having very short windows where you can
attack them such as in the Corn Boss from
Castle Crashers.
The gimmick with this guy is that he constantly
pops up from the ground randomly across the
arena.
As its health depletes, your opportunities
to attack him will get shorter and shorter
until you’re barely getting any hits on
him before he pops back down underground.
It draaaaaags the fight out, and makes for
an annoying and uninteresting boss.
So yeah, bosses are tricky things to design,
and the design process is full of ways to
make something not worth playing.
Let us know in the comments some of your favorite
and least favorite boss fights, which we might
talk about on the next edition.
No matter the length or difficulty, boss fight
designers can make their job easier by focusing
on engagement.
Get that right and you’ve got a great boss
fight.
All these bosses bow down before the toughest
boss of them all.
Identity theft.
Privacy.com can help keep that from happening
when you shop online.
They let you pay and transfer money online
with a virtual credit card number that you
can lock to one merchant.
If a hacker tried to use that number at another
store, you’d get an instant notification
and can cancel the card immediately.
And there’s a browser extension that makes
it super easy to use!
Head to privacy.com/designdoc and sign up
for an account.
As a special offer for Design Doc viewers,
new customers will automatically get $5 to
spend on their first purchase, for a limited
time only.
Yep, that’s free money!
Go to privacy.com/designdoc and sign up now!
*chill vibes outro from Sly Cooper 2*