You can make a good boss fight out of anything.
A turtle, a pig, Fabio, Teddy Roosevelt, whatever
this is.
But even though what subject you choose isn’t
that important, there are other rules to follow
lying under the surface.
Great boss fights have to respect the player’s
time.
Good pacing, engaging fight mechanics, exciting
set pieces - bosses that can capture the player’s
attention, and then reward them for their
generosity, are the ones that live on in memory
after the game is over.
Today I’m talking about 3 more good and
bad boss fights that show off repetition,
difficulty, and spectacle and how they are
used or misused to respect a player’s time.
Leave a comment if you’ve got another boss
we should talk about for a future episode.
And just FYI, there are a few spoilers ahead.
Nothing gratuitous, and nothing from any recent
games, but we are talking about some major
bosses here, so have a spoiler card.
*spoiler card music from Final Fantasy 7*
No one can say Okami doesn’t give you your
money’s worth.
It’s a fantastic, fully packed game full
of outstanding and climactic bosses.
Each third of Okami has a solid plot, good
progression, and a grand climactic boss fight,
making each third feel almost like its own
complete game.
The first third ends with an encounter with
the 8-headed Orochi.
Orochi radiates spectacle and grandness, from
his design to how he’s portrayed in the
cutscenes and is built up to be a substantial
threat through lots of great moments.
He’s a wonderful villain and a REALLY underwhelming
boss fight.
Orochi is a battle full of repetition, tedium,
and missed potential.
The fight takes place in a circular arena
with a chain of 8 pools of sake.
Each of Orochi’s 8 heads are invulnerable
to all attacks thanks to its protective barrier,
so you can’t win.
Just kidding.
You go to one of the heads, which will attack
you with its respective elemental move.
You either use the game’s central Brush
mechanic to counter the elemental attack,
or you just dodge it.
It’s not a big deal.
The head finishes attacking and will roar,
which lets you use the Waterspout brush ability
to feed the head sake from the pool.
Do two rounds of that, and you’ll incapacitate
the head.
Now move over and do it again to a different
head.
And again.
And again.
And… oh wow, it looks like they knew fighting
all 8 was boring, so you’ll be able to climb
on Orochi’s back and... uh... smash that bell!
I’m sorry. No I'm not.
OK great, boss over… ugghhhhh that’s just
phase one.
You can now damage Orochi for real!
Now you get to take out every.
single.
head.
The attack cycle with each head is the same
as the first phase, but for some reason, they
almost never use their elemental attacks anymore,
which were the only unique part of the fight
in the first place..
Instead, they all just try to bite you and
concuss themselves in your general direction.
Do the sake thing again and wail on it until
the head goes down.
For every head.
And no cutoffs at 3 this time around.
You have to repeat this same cycle for 8 identical
head fights.
For a character with so much buildup and importance
to the story, it’s really boring to do roughly
the same cycle 11 different times, and also
really silly that while you’re killing one
of the heads, the other 7 just stand around
to wait their turn like Jackie Chan movie
mooks.
The neighboring heads might do that same bite
attack but to little effect.
Orochi is a wasted opportunity at the end
of act 1, and it’s ridiculous that it returns
in act 3 as the same exact fight.
Two more times.
Within a few hours of each other too.
In the second fight, Orochi turns gold and
reveals his true form, which you beat in EXACTLY
the same way.
And the third time the story doesn’t even
give you the false hope that the fight might
be cool.
You just do it again as part of a boss rush.
That makes 33 almost identical Orochi heads
to beat, which should take you a half-hour
or more to slog your way through.
The set of three Orochi fights feel like the
worst kind of padding, staining a beautiful
game by contributing to its lethargic pace.
Some bosses, like Orochi, are too rigid for
their own good.
If a boss fight has only one way to win and
only one way to go about winning, that’s
inherently less interesting than a boss that
lets you control how you beat it.
Bosses with this problem can be pretty stale
on second and third playthroughs where the
player just has to go through the motions
to win again, but it can make first-run fights
disappointing, too.
We’ve touched on the good and bad versions
of this idea before.
In Volume 1, we talked about the battle with
The End in Metal Gear Solid 3 and how the
many different ways to win brought the fight
to life.
In Volume 2, we talked about the Iblis fight
in Sonic 06 and how the rigid fight formula
and timers made the boss miserable.
Well, buckle up because we’re diving back
into the Sonic-o-verse for another boss.
Sonic’s bosses aren’t all Iblis-tier disasters.
Many classic ones let the player control how
the fight structure plays out to SOME extent.
A fight that might be a little slow to beat
normally might be much quicker to beat with
smart positioning or if you cleverly use momentum.
Some bosses might be super easy to blast through
if you plan ahead and show up as Super Sonic.
But Sonic Mania Team has done better.
One of my favorite bosses, Sonic Mania’s
Gachapandora, takes the idea of a customizable
path to victory a step further.
Sonic Mania is a game built as a tribute to
the entire history of the classic games.
It reuses, recontextualizes, and remixes the
stages, level gimmicks, and characters to
build something both familiar and new.
The callbacks can get very creative, and Gachapandora
might be one of the best ones.
It’s a literal capsule machine with 8 ‘prizes’
inside.
You’ve gotta empty the machine to win.
The capsule machine doesn’t attack you itself,
but when you turn the dial, it releases one
of three possible enemies to go after you.
One is a mini version of the flying egg mobile
ripped from Sonic 1, one is the pointy drill
car from Sonic 2, and the last one combines
two different callbacks into a kamikaze robot.
Just… grab and explode.
To defeat Loot crate, you have to turn the
crank 9 times and defeat the mini-bosses as
you go.
The trick is that you can turn that crank
as quick as you want.
You could play it safe and dispatch one boss
at a time, or you could go for broke and keep
hammering it - drowning in murderous callbacks.
If you know what you’re doing, you can take
care of them all at once, but it’s definitely
riskier with so many enemies going after you.
Each of the 3 robot types isn’t a big deal
individually, but they synergize together,
covering the air and ground while the kamikaze
robot slows you down a little.
The fight is way more interesting because
of that player-driven, customizable difficulty.
Letting a player control the difficulty themselves
from within the fight is way more engaging
than a boss with more HP, or if you had to
select ‘Hard Mode’ from a menu.
Gachapandora is a bit of an anomaly to let
you control the pace.
Not every boss in Sonic Mania is crafted that
well.
Some do force you to fight in the same rigid
way you did on your first run.
But that boss is a good case study for how
you can use differing player skill and optimization
to create a path for players to engage in
a boss fight more deeply.
Now Gachapandora was a unique fight surrounded
by a bunch of same-y ones.
But when a game is all about its boss fights,
they’re usually all unique.
Like in Monster Hunter.
Monster Hunter is 100% pure, export quality,
24-carat boss fights, straight into your veins.
Obviously, Capcom put a lot of thought into
each battle in every game, but there’s a
risk that boss-fight-only games all have.
If every single fight played out in broad
strokes in the same way, they could start
to blend together a bit.
So every so often, Monster Hunter adds something
qualitatively different to act as a palate
cleanser.
What if instead of a big monster, you fought
a…
r…
REALLY… big monster?
Nailed it.
Cue the ‘siege monsters’.
Instead of the usual fight cadence, you’re
going to take them down through unconventional
approaches and special equipment.
But the siege monsters have a mixed reputation.
They’re a drastic change of pace, sure,
and that’s a worthy goal to aim for, but
straying from the tested formula opens the
door to missteps if you’re not careful.
Siege monsters, as huge set-piece fights,
have often put more importance on spectacle
over solid combat design, and Zorah Magdaros
wraps up a lot of the style’s problems in
one long, meandering boss fight.
The first encounter with Zorah has pretty
much the same issues, but we’ll focus on
the final one.
The fight is divided into two different phases.
The first has you climbing on Zorah’s back
to take out three flaming cores at a few map
points.
But Zorah IS the stage, so it’s really just
a worse reskinned version of mining for minerals,
but with a little lava thrown in there.
There’s not much danger involved.
The terrain might change, but there’s nothing
you can really do about it, and it just makes
navigation a little more annoying.
Once you take care of the cores, the second
phase begins…
... Eventually.
First, you wait for the fixed timer to count
down.
You might be waiting for 5 minutes.
Oh yeah, and it turns out you didn’t even
need to go for the cores in the first place.
They’re just there for crafting materials.
What else...oh.
You can fire at stalactites to get them to
crash down on Zorah, I guess...that’s cool,
right?
What is it with boss fights and stalactites?
Oh, but wait, I forgot the most important
part!
There’s also Nergigante!
He’s cool!
He’s on some of the covers!
One of the best fights in the game!
During the boss!
Boss-within-a-boss!
Except you don’t have to fight him.
He stays in one place since the rest of the
map is far too narrow for him.
He won’t come looking for you, and there’s
no penalty for ignoring him completely, even
though the NPCs say otherwise.
Eventually, he leaves.
Time for phase two.
You’re placed on top of a massive barrier
with cannons and ballistas and ammo to fire
at Zorah.
He’s gonna attack the barrier!
Stop him!
Oh heeeee’s a-coming!
Yep.
Hmm.
Well, you're supposed to arm and fire all
of the weaponry while some little flying monsters
attack them.
But this part of the fight feels really bullet
sponge-y.
You’re supposed to coordinate the attacks
to build up enough DPS to take him out before
he can attack the barrier, but slowly going
back and forth to load up the cannons gets
real tedious.
There are flying enemies attacking the cannons,
but they don’t have great visual indicators
when they’re under attack until they fall
apart from the damage.
Man, I dunno if I'm gonna take him down in
time.
Oh no, he's attacking the wall and… wait,
that's it?
The giant lava mountain can’t take out a
wooden barrier?
There goes the sense of urgency.
There’s one more weapon on the ship underneath
- the short-range Dragonator, which does a
lotta damage, but really it just feels like
a mercy to speed up this fight to the ending.
The developers tried really hard to make the
Zorah Magdaros fight concept work.
Capcom spent a year with a team dedicated
full-time to just this fight.
There must have been countless iterations
and tweaks to try to get the concept of 'Fight
this mountain' workable.
But the end result was one of the series'
least popular fights, according to the community.
They've gotten the Siege Monster concept to
work with bosses like Kulve Tarroth.
In that fight, your goal isn't to kill the
powerful elder dragon but just to break its
golden armor and horns before it escapes.
She is a lot larger than your average monster
but not awkwardly ginormous like Zorah.
It's a 3 phase fight over multiple chambers
where you use a combination of tactics to
attack her head on, siege weapons, and even
some environmental traps as it marches through
a linear path.
The fight has a much more even progression
as the monster goes from ignoring you, to
treating you like a threat, then going all
out on you at the end.
It's an overall grander fight than the typical
monster, which is just the change of pace
that these siege fights are supposed to be,
but the core gameplay isn't as far off from
what had been working in the game up until
this point, unlike the total departure we
get in the Zorah fight.
The Zorah Magdaros fight feels like a slog
where you're just wailing on a tiny part of
a gigantic damage sponge that acts like you're
not even there.
Both phases suffer from tedious pacing and
keep undercutting the sense of urgency.
They wanted this battle to be a spectacle
and a technical showpiece where you're scaling
a massive beast but the moment to moment situations
the fight occurs in makes it hard to appreciate
that spectacle.
I'm not in awe of this gigantic creature.
I'm staring at a rock texture, hoping I don't
get knocked off by a sudden plume of lava.
The shifting terrain is cool in concept, but
it's more of a minor inconvenience that doesn't
add a lot to the fight mechanics.
The fight with Nergigante being entirely skippable
and only able to happen in one small area
undercuts what could've been a fun idea.
Forced waiting for a timer to get to 0 is
just about the least exciting thing you could
put in a game.
The second phase shows off Zorah better, but
that spectacle is fleeting.
Add all the flair you want.
It doesn't make carrying cannonballs back
and forth any more fun.
What few things that do get in your way are
more of a nuisance than a threat.
The tempered version of Zorah is tougher with
damage scaled up and a much tighter time limit,
but that doesn't change any of the fight's
fundamental issues.
If anything, the shorter time limits just
add a layer of frustration to a chore.
The Zorah Magdaros fight is incredibly ambitious,
but none of the pieces play well with the
game’s strengths, and its awkward pacing
and undercutting of its own built tension
are fatal flaws in the finale of the game’s
main storyline.
Speaking of ambitious, that’s a wrap for
the most ambitious year of Design Doc yet:
15 new videos and tons of new viewers.
If this is your first video, or if you’ve
been with this channel since the ancient Let’s
Play days, we hope we brought some joy to
your life this year.
From Dan and Mike, thank you for your viewership,
and special thanks to our Patreon members,
whose support helps make it possible for us
to work on the channel full time.
If you'd like to support us and gain access
to things like early ad-free episodes, voting
in future topic polls, and our exclusive behind
the scenes podcast, click the link in the
description to join the Patreon club.
With your support, we can make 2021 an even
brighter year for Design Doc.
*chill vibes outro from Sonic Generations*