Let’s say you’re making an RPG. Congratulations! 
I believe in you. I’m preordering it right now.
But you’ve got a lot of things to focus on. 
Your protag’s missing that spice. You can’t  
ship your villain with ANYONE, gotta fix 
that. It says here you’re using the reels  
from Unlimited Saga. That’s a choice. And 
all your environments feel… kinda flat.
Well, lucky for you, we can fix that one. It 
takes more than a pretty skybox and some cool  
level geometry to make a battle map feel 
like an integral part of the game. But a  
little bit of theming and some light mechanics 
can go a long way. Let’s talk about a bunch of  
RPG battle screen quirks, and how you can 
sprinkle them in to set a killer stage.
And you know, if you need some help coding it, you 
could always check out today’s sponsor Boot.dev
Boot.dev helps you figure out if a career 
in programming is right for you. They’ve  
built a whole bunch of bite-sized lessons 
on the Python and Go programming languages,  
gamified the entire thing to make it fun at 
every step, and then they take you by the  
hand to teach you what you need to know about 
backend development. They aren’t teaching you  
weird tricks and gimmicks or anything, these 
are the real fundamentals of programming,  
and if you stick with it, Boot.dev can set up the 
foundation you’ll need to succeed as a programmer.
If you’re wondering whether you’re cut 
out for coding, this is the best way  
to find out. It’s way cheaper than formal 
classes, and their active Discord community  
full of learners like yourself can help 
you when you get stuck. They’ve even got  
a 30-day no questions asked refund policy, and 
a demo! They’ve made it super easy to try out.
Click the link in the description box and 
use my code DESIGNDOC to get 25% off your  
first payment for boot.dev. That’s 
25% off your first month or year,  
depending on the subscription you choose. 
Think like a programmer, sign up for Boot.dev
Alright. How would you go about 
making your RPG fight arenas better?
Let’s start basic. Where ya gonna fight?
Now, strictly speaking, you don’t need 
to have where you fight reflect where you  
are. Earthbound doesn’t bother with that. But, 
c’mon. Having your setting change appropriately  
to reflect where you are or what’s going on 
in the story is really the least you can do.
Theme your space. It helps keep combat from 
getting too monotonous or stale over time,  
especially if that theme 
impacts how the fights go down.
If you want some bonus points, though, take 
cues from games that have come up with a larger,  
overarching theme for their battle stages.
Paper Mario: The Thousand Year Door has a 
charming, skeuomorphic approach to battle. You’re  
fighting on an actual stage, like a stage play 
stage, with a live audience full of Koopas and  
Toads and all kinds of Mario species and Luigi. 
Both the stage and the audience can influence  
battle in several ways. As you perform attacks, 
the background sets can fall over, damaging you.  
Lights and other objects might fall from above, 
dealing pain and maybe a status effect. Maybe even  
a good one. There’s things here to freeze you, 
create an accuracy-lowering fog, pouring some  
water on you to get back to normal, setting fires, 
explosions, you name it. At specific levels,  
the stage itself upgrades, and the interactions 
will get more and more complex over time.
The audience has a lot going on besides. The 
people will come and go as you do better or  
worse in fights. Doing stylish moves, which 
are optional actions you can take mid-battle,  
or just asking them all to believe, can get 
your fans to cheer you on and boost your star  
meter. Everyone’s a critic, though. Some might 
even throw rocks at you. Or hammers. You can go  
out there and deliver justice yourself, just 
don’t scare off people who were just trying  
to help. Different Mario species have their 
own traits and behaviors that can influence  
the battle in their own way. Toads are great 
at cheering. X-nauts are x-not. Shy Guys jump  
on the stage and trigger hazards. As more 
species appear and the audience expands,  
more and more random events will occur. 
A few bosses might even break the fourth  
wall and a few laws by wreaking havoc on 
the audience. Should’ve signed a waiver.
Paper Mario’s battle system isn’t all that 
complicated. The actions and interactions in  
combat are relatively simple, but this thing 
is so overflowing with charm that it’s fine.
The set falling apart adds a layer of 
unpredictability while still being an  
element right at home with the theme. The 
audience reacting to how well you’re doing  
and how well you’re pandering directly to them 
feeds back into the game’s mechanics to help you  
along. It’s all these little wrinkles that help 
keep the combat system more fun for more time.
OK, so you’ve set the stage nicely. But 
Paper Mario’s stage theme also gets to  
our next major point. Environmental mechanics, 
and how they can affect the tides of battle.
So why should a game bother to have environmental 
mechanics on its battle screens? Your combat  
should be fun enough on its own, right? Well, 
sure, if you can manage it. RPGs are rarely short  
games, and since a ton of the runtime is likely 
going to be spent in battle, your players are  
going to spend a lot of time fighting fights 
on these screens. Even if a game’s combat is  
fun at first, there’s a graveyard full of games 
whose combat outstayed its welcome. Over time,  
you learn the ways to win, and you do them. Over 
and over. And over. It becomes a routine, and a  
lot of these games don’t really have a great way 
of shaking you out of the routine. Once it sets  
in, these games are in severe danger of having 
their combat turn into a dull, predictable slog.
So. What can we do about it?
On its surface, Pokemon battles aren’t 
that complicated. The game is meant to  
be very playable by young kids with 
just some basic understanding of type  
mechanics. If that was all there 
ever was, there might not be that  
much to grab onto if you wanted high-level 
competition. Over the generations, though,  
the series has kept its basic surface, and 
added more and more layers just underground.
Since Gen 2, Pokemon has had weather effects 
that influence fights in a few ways. Weather  
can occur naturally in an area, or it can be set 
up temporarily with a Pokemon’s specific moves and  
abilities. The weather, in turn, affects other 
specific moves and abilities. Rain, Sunlight,  
Sandstorm, and Hail - now Snow - all favor 
different Pokemon types. If it’s raining,  
Water-type moves will get a power boost 
and Fire-type moves won’t. Sunlight is  
the opposite. Hail and Sandstorms gradually 
damage Pokemon without the right type, ability,  
or held item. Snow removed Hail’s damaging 
effect, and instead boosts the defense of  
Ice types by 50%. The more recent generations 
added “Terrain” moves that respectively can  
boost up grass, electric, psychic and de-buff 
dragons. The system is a little haphazard,  
and selectively boosts only a few types, but it 
does help make battles feel a little more like  
it’s actually taking place somewhere, instead 
of just in a cordoned-off ‘fighting zone’.
Weather isn’t a crazy prominent feature in the 
single-player game. It’ll influence some fights  
and can help your team if you build around 
it, but it’s rare for the campaign to use  
the mechanic against you. It’s much more geared 
for the competitive scene. Specific moves get  
major enhancements in some weather, like Solar 
Beam not needing a turn to charge up during  
Harsh Sunlight. The same team in different 
weather can go from a joke to a powerhouse,  
and since only one weather effect can be active 
at a time, there’s a ton of room for counterplay.
Also Castform exists. It's not that good.
If weather’s not your thing, you can affect the 
field in other ways. There’s a subset of traps,  
or ‘entry hazards’ that you can use. 
Whenever a Pokemon enters the arena,  
they’ll step on some spikes and get hurt. Or a 
stealth rock comes flying in from the expanse.  
Not all of these are damage-dealers, 
either. Sticky Web lowers your speed,  
which can completely mess up your plans to try 
to win before your opponent gets another turn.  
Whole moves are designed around negating 
these traps, like Rapid Spin and Defog.
Again, all these are little wrinkles. 
One small change to the norm,  
but one whose effects ripple throughout team 
compositions and strategies. These mechanics,  
while niche, can dramatically help the 
depth and complexity of a game’s combat.
Adding environmental mechanics 
to battle isn’t without risk,  
though. Even simple changes can 
have big negative consequences.
Chrono Cross has a relatively simple physical 
battle system and a way more complicated magic  
system. Each of your characters has an Element 
Grid, full of slots to put all your spells in,  
and natural levels in that board for magic 
to be, and boosts and penalties for placing  
your magic in the wrong place, and affinities, 
and all kinds of stuff. But up in the top left  
corner there’s this Field Effect icon. That’s 
an extra bonus on top of everything else,  
for casting magic of the right color at the 
right time. Each spell that gets cast fills in  
the centermost icon in the Field and pushes out 
the rest, so it’s really just keeping track of  
the element colors of the last 3 spells cast 
during the fight. The more matching colors  
you have in the Field Effect, the more of a 
power boost you get for casting a new spell  
of that color. If opposite colors are in the 
field, that’ll weaken whatever you’re casting.
Easy. Fun. A quick little wrinkle to get 
some bonus damage in there, right? If only.
The Field Effect system also handles the game’s 
summons. There’s some real fiddly, half-baked  
trapping mechanics in here to get a summon, but 
let’s say you’ve got one. These are the most  
powerful spells of that color in the game, and 
they all have a cool summoning animation. A spell  
this powerful, though, can only be cast when the 
field is just right. Every segment has to be of a  
matching color, or else your summon’s not gonna 
summon. That doesn’t sound so bad, right? Well,  
the thing is, not only do your characters add 
to the Field Effect, your opponents do too.
Every random spell cast by a boss or some 
jobber will push out the other colors. When  
will they get their turn to cast? Who knows! 
It’s probably right after you cast BlueField  
and right before you had a chance to summon 
the FrogPrince. Now no one gets to have fun.
It’s extremely tough to set up the environment 
to get a summon to trigger. Your best bet is  
to try to play WITH your enemies and cast the same 
color that THEY’RE casting. Though if you do that,  
how much damage are you going to do anyway? If 
your summon is a big fire-breathing salamander,  
do you really want to use that 
thing to attack the fire elemental?
Chrono Cross’s Field Effect seems like a nice 
and easy little addition to a battle system,  
but in practice it actually locks away some 
of the cooler battle animation content,  
and is an unending source of 
best laid plans, laid to waste.
What else can map effects do? Well, they don’t 
have to just be there for their own sake.  
They can contribute to an overall effect. 
Some mechanics can help you suspend your  
disbelief a little. These mechanics can help 
a world come across as a touch more realistic.
Unicorn Overlord isn’t as complicated 
as the crunchier tactical wargames,  
but the environment can still 
change how you approach a fight.
The game’s story puts you on a mission of 
liberation, going town to town to free Fevrith  
from Super Evil, and collecting allies along 
the way. The game plays just like Ogre Battle,  
which plays kinda like Fire Emblem with 
little unit squads running around in real  
time. When a stage begins, you’re dropped 
into a portion of the overworld map. You’ll  
put together squads of characters and 
send them off towards map objectives,  
like bridges, forts and towns, 
fighting enemy squads along the way.
The game heavily emphasizes tactical fighting, so 
there’s way more to battle than just bumping your  
little armies into each other. Unit fights 
have plenty of tactical options to explore,  
but the environment has its fair share, too. The 
terrain is as varied as real life, with forests  
that obscure vision and hide units, thick brambles 
that damage on contact, roads that speed along  
travel, and impassable rivers and mountains. 
The map topography might funnel you towards  
a confrontation in places where the defender 
might have an easier time of it. Nearby units  
can provide firepower, and permanent defensive 
structures like towers can give an advantage.
You can impact the map yourself, too. You 
can bury magic mines, set traps to ensnare,  
start fires, or put them out. You can hide behind 
temporary barricades that must be broken down,  
or hide inside a mantlet for a defensive boost 
wherever you stand. The same fight between the  
same squads can have totally different outcomes 
depending on where the engagement happens.
The game even has a little bitty day-night cycle.  
Most of the time it’s cosmetic and doesn’t 
really matter, but there are a handful of  
classes that are much stronger when fighting at 
night, so you could use that to your advantage.
The variety of tactical options the game gives 
you help you steer the battle and have it play  
out in many different ways. It gives variety to 
maps, making each fight feel a little more unique,  
and making you think through squad composition and 
leaders a little differently. Some maps are laid  
out where taking gryphon riders over mountains 
might be the fastest option. Some might force  
you to sweep through forests to 
make sure you aren’t letting a  
straggler get behind your lines and 
capture objectives you thought were  
safe. Cutting through rough terrain is just 
one part of the game’s strategic texture,  
but it makes a huge contribution to 
Unicorn Overlord’s distinctive feel.
You don’t have to settle for a light 
dusting of realistic interactions,  
though. If you’ve got the time and the 
development budget, you can get infinitely  
more complicated with how the environment 
reacts with your character’s combat options
Baldur’s Gate III is unbelievably detailed. 
Not only does the game have basically every  
major mechanic in the DnD rulebook, but 
they go to ridiculous lengths to give  
satisfying payoffs for player actions 
that barely anyone’s going to do.
The fight arenas aren’t just grids of terrain. 
They’re full of objects to interact with. Things  
to perceive, or not perceive. Items 
that react to all kinds of different  
spells in your arsenal. Combinations 
that are logical, but so specific it’s  
amazing to see that these interactions 
actually work about like you’d expect.
Use this stone chandelier.
Dip your weapon in a fire.
Throw an explosive pouch, hit it with 
an arrow, and blow up this whole group.
Smooth talk your way through 
things without fighting at all.
Collect all the spider webs!
Push a guy off a cliff! It works! Any cliff! 
Your dice rolls may fail you, but a cliff won’t.
D&D is steeped in improv, and to see a completed, 
high-budget game actually reflect those roots in a  
satisfying way is a miracle. All you need 
to do is to be Larian. So. Get on that.
Battle terrain doesn’t have to play 
second fiddle at all. You can make  
entire games where the shape of terrain 
plays the most important role in combat.
There are a number of games that make
terrain control the main feature of their combat system
In Mega Man Battle Network, battles 
take place on a 6 by 3 panel grid,  
divided down the middle. You can move in real time 
to whatever panel you want on your side’s squares,  
but you can’t cross over to your opponent’s. This 
battle arena is pretty featureless to start, but  
it’s not going to stay that way. You’re equipped 
with special chips that allow you to mess with  
the terrain. Most of those involve converting 
your opponents panels to your side temporarily,  
or damaging and destroying them outright. 
Your opponent will be doing the same to you.  
These moves can make it much harder to move 
around your side of the grid, and the game’s  
tactics revolve around how to pin down your 
opponent by taking away their movement options.
Managing the field both offensively 
and defensively is the core of Battle  
Network’s combat, and the different 
ways to do it can give enemies their  
own identity. One enemy’s whole thing 
is to attack with a ground-shattering  
earthquake that destroys every panel in a 
row. The panels take a while to respawn,  
so what you want to do is bait the attack out 
in the top or bottom row, so you can still move  
to the rest of the grid. If the attack hits the 
middle, you’re going to get stranded. You can get  
trapped in a corner if you’re not careful, and 
get blasted down by AoEs that you can’t escape.
Other enemies like to steal 
columns of your territory,  
corner you, and then finish you 
off with powerful melee attacks.
This is a solid basis for combat, 
but there’s one snag. By itself,  
this system is beholden to geometry. A corner 
piece will always be a worse position than the  
center, where you have the most movement 
options. To keep this from getting stale,  
the game throws in some elemental 
effects on top of the grid.
A healing grass panel, a poisonous swamp, 
slippery ice, searing lava, And magnet panels  
that’ll pull you in. Different attacks benefit 
from standing on one or another type of panel,  
so the right moves to make aren’t always the 
same, and will depend more on what panels you’re  
working with for that fight. Or, you can take 
things into your own hands and change the arena  
yourself by clearing out the panels you don’t 
want, or adding a nice sturdy rock for defense.
Battle Network’s grid arenas MAKE that 
game. The different options you have at  
your disposal for changing terrain make 
for a deeper strategic experience than it  
appears at first glance, and create 
the series’ signature combat feel.
OK, so Mega Man puts a layer of stuff 
over their terrain - one extra property  
on top of a flat grid. What else can you do with 
terrain layouts? What if you made a game where  
the exact geometry of the space mattered 
a little more? That might be a fun angle.
In Steamworld Heist, you’re a group of 
scrappy steam-powered robot pirates roaming  
through space and raiding even scrappier 
pirates for delicious loot. It’s not far  
off from a 2D XCOM with gun aiming instead 
of a percent hit system. You send a small  
squad into enemy ships and fight your 
way through, steal as much as possible,  
then get outta there. These arenas are small 
and cramped, and being picky about where you’re  
standing is crucial to whether you’ll get out 
of there alive. Some squares provide cover for  
you to crouch behind and make you harder to hit, 
but there’s more to the level layout than that.
Taking enemies head-on is often not the best 
approach. You can manually aim your shots  
to maximize damage and use your opponent’s 
surroundings to your advantage. Many of the  
weapons have ricocheting bullets, which 
let you use the stage geometry to pull  
off some crazy billiards trick shots. 
Some weapons even have laser sights,  
and let you preview your latest bright idea and 
adjust until you get what you want. Shooting an  
explosive barrel is too obvious. Trick shot 
explosive barrels are way more fun. You’d be  
surprised how much more effective you can 
be when you have this level of control,  
and you’ll need every bit of it to clean 
house and get out of there in one piece.
There’s no way to play the game 
without considering the space.  
A new level can just be another 
pirate ship with different rooms,  
and every new layout becomes a new problem 
to tackle. You don’t have to come up with  
a thousand new mechanics to be able to 
make a thousand different experiences.
So environmental hazards can be 
a pillar of your game’s tactics,  
and they can add a dose of realism. But can they 
do anything for your game’s characters? Sure!
Valkyria Chronicles uses terrain for cover 
like a lot of other strategy RPGs. Crouch  
behind some sandbags and headshots against 
you won't count. Hide in some tall grass  
and you’re basically invisible. That 
kind of stuff. It's not revolutionary,  
but it's useful as a way to make your surroundings 
matter beyond just line-of-sight considerations.
Beyond that, though, is the 'Potentials' 
mechanic that adds another strategic layer  
to the game. Each of your soldiers come with 
several 'Potentials' - special traits and  
personality quirks that have a chance to trigger 
effects under the right conditions and give your  
characters a buff or a nerf. A good number of 
these traits are location based. Some characters  
feel more at home in a city-like area and get a 
defensive boost while standing on paved roads.  
Others feel the opposite, and might get an 
accuracy bonus on a dirt road. Claustrophobic  
people don't deal with trenches very well. Someone 
might have a pollen allergy and gradually take  
damage if they're stuck in a field. Some people 
are really into other people. And others…oh no.
Everyone's a little different, and the array 
of different locations and possible trait  
interactions give every one of your units 
opportunities to either shine or struggle.
Who you choose to fight with is no longer 
only a matter of who’s the strongest.  
Where you’re about to go can inform what 
characters you’re going to bring with you,  
or which objectives you have each of them perform.
It's not so overwhelming that you can't overcome 
a bad map for a trait, but it definitely gives  
an extra dimension to every fight you're fighting, 
and to every character you're sending into battle.
Even this tiny bit of characterization - barely 
a single character trait, but one that can show  
up in gameplay - can help build up an anonymous 
character into someone you’ll remember.
Head for stable ground, down in our comments 
section. If you’ve got a game we didn’t mention  
that has some weird terrain mechanics, 
let the people know down there. We’ll  
the environment and the characters, 
or to the game’s strategic approach,  
or even just create a couple of extra thematic 
layers and you can elevate your space.
*chill vibes from Valkyria Chronicles*