Welp, another year is in the books, and with
the new year comes a great time to reflect
on the past.
We’ve made 15 videos over 2019 and covered
hundreds of games, old and new, but some of
the titles that we’ve loved this year never
made it into any of the episodes.
So today we’re going to fix that.
Think of this like a Good Design, Bad Design
episode, but they’re all Good Design, the
games all came out in 2019, and they don’t
have to be related to graphic design or visual
communication.
Welcome to the Design Doc Bonus Bag 2019.
Sponsored by Skillshare
As we start the new year, it’s a great time
to focus on self-improvement.
And I know just the thing - Skillshare.
Skillshare is an online learning community
with thousands of classes on all kinds of
topics.
You could start the year off right by learning
some of the basics of photography.
You could learn how to write better lyrics,
or how to play the guitar.
Or brush up on your typography, video editing,
and character animation skills.
I’ve been following several character animation
classes from the very talented Fraser Davidson,
who has some fantastic tutorials on lip syncing
and rigging characters in After Effects.
His techniques have saved me a ton of time.
The classes are very high quality, and easy
to learn from, and you get access to everything,
every topic, with Premium Membership, all
for less than $10 a month with an annual subscription.
It’s way more affordable than in-person
classes and workshops.
And thanks to Skillshare’s sponsorship of
this episode you can start with a 2 month
trial for free.
Click the link in the description to get 2
free months of Premium Membership and explore
your creativity!
Alright, let’s see what's in the bonus bag.
Let's pull out the first game...
Here we go...
Aww man, it’s exercise.
Wait, I like this thing.
I put these here.
What am I saying?
So I don’t like to exercise very much, it’s
more of a chore and an obligation.
But I do like gimmicky exercise things that
help take my mind off of the boredom.
So I saw Ring Fit Adventure and I was intrigued,
but cautious.
There have been a lot of ‘exergaming’
attempts over the years and they usually fall
apart in a couple of ways.
Either the fitness routine is too easy, too
boring, or it doesn’t do enough to make
itself a habit.
For a lot of people, exercise sucks.
You’re intentionally leaving your comfort
zone so you can stretch that zone a little
wider, week by week.
It’s inherently slow going to improve your
fitness, too.
So at the core of exercise you have an uncomfortable,
slow process that you can’t work around
without missing the point of why you’d exercise
in the first place.
But what you can do instead, and what Ring
Fit Adventure does great, is to distract and
simplify.
Ring Fit Adventure is Nintendo’s attempt
to start a Wii Fit-like craze on the Switch.
In an $80 package you get the game, this leg
strap, and this Pilates ring.
Once you snap your two joy-cons into the hardware,
the game can measure the ring and strap positions
with the controller gyroscopes, sensors in
the ring can tell if you’re squeezing or
stretching it, and the IR camera can kinda
check your heart rate.
With those building blocks, the game can throw
dozens of different exercises at you, monitor
your form, and does a decent job of keeping
you from cheesing your way through the exercises.
That’s a great start, but exercise variety
and keeping players honest about doing the
work is not enough by itself.
To really make Ring Fit Adventure a good piece
of design, Nintendo needed to do a lot more.
Ring Fit Adventure’s Adventure Mode is a
light RPG where you’re jogging in place
to travel on rails through a series of stages,
finding and capturing items and power ups
by pushing and pulling on the ring, and fighting
through waves of enemies by doing sets of
specific exercises.
When I say ‘light RPG’, I mean really
light.
The game is a skeleton of an RPG, but it does
have all of the elements.
Experience points?
Yep.
Attack and defense stats?
Sure.
Items to boost your stats?
Check.
A skill tree?
It shows up extremely late, but yeah.
It’s just enough of a game to successfully
distract you a little bit from all of the
exercise at the game’s core.
The game mechanics might be light, but Ring
Fit Adventure doesn’t skimp on its presentation.
The adventure mode fully commits to its ‘exercise
world’ premise.
Your sidekick is literally the Pilates ring
that came with the box, and he’s the only
fully voiced character in the whole game for
some reason.
Smoothies work as health potions and stat
boosts.
There are mini games to play in these gyms
run by these robot guys.
There are exercise fetch quests and exercise
boss rushes, all to save the exercise world
from a dragon who’s a little too into exercise.
It’s all pretty silly, but they COMMIT to
the dumb premise, and it somehow all works.
Ring Fit Adventure’s design encourages you
to fight through discomfort, keep going, and
push yourself a little more.
The stages are usually 5 to 10 minutes long,
and serve almost like workout ‘modules’.
If you’re feeling tired in the middle of
one, you still feel like you have to work
for another few minutes to complete a stage.
The game can tell when you’ve stopped moving,
and the timer in the corner stops ticking
to encourage you to get going again.
Within the stage, as you’re watching the
scenery pass by as you’re jogging, or during
battles when you’re thinking about which
attacks to use in what order, you’re not
as fixated about how sore your arms and legs
are.
The game has dozens of exercises, but simplifies
your options.
It only lets you bring a small handful of
them to any battle, so you aren’t bogged
down by as many choices about what to do next.
Just keep exercising.
The game is also really good at adapting to
your skill level.
You can set an exercise intensity, that changes
the number of reps throughout all of the game’s
exercise sets.
The game keeps checking in from session to
session too, and will often ask if you want
to make the sessions easier or more difficult.
The intensity can be set extremely low for
beginners, and up to a very intense workout
if you want it to be.
It’s legit exercise.
In 20 minutes, you’ll be drenched.
30 sessions in, and I’m feeling more energetic
and more limber.
I just feel better, and that’s the whole
point, right?
For all of the distractions and gamification
steps, at its core it’s a legit exercise
routine.
No, it doesn’t have the best story, or the
best graphics, or the deepest gameplay.
But Ring Fit Adventure does something that’s
harder to find.
It found a way to take something you don’t
want to do but should and makes it something
you look forward to.
Alright, now back to the bag.
Hah.
You get most improved.
The first Yooka-Laylee was disappointing to
a lot of people.
Not that it was an awful game, but it felt
half-baked.
There were issues with polish and consistency
throughout.
Some stages were bloated and overly large,
yet felt emptier than you’d expect.
There was a landslide of terrible minigames.
The game did stay true to the classic 3D platformers
it was trying to emulate, but some of those
elements had been left behind over the past
20 years for good reason.
Despite the flaws, I was happy to give Playtonic
some slack.
I enjoyed the first game, and I was excited
to see what they would do next.
I never expected them to shift genres in their
sequel, Yooka-Laylee and the Impossible Lair.
The new game traded in the Banjo-Kazooie style
3D collectathon platformer for a SNES Donkey
Kong Country style 2D platformer.
It makes sense in retrospect.
A lot of Playtonic’s staff were some of
the key designers on the Donkey Kong Country
series.
What I expected even less was that it would
be one of my favorite games of the year.
They modernized the core of the DKC-era platformer
by mixing in concepts from the past several
generations of game design.
The structure change is a breath of fresh
air, and the number of systems that all feed
into each other make it more than a nostalgic
throwback.
Yooka-Laylee and the Impossible Lair can stand
toe-to-toe with some of the best-in-class
modern platformers, like Rayman Legends and
Donkey Kong Tropical Freeze.
Playtonic took a couple pages from the Breath
of the Wild playbook.
At the start of the game you’re thrown into
the titular ‘Impossible Lair’, an outrageously
long and brutal final level with zero checkpoints.
Yeah, it’s POSSIBLE for you to beat it on
your first try, but it’s not going to happen.
Once you get kicked out, the rest of the game
reveals itself.
There are two distinct parts to the game - the
20 main levels where all of the 2D platforming
happens, and the overworld, which is a top-down
3D space focusing on exploration and puzzle
solving.
Each of the main platforming levels is set
within a magic book, each housing a couple
bee soldiers in the ‘Beetallion’.
As in Breath of the Wild, everything you do
is technically optional, but it’s all there
to prepare you for the game’s final challenge.
Each bee you free counts as an extra hit point
for the next time that you enter the Impossible
Lair.
The overworld is a hub into the main levels,
but it also holds tons of secrets, open pathways,
and most notably, a way to modify each of
the levels’ magic books.
When you do that, it alters that book’s
level in a fundamental way.
Each of the 20 stages has a unique alternate
version of itself that is nearly unrecognizable
from the original, doubling the stage count.
You might alter a stage by submerging its
magic book in water, flooding the level, or
by putting it near a fan, causing a windstorm
to sweep over the world.
Also hidden in the overworld are a ton of
special game modifying tonics.
Some are cosmetic changes like graphics filters
and big head mode while others are mechanical,
that can make the game harder or easier.
Some of these tonics might make enemies take
an extra hit, or might give you more powerful
moves.
As you use these to change the difficulty
of each level you’re rewarded with more
or fewer quills, which act as currency.
It’s a lot like the system in Bastion and
the other Supergiant games that can incrementally
modify the feel of each level with just a
few mechanical adjustments.
There are large parts of the overworld blocked
off by literal paywalls (yes, that’s what
they call them in-game), where you pay with
special TWIT coins that you’ve collected
in the main levels to unlock the next sections
of the overworld to explore.
The potions can affect how fast you’ll earn
quills that you can use to buy more tonics
or unlock more secrets in the overworld.
All of these systems feed into each other.
Finding Bees in stages make your character
more survivable for the Impossible Lair.
Modified stages lead you to more Bees.
The Overworld helps gain new stages and modify
existing stages.
The overworld also hides tonics that make
the game easier or more challenging, and can
make you gain more money to buy more tonics
and key items.
Tokens unlock large parts of the world, opening
even more stages.
Each step in the chain is important, and it’s
customizable in a way that lets you take on
as much risk as you want to, and progress
at exactly your own pace.
The systems and levels flow smoothly into
each other, jumping between platforming action
and Zelda-like exploration.
The game becomes an excursion to add new modifiers
and new techniques to your toolset, that will
get you the resources you’ll need to fight
through the game’s first, and last challenge.
You can head back into the Impossible Lair
at any time when you feel you’re ready.
This kind of self-directed progression isn’t
a new idea, but it’s pretty uncommon, especially
in platformers.
Instead of the level-to-level grind of the
SNES-era platformer, that gives way to a constant
decision you’re making yourself: Have you
yet learned enough?
Did you yet unlock enough?
Are you yet good enough to tackle the Impossible
Lair?
Alright, one more pull from the bag.
Huh.
This is a big one.
I'm a fairweather Fire Emblem fan.
I enjoyed Path of Radiance and the first GBA
game before that, and I adored Awakening back
in 2013 but I didn't really feel the need
to revisit the series until this year with
Fire Emblem Three Houses.
It's my favorite game of the year.
The changes to the series’ familiar systems
make for something a little bit deeper while
still feeling at home in Fire Emblem.
The tried and true weapon triangle was replaced
with the new Combat Art system.
It adds an extra strategic layer where burning
through your weapon’s durability lets you
perform better attacks.
Other additions like battalions and the giant
monster units force a significantly different
combat approach and spice up combat.
The Divine Pulse, previously in Fire Emblem
Echoes under a different name, simplifies
how a lot of players were working around the
game's permadeath by restarting missions from
scratch.
It lets you just rewind time and retake turns
if you make a mistake.
It's a safety net and a big usability improvement,
while still keeping the pressure to get your
entire team through a mission alive.
The Persona-like calendar based social elements
build on the support systems of the previous
games.
Every month you have a few free days to spend
time with your units to build up their affinity,
get items, increase your own abilities, recruit
other house members into your team, or go
out on optional missions and paralogues.
The new social elements also feed into the
new tutoring system where you build up each
unit’s abilities like weapon proficiency,
magic, and mounts, and eventually gain access
to more powerful classes and benefits.
The more time you spend with your students,
the more motivated they will be, which lets
them build up their abilities faster.
The changes lead to a ton more customization
and flexibility in how your team is built.
But the best part, and what makes me love
Three Houses the most, is how well it integrates
its huge cast of characters into its long
and rewarding story.
There are four different campaigns to take,
and they all go in significantly different
directions, and follow a ton of different
themes.
Each campaign's story is consistently high
quality and very long, no matter which route
you take.
There's plenty of new content in each storyline
that a second, third, and fourth run through
the game rarely feels like retreading an old
path.
The game's huge extended cast is the spotlight.
There are so many little character-driven
subplots that interweave into the main arcs.
Unlike other large cast RPGs like Chrono Cross
or Suikoden, each character in Three Houses
feels relevant to the story and shapes and
is shaped by the story's events.
The paralogues and support conversations all
do a great job building up each character
and make them feel important, even if they
aren't central to the plot.
They all feel fleshed out and not just one-note
cardboard cutouts...except for Cyril.
The world of Fodlan has a ton going on.
The intricate political dynamics of its various
factions, the dysfunctional nature of Fodlan’s
nobility, and the many ways that it impacts
the main cast and informs each of their individual
arcs.
Despite how different the story can be with
each route and how many expendable characters
are featured, it all feels cohesive and everyone
feels relevant even outside of their support
conversations and paralogue missions.
Fire Emblem Three Houses takes a series that
had been comfortable in its formula for a
long time and through some smart updates to
its mechanics, narrative structure and how
it handles its large cast, keeps the series
feeling fresh.
And with that, we’ll call it a year.
2019 has been great for Design Doc, thanks
to all of you, our viewers, subscribers, and
supporters.
We reached 100,000 subscribers and got a cool
plaque.
We started a behind the scenes podcast over
on our Patreon hint hint.
And we broke our video release record.
No sense in stopping now.
So from Dan and Mike,
Mike: 'Hey!'
thank you all for watching.
Here’s to a new year of Design Doc!
*chill vibes outro from Fire Emblem: Three
Houses*