I love games with unforgettable allies.
That feeling you get when you team up with
a new character gets me every time.
Getting Auron to join permanently in Final
Fantasy X. Meeting a new partner in Paper
Mario back when it was...y’know...good.
Or Drachma from Skies of Arcadia.
Oop, nope, nevermind.
Oh you're back!
Great!
Oh.
OK.
In a lot of turn-based games your party members
were an extension of yourself.
You’d have full control over what they’d
do on their turn.
In lots of more action-based games however,
you can’t control your whole team at once,
so you need to rely on AI to control your
allies.
Designing and fine tuning their automated
behavior can make or break an entire game.
If they’re too useful or powerful you risk
them playing the game for you.
If they’re too weak or ineffective they
could become an unintentional liability or
you might forget that they're even there.
In a perfect world these characters should
feel like they make a real contribution without
stealing the fun from the player.
That's easy to say, but clearly there are
pitfalls everywhere.
Let's look at how some games approach AI companion
design successfully and unsuccessfully, and
talk about how both the mechanics and story
of a game can influence AI design.
There's an idea in psychology called Loss
Aversion that says that losing something feels
more negative than gaining it feels positive.
One way to design an AI around Loss Aversion
is instead of depending on a character and
being disappointed if they fail to help, switch
it up and have an AI character occasionally
give out bonuses.
Just framing the player’s expectations differently
can make them happier, even if they’re getting
the same benefits on average either way.
The palicos of Monster Hunter World are a
good example of how to design around Loss
Aversion.
Palicos are great at distracting monsters
and creating opportunities during fights.
They don’t do much damage, but they make
up for it in utility and customization.
They can be equipped with status-inflicting
weapons and special palico tools that can
heal you, give you buffs, set up traps, or
they can even steal monster materials.
They will use these skills on their own but
you can command them manually if you want to.
There’s no major penalty if they run out
of health, either.
They have autonomy without being a liability.
Some palico equipment loadouts are better
than others, but they all provide at least
SOME benefit, but never so much that they
make the monster hunting at the core of the
game too easy.
If Monster Hunter framed palicos as allies
that did a major part of the monster hunting,
the same behaviors would feel disappointing.
But since they're more of a companion that
gives out bonuses, and they only show up when
you don’t have many actual players in your
party, they feel like good partners.
They're great during the beginning of the
game while you figure out the ropes, and they
don't get in the way of high-end monster hunting.
And above all, it’s a cat.
It’s adorable.
Don’t overthink it.
There's a murky middle ground for AI design
that you can see in Kingdom Hearts.
One of the running jokes with Kingdom Hearts
1 and 2 was that Donald and Goofy were the
poster boys for useless companions.
I revisited Kingdom Hearts 1 and I was surprised
in the early game.
They actually did more than I ever gave them
credit for.
They’ll automatically attack enemies, using
offensive and support skills to help you out.
You can also use the triangle button to send
them after a specific target that you’re
locked on to.
They do well enough against the fodder in
the early game, but once tougher enemies and
bosses come into the picture they just can’t
keep up.
Unlike the palicos, Donald, Goofy and the
various guest party members don’t create
many opportunities for you during fights.
They can’t really evade or block attacks
well, they waste MP by whiffing attacks and
they'll take slivers away from the enemy's
health while Sora takes out huge chunks with
each hit.
They don't know how to protect themselves
and will quickly burn through any items you
give them.
When they're not doing chip damage or wasting
items they're probably unconscious.
They end up being much more useful if you
customize their skills and behaviors to focus
on support skills like MP Gift and Cure.
It's nice that the game is flexible enough
to let you do that, but it's a little disappointing
to have to override some bad AI if you want
Donald and Goofy to be as useful as I think
the game intended them to be.
Kingdom Hearts 2 tried to make them more useful
in combat with the Limits and Drive Forms
that require your party members to perform,
and it helps a bit, but they still can't do
that much on their own.
They also took out most of the support abilities
and the AI control, so even going back to
the strategies you used in Kingdom Hearts
1 isn't as effective anymore.
The AI feels like wasted potential, requiring
too much hand-holding to be effective, but
they’re not so useless as to break the game.
Luckily, Kingdom Hearts 3 fixes a lot of the
series' AI problems.
Your party members will do decent damage this
time.
There are new team combo finishers that trigger
if they’re nearby.
The game has lots of customization options
like Kingdom Hearts 1 and special limit commands
like Kingdom Hearts 2.
Your party feels more complete.
Strategically, anyway...
Donald: This might be a good spot to find
some ingredients.
Mmhmm.
Thanks.
Ally design can also become a problem if you
don't properly frame what the AI members should
be responsible for.
In Star Fox Assault, there's a disconnect
between what the game SAYS the AI characters
are there for and what the game actually DOES
with them.
Star Fox is supposed to be a team of space
mercenaries.
Emphasis on TEAM.
But, it’s mostly just the Fox McCloud show.
Let’s use the 3rd mission of Star Fox Assault
as an example.
In this all-range map you have to infiltrate
a space station to take out a number of enemy
spawners.
While you look for them, enemy ships will
periodically spawn outside of the station.
As more ships appear, a meter will fill up
and if it maxes out the mission will fail.
Your teammates will either help you on foot
in the station or fend off the enemies outside
in Arwings.
Hah, just kidding.
They're just flying around in circles taking
random pot shots.
Or firing at me!
You’ll have to go outside yourself to clear
the area before the meter maxes out.
Your ally on the ground can actually hold
their own, kinda like an auto-turret, but
they’ll only stay within a very small space.
Scripted events will show your wingmates being
useful, but the second they're needed in the
actual game it turns out they're really just
there for show.
The framing of the role of your wingmates
is confusing and makes the situation feel
like a missed opportunity.
Ace Combat 7 has exactly the same problem,
actually, but in every mission.
The series gives you wingmates every game,
and Ace Combat 5 even lets you guide their
behavior.
Ace Combat 7 however has teammates that take
random shots at random targets and you have
no way of making them do anything else.
Very, very rarely will your wingmates take
out any of the mission critical targets marked
in red.
Instead you might see them pick off a non-critical
target once in a while.
Or maybe just nothing.
It's the same problem as Star Fox, but it's
a strange regression for a series that had
more or less fixed the problem in an earlier
game.
If this makes you think that maybe you know
better than the AI programmers and you should
just make the AI yourself, you should try
Final Fantasy XII.
The gambit system in FFXII lets you program
exactly the steps, or ‘gambits’, that
your AI party members will take in battle
in a kind of Lego brick sort of way.
For example, you can set a gambit to have
a character cast healing spells whenever someone’s
HP drops below a set threshold, or automatically
cast Haste on the party whenever you can.
More advanced and specific conditions for
gambits can be found in shops as the game
progresses.
You also have to consider the priorities of
your gambits, placing more situational instructions
at the top and common ones at the bottom.
If you have attacking nearby enemies as a
top priority, the other gambits will never
be used.
It's not that far off in concept from what
an actual AI programmer might code, but this
way you feel like you’re in control if the
AI screws something up.
Even though the gambit system needs micromanaging
like in Kingdom Hearts the framing is completely
different.
Managing gambits is a huge part of the game,
so it's not as frustrating as the micromanaging
was in Kingdom Hearts.
Players expect it, so they’re OK with putting
in the time.
The idea of what a player 'expects' a character
to do is pretty central to AI design, but
an AI’s expectations can also overlap with
a game's story.
The narrative of a game can make an AI character
behave unexpectedly, but there is a way to
do it that won't frustrate players as much.
God of War 4’s story is all about the father-son
relationship between Kratos and Atreus.
The developers at Santa Monica designed Atreus
to always feel like he was contributing during
combat.
He can shoot arrows and summon creatures on
your command with a single button.
He’ll follow up on your attacks when he’s
nearby and he can distract and stun enemies
and open them up for you.
You don’t have to micromanage him beyond
equipping stat boosting gear and occasionally
saving him when he gets caught by an enemy.
Atreus also acts as your hint guide and helps
you solve puzzles.
He’s not treated like an escort character
but the game does turn him into a liability
in combat to fit with some of the story beats.
In a later section of the game, Atreus won’t
always listen to your commands and will recklessly
lead you into bad situations.
He’ll even start using the special summon
attacks on his own regardless if it's well
timed or not.
For some this sequence can come off as rushed,
but it's a deliberate choice and it's an effective
way to tie together an antagonistic AI character
in the story with their behavior in the gameplay.
Deltarune also uses AI controlled allies as
part of its narrative with Susie.
Susie’s deliberately designed to be a headache
for your party and, unlike Atreus, this happens
over most of the game.
If you’re an Undertale veteran you’ll
probably try to play through the game as a
pacifist.
Susie, the bully of the group, will make life
tough for your pacifist playstyle by automatically
attacking whatever you fight.
It adds an interesting wrinkle to combat since
you have to account for Susie’s violent
actions if you want to get through battles
peacefully.
It's very easy to circumvent though, as it's
meant more as a characterization device instead
of a real gameplay challenge.
The battle system in Deltarune is treated
more like an extension of the story, and to
that end Susie's behavior in battle and how
it changes over time is an interesting way
of progressing her story arc.
With a good story driven reason, even the
most annoying character actions can have purpose
and make the game better.
But without a reason there's nothing left
to counter the raw annoyance that uncontrollable
bad actions inherently have.
I love Persona 3, but the biggest problem
with the console releases of the game is your
uncontrollable party members.
It's rare for a traditional turn-based JRPG
to not give you full control, and the console
versions of Persona 3 show why.
Things can go south real fast in Shin Megami
Tensei’s press turn system.
In it, you take away enemy turns by hitting
them with elemental weaknesses.
Your opponents will also try to do the same
to you.
You can only fully control your main character
and if you’re hit with an elemental weakness,
you lose your only turn that combat round.
You can give your allies broad commands like
‘Conserve SP’ or ‘Focus on weaknesses’
but you can only change these commands during
your turn so you can’t always micromanage
them if you need to.
This can lead to some ugly scenarios where
you’re at the mercy of not just the enemy
AI but also your allies.
Sometimes the party will cast the spell you
need them to.
Other times they cast marin karin which will
probably miss and lead to your death.
And to add a horrible twist to the situation,
if your main character’s HP hits 0 for any
reason it's game over.
The AI can lead to a frustrating death and
it’s a big reason why I sometimes hesitate
to recommend Persona 3 over its sequels.
AI design is hard to do.
Developers have to find the balance between
an AI that feels like a help without taking
over the game, between an AI that takes input
from players but still doesn’t need their
hand held all the time.
Lots of games get the balance wrong for lots
of reasons.
But by learning from mistakes made in the
past, taking some cues from psychology, and
setting expectations properly you can turn
an AI into an ally.
[chill vibes outro from Deltarune]