Genres are alive. Like other living things,
genres are created, they mature, they adapt,
they age, and they die. Well, sort of. A ‘dead’
genre is a misnomer. It might become rare
and niche, but no genre is truly dead. They
can split and shatter, and be remade and remixed
into a dozen others. And they can be reborn,
come back in vogue, and fade away again.
I think there might be no genre with a more
interesting history than the Adventure Game.
It spawned 40 years ago as little more than
text, adapted and changed with new hardware
and new design sensibilities, became a juggernaut
in the 90’s, collapsed, and re-emerged
to live again. And so we’re making a two-part
series on the history and design of the Adventure
Game, and today’s video is the first half
of this story: Classic Adventure Games.
But first, a quick word from today’s sponsor,
Skillshare!
I’m a big fan of Skillshare - I’ve been
using their courses for years now, and thanks
to them I’ve learned a ton and become much
more efficient at editing videos. Skillshare
is an online learning community with thousands
of classes on dozens of topics.
They’ve got some great motion graphics courses
full of techniques that I’ve been working
into almost every episode of Design Doc. They’ve
got great classes on video editing, graphic
design, and animation, my favorites, but also
photography, marketing, web development, and
so many other subjects, that you could use
too.
You can get access to everything with Premium
Membership, for just $10 a month, which is
way cheaper and more convenient than in-person
classes or workshops. You can try it out with
a free 2 month trial by signing up with our
link below.
The 1970s were a decade of discovery for video
games. No gaming conventions had been established.
Even the idea of telling a substantial story
in a game was new. Will Crowther and Don Woods
developed Colossal Cave Adventure, the first
known example of interactive fiction, anywhere.
You and I would immediately recognize it as
a text adventure, but this was cutting edge
design in 1975. The game would unfold as a
series of lines and paragraphs, and based
on clues in the text, you’d type up what
you wanted your character to do next. ‘Go
East’ ‘Pick Up Rock’. For the time,
it was amazing. It was like a book where you
could choose your own direction, and where
the story adapted to the circumstances that
you had a part in creating. Well, as long
as the text parser understood what you were
typing. But in a world where your other gaming
options were this, or this, literally any
story that couldn’t be summarized in 10
words was a killer app by itself.
More developers made more text adventures
over the next several years. Here’s where
Zork and Planetfall get their start. Some
developers also realized you could adapt existing
licensed properties into the text adventure
format really well. Popular books like The
Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy and The
Hobbit got their own text adventures. The
games slowly became more complex, longer,
and better written, but home computing was
opening new opportunities to tweak the format.
Roberta Williams, founder of Sierra, had an
idea. She thought the newer computers coming
out in the early 80s, with their slick, uh....
having graphics.... could help make the adventure
genre way more popular. She wrote the script
for Mystery House in three weeks and got her
husband and Sierra co-founder Ken Williams
to program the thing. It was the first adventure
game with graphics, and was a surprise hit,
selling tens of thousands of copies over mail-order.
It started Sierra’s Hi-Res games series,
which would become their first success and
establish them as major adventure game developers.
Yep, this was so hi-res in 1980 that they
named their entire series ‘hi-res’.
Sierra’s games caught the eye of IBM in
1982. IBM was looking for a killer app for
their new home computer, the PCjr. It boasted
16 color graphics and a sound chip that sounded
much better than the built-in PC speaker of
the day. They asked Roberta and Ken to make
something stunning for their new machine:
a replayable, complex, and dynamic adventure
game. Roberta took inspiration from folklore
and fairy tales that she liked to read as
a child, and developed the story for what
became King’s Quest. The game would be a
full screen, colorful, animated adventure,
with lots of puzzles to solve in a modeled
world the characters moved through instead
of showing static scenes on screen. The characters
could even move with the arrow keys, instead
of going through the chore of typing out directions!
IBM was sold, and 18 months later, the first
King’s Quest was released.
The game was a critical success, but the PCjr
sold terribly, and sales of King’s Quest
were just as bad at launch. It was a big problem
for computer game developers in the 80’s.
The home computer ecosystem was extremely
fragmented, and software sold for each system
was largely incompatible with other computers.
If you wanted a true blockbuster game, you
might have to port it to a half-dozen systems,
and you’d likely have to do it from scratch
for each port. To help speed things along,
Sierra was also developing their own adventure
game engine: the Adventure Game Interpreter,
or AGI. King’s Quest 1 was built on it,
and thanks to that foresight, Sierra spent
less time porting the game to other platforms.
They also got a stroke of good fortune. Soon
after the game’s release, Tandy happened
to develop an IBM-PC compatible platform that
did take off, and now that the game could
run on lots of popular platforms, sales of
King’s Quest soared. AGI was the engine
used for the next several King’s Quest games,
but also Space Quest, Police Quest, and others.
It made it much faster to develop and distribute,
and much easier for those games to sell well.
The engine also contributed to the series’
similar look and feel. With their production
pipeline humming, Sierra was able to crank
out hit after hit in the 80’s.
That was sometimes in spite of the text engine
interface. The UX of typing in commands was
a weak link in the design of adventure games.
On its surface it seems like a very free-form
way to interact with a game - just type whatever
it is you want to happen. But in practice,
players were very often frustrated with just
how limiting the text parser was. Misspell
anything, use a synonym, describe an object
wrong, or try to do anything outside of a
very rigid set of verbs, nouns, and tasks,
and the game would screech to a halt.
There had to be a better way.
The mid 80’s started to see some games get
away from the text parser, and Japan led the
way. Planet Mephius, created by Japanese developer
Eiji Yokoyama, had allowed limited mouse controls
and a command menu system in addition to the
traditional text control. Ports of other adventure
games on the NES basically had to use a cursor
system to work nicely with a controller. But
it was LucasArts who would bring the point-and-click
adventure to a much wider audience.
LucasArts was already a well-funded branch
of Lucasfilm when they decided to dip their
toes into the graphical adventure game market.
They had already made a text-parsing adventure
game in an adaptation of the movie Labyrinth,
but in 1987 Ron Gilbert and Gary Winnick designed
their first point-and-click adventure game:
Maniac Mansion. To help make it, they created
an adventure game engine of their own: the
SCUMM engine.
From a technical perspective, the SCUMM engine
fixed many of the same problems that Sierra’s
game engines were fixing. Separating game
concepts from the engine allowed them to both
quickly iterate on characters, game scenarios,
and the game script, while also letting the
programmers more easily port the game to Amiga,
Macs, DOS, Windows, and others.
The SCUMM engine let LucasArts iterate very
quickly, and they would crank out many successful
games over the next several years. Maniac
Mansion would spawn a sequel, Day of the Tentacle.
The Monkey Island series became very popular.
Thanks to being under the umbrella of Lucasfilm,
they made several fantastic Indiana Jones
adventure games. Ron Gilbert would also start
Humongous Entertainment, which licensed the
SCUMM engine and would use it to make even
more popular adventure games geared towards
kids.
But LucasArts wasn’t just putting out the
same type of adventure games as everyone else.
There was a distinct design sensibility to
their games. Ron Gilbert wanted to fix many
of the shortcomings he saw in the standard
adventure game design of the time.
He hated typing out commands, and designed
the games to be fully point-and-click, showing
all of the actions the game allowed, and letting
players click on objects to interact with
them. LucasArts’ puzzle design was not as
obtuse as Sierra’s on average, with clearer
goals and subgoals, and with solutions that
seemed obvious in retrospect, instead of arbitrary.
They avoided having players find ‘dead ends’,
deaths, or other unfixable states a player
could wind up in. The King’s Quest series
had been infamous for having unsolvable puzzles
caused by something the player had done or
forgotten to do hours before. LucasArts games
also tried to avoid strict real-time timer
based puzzles. Players could more often think
through problems at their own pace. And the
tone of LucasArts games generally leaned towards
slapstick comedy, which, thanks to some great
writers, they nailed in game after game.
Both Sierra and LucasArts had settled into
their niches, and cranked out hits one after
another. Sierra made 4 Kings Quest games,
2 Space Quests, a Police Quest, a Leisure
Suit Larry, and a half dozen other games on
AGI in a span of 6 years. Then they made an
update to their engine, called SCI, and made
ALL OF THESE.
Yep.
Still going.
They made a lot.
In one decade.
LucasArts made Maniac Mansion and its sequel Day of the Tentacle,
three Monkey Island games, Zak McKracken,
two Indiana Jones games, Loom, Sam and Max,
The Dig, and Full Throttle on SCUMM at roughly
the same time.
The engines that let Sierra and LucasArts
release so many games so quickly were only
letting them make games with very similar
core designs. Sierra games running on AGI
and SGI largely had similar looks and feels.
Same with SCUMM engine games. And the shortcomings
of the genre were becoming more apparent.
There was still a lot of pixel hunting. The
games sometimes suffered from a lack of direction.
Inventory puzzles could still be nonsense,
and devolve into rubbing two items together
randomly until they stuck. Even just the march
of time with year after year of largely similar
games were taking their toll. The formula
was getting stale.
While Sierra and LucasArts were humming along
at the top, there was a little studio and
a big technological advancement that were
about to blow the adventure game market wide
open. The year is 1993. Up until now, games
were severely limited in size. Games came
in bundles of 3 ½ inch floppy disks that
each held only about a megabyte and a half
of data. But that was about to change. CD-ROM
drives were just now becoming mainstream,
and with them you could fit 700 megabytes
on a single disc.
You could now cram tons of photorealistic
graphics and real recorded audio in your game!
And that’s just what a small developer named
Cyan did. They took inspiration from Jules
Verne’s novel ‘The Mysterious Island’
and made a fully-rendered 3D adventure game
called Myst. It was a calm, serene, design.
An adventure game geared towards adults, featuring
a completely minimalistic UI and an anonymous
main character that was designed to be a stand-in
for the player. Players could get lost for
hours in the game’s surreal dream-like landscapes,
filled with puzzles without time pressure,
and just like LucasArts games, no real way
to fall into a fail-state.
Myst and other early CD games looked leaps
and bounds better than their competition,
and Myst became a blockbuster hit. A game
that reached a much broader audience than
the standard computer games of the day.
Yeah, under the surface the games were still
point and click interactions and puzzles whose
answers kinda sorta barely made sense, but
LOOK AT HOW GOOD THIS GAME LOOKS!
(yes i know its not great now get in the 1993 mindset
cmon)
The CD-ROM had its killer app.
Sales were unbelievable. Myst became the greatest
selling PC game to that point, a crown it
would hold for 7 years and only give up to
The Sims. Suddenly, the 3D rendered graphical
adventure was extremely in vogue.
The smash success of Myst opened up publisher’s
wallets to fund the development of an exploding
number of other adventure games. Some borrowed
from the grittier, more mature, minimalistic,
and more immersive feel of Myst. Others borrowed
from the cartoonier, comedic feel of LucasArts.
There were lots of FMV games like the Tex
Murphy series and Toonstruck, starring Christopher
Lloyd for some reason. But there were a lot
of games clearly made to chase trends, too.
Even Sierra wasn’t immune to the draw towards
a darker, grittier adventure game. They released
Gabriel Knight, which was pretty good, and
Phantasmagoria, which... wasn’t. Though
it did sell very well. Myst was even popular
enough for someone to pay John Goodman to
star in a direct parody game, Pyst.
John Goodman: 'Hello there! I'm King Mattress, ruler of Pyst! And I know who you are.'
Yeah, this was on every computer store shelf in 1996.
With so many adventure games coming out in
such a short time, it’s surprising how static
the core design was. The engines that helped
Sierra and LucasArts make games very quickly
did so by allowing them to put new scenery
and objects over the same mechanics, game
after game.
So adventure games stayed what they were.
Sierra and LucasArts built empires on that
design, so why rock the boat? But the competition
was catching up fast. Bit by bit, other genres
were putting in their own cutting edge graphics
and complex storytelling. This was the era
of Half Life, Diablo, and Starcraft. Of Metal
Gear Solid, Resident Evil, and Ocarina of
Time. Adventure games couldn’t stand alone
as the best the medium had to offer anymore,
and the public interest started to drift away.
The flaws in the games were more apparent,
and the gameplay was so static that the entire
genre was practically DEFINED by its mechanics.
The perspective and framing of the story.
The point-and-click gameplay. The obtuse puzzles.
The pixel hunting. None of it was aging well.
The genre was about to collapse.
By 1998, even Grim Fandango, perhaps LucasArts’
greatest critical success and finest adventure
game title overall, sold terribly. The people
that had in years past bought King’s Quest,
Monkey Island, and Myst could now buy lots
of high quality first-person shooters, strategy
games, RPGs, and action-adventure games. The
years of stagnation in the point-and-click
gameplay design and the competition from other
games in the graphics and storytelling departments
sapped much of the drawing power of what had
made the genre so popular in the first place.
The adventure games being made at the end
of the 90s weren’t bad games, of course,
they just weren’t groundbreaking anymore.
Plus, the increase in art resources that top-tier
adventure games now demanded made each game
much more expensive to make. Publishers saw
sales take a dip, and became very skittish
about funding new adventure games. The last
few that were in development were allowed
to finish, but they didn’t fare much better
than Grim Fandango. Publishers looking forward
could reasonably project sales to continue
to be low, so it didn’t make much sense
to allocate enough money to make a big-budget
adventure game. They could use that money
to fund a game in another more popular genre
instead. Sequels to Sam and Max and Full Throttle
were canceled. Without the budget to make
a new top-tier 3D adventure game the flow
of new ones slowed to a crawl until they practically
disappeared. The public perception of decline
fed on itself, and the adventure game was
cemented as a dead genre.
But... was it?
Next time on Design Doc: modern adventure
games. Japanese adventure games keep rolling.
Kickstarter funds a wave of throwbacks. The
meteoric rise and fall of Telltale, and indies
make the genre go supernova.
*chill vibes outro from Space Quest*