Big budget games are getting harder to make.
Cutting edge AAA games get more expansive,
more fluidly animated, and more beautiful
every year.
That means more assets need to be made.
More detail needs to go into each piece.
More polish needs to be applied.
All of this needs to be done by the professional
artists, animators, riggers, musicians, and
programmers of the gaming industry, and they
don’t work for free.
But, even with the astronomical budgets of
modern AAA games there’s an ironic twist:
There are game design problems that get harder
and harder to solve as a game scales up.
The more work that goes into making a game,
the harder it is to infuse it with meaningful
narrative choice.
The ability to play with narrative choice
is one of the great strengths of video games
as an art medium.
But, narrative choice needs to be thought
through carefully, and all paths of that choice
need to be developed.
Otherwise, if you’re not careful, if a game
designer or script writer could put narrative
choice in wherever they think it’s most
interesting, the production process of a game
can get out of hand very quickly.
So what are some ways that game developers
add meaningful narrative choice efficiently?
Let’s say we’re making an RPG that follows
the plot of Star Wars Episode 4.
Early on, you want to let the player make
a really interesting narrative choice for
Luke - he could follow Ben, become a Jedi
and save the galaxy, or he could stay as a
moisture farmer on Tatooine.
If you leave with Ben, your game should probably
develop into a pretty standard RPG - action
sequences, dialogue options, pretty similar
to Knights of the Old Republic.
But if you stay, it wouldn’t really make
sense to have a bunch of fight scenes.
Instead, the Luke-as-moisture-farmer game
might feel more like a Star Wars themed Harvest
Moon.
A completely different experience.
The setting would be unique, game mechanics
would be completely different, the music would
change, entirely different creatures and people
would have to be modeled.
If you had a big set piece action sequence
on the galaxy-saving branch you’d probably
want to create something equally impressive
on the other side, or else the branches would
feel out of balance.
You’d need way more people and way more
time to build out both choices.
By giving the player just this one narrative
choice, the studio would need to create two
essentially unique games and bundle them into
one disc.
But, this example is a bit overboard.
If it were THAT hard to add narrative choice,
we wouldn’t have many games with it at all.
So how do game designers add what feels like
meaningful narrative choice to their games
without creating an avalanche of work?
Well, for one, you could make the choices
not last nearly as long.
If you can make a choice, but resolve that
choice before too long, you can rejoin a central
plot thread.
For example, Night in the Woods let you pick
which friend to hang out with on several nights.
Hanging out lets you get more insight on each
of the characters, but the next morning will
play out the same way no matter what choice
you make.
The choices are isolated, and this can encourage
multiple playthroughs, but using this technique
can cause other problems too.
Shadow the Hedgehog has a bunch of splitting
paths that unlock as you make choices during
the earlier stages, letting you sort of Plinko
your way through to the end of the game.
[cheering audience]
It even diagrams all of
the paths that you’ve taken, so you can
see exactly where you are.
Unfortunately, once you’ve played the game
a few times, you have to slog through big
chunks of the story that you’ve already
played to get to any new content.
Also, Shadow the Hedgehog is terrible, and
it’s really hard to make a bad game good
by having a lot of different endings.
Speaking of that, another way to get the feeling
of choice in a game without blowing your budget
is by having multiple endings.
If the ending hinges on one choice, especially
near the end, you don’t have to make as
much content for each path, and you also avoid
that replay fatigue problem if you let the
player save right before they make that choice.
You can also make a lot of small choices add
up, instead of having a single major choice
decide your ending.
A lot of Bioware games took this route, with
a light and dark meter in Knights of the Old
Republic and the Paragon/Renegade system in
Mass Effect.
Throughout the game, you accrue points that
determine character alignment.
Meet certain thresholds throughout the story,
and new options open up to you, including
distinct endings.
Fable and Infamous did something similar too.
Dishonored has a more modern take on this
- there’s an ‘order’ and ‘chaos’
meter that you affect throughout the game.
The world changes as you move towards either
extreme, which helps make the world feel impacted
by small choices that you’ve made.
However, these meter systems often have a
problem - It’s very easy to make the middle
path uninteresting.
If you don’t act like the saintliest saint
or the most devilish devil, your in game options
are limited.
A lot of the most interesting powers are locked
away at the extremes, and a lot of the more
interesting story options are too.
The middle path can result in underpowered
characters, no faction really to call your
own, and NPCs that criticize you for the choices
you’ve made anyway.
This makes players want to pick a side and
stick with it always, which ironically makes
a game full of choices feel a lot more linear.
Telltale adventure games have lots of small
decision points too, but they often run into
a different problem.
If you make a choice between option A or option
B, and both have to make sense in the rest
of the plot, the game shouldn’t just hand-wave
away the implications of one of the paths.
Take Telltale’s Game of Thrones.
In it, you have to pick one of your advisors
to become your right hand man.
Spoiler Alert: The other one betrays you.
For one of the advisors the reasons for their
betrayal make sense, but if you chose to promote
them instead the other side completely breaks
character to betray you, just because both
of these possibilities needed to rejoin the
plot at the same point.
Another strategy that adds choice while keeping
production costs down is to reuse as much
of the game as possible, but give new context
depending on the path you’re taking.
Tactics Ogre does an amazing job here.
The game takes place on a small number of
discrete maps which you travel through and
fight on throughout the story.
There are a few points in the main plot where
you’ll pick a side to ally with, which completely
changes which NPCs you encounter, fight for,
and against.
But the maps all remain the same.
You might be fighting north to south for one
faction, marching toward a southern port town,
while if you took the other path you’d be
fighting on the same map marching south to
north, looking to besiege a northern castle.
You get a completely different story and really
feel like you’ve made a major choice, without
a ton of extra work for the developers.
Like Tactics Ogre, Chrono Cross also reuses
large parts of the game, but adds a lot of
narrative choice through the interactions
you have with your party members.
The game lets you recruit literally dozens
of unique characters, but many of them are blocked
off in side quests or story options.
Make a choice to save a character and not
only can they join your party but entirely
unrelated branches of the story will unlock
later on, each in turn having their own characters
to recruit.
Make a different choice and the game unfolds
completely differently.
The characters you recruit will all say the
same lines in a given cutscene, but they’ll
say them according to their own verbal tics
and mannerisms.
Different events will happen in the same map
location depending on which characters you’ve
recruited before.
Chrono Cross does have paper thin characterization
for most of the extended cast, especially
once they join your party, but the game gives
you so many options and the same story advances
in so many different ways depending on the
path you take, that your choices do feel impactful.
Lots of these techniques work best in relatively
large games, but how do smaller indie studios
with tiny staffs and shoestring budgets make
games with interesting choice?
Actually, that irony I talked about earlier
works in their favor: The production value
expectations that get baked into AAA game
development make it more time consuming to
create the branching paths that come with
meaningful choice, but if you don’t have
to make something as pretty as a AAA game
a lot of that problem goes away.
Less graphical fidelity for each asset makes
it easier for a small team to make more of
them.
It’s much faster to make branching storylines
for a game that looks like Final Fantasy Tactics
than for a game that looks like Final Fantasy
XV.
Better development tools over the last 10
years have also made it easier to do more
work in less time.
Narrative choice is a tricky problem in game
development.
If you let it, it can explode the scope of
a project, and slow down production on even
the highest budget games.
Finding the right combination of meaningful
choice and handling how that choice plays
out over the course of a game can mean the
difference between an immersive and personally
meaningful experience
and vaporware.
[chill vibes outro music from Chrono Cross]