[Music]
A ton of games are usually about going
on some kind of journey. But how do we
know where we're going? What do games do
to point us in the right direction? Most
games don't necessarily need to do a
whole lot for players to have an idea of
where to go, but the way to efficiently
present this can depend on how linear or
open a game is. The way most games are
structured falls somewhere on a spectrum
of two extremes: linear and open-ended.
For the purposes of this video, we'll be
classifying games under three broad
categories: linear, open-ended, and in
between these two,
semilinear. On the linear extreme, we
have games like Uncharted and Star Fox
64. These games are similar to theme
park attractions, often taking players
through elaborate corridors and set
pieces. Traditional exploration is not
really the focus of linear games.
Instead, they're more about providing
either a specific challenge to a player
or unfolding a traditional narrative. On
the open-ended extreme, we have games
like Skyrim and Minecraft, which are
usually large sandboxes where players
are free to explore and engage with the
world however they see fit with little
limitation. For many of these games,
exploration is the game. Now, between
linear and open-ended games, we have
what we'll call semi-linear games,
which, as you might guess, are a mix of
both worlds. The games that fall right
in the middle under this category would
include games like Dark Souls and
Castlevania Symphony of the Night. Often
the goals in these games are very
straightforward, but there is an
emphasis on exploration. The category a
game may fall under can have a major
influence on how it can efficiently
direct its players. For the remainder of
this video, we are going to take a brief
analysis of three different games that
each fit into these three categories. We
will discuss how each visually directs
the player on where to go within the
first few seconds of gameplay. And
interestingly enough, all three of these
games can be found on the original
Nintendo Entertainment System. These
include Super Mario Brothers, Metroid,
and The Legend of Zelda. This holy
trinity of Nintendo each fit within
these categories and effectively convey
their respective goals the moment that
the player hits start. So, let's begin
by taking a brief look at the original
Super Mario Brothers. One thing to keep
in mind is that being a launch title for
the original NES, Super Mario Brothers
was designed as an introduction to video
games for millions of people. And the
way that it almost effortlessly teaches
its players through level design alone
reflects this fact. You don't need a
manual to understand how to play Super
Mario Brothers. And the first screen
shows us this. Notice where the player
character is faced. On the left, facing
right. The composition of this screen is
saying one thing to the player. Go
right. A thing that you'll be doing for
99% of this entire game. But what is
really worth knowing is that once Mario
moves towards the center of the screen,
the camera begins to follow him, placing
him at the center of the screen, which
makes the purpose of the first screen
more clear. This deceptively simple use
of spacing at the start does wonders in
literally directing a new player to move
forward. Now, with this knowledge, let's
move on to our semi-linear game, 1986's
Metroid. Now, compared to Mario, how
does Metroid
[Music]
start? It's a bit different, right?
Unlike Mario, the player character, who
is named Samos, is placed not on the
left side of the screen, but at the
center. Well, slightly off center, but
we'll come back to that later. Anyway,
being at the center, the player is now
presented with two paths, left or right.
Let's pretend that Mario is the only
other game we've played. So, we stick to
what we know and move to the right.
Moving to the right, we encounter some
enemies, make a few jumps, shoot through
some doors until we come across a space
that is too small for us to pass
through. We can no longer progress this
way. So, logically, we go back the way
we came and take the path on the left,
where we see a stairway and a space
similar to the one that we saw earlier.
Beyond the stairway, we find a small
area with a flashing orb in the center.
With no other options, the player
naturally goes to collect the orb, which
gives us a new ability to change into a
ball form, which is our only way out of
both here and the area that blocked us
earlier. And already, Metroid has
established the core of what the player
does for a majority of the game.
progress through the world in a somewhat
linear fashion while exploring the
available areas for hidden paths and new
abilities to get even further in the
world. All without the player ever
needing to look at the manual or read a
piece of dialogue. And going back to the
first moments of the game, remember how
Samus was placed off center to the left?
Well, that was a subtle way to nudge
players into the direction of the
powerup, which would save the player a
few seconds if they chose to go that
way. While there is a linear progression
to Metroid, it's a game that you can
only progress by exploring every nook
and cranny for new abilities to reach
new areas. And this first area is
brilliantly designed to get that idea
across to the player. Now, for our final
example, we'll be looking at one of the
first major attempts at openw world game
design, The Legend of Zelda. Similar to
Metroid, we are placed at the center of
the screen, but now we look at the game
from a top- down perspective. We have
also upgraded from two paths to a
whopping four left, up, right, and a
black square that represents a cave.
Based on the contrast of the cave
entrance, the player is more likely to
go here first. Inside the cave, the
player is given a wooden sword, which
allows them to fight off enemies that
they'll encounter on every other path.
If the player goes off without grabbing
the sword, they'll likely come back here
at some point, whether they died or they
feel that they can't handle the enemies
out there. Now, once the player has
their weapon, they're free to explore a
pretty large portion of the world in the
pursuit of secrets, dungeons, and
treasure. Now, while this is somewhat
similar to how Metroid was structured,
there is way more emphasis on both
exploration and discovery. There isn't
really a straightforward path, and the
opening screen reflects this nature. So,
now that we've gone over these three
structures, we now know that depending
on how a game is structured, whether
it's linear or open-ended, should be
reflected upon how the game presents
itself to the player. Many of the
fundamentals that these examples
displayed have continued and evolved.
From Mario to Crash Bandicoot to
Uncharted, from Metroid to Symphony of
the Night to Dark Souls, from Zelda to
Shadow of the Colossus to Skyrim, the
influence of level design and the sense
of direction is still there and
continues to evolve and change. Now, at
some point in a future video, I would
like to dive into the nitty-gritty of
the other ways that games direct the
player, but for now, think about this.
Next time you're playing a game, think
about how that game might be leading you
on, particularly if that game is
open-ended. You might be surprised by
just how subtle or direct a game can be.
[Music]