Today’s episode is sponsored by Squarespace,
the all-in-one platform to build a beautiful
online presence.
Get 10% off your first purchase with the offer  
code DESIGNDOC
In our first Kart Racers episode, we covered
what makes the big name traditional kart racers
so good, but there's so much more going on
in kart racing besides Mario and Diddy.
Let's get experimental.
There are a bunch of smaller games that take
an unconventional approach to the fundamentals
of the kart racer: driving mechanics, items,
and track design.
We have 5 games to talk about with 5 different
twists on the genre, so let's get into it.
Oh hey, great timing!
We have a brand new game to talk about!
Team Sonic Racing is the third Sonic kart
racer developed by Sumo Digital, and it’s
not just a sequel to All-Stars Racing and
All-Stars Racing Transformed.
You won't find Jet Set Radio, NiGHTS, The
Football Manager, or Danica Patrick here.
You won't find planes or boats either.
But in its place, you have team racing.
You team up with...well… a ‘team’ of
racers and get points based on how well you
all collectively do.
Team racing modes aren't completely new.
They've appeared before in the Mario Kart
series and in Crash Nitro Kart.
Only a few of these team modes add any special
new mechanics for team based gameplay.
Some of the might turn off friendly fire,
but otherwise it’s no different than a normal
Grand Prix mode.
You just add up team points together at the
end.
There's so much more you can do mechanically
with team racing.
Crash Nitro Kart started down that road.
It had a special team meter that builds up
when you and your partner are close to each
other.
When the bar is full you can activate ‘frenzy
mode,’ which lets you rapid-fire unlimited
items at your opponents for a short time.
Mario Kart: Double Dash also dabbled in cooperative
gameplay, with two characters to a kart and
a little bit of co-op thrown in where one
player drives and the other uses items, but
compared to Team Sonic Racing that’s NOTHING!
Team Sonic Racing has team gameplay seeping
into its very core.
Its basic driving mechanics are very traditional.
You have drifting, mini-turbos, tricks, power-ups,
the usual.
But it adds a layer of teamwork to its boost,
item, and comeback mechanics.
In addition to standard boosting items and
drifting mini turbos, the new 'slingshot'
and 'skimboost' mechanics are new ways to
gain speed boosts, and they both need a teammate
to perform.
The 'slingshot' mechanic replaces traditional
drafting.
Whoever is leading your team will leave behind
a glowing trail.
If anyone on your team drives over it, they
build up a boost that will activate as they
leave the trail.
If you're ahead of all of your teammates you
have to think harder about your own racing
line.
Putting down a steady line for your teammates
to follow does wonders for helping them catch
up.
The other new ability is the ‘skimboost’.
If a teammate that’s ahead of you gets hit
with an item or is driving slowly, if you
brush right by them, they will jolt forward.
The faster you pass them, the greater the
boost.
It can be a lifesaver, working as a counter
to some of the game's revamped items.
They're all more devastating than they were
in All-Stars Transformed, stopping your car
completely if you're hit.
If your team is close behind you, the skimboost
can get you right back into the race.
The item system is more team-focused too.
Teammates can transfer items between each
other by either offering or requesting them.
You don't hand teammates your items exactly,
but you do give them a roulette with a better
item pool.
They might get a trio of basic items, or the
more powerful items that are normally exclusive
to certain character types like the fire trail
for speed characters, blinding music notes
for technique characters or defensive spikes,
a long range laser, and the item sucking void
for power characters.
The item swapping and new boost methods give
plenty of reason to work with your team, but
all that teamwork also feeds into a shared
meter that lets your team use TSR’s biggest
comeback mechanic: the team ultimate.
Everyone essentially gets a Mario Kart star
all at once, boosting your speed and acceleration,
and making your kart invincible.
If all 3 team members activate it at the same
time it'll last even longer, so teamwork and
coordination would be great.
But there's no good communication tool or
voice chat in this game, so good luck trying
to activate your team ultimates in sync.
Whoops.
Minor issues aside, succeeding as a team feels
great in TSR.
The mechanical changes that were added to
support the team aspect add a whole new layer
to the game’s item system, driving mechanics
and even how you attack the track with racing
lines.
It's a great example of rebuilding a game
from the ground up on a new style of play.
While we’re still on the topic of kart racers
with ‘Team’ in the name, I think I have
to mention Crash.
Not Crash Team Racing...Crash Tag Team Racing.
As the third game in the series, it completely
deviates from the design of Crash Team Racing
and Crash Nitro Kart and instead takes a...questionable
approach to the Double Dash idea of having
2 characters on one kart.
Crash Tag Team Racing’s defining feature
is the “Clash” mechanic.
It allows you to merge your kart with one
of your opponents.
When you clash, your car turns into a turret
that you control while your new teammate handles
all of the driving.
You might think to yourself, 'well, if I can
attach myself to any opponent's car, could
I just let them drive and win without having
to do anything?'
Yes!
You can literally attach your car as long
as you want, and hop off right before the
finish line.
To make things even easier, you boost forward
for free when you hop off, so it's really
easy to just steal the win.
Every time.
Clashing is one of the most poorly thought
out and easy to exploit mechanics that I’ve
seen, in any game, not just kart racing.
It's so fundamentally broken that I'm surprised
it wasn't weeded out in playtesting.
There's nothing the other driver can do to
get rid of you.
While the turret does have limited ammo, you
can easily replenish it by just hopping off
and hopping back on to the same driver.
Your turret is more powerful than any of the
traditional items, so just blow up anyone
challenging you for first place and take the win
for yourself.
Clashing was the big hook of this game.
The rest of it seems phoned in.
The core mechanics are barebones, I mean you
can’t even drift in this game.
The items are basic, the courses are pretty
much circles, there aren't many hazards, and
the track designs and themes blend together.
There's a 3D platformer in here too, but it's
just as half-baked as the driving.
Crash Tag Team Racing is an example of building
around a core mechanic poorly.
Next up, what if you wanted to make a kart
racer with the simplest possible controls?
How far could you go?
To answer that question, Masahiro Sakurai
created Kirby Air Ride, and he says the answer
is 'ONE BUTTON ONLY'.
One joystick for steering, one for the camera,
and one single button for EVERYTHING else.
Braking, charging, sliding, activating track
features like zippers, Kirby's inhale and
copy abilities - they all use that same button.
So what else has to change to make it work?
Air Ride doesn’t handle like most other
kart racers.
You accelerate automatically and press A to
brake.
Braking lets you drift around corners and
builds up a mini-turbo-like charge that gives
a boost when you've stopped drifting.
Classic Kirby enemies are running around each
track and take the place of items.
Tap the A button when you're close to one
and Kirby will inhale and copy them.
Some of the abilities are passives, while
others can be activated with... you guessed
it!
A tap of the A button.
There's a surprising amount of depth you can
squeeze just out of that one button, and the
context-sensitive actions make a game that
seems like it should be very simple surprisingly
tough to master.
There's even more depth in the game's vehicle
design.
Each vehicle, or ‘ride’ as they’re called,
plays around with the context-sensitive options
in weird ways.
The Wagon Star has good acceleration and handling,
but it can’t charge boost when you brake.
The Swerve Star has great top speed, acceleration
and it stops on a dime, but it can ONLY turn
while braking or in the air.
It’s really bizarre to control.
Most of the other rides have more of these
types of quirks that play with the fundamental
mechanics.
There's a ride for constantly gliding.
There's a ride for keeping your momentum up.
There's even one with a supercharged boost
that takes forever to charge up.
Kirby Air Ride's context-sensitive actions
make for a game that is uncomplicated on its
face, but deep and surprising as you get familiar
with its new approach to driving mechanics.
It proves that you can do a lot with just
a few resources.
Here’s something that I’ve wanted to talk
about for a long time.
Snowboard Kids 1 and 2 are amazing, two of
the most underrated and overlooked games in
the N64 library.
That's not even nostalgia talking - they still
hold up well today.
They’re super charming, AND they just so
happen to be a very unique take on the genre.
No, they're not driving karts, but they're
absolutely kart racers.
The ‘driving’ is based around snowboarding
physics which changes the game's handling
immensely.
You don’t accelerate by just holding down
the gas button.
You have to work WITH the mountain to go fast
- shifting your character's weight and taking
a line that keeps your speed high.
Take a turn wrong and you might end up sideways,
lose your momentum, and sit there watching
everyone else pass you.
Get hit with an item or lose your edge and
you'll have to hop around to get back up to
speed.
I love the quirky way Snowboard Kids handles
laps.
In most snowboard racing games you're just
racing down the mountain.
In Snowboard Kids, though, you're racing LAPS
on the mountain.
Instead of speeding through the finish line
and being done with the race, you have to
ride a ski lift to get back to the top for
the next lap.
And you have to maneuver into the lift line
yourself.
It turns into a frantic positioning puzzle
to grab an open ski chair.
Do it wrong, and you'll crash into the turnstyle
and give someone behind you a chance to cut
in line.
The courses are still long enough that you'll
still have time to catch up even if you’ve
had some bad luck.
Still, it’s a fun way to add laps while
fitting perfectly with the snowboard theme.
Snowboard Kids' item system is just as fun.
Item boxes are divided into two categories:
red and blue, each with their own item set.
Do tricks or pick up coins lying on the course
to earn money that you can trade in for items.
Just make sure you can pay, or else...
-Game audio: ‘NOT ENOUGH!’
Red items are projectiles: a hand to knock
people over, a snowman that takes away steering,
explosives, ice shards, and my personal favorite,
the parachute.
If someone gets hit they'll drift slooooowly
back down to the track.
Or time it right before a jump and they'll
sloooooowly drift into a pit.
Perfect.
Blue items are a little more defensive and
specialized.
Rocks to trip people behind you.
Pans to squash everyone, kind of like Mario
Kart’s lightning, fans to boost your momentum,
ghosts to slow down your competition, and
more.
The items were a fresher take on the usual
missiles-and-speed-boosts affair.
They have purposes that are easy to decipher
and are varied and situational enough to make
them fun to use strategically.
The splitting of the item boxes into two different
sets adds an extra layer of strategy to picking
up items.
The item shop coins even feed back into the
unlock system to add a little more spice to
the game’s progression, and make the whole
game feel more cohesive.
Snowboard Kids 2 is mostly a refinement of
the first, but it did add some nice quality
of life improvements.
It had a light story mode with tons of unlockables,
like this SICK poverty board, a deeper trick
system that lets you perform multiple flips,
spins and grabs, and the ability to parry
and reflect incoming projectiles with a quick
grab at the right time.
It's hard to pull off, but it's super satisfying
when it works.
The Snowboard Kids series is one of my favorite
kart racers.
It's wasn’t as polished as Mario Kart, but
there's so much heart here.
The way it changes mechanics to fit the theme,
and the overhaul of its item box system make
it worth studying.
Its charm, inventive courses, and amazing
music makes these still worth playing.
And there’s the DS game.
We don’t talk about the DS game.
*side whisper* Atlus.
Persona 5 Shredding All Morning.
Make it play like Snowboard Kids.
Doitdoitdoitdoit.
So as Snowboard Kids and Kirby Air Ride show
us, you don’t need to drive a kart for a
game to be a kart racer.
If it's some kind of racing game and you have
items, that's close enough in my book.
Games can draw inspiration from other genres
too.
Like how 2013’s Speedrunners mixes in platforming
concepts to get something unique but still
recognizable as a game inspired by kart racers.
It's not the only racing game to dabble in
platforming: Sonic Rivals, Raskulls, heck
even Iggy's Reckin Balls had some similar
ideas, but Speedrunners is a well-polished
extension of the platform racer.
In Speedrunners, you are pitted against 3
opponents.
Everyone shares the same screen and race around
a circuit.
You’ll jump, wall jump, slide, grapple,
boost, and use power-ups to sabotage your
opponents.
Keeping up your momentum is very important.
Swinging, sliding up or sliding under walls
can push you way ahead of your competition
if you know what you're doing.
The platforming bits aren't the only change
from the traditional kart racing formula either.
Instead of a lap-based race, you're competing
over short bursts on the same circuit.
You run, avoid obstacles, and sabotage each
other with items to get ahead of the pack.
As soon as one player falls behind the leader
by enough to fall out of the frame, they're
out and the screen closes in on the remaining
players.
Eliminate all of your opponents to win a round.
Do that 3 times and you've won!
There's a natural balance, where players leading
the pack are closer to the leading edge of
the screen and have less time to react to
the upcoming obstacles.
The game has items, and they ARE useful, but
they’re not guaranteed to win the match.
Skilled opponents can avoid them.
Without the rigid start and end points of
a traditional circuit, races can be more condensed,
more intense, and more unpredictable.
The elimination structure helps keep things
moving, but also keeps the stakes high enough
to make the game incredibly exciting, especially
when playing on the couch with your friends.
Just as much as traditional kart racers.
Speedrunners might not look like a kart racer,
but the spirit is there.
Kart racers are so much more than Mario Kart.
It’s been the gold standard of great kart
racing for so long, that it’s easy to overlook
the hard work happening in the genre around
the edges.
Team Sonic Racing, Snowboard Kids, Speedrunners,
and Kirby Air Ride all show new facets of
what future kart racers can be, and even Crash
Tag Team Racing serves as a cautionary tale.
Kart racers may seem like a genre set in stone,
but there’s plenty of variety if you know
where to look.
If you’re looking to make a website, check
out today’s sponsor Squarespace!
We’ve built a few websites over the years,
and in our experience Squarespace is by far
the easiest way to get a killer looking website
up and running extremely quickly.
They’re a one-stop shop, with domain registration,
easy drag and drop tools, no plugins necessary,
and great traffic monitoring tools so you
can watch all those sweet page views roll
in.
Go to squarespace.com for a free trial, and
when you’re ready to launch, head to squarespace.com/designdoc
and use offer code DESIGNDOC to save 10% off
of your first purchase of a website or domain.
*chill vibes outro from Snowboard Kids*