[Intro music from Final Fantasy XIII]
Final Fantasy XIII has a reputation it can’t
shake.
When people talk about it, usually someone
brings up that they think the game is ‘too linear’
especially in its environmental
design.
But just describing the game as ‘linear’
doesn’t tell the whole story.
After all, Final Fantasy X has very linear
maps as well and people still love it.
So what's the difference?
Why is X so well liked while XIII is one of
the most divisive games in the series?
Linearity is a big part of it, but the linearity
of FFXIII bleeds into so much more than just
the game’s environmental design.
So, let's take a look at X and XIII, and see
how two 'linear' games can be so different.
[Besaid theme from Final Fantasy X]
We’ll start with the story and world building.
Both of these games have linear stories, without
branching narrative paths.
In FFX, the story is focused around Tidus,
a young star athlete from the futuristic city
of Zanarkand.
After surviving a devastating attack on his
home by a living hurricane/whale/awful father/kaiju
thing called Sin, Tidus is taken away to the
post-post-apocalyptic land of Spira, where
Sin has wreaked havoc for 1000 years.
Tidus soon joins a young summoner named Yuna,
who sets out on a pilgrimage in order to obtain
the power to defeat Sin.
FFX is super effective at getting players
up to speed on the core story in the first
20 minutes.
Here’s Tidus, he plays underwater soccer
in a huge city.
He’s kinda cocky.
Implied daddy issues.
Here’s Sin, it attacks the big city.
PRIMARY VILLAIN ESTABLISHED
Tidus gets taken
to another world through Sin.
CORE PREMISE IS [Commander Kahn: GO]!).
After introducing you to the world and main
story conflict, the game keeps filling in
its setting at that same brisk pace.
Every area you travel to explores an aspect
of Spira, Summoners, and Sin.
In Besaid you learn of the religion of Yevon,
its summoners, and their role in defeating
Sin.
At Kilika Sin’s power is demonstrated, the
fiends that you fight in random battles are
revealed to be malicious spirits of the dead,
and you see firsthand what Summoners provide
for the people of Spira.
In Luca you learn of the leadership in the
church of Yevon, the prejudice against the
Al Bhed, and even how the game's minigame,
Blitzball, brings together the people of Spira
as one of the only sources of fun in a world
of constant tragedy.
Operation Mi’Hen establishes why Sin cannot
be fought through normal means.
Even though you're locked into moving from
one location to another, the game is structured
to reveal the culture and history of Spira
at an even pace, steadily building up the
anticipation as your party gets closer and
closer to their goal, the ruins of Zanarkand.
Final Fantasy XIII is a bit more complex.
It’s set on the two warring worlds of Cocoon
and Gran Pulse.
The story is centered around a small group
of people from Cocoon.
After a complex series of events involving
a small scale rebellion against the militia
of Cocoon, our group is cursed by a divine
being known as a Pulse fal’Cie.
This curse turns the group into Pulse l’Cie,
Sazh: ‘Pulse l’Cie are the enemies of Cocoon.’
Sazh: ‘Enemies of Cocoon’
Sazh: ‘Enemies of Cocoon’
Serah: ‘Enemy of Cocoon’
Fang: ‘Enemies of Cocoon’
Sazh: ‘Enemies of the state’
Lightning: ‘An enemy of the state’
Sazh: ‘Pulse fal’Cie are Cocoon’s enemies!’
Hope: ‘They’re the enemy!’
Snow: ‘Huh?’
l’Cie are superpowered agents of whichever
Fal’cie chose them.
All l’Cie are given a Focus, a mission assigned
to them by the Fal’cie through extremely
vague visions.
The party of newly branded Pulse L’cie must
complete their focus or be turned into mindless
monsters called Cie’th.
The group sets out to find the truth of their
Focus, evade the pursuit of Cocoon’s Militia
and do whatever they can to save both themselves
and their home.
The difference here is with the game's herky-jerky
pacing.
Key plot information in Final Fantasy XIII
isn’t as clear cut as it is in Final Fantasy
X and the game just LOVES throwing tons of
new information at you all at once.
The game starts by jumping between 3 different
perspectives Lightning and Sazh, Snow, and
Hope and Vanille, all in the middle of a pretty
vague side conflict.
What is Lightning after?
Oh, she’s after Pulse fal’Cie.
Here it is!
Oh wait no that’s not actually the Pulse
fal’Cie...that’s just the Vestige.. which
is like a building that holds the Fal’cie.
What is a Pulse fal’Cie?
No time for that just look at the Datalog.
Now here’s Snow and his child army.
They’re “heroes”…I guess.
Here’s the PSICOM soldiers.
They’re all from Cocoon.
Except Lightning, who is not a PSICOM soldier,
she’s guardian corp soldier, which is different
from PSICOM… I guess?.
Confused?
Datalog!
WHERE IS THIS?
LOOK AT THIS SKYBOX, THIS IS ALL JUST VAGUE
SCI-FI.
FFXIII’s story isn’t really that complicated
but it’s more convoluted and hard to follow
than it needed to be.
FFXIII leans on explaining fundamental aspects
of its world through data logs, rather than
the actual events, which makes it tougher
for newcomers to keep up with what’s going
on.
The terms tend to be less straightforward
to explain, as well.
Explaining things like ‘fal'Cie’, ‘l'Cie’
and ‘Cieth', and the differences between
Cocoon and Pulse l'Cie tend to be more demanding
than explaining the terms in FFX like 'summoner’,
‘Sin’, and ‘blitzball’, and makes
it just a bit harder to get into the flow
of the game.
Compared to X, XIII doesn’t guide the player
through this new world as clearly either.
Outside of a few exposition dumps most of
the information about Cocoon and Pulse’s
culture is buried in datalogs.
There isn’t much in the way of recurring
characters or even side plots either as the
story focuses on developing its 6 main characters,
yet the story still sometimes spins its wheels.
YES Hope, I GET that you want to murder Snow.
HE’S GOING TO CATCH ON IF YOU KEEP DEATH
STARING AT HIM.
Can we PLEASE move on?
In X, the people you meet along the pilgrimage
give character to the world of Spira in a
clear and digestible manner.
The story in XIII makes more sense if you’re
already familiar with the world of Cocoon.
The time that X spends building it’s world
alongside characters, XIII spends building
up characters in a world that hasn’t been
fully built yet.
All these little hang ups make it harder to
get into the flow of XIII’s story, and since
the game’s linearity is done in service
of progressing that story, these problems
degrade the overall game experience.
Now let's get into the environmental design
for both games.
Both have very linear maps, you know, just
go from HERE to HERE, but there’s more to
it than that.
Final Fantasy X does 4 key things that help
distract from its own linearity.
Pacing, Level Gimmicks, Pit Stops, and Secret
Items.
The pacing is quick - the areas in FFX are
only about 2 or 3 screens long.
You move onto the next locale before an area
outstays its welcome.
Many areas have unique gimmicks or minigames
- dodging lightning, riding chocobos, blitzball,
solving puzzles in the cloister of trials
or navigating a maze.
Most areas have pit stops - small shops or
other locations where you can learn about
side plots and supporting characters.
The Old Sage Maechan tells you about the history
of Spira.
The rival summoner Dona gives the player another
perspective of the responsibilities of the
Pilgrimage.
The acolyte Shelinda represents the followers
of Yevon.
The shrewd merchant O’aka gives you special
deals on items if you invest in him early,
and the retired summoner Belgemine gives Aeon
combat challenges and tips.
These little pit stops serve as a break in
the core gameplay loop.
The game still rewards exploration in each
environment by sticking hidden chests and
little secrets everywhere.
You never know when you'll stumble into one
of the many Al Bhed primers or Jecht Spheres.
The game's fixed camera even plays into this,
making it trickier and more rewarding to discover
everything.
All these subtle variations and side content
serve to break up the monotony of X’s environments.
Most of FFXIII's environments are like the
Mi'hen Highroad from FFX, minus the NPCs,
pit stops, and triple the length.
Areas like the 5th Ark in Chapter 10 just
seem to go ON and ON and ON.
Move forward, fight, move forward, fight,
CUTSCENE, Sazh: ‘Cocoon’s enemies!’
move forward, and fight.
There are a couple gimmicks in chapter 4 and
chapter 6, but they’re the exception, and
they’re pretty short anyway.
Treasure chests are very rarely hidden.
They’re almost always placed at the end
of a short branching path with an enemy guarding
it.
I know it’s a cliche at this point, but
these environments really are mostly just
fancy hallways.
There is one moment where XIII does take a
small break from this formula.
It happens in chapter 7 when you reach Hope’s
house and he reunites with his father.
Every character gets to literally take a break
and have some interesting conversations.
It’s a nice tonal shift, and the game really
could’ve used more of them to break up the
gameplay.
You almost get another one at the start of
Chapter 8 in the amusement park Nautilus,
which is basically a stand in for FFVII’s
Golden Saucer.
This perfect opportunity for mixing up the
gameplay is completely wasted.
The whole area is just another giant hallway
that just happens to have a few NPCs that
only talk as you pass them by.
The area would’ve been much better with
2 or 3 simple minigames, some special shops,
maybe play around with these chocobos or ...oh...
OH MY GOD LOOK AT THESE SHEEP!
LOOK AT EM!
Look at that smile!
YOU don’t need me to summon Ragnarok, do
ya?
There just aren’t any alternative goals
or secrets in these levels.
No discovery.
Just more combat which IS pretty good, but
not for a 40-50 hour long game.
Beyond your party composition, which takes
20 hours to open up mind you, the game is
extremely inflexible in how you can play it.
And that brings up the leveling systems.
FFX introduces the Sphere Grid which is a
fusion of a traditional skill tree and a board
game.
As you gain experience by fighting enemies,
you move each character's token across the
board, activating nodes along the way to gain
abilities, stats and open up new development
pathways.
Each of your 7 party members are placed at
different points on the grid and start down
a path that plays to that character’s natural
strengths.
Tidus’ path specializes in speed and time
magic.
Yuna’s path is focused on White Magic.
Auron’s is based on strength and “break”
skills and so on.
As you progress through the grid, you can
sometimes jump to another character's natural
route.
The ability to branch out is best shown with
Kimahri, who in the Expert version of the
Sphere Grid has immediate access to everyone
else’s pathways, making him ideal to experiment
with as a hybrid character.
In my last playthrough, my Kimahri was a powerhouse
who was a mix of both Wakka’s and Aurons’
skills, topped off with some of Rikku’s
thief abilities.
It was totally up to me to customize the character,
which gave me a great sense of agency in how
my party developed.
That agency doesn't really apply to XIII.
Every character specializes in 3 of 6 different
combat roles.
Each of those roles are powered up through
the Crystarium, which is this game’s Sphere
Grid.
The Crystarium is a set of skill trees for
each role.
Well, maybe not a tree actually.
More like… a skill... telephone pole?
Each role is set up as a straight line with
the occasional short branch and.. wait a minute....
[whisper yell] OH MAN THIS BRANCH HAS ANOTHER
BRANCH
[exploding head sound]
The Crystarium is about as simple as you could
make a leveling system.
You gain experience that you can spend on
each of the trees annnd that’s it.
Even your stats are stripped down to only
Health, Strength, and Magic.
You can’t specialize or take a different
path within a role.
Just go down the long loooooong path.
Now every character DOES eventually gain access
to all 6 roles but who cares since FFXIII
punishes you for 'jumping the track' in the
Crystarium - any tree that allows, lets say,
Hope to go Rambo on dudes takes like 5 times
as many points just to take one step.
Investing in leveling up a character’s secondary
roles is really only viable if you want to
grind for the post game content.
In contrast, FFX punishes you a bit to jump
to another track, but then you can just continue
on without any further punishment.
The game even gives you items specifically
meant to jump to the track of another character.
FFX encourages you to stay in the lines but
it will let you go outside of them if you
want.
XIII demands that you play within those lines.
It’s very ironic for a game themed around
‘fighting against fate’ to have such a
linear system.
So, Final Fantasy X and Final Fantasy XIII
are both ‘linear’ in a basic sense, but
the difference is in the details.
FFX distracts from the main story’s linearity
with little touches all over the place, from
blitzball, to the side plots, from the hidden
items to the Sphere Grid.
For Final Fantasy XIII linearity also bleeds
into its pacing, world building, story presentation,
characters, and leveling systems.
It boils down to this: Final Fantasy XIII
is like a straw
Final Fantasy X is a silly straw.
[chill vibes outro music from Final Fantasy
X]