Hey, we’re relaunching our Patreon!
We have a new Patreon exclusive behind-the-scenes
Design Doc podcast, and we’re putting early
video access, credit shoutouts and voting
in lower backer tiers.
If you like our videos click the Patreon link
in the description below to help support us
and keep Design Doc rolling.
[intro music from Final Fantasy IX]
Square caught fire in the late 90’s.
Over 5 years, they released a string of 4
JRPG masterpieces back to back to back to
back.
Dozens of other studios have made countless
JRPGs since then.
Some have been great, some are a different
kind of great, but Square’s streak of speed
and quality was unmatched from Final Fantasy
VII through X. Yes, that includes the one
with the gun hot glued to a sword.
Right in the middle of that streak was Final
Fantasy IX.
It wasn’t the best selling, but it sold
well enough.
It wasn’t the best looking of the 4, but
for a game on the original PlayStation, it
looked great.
It didn’t have the best soundtrack.
Wait, I take that back.
Maybe it did.
But it had a killer narrative and a very good
level up system.
Let’s dive into Final Fantasy IX and explore
how Square created a gripping narrative, a
tight gameplay loop, and talk about what it
took to design Sakaguchi’s masterpiece.
FFIX came out in the year 2000 and all together
sold about 6 million copies over its lifetime.
Maybe a little more now with the new re-releases.
It’s beloved, critically acclaimed at release
and a fan favorite now, but it’s the weakest
selling of any of the 3D mainline single-player
Final Fantasy games, from VII through XV.
They’re not BAD sales numbers, but FFVII sold
13 million copies and VIII sold 9 million
copies.
FFIX just wasn’t in the same ballpark.
The most astonishing thing about FFIX might
be how quickly it came together.
It came out barely a year after FFVIII with
only a few months of pre-production work on
IX happening during the development of VIII.
That’s an astounding turnaround time for
such a rich, fully featured game.
It’s been a long time since top-end AAA
game development could crank out a game in
a little over a year, and Square hasn’t
come close to matching that since.
In the time between FFXIII and FFXV you could
cram like…
4 FFIX development cycles in there.
Get those sequels out.
With its release date announced in the same
press conference that introduced both Final
Fantasy X and XI, FFIX was never given a chance
to breathe.
Too bad, because it was designed as a vision
of where the series had come from and what
it could be at its best.
A beautiful fusion of classic sword-and-sorcery
Final Fantasy and the system-heavy story-driven
epics of the more recent games.
By the time it was released the PS2 was already
out.
FFX was less than a year away, and that had
fancy new higher resolution graphics and full
voice acting, not to mention a good story
and fun gameplay in its own right.
FFX was always destined to steal the spotlight.
Even though it was buried by a hardware cycle
FFIX is still as good today as it was in 2000,
just waiting to be discovered by new fans
willing to seek it out.
But what makes it a gem?
FFIX has some of the best pacing in games,
in its narrative, and in its gameplay.
Especially for a game from around the year
2000, and certainly for a JRPG.
So what is narrative pacing anyway?
It’s plot crossed with timing.
A story’s plot will include things like
a character’s background.
New locations to visit.
New motivations.
A fateful conversation between two characters.
Action scenes.
Romance.
Betrayal and redemption.
But pacing isn’t just about the plot.
You can tell those same events in an infinite
number of ways.
Pacing is about how you pick and choose the
events to show in your story.
It can be sped up or slowed down depending
on which events you show, which you leave
out, and how they’re told.
In Skyrim, if you started the game with a
prisoner cart ride that took 2 hours instead
of a few minutes the game’s plot would be
the same, but the pacing would be a disaster.
Bad pacing bores the audience and they might
put your game down, never to pick it up again.
Final Fantasy IX is paced very well, with
an action-packed first few hours.
The game opens with the lead up to an elaborate
stage play-turned-kidnapping scheme.
You flip between Zidane, the thief and theater
troupe member, Vivi, a lonely young black
mage looking for a place to watch the show,
and Steiner, the bumbling captain of Alexandria’s
Knights of Pluto.
Each segment quickly introduces a chunk of
the game’s cast.
You get just enough information to keep their
immediate motivations in context without bogging
down the story with irrelevant details.
Vivi’s story starts with him finding out
his ticket to the play is fake, but you get
the sense that Vivi is out of place, on a
deeper level than just a counterfeit ticket.
And then he accidentally gets swept up in
the heist.
You get clear goals for Zidane, Garnet, and
Steiner, and an antagonist to root against
in Queen Brahne.
Supporting charactrs like the Tantalus group
of thieves, the jesters, and Beatrix appear
briefly, to be fully integrated later.
You’re introduced to the beautiful streets
of Alexandria, filled with dozens of NPCs
to give it vibrancy.
Even the save system has a bit of depth to
it, with the start of a subplot about the
Moogle’s mail delivery system.
Within the first hour of play, you’re led
outside of the city and into a forest mini-dungeon
and an ice cavern mini-dungeon.
The characters start to flesh out their motivations
and what they’re immediately trying to do.
And you start to have wayyyyy more questions
about Vivi.
Ooh boy.
That’s uhh… that’s rough bud.
Through the first two hours, you’ve already
met most of the game’s major players, you
were exposed to tons of story hooks, you’ve
played through two dungeons and have gotten
used to the battle system.
These story beats are made up of just a few
sentences, but they paint the world in surprising
detail.
Each new segment opens the door to a little
more of a character’s true depth and personality.
You zip between groups and plot hooks so quickly
that the game never feels like it has stalled
out or started to flood you with one big exposition
dump.
It lets the intrigue of the Mist Continent
and the world of Gaia develop gradually, but
steadily in the background.
Most of the rest of the modern Final Fantasy
games take a longer time to get into gear.
FFXIII’s 20-hour tutorial is the most famous,
and worst example.
FFVIII gives you a battle system and story
exposition dump back to back at the very start.
FFX was a slower burn, meandering for 2 or
3 hours after an explosive beginning.
FFXV is actually close to FFIX in its early
game pacing, with a more reasonable 20ish
minutes to get into the action.
Throughout the first two disks of FFIX, the
stakes steadily build, alliances develop and
deepen, the antagonists reveal themselves
and evolve.
The game’s expert pacing keeps players in
the flow of the story, and before you know
it you’re fully committed to the complex
world of Final Fantasy IX.
So FFIX’s narrative pacing is phenomenal,
and if it were a novel or a TV series that
would be the start and end of it, but games
are different.
Games are interactive, and there’s a different
sort of pacing that games can use, beyond
their story.
Many designers call it the ‘gameplay loop’.
It’s the moment to moment game actions you’re
taking as a player.
Just like how well designed narrative pacing
in a story can make it easier to stay invested
in the world, the gameplay loop can make it
easier to stay invested in the action.
Jaime Griesemer, formerly of Bungie, coined
the phrase ‘30 seconds of fun’ to describe
the gameplay loop they designed while creating
Halo.
Halo’s ‘30 seconds of fun’ was a series
of actions that you would take over and over
again while you were playing the game.
The context, the stuff happening around that
loop, would change a little bit each time,
but that core would stay roughly the same.
Halo’s loop was centered around how to take
out a group of enemies.
You’d sneak up on one and melee them, toss
a grenade towards another group, and clean
up whoever was left.
Surrounding that loop there would be little
tweaks as you progressed through the game.
The makeup of the enemies would change a bit,
the level layouts would be different, the
backdrop might be different, but you’d still
be using grenades, guns, and melee attacks
as core actions.
Crowd control, cover, and weak points.
Getting that loop to be fun was perhaps the
most important thing in the game’s design.
It did the heavy lifting to hold the player’s
attention.
If the loop was dull the fundamental core
of the game would be dull too, and people
would quit.
With an engaging loop and enough interesting
little twists on the periphery, they could
keep the momentum of the game going.
That’s how a game can hold a player’s
attention through hour 1, hour 5, and hour
100.
So what’s FFIX’s gameplay loop then?
You’ve got the usual turn-based JRPG battle
mechanics on one hand.
Wait your turn and punch some monsters.
Get experience when you win, then level up.
Basic stuff.
But it turns out that surface level grind
isn’t all that important in FFIX.
It’s not THAT difficult to keep your character
levels very low and still win the game.
There’s another, more important mechanic
that helps pace the game just like the narrative
loop does.
FFIX has an AP system that combines skills
and equipment into a system that keeps your
interest and feeds right back into the basic
JRPG combat loop.
Every weapon, piece of armor, or accessory
you can equip has a set of Abilities.
They’re spells, passive skills, or unique
moves that certain members of your party can
learn.
As you fight monsters you gain AP, which goes
into filling up a progress bar on each of
those learnable abilities.
Equip some higher level armor you just found
and immediately get a test-run of a cool new
move, a handy way to protect your character,
or a new way to fight an enemy.
Fill up one of the bars and now you get the
ability permanently.
Each of these abilities will slightly tweak
the basic JRPG gameplay loop.
Now instead of just hitting enemies you can
roast them.
Or zap them with an eidolon.
The skill progress bars will complete at different
rates, so almost every battle you’re unlocking
something and juggling equipment among your
party members so they’re always learning
something new.
You start to strategize around the equipment
loadout.
Not just on a strict ‘this is stronger than
this’ way, but in a ‘how can I most efficiently
learn all the skills I want to use’ way.
It makes players feel like they’re more
involved in the progress of their character.
More so than just sitting around and waiting
for predefined skill sets to unlock in strictly
more linear systems, like those in FFIV or
XIII.
Just like a fast-paced story will keep a narrative
from feeling like a slog, the constant drip
of new abilities helps keep the gameplay from
bogging down.
Combined with the game’s excellent narrative
pacing it makes the game so easy to fall into,
and so easy to love.
Final Fantasy IX was made incredibly fast
but was carefully crafted.
It was a refined version of its more popular
predecessors on the PlayStation.
It draws from the series’ history with countless
references but also as a logical culmination
of what the first game wanted to be.
FFIX became the most complete package that
Square had ever made.
It’s not as sweeping as 7, not as experimental
as 8, not as groundbreaking as 10, not as
intricate as 12, not as flashy as 13, not
as pretty as 15, but Final Fantasy IX is an
incredible game, and in my book it’s the
platonic ideal of Final Fantasy.
[chill vibes outro from Final Fantasy IX]