Before the open road, before the Realm Reborn,
before Cocoon and Pulse, before Ivalice.
Before the MMO, before the sequels, before
voice acting, and before the throwback, there
was Final Fantasy VIII, a followup to the
most ambitious RPG Square had ever made.
For it to be a worthy successor, the designers
of Final Fantasy VIII had to be just as ambitious.
Final Fantasy VIII is a weird one in the series,
made at a time before there were so many ‘weird
ones’, and the crown jewel of weirdness
lies in how Square took the fundamentals of
the JRPG experience and mashed them all into
one all encompassing super system:
The Junction system.
JRPGs are often made of several distinct gameplay
systems.
You can cast magic, use summons, increase
stats, use items, wear equipment - you know,
standard RPG stuff.
But for a game like FFVIII, the follow up
to one of the most beloved RPGs of all time,
what could be more ambitious than a system
to replace all of these conventions?
FFVIII’s core systems revolve around equipping
your characters with Guardian Forces, GFs
for short.
They’re essentially summons.
Junction a GF to any character, and you can
assign your GF to learn skills as you gain
experience by fighting other monsters.
Some of those skills are fairly standard bonuses
like raising HP by 20% or boosting your character’s
strength stat by 40%.
But the junction system also had more unique
skills: you can unlock the ability to attach
your magic spells to your stats.
Like, put Ultima on your vitality stat, or
Haste on your Speed stat.
Also instead of characters having an MP bar
each magic spell is a consumable item.
To get more magic spells you ‘Draw’ out
copies of the spell into your stock in two
ways - either from draw points located throughout
the world, or by sucking the magic out of
the enemies you fight.
When you attach spells to your stats the boost
you get changes depending on how many of that
spell you have in stock, the strength of the
spell, and how well a spell vibes with that
stat.
For example, junctioning 100 Curaga spells
to your HP slot will boost your HP more than
100 Cure spells.
100 Cure spells boosts HP better than 100
Fire spells, and 100 Fire spells boosts HP
by more than 10 Fire spells.
The way FFVIII mixes magic and character progression
is already a pretty complicated RPG system,
but then it keeps going.
Some GFs have the ability to turn items into
magic spells directly.
Like, turn that tent you just bought in the
store into a bunch of Curaga spells.
That lets you get high end spells way earlier
in the game than you could find normally.
And even that isn’t the end of the system:
Some GFs let you turn Triple Triad cards into
powerful items, which you can then turn into
even more powerful late game magic.
If you look at it in the best light, the junction
system lets players tailor the game to THEIR
playstyle, giving players more options and
more control than the average JRPG.
It lets the player determine the answers to
questions like: How do I want to develop these
characters?
Which GF abilities do I get next?
Who do I attach them to?
How do I combine GFs that work well together?
How do I use and distribute my magic to maximize
my stats?
How can I get more of the magic I need to
complete this build?
The junction system is set up to give small
incremental rewards as you figure out the
nuances of the system while you develop your
characters:
Lots of players go through a progression:
they start by understanding the basics, then
start min/maxing by drawing from enemies,
then start playing with the item refinement
system, and then discover the card mod techniques.
At each step, your characters will become
noticeably more powerful, changing the game
experience along the way, from challenging,
to balanced, to powerful, to game-breaking.
If you know what you’re doing, you can turn
a 50 hour game into a 10 hour playthrough.
How and when a player travels through those
stages is mostly up to them, and discovering
those tricks gives players a sense of mastery.
The junction system is large and complex enough
to give players the space to experiment, figure
out its mechanics, discover combinations,
and develop each of their characters however
they see fit.
And yet, the junction system and FFVIII as
a whole is extremely divisive.
Some people think the story’s wheels fall
off halfway through, but whatever, that’s
a matter of taste.
Some people don’t like the way enemies will
level up alongside you, but that change was
effective at guiding players away from level
grinding.
Despite all of its potential, FFVIII’s biggest
problem is also the junction system.
At its best, it’s complex, ambitious, and
innovative.
At its worst it’s cumbersome, confusing,
and very slow.
The tutorials are paced poorly, worded poorly,
and too front loaded, showing up even before
the first battles.
A good chunk of the start of the game is spent
explaining junctioning, but by the end of
it you still don’t have a full grasp of
what the system is letting you do.
Switching the GFs around when you swap party
members is fiddly and slow, and the game forces
you to do it pretty often.
ALL.
OF.
THESE.
ABBREVIATIONS.
ARE.
THE WORST.
The steep learning curve can be a deal breaker
for hooking new players onto the game, and
even other Final Fantasy fans may abandon
FFVIII because of it.
The system’s problems don’t stop at the
tutorials either.
The way most players start tinkering with
the junction system is a terrible, grind heavy
experience.
Usually, the first thing people try is maxing
out how much magic they have.
Why settle for 10 spells when you can have
100!
You can draw magic from the scattered draw
points in the world, but there aren’t a
ton of them.
They just give a few copies of one spell,
and then lock you out from drawing again until
your character takes enough steps.
They’re not very easy to farm.
No, instead you’re supposed to draw magic
from enemies you encounter.
One spell at a time, up to 100 copies, from
1 to 9 copies of the spell per draw.
For each of your 3 party members.
This takes a ton of time and you have to do
it for EACH spell.
ALL of these.
At least, all of the ones you want to junction
with.
And, since the more spells you have the more
powerful your stat boosts are, you become
a spell hoarder.
You’re not going to want to use any of your
magic.
Otherwise, you’ll have to go back to the...
drawing….
board.
*in background* M: Hah!
D: Mmm.
The draw system is a major problem in the
design of the game.
No skill, not much risk, not much thought,
and it’s a weird choice for a game design
that tried to make normal level grinding pointless.
It’s a chore, so people give up.
It’s unfortunate, and understandable.
It’s just one part of the game, but you
can’t separate FFVIII from the junction
system.
For the people who fall in love with it FFVIII
is a classic.
And for people who don’t click with it FFVIII
is a weird, frustrating game.
It’s not for everyone and whether or not
it’s for you depends on your preferences
for problem solving and playing with the system.
Game designer Marc LeBlanc, one of the designers
of System Shock and Thief and a speaker at
GDC has proposed that ‘fun’ in games can
be broadly categorized in 8 different ways:
Sensation, Fantasy, Narrative, Challenge,
Fellowship, Discovery, Expression, and Submission.
Final Fantasy 8 nails Fantasy and Narrative,
much like the rest of the series.
The tricky category is Challenge.
The junction system can provide challenge,
but it can also undermine it.
The initial confusion of the system can prevent
the challenge from being fun.
Or the challenge can be skipped in the same
way it can be skipped in a puzzle solving
game, like ‘The Witness’ - by looking
up the answer or figuring it out very quickly.
In FFVIII, the ‘answer’ is the quickest
path to an incredible build.
The game doesn’t put up very many artificial
roadblocks to keep you from ‘solving’
the system earlier than it intends you to.
The pieces to an end-game build are there
early on and it’s just up to you to put
them together.
It’s a two edged sword - the design of the
junction system gives you much more personal
control as to how fast you progress on your
journey to mastery, but it’s also exploitable.
If you avoid short-circuiting the challenge,
and you’re the kind of person who is attracted
to working through the system FFVIII offers
a unique take on character progression in
a very good JRPG.
On the other hand, if you either get sick
of dealing with the system or skip over the
process of mastery with a guide, by skill,
or by luck, or if you just aren’t interested
in tinkering with it FFVIII can feel like
it’s offering much less than other games
and that can be why the junction system and
FFVIII as a whole is so divisive.
In Final Fantasy’s long history, the junction
system is an icon.
It’s what makes FFVIII so unique and at
the same time makes it tough to introduce
to new players.
Square took a risk, and even though it can
be frustrating at times I’m glad they did.
I’d rather play a game that takes a big
risk than play a cookie cutter game.
That’s the only way to get something innovative
even if it doesn’t work out all the time.
The junction system may have flown too close
to the sun but it burns beautifully.
[Chill vibes outro from Final Fantasy VIII]