New ideas happen all the time.
But GOOD new ideas are hard to come by.
Research and development of a new way of doing
things can be expensive and time-consuming.
Plus, if someone could just steal your idea
afterwards they would get all of the benefit
and none of the pain.
That’s why patents exist, as a way to protect
ideas, and to encourage people to develop
new ideas and designs.
But patents are just a tool, and can be used
well and poorly.
Gaming patents are no different - some protect
ingenious designs in their infancy.
Some protect… not as ingenious designs,
but are still aggressively guarded by their
patent holder.
And some protect ideas that never even got
off the ground, trapped as a diagram on paper
forever.
Patents can be useful, but they aren’t magic.
They can be worked around, fought over, used
and misused.
I’ve got some interesting gaming patents
to talk about, so let’s see how they worked
for companies, and were worked around by their
competitors.
First, some really simplified groundwork on
what a patent is.
Other videos go into more detail about the
patent process, all the different kinds of
patents, and how they can help and harm creativity.
But we’re not lawyers, so y’know.
Don’t rely on us.
*Fast talking disclaimer voice* Warning: Design
Doc is not a replacement for a real law education.
Patent idea quality may vary.
Please consult the most expensive legal team
you can find.
A patent gives its owner the sole right to
make, sell, or use the patented idea for some
period of time, usually 20 years.
Think of getting a patent as like getting
an exclusive license on an idea, and that
license allows you to sue anyone who copies
it.
In a perfect world, a patent is supposed to
prevent someone from immediately ripping off
your good ideas.
But which ideas are patentable is subject
to interpretation.
Even ideas that seem obvious or silly can
be patented under the right circumstances.
There are tons of gaming patents that boil
down to something kind of obvious.
Maybe the most famous example is in Crazy
Taxi.
Sega patented a few of Crazy Taxi’s core
gameplay ideas.
Starting in 1998, a patent titled ‘Game
display method, moving direction indicating
method, game apparatus and drive simulating
apparatus’ - yes, most of these patents
have terrible names - meant no one besides
Sega could use a floating arrow like THIS
that points to your destination.
The same patent also covered exactly how the
Crazy Taxi pedestrians would jump out of the
way of your car.
A short time later, Radical Entertainment
developed ‘The Simpsons: Road Rage’, licensed
from Fox.
It’s… let’s say... conspicuously similar.
That hand looks pretty familiar.
Hmm.
That car dodging looks pretty familiar.
Hmm.
So, Sega sued Fox for infringing on their
patent.
Fox and Sega settled out of court, quietly,
for an undisclosed amount of money.
No one, or at least no one worth suing, tested
Sega’s patent again.
But developers are creative.
Limits, like the limit being enforced by Sega’s
legal department, can lead to creativity.
Patents don’t cover every possible way to
solve the same design problem, just a specific
implementation.
It was time for a workaround.
An arrow isn’t the only HUD element you
can use to convey direction.
Fable’s developers used a glowing breadcrumb
trail.
Skyrim has a compass heading and waypoint
markers to help point you in the right direction.
You start seeing a lot of minimap based navigation
crop up right after Crazy Taxi, too.
Grand Theft Auto 3 and onwards all used a
minimap heavily instead of floating arrows
for mission directional guidance.
Fox even jumped back in after their arrow
lawsuit.
The Simpsons Hit and Run didn’t need any
arrows!
They added a mini map!
Just like… oh.
GTA doesn’t have a patent on that minimap,
huh?
Hope you cleared it with Legal this time.
The mini-map is a much better design than
an arrow anyway.
It’s way more flexible, and lets you plan
routes and see multiple objectives at once.
You can’t see a secondary objective with
just one arrow.
So even though Sega’s patent on Crazy Taxi’s
arrow kept others from using it, it still
did the gaming world a small service.
It forced other companies to think harder,
lest they get sued like Fox did, and the new
designs solved even more problems.
The Crazy Taxi patent expired in late 2018,
so anyone can now put that arrow in their
game.
Eh, the world has moved on.
I don’t think it’ll be coming back.
Not every patent protects a flimsy design,
though.
Lots of them protect popular, well-loved pieces
of video game history.
There may be nothing that evokes video games
as a medium more than the D-pad.
But until 2005 Nintendo owned a patent that
protected maybe the most well-known version
of it.
Nintendo’s patent, mercifully titled just
‘Multi-directional switch’, covered the
design and mechanics of Nintendo’s D-pad.
It specified how the top was a single piece
of plastic, with 4 directional arrows showing
on top pivoting around a center nub, and it
could tilt in 4 directions.
It covered how a button press pushed down
on a piece of rubber with these little conductive
pads.
The pads touched a circuit board with electrodes
on top, completed a circuit, and that signaled
to the console that you pressed a button.
The patent also covered how the pads and the
top plastic bounced back to a neutral position
when you let go.
The patent was granted in 1987, and the whole
D-pad assembly became a staple of Nintendo
controllers ever since.
The NES, SNES, Game Boy, GBA, N64, Gamecube,
DS Lite, Wii, Wii U, and the Switch Pro Controller
all used extremely similar D-pad hardware.
Only the DS, 3DS and the Switch’s joy-con
didn’t use the same design.
The DS and 3DS used metal dome switches, and
Nintendo’s traditional D-pad just could
not work with the Switch’s single joy-con
controller configuration.
It was replaced with 4 independent buttons
that could just be remapped as a D-pad.
Nintendo held the rights to this D-pad, but
Nintendo had competitors.
They each had to do SOMETHING similar to it.
The D-pad is just too useful of a design to
omit from Sega, Sony, and Microsoft’s consoles.
They all had to find a way around this protected
design.
Sega didn’t change much.
The Genesis and the Game Gear just redesigned
the top plastic key.
Instead of a 4-way pad, they each had a circular,
multi-directional key.
The internal rubber pad and circuit board
were kept very similar to Nintendo’s design.
It’s juuuust different enough to avoid a
patent lawsuit.
The Saturn had a different unique plastic
key, going with a domed, multi-way design,
but again it kept very similar internals.
The Dreamcast D-pad looks like Nintendo’s
at first glance.
There are no arrows on the top about which
direction is which, but by 1999 that was pretty
safe to leave out.
The changes were mostly on the inside.
Inside the Dreamcast controller, the D-pad
doesn’t use the same pivot mechanism.
Well, actually, it does, but the pivot point
is on the internal rubber bit instead of the
top plastic key.
That’s it.
Even though they look the same and do similar
things in a similar way, just that one teeny
tiny change makes the designs different enough
for Sega to use, no problem.
Sony took a cue from the Genesis and just
drastically changed the look of the top key
for the Playstation controller.
Inside it still relies on the pivot-and-contact
mechanism that Nintendo’s design does.
They DID add a sheet of conductive plastic
to the DualShock 2 and 3, which let the controller
detect how hard players were pressing on each
button.
It was meant mostly for the face buttons,
like how it was used for Metal Gear Solid,
but the functionality was very simple.
It was easy to give the D-pad the same functionality.
Microsoft changed the plastic key for both
the Xbox and Xbox 360.
For the notorious Duke controller, Microsoft
put this wavy… melted pringle looking thing
on the top, and WHAT.
WAIT A MINUTE.
They REDESIGNED the interior!
Gone is the single molded rubber pad, please
welcome… a few separate tiny rubber pads!
The contact points and central pivot look
like they’re attached directly to the plastic,
and they flex down to make contact with the
circuit board.
And… oh wait.
That’s just a plastic piece hiding the…
single molded rubber pad.
OK, yeah, it’s just like all the other D-pads,
but like twice as complicated.
The Controller S and the 360 controller put
a Sega-esque circular key on top, changed
the underside design to make the pad feel
just...terrible, and used everyone’s favorite
rubber contact pad assembly.
A redesigned, transforming D-pad showed up
in a special 360 controller released years
later, and while it was a little better, it
still didn’t feel that great.
The Xbox One was released in 2013, after Nintendo’s
patent had expired.
And hey, look at that.
Wonder where that design came from?
Boy that looks like it’s going to be Nintendo’s
design...WRONG!
Look at that!
A metal spring mechanism on the interior!
AND metal dome switches!
And no rubber to be found!
And the Elite controller has magnets in it!
Someone finally used a new D-pad mechanism!
Right when they stopped having to dance around
the patent.
Go figure.
As we go over these designs you might ask
yourself, if competitors can just make tiny
tweaks to your design and sell that, why bother
with the patent at all?
But you can also think of a patent as a way
to protect the external look of a company’s
products too.
Even little decorative things like the look
of the top plastic key can work as a kind
of branding.
If you see Sony’s D-pad you think Playstation,
and that brand association does have some
value worth protecting.
Man, that was 5 minutes on D-pad design.
So let’s close it out with some rapid fire
patents:
Namco patented putting games in the loading
screen.
It’s expired now.
Game up your loading screens.
Or hide them behind shimmying between rocks
and stuff.
Everyone’s doing it.
Namco also patented the really good tutorial
and practice mode in Tekken, which showed
you the button inputs for combos as you pressed
them.
Thanks Namco.
Steal it anyway, it expired in 2017.
Square filed a patent for the Final Fantasy
X Sphere Grid and made it 10 times harder
to understand in this description.
Ok got it.
DON’T steal this one though, it’s still
active in 2019.
Oh, and remember Final Fantasy Tactics Advance?
That Judge system with the red and yellow
cards?
Patented.
That mechanic was neat.
Gotta wait until 2025 for this one to expire.
The Bioware dialog wheel?
Patented.
Katamari Damacy?
Sticking things to a ball in a video game
is now patented.
Thanks AGAIN Namco.
There’s a Sony patent for skipping ads by
yelling at your TV.
In the year 2000, Koei patented something
that kinda sorta seems like how Dynasty Warriors
does group battles.
They DID write this line in there though:
“With the rapid advance of current computer
technology, it is possible to display images
on the screen of the TV monitor that are equal
to that of movies”.
Sure, buddy.
Year 2000.
Just as good as movies.
I think I’ll cut it off here.
There are literally thousands of gaming patents,
and more are approved all the time.
Whether any one patent was worth getting is
debatable, but each and every one is valuable
in another way.
Every patent shows the mindset of the company
that pursued it.
Each is an artifact of an idea that someone
wanted to protect.
Even though it cost a ton of time and money.
Even if the idea could still be tweaked and
used.
Even if the idea never got off the ground.
Patents may be a flawed tool, but each one
is born from a desire to design something
that stands the test of time.
If you’re looking to design something worth
patenting, you’ll want to learn as much
as you can first.
Skillshare is an online learning community
for creators, with more than 25,000 classes
in graphic design, technology, and more.
With Skillshare you can learn all kinds of
new skills, like how to use After Effects
to make the kinds of custom animated graphics
I put into every one of these videos.
I’ve taken several Skillshare courses to
improve my motion graphic design work.
They’re all very well done and easy to learn
from.
I’m forever a fan.
Skillshare has teamed up with us to provide
2 free months of Skillshare Premium for the
first 500 Design Doc fans that sign up with
the referral link in the description below.
Join more than 7 million creators learning
with Skillshare.
Sign up with the link in the description,
and learn something new.
Thank you to Skillshare for supporting this
episode of Design Doc.
*chill vibes outro music: Pac Steps - Pac-Man
Championship Edition DX*