Golf Story is wonderful.
It’s exactly the kind of out-of-nowhere
surprise that Switch owners were hoping to
get in 2017.
Australian developer Sidebar Games have come
out with a golf game with the look of Stardew
Valley, the irreverent tone of Earthbound,
a surprise contender for Best Use of HD Rumble,
and a fresh and inventive take on the mechanics
of golf.
But maybe most surprising of all Golf Story
is the latest, maybe greatest, entry in a
quirky genre that has flown under the radar
for too long: The golf RPG.
The genre is almost empty - Golf Story sits
next to Camelot’s Mario Golf on the Game
Boy Color, its sequel on the Game Boy Advance,
and the relatively unknown Korean MMO Shot
Online for the PC.
If you haven’t played one before, a golf
game and an RPG might sound like a strange
mix, but fans of these games will tell you
that it feels like golf and RPG mechanics
were made for each other.
You’ll find other progressive, character
building modes in sports games like the career
modes in Madden and NBA2K, and even in other
golf games like the Everybody’s Golf series
and some of the newer PGA tour games, all
of which borrow some elements from RPGs, but
those games are missing a key piece - either
they don’t mix the sport and the RPG mechanics
very well, they don’t build a world to explore,
or they are missing a dramatic narrative.
A game just isn’t a full on sports RPG without
including all of those pieces.
What makes Golf Story so unique among sports
games is how well it mixes a system of character
progression alongside its story and the world
it builds.
Usually what’s missing is the narrative.
The latest generation of sports games have
tried to add one, most famously when Spike
Lee directed the career mode in NBA2k16 to,
well, mixed reception, but it should be more
common.
You can fit a dramatic story into any setting
if you put your mind to it.
There are dozens of dramatic movies centered
around sports and sports teams, so it’s
strange that there are so few in video games.
If other developers can create narratives
for a bird dating simulator, a game development
company, a cooking game, and a game where
you roll up the world into a ball, writing
a dramatic story for a sports game should
be a piece of cake.
Golf Story gets credit for even trying and
gets even more credit for making a story that
is actually pretty decent.
But just having a narrative doesn’t make
for a compelling RPG by itself.
You also have to marry the RPG mechanics to
the game’s setting.
Just about all of the most popular RPGs, from
Final Fantasy to Pokemon to Skyrim, have a
numeric system at their core.
Dice rolls, damage outputs, defense modifiers,
and so on.
The mechanics of these RPGs dictate that progress
usually means improving those fundamental
numbers about your character.
For traditional RPGs like Final Fantasy, fitting
this numeric system to the setting isn’t
a big problem, since the world is so strange
that players can accept that this system is
just how the world works.
But with a sports RPG, you do have to get
close to the look and feel of the real sport.
That’s the tricky part, and that’s the
secret of the golf RPG.
The mechanics of golf work better with these
numeric systems than the mechanics of most
other sports.
To appreciate how well it works for golf let’s
see how it works in another sport.
Let’s say in a basketball RPG
when your character levels up, maybe your
shot percentage would go up, or your steal
percentage would go up.
But it won’t be as clear that you’ve actually
improved.
Making changes to probabilities like shot
percentage doesn’t necessarily feel like
you’re progressing, even when you are.
Going from an 80% to an 85% chance to make
a shot in basketball is a huge change, but
in the moment to moment of the game it will
very rarely make a difference.
The progress you’ve made means only 1 in
20 extra shots go in.
You get the same problem in a lot of other
sports - football, baseball, soccer - the
game HAS to, at some point, roll a random
number, or else a skilled player could figure
out how to always hit home runs or sink every
half court shot.
They would look superhuman, and the sport
wouldn’t feel like the real sport any more.
That’s not to say that it’s impossible
for an RPG to work in a different sport - modes
like the Career modes in Madden, NHL or the
NBA2K series are still plenty of fun, but
feeling the progress you’ve made as a player
is harder to detect, which makes the gameplay
loop a little less rewarding, and makes the
RPG side of the game feel a little less satisfying.
Even traditional RPGs outside of sports have
to deal with this same problem when they use
probability-based systems - Let’s look at
Fire Emblem.
In the game, you get a preview of how likely
your attacks will hit your opponent.
In the earlier entries in the series, this
number was completely accurate - i.e. a 95%
chance to hit really did only miss 5% of the
time.
But the developers noticed a problem.
The negative feeling of missing what felt
like an almost-sure hit stuck with players,
and since the player’s strategy can fall
apart when they DO miss, using real probabilities
made the game a little less pleasant to play.
SO the developers made a change for releases
outside of Japan, the game will still say
you have a 90% or a 95% chance to hit, but
under the hood the game will roll the dice
twice and average the two values, making it
much much harder to get the numbers you need
to actually miss a 95% attack.
In Golf Story, as you level up and increase
your stats, you can see your character improve
just as clearly as you can see your damage
numbers rise in a game like Final Fantasy.
Your drive distance goes up.
Your slice and backspin instantly improve.
Instead of getting trapped in a bunker, you
can now hit the ball just far enough to clear
it and land on the green.
You feel like you’ve progressed your character
every time you hit the ball, because your
performance makes it clear that something
has changed.
It’s that immediate feedback in the gameplay
that makes progressing in the game feel more
satisfying, and makes golf RPGs in general
so fun to play.
Yeah, Golf Story has problems.
There are too many fetch quests.
The golfing is a little too easy.
The game’s narrative sometimes goes too
long between tournaments and golf events.
The tutorials are pretty sparse.
It’s glitchy.
The humor is hit or miss sometimes.
But Golf Story still is a solid game.
Even with it’s faults, Golf Story wins you
over with a lot of heart, and it’s a welcome
sight for a genre that is so neglected, but
so promising.
[Chill vibes outro music from Mario Golf]