Some games show up beautiful
Some are just benign 
Four new games to talk about
Let’s look at some design!
Video game graphic design, that is. That’s what 
we’re talking about today. Things like menus,  
UI, UX, color choice, font choice, 
animation, character design. You know,  
the presentation of information. 
If this is your first time here,  
welcome. Start with this episode, and 
check out the series playlist at the end.
Don’t worry about spoilers today. We won’t 
be focusing on anything too far into any of  
these games. Also, don’t worry too much 
if your favorite game is in a Bad Design  
segment - these are all actually really 
fun. Some of the specifics could just  
use a little work for a couple. Maybe head 
back to the drawing board to fix them up.
And what a beautiful drawing board it can 
be, with today’s episode sponsor, Milanote!
If you haven’t tried Milanote yet, I don’t 
know what you’re waiting for, it’s great!  
Milanote is a tool that helps you organize 
your projects and collaborate with others.
Any project you have where you need 
everyone involved to be on the same page,  
Milanote can make sure that happens.
We use it here for getting a handle 
on the scope of our own scripts. I  
can drop in image references, links 
to inspiration, structural notes,  
and to-do lists, arrange them exactly how 
I want, and then share them with anyone  
else working on the same thing. They can add 
their own notes and material in real time,  
and we all get to keep iterating on the ideas 
until we all get something we understand and  
can execute. Milanote is built for this type of 
collaboration, and its tools are geared to let  
you do it way more easily than if you tried to 
make it work in like a Google Doc or something.
They’ve got great templates 
specifically for game design,  
too. You and your group can work 
together on a visual design doc,  
making sure everyone’s on the same page, 
and that no good ideas are left behind.
If you’re building a game, Milanote is a 
killer tool for organizing and sharing your  
designs in an easy, collaborative, 
and dare I say, beautiful way.
Add stuff, mark it up, take notes, connect 
the dots, dig deeper, make it pretty,  
and do it all with a super easy drag-and-drop 
interface. If you’re in school right now,  
it’s a great tool for all 
kinds of group projects, too.
Milanote is free. With no time limit. 
Seriously! Use the link in the description  
to sign up now to get started. Bring 
your projects to life, with Milanote!
I love great art direction. Moreso when you 
can feel it seep into every aspect of a game,  
not only its look. This entire Good Design, 
Bad Design series started as a love letter  
to Persona 5's UI and aesthetic. Its kinetic 
animation and bold, black-on-white ransom note  
text were striking on release, and still hold 
up great. The fluid motion from menu to menu,  
both inside and outside fights, with each 
command one tap away was as pleasant to  
look at as it was to play. Making something 
that looks and feels THAT good is NOT easy.  
Katsura Hashino was the director, and he's gone 
on record as thinking the design process was,  
quote, 'Really annoying'. The font alone was 
a nightmare, with tons of manual tweaking to  
get the right balance of making the ransom letters 
easily readable. The effort was worth it, though,  
and the presentation style has survived, with some 
changes, in Persona's later sequels and remakes.  
But at some point, there would be a successor, 
and that time is now. Metaphor: ReFantazio.
Now, you can't hype a successor to one of the most 
striking games of the last decade and then drop  
the ball in the art department. That wouldn't 
do at all. So someone had to ask the question:  
'How the hell do we follow up on the art 
direction of Persona 5?'. I don't know,  
how about we throw it back a few hundred years?
Metaphor isn’t about stealing hearts, it’s about 
struggling for political power in a fantastical  
society. So it does away with the thief motifs 
and brings in a dose of the Renaissance.
The UI’s theming evokes the drawings, notes, 
and art of that era. The high contrast,  
ransom note style has been replaced with 
painterly touches. The game is filled with  
ink and sketch motifs. Background color blocks 
and border margins that seem like they could  
be physical brushstrokes. Thin, scratchy 
guidelines on borders, and for decoration.
Most UI elements incorporate motion,  
but not distracting amounts of it. The 
text boxes use shifting brush strokes in  
the corners. The character portraits all 
cycle through slight shading variations,  
to add to visual interest while being 
subtle enough to not demand your attention.
The game’s fonts still have that wild mix of 
weights, styles and sizes that were in P5,  
but they’re definitely more reserved this time.
The art direction repeatedly goes back 
to the well of the idea of scientific  
discovery. You can’t go 5 minutes 
without something alluding to that age.
The Archetypes - essentially character classes 
- are laid out on a graph evoking Da Vinci’s  
Vitruvian Man, itself a symbol of the merging 
of art and science from this time period. The  
Velvet Room replacement is called Akademia, 
and is filled with books on every subject,  
astrolabes, and a ginormous statue that also 
evokes the Vitruvian Man. Your characters,  
they too…are the Vitruvian Man, if that 
connection wasn’t clear enough already.
Each new bond, the system that 
replaces Persona’s Social Links,  
is sealed with a handshake, whose depiction 
evokes the high contrast and deep, scratchy  
shadows in the illustrations in Gray’s Anatomy, 
another iconic merging of art and science.
Many monsters and bosses are homages to 
the paintings of Hieronymus Bosch, an early  
Renaissance painter, and one of the earliest 
people you could consider a fantasy artist.
The game isn’t fully stuck in 
the past, though. Here and there,  
touches of the modern world sneak in. The intro 
video has parchment documents being redacted. The  
street shops in the capital look a little more 
modern than you’d expect in the Renaissance.
The game’s visual direction fits with its 
story themes, where concepts from our world  
work their way into this fantasy realm. Hashino 
has talked about how early in its development,  
the game felt much more like a 
standard Western fantasy setting,  
and adding in contemporary elements help it 
feel much more like its own unique world.
This whole thing IS a metaphor, after all.
The combined effect evokes a world on the brink 
of change, while combining it with the surreal  
fantasy elements the studio has always been 
known for. A setting rooted in the familiar,  
but nothing quite exactly like you’d expect, 
with a wide enough variety of inspiration to  
discover fun new touches all the time. It’s a cohesive, unmistakable art direction.
Everyone loves a classic. Art, music, 
architecture - any piece of design work  
that stands the test of time. But classic 
doesn’t mean universal. Something amazing  
in one context can be very out of place in 
another. So too with UI elements. A piece of  
the UI that works perfectly once - in one 
place, in one game - may fail to meet the  
needs of another. It might be obvious that the 
same UI doesn’t work for two unrelated games,  
but what happens when a UI element wears 
out its welcome within the same series?
Zelda: Echoes of Wisdom is the first 
top-down Zelda game in over a decade,  
and the first one made in the modern ‘Open Air’ 
era that was kicked off in Breath of the Wild.  
In this style, puzzle solutions are designed 
to be more open-ended and let players approach  
problems in their own way. It’s also the first one 
starring Zelda. Good job, Zelda. The game revolves  
around the titular Echoes - copies of objects 
and enemies that Zelda can summon on command.
Each echo does its own unique thing, and you'll 
constantly cycle through these to fight, explore,  
and solve puzzles. Need to cross a gap? You could 
make a bridge out of water blocks... or beds...  
OR, summon a bunch of Strantulas and climb on 
their webs to cross. It reminds me a little of  
Scribblenauts with how wide a range of options all 
of your Echoes will provide you. Playing summoner  
while in combat and sending a bunch of offensive 
Echoes to fight for you can be very fun, too,  
once you get the hang of it. There's just 
one problem: this menu sucks at its job.
Back in Breath of the Wild, they introduced this 
quick select equipment menu. Hold down a direction  
on the D-pad to pause the action and bring up 
a single horizontal row of equippable items,  
scroll to what you want, let go, and 
you're back in business. Weapons,  
shields, bows, arrows, and your special 
Sheikah runes all had their own carousel,  
and were quick enough to scroll 
through. Everyone loves it.
Now jump ahead to Tears of the Kingdom. Lots 
of the game's UI is unchanged at a basic level,  
but we've got a whole new category to fold 
in: Materials. Through abilities like Fuse  
and Ultrahand, you'll be selecting from a HUGE 
amount of materials all the time, and it's all  
shoved into a single new carousel. You're now scrolling through  
dozens of things to get from one side of the menu 
to the other. It doesn't matter that most of the  
items are useless fluff only good for cooking, 
you’ll be scrolling through all of that too.
Echoes of Wisdom made the 
same problem worse. You'll  
be gathering a TON of echoes throughout 
your adventure, especially at the start,  
and you'll NEED to swap between them frequently. 
The system becomes unwieldy very early on,  
and managing all your echoes becomes the most 
annoying part of the moment to moment gameplay.  
The single horizontal row menu is way too slow 
and narrow to be effective.
Roughly halfway through the game,  
you'll have enough echoes that it'll 
take 10 whole seconds to see them all.
If you try to get creative, or use many echoes, 
or experiment with your lesser used ones,  
you’ll find it’s way more of a pain than it 
should be. You can only equip one echo at a time,  
even though there are multiple free buttons 
that could be assigned something. The only  
saving grace is the 'Last Used' and 'Last Learned' 
sorting options to move common echoes to the front  
of the line, but it's just not enough. 
There IS a grid-based 'notebook' menu,  
which fixes a few of these problems, but it's 
an extra press, and there aren't any additional  
sorting options like the regular menu, so 
it's not nearly as useful as you'd think.
The gridded design in the default quick menu 
would go a long way towards fixing the problem,  
but as it is, it's just too slow. It worked 
in Breath of the Wild because it only gave  
you so many things per carousel, so you couldn't 
actually be that far from any given item. Sticking  
to the same UI design under completely different 
conditions is a great thing for visual cohesion  
and not having to teach a whole new thing to a 
player, but the UI element is just not fit for  
purpose, and that overwhelms any other benefit 
that not changing the element could provide.
Whenever you're borrowing a solution 
from some other context, remember to  
check if the problem it's solving has changed.
There’s a lot of games whose puzzles feel tacked 
on. Like you’re traveling in a strange place,  
but once in a while there’s some question 
from an IQ test that will get you a key,  
or a slide puzzle to get to an exit, and you 
have to solve it before you can re-immerse  
yourself in the world. The puzzles in these 
games can sometimes not feel like they belong.
Chants of Sennaar feels like the opposite of that.
Chants of Sennaar is ‘Context Clues: The Game’. 
Well, it’s ‘Tower of Babel: The Game’, but the  
only way you’re going to get to the top is through 
context. You’re traveling through different  
communities of people, all living in the same 
tower, all with wildly different cultures, and  
all speaking completely different languages that 
you do not understand. It’s up to you to piece  
together what’s actually going on in this society, 
but first, you’ll need to write some dictionaries.
Beyond your typical adventure game puzzle 
set, the crown jewel of Chants of Sennaar’s  
gameplay is its language deduction puzzles. 
You’ll be defining and translating several  
dozen glyphs in each language. You’ll 
meet people speaking to you in glyphs,  
see them carved into stone, on tapestries, 
find signposts written in them - and it’s on  
you to figure out what they could all 
mean. They could be any word, really.
You can pencil in your translation guesses, 
and the game will auto-translate any glyph  
you see in the world with it, so you can see 
in different contexts if your assumption makes  
sense. To get some assurance you’re correct, 
the game borrows a page from The Return of  
the Obra Dinn. Every so often, once you’ve 
recently discovered some new glyphs or context,  
the game will pause and have you try to 
match a glyph with an illustration of its  
meaning. If you get all of the glyphs on 
that page right, each of those symbol’s  
true English definitions will lock in 
and be revealed in-world from there on.
The game is a deduction puzzle. As you figure 
out new words, you can read more and more  
of what’s around you. It lets you grasp more 
context, and slowly this world’s culture and  
people reveal themselves to you. As you travel 
between areas, the languages will also change.  
The glyphs aren’t haphazard. They’re inspired 
by completely different real-world languages  
and different cultures across time. Each language 
is visually distinct, and contains subtle details.  
The simple glyphs might look similar to the object 
they’re describing. This smiley face is one of the  
first things you see, and it means ‘Hello’. Easy 
enough. The more complicated concepts contain  
details that might help you deduce meaning. 
Once you name a few of them, you might notice  
that they’re made up of sub-glyphs, not unlike 
the radicals that make up parts of some Eastern  
languages. You might know that this glyph means 
‘God’, but add another glyph that surrounds it,  
like this box here, and it might change the words 
to mean the ‘House For God’, or, ‘Church’. It  
gets more complicated with grammar rules and the 
like, but this process of deduction is the game,  
and it’s a mystery whose answers give you the 
immediate satisfaction like any puzzle, but  
also the slow burning satisfaction of being able 
to better understand all of what surrounds you.
It’s really a monumental task to make a world 
feel this believable and organic. Julien Moya,  
creative director at the developer Rundisc, had 
an interview with GameDeveloper.com where he talks  
about how incredibly difficult it was designing 
the languages, the people, the world, and the  
puzzle design all simultaneously. Any additions 
or changes would have ripple effects throughout  
the game, requiring new words or changing context, 
or implying other things, and made them have to  
almost lock in everything at once. The immense 
amount of prep work they did paid off huge.
The sheer attention to detail this game has 
put into making its world, dialogue, story,  
and mechanics feel like one cohesive whole 
is unlike any other game I can remember.  
Chants of Sennaar is an immersive experience, in 
the grandest sense of the word. Go check it out.
No game can be designed in a vacuum. 
Every player arrives with their own  
set of expectations. Those can be genre 
conventions, like how you expect pulling  
a trigger will make a bullet fire in a first 
person shooter. They can be cultural conventions,  
like which direction you read events on a timeline 
in. They can also be UI conventions, like all the  
stuff that Lorelei and the Laser Eyes tossed 
aside when they built their menu navigation.
Lorelei and the Laser Eyes is a very 
good puzzle game. You’re working your  
way through an eccentric movie director’s 
hotel, filled to the brim with puzzles,  
locked doors, mysterious clues, and holes in the 
floor to fall into. It’s a little bit 7th Guest,  
a little bit Twin Peaks, well, a lot Twin Peaks 
actually, and a little bit The Room (the game,  
not the movie). Uncover the director’s 
history, unlock dozens of rooms, and figure  
out what exactly is going on, so you can start 
your car again and get the hell out of here.
It’s a very intricate escape room-style 
experience, where you’re piecing together  
clues from all sorts of sources 
scattered throughout the house,  
and using them to unlock more rooms 
with more clues and more puzzles. Look  
through conversations, film synopsis notes, 
posters, cards, hotel schedules, phone books,  
and a hundred other little things to solve 
these puzzles. Luckily - and this would  
wreck the game if they didn’t do it like 
this - you’ve got a photographic memory,  
and can reference all of this material in the 
game’s extensive menus as you wander through the  
house. With all of these pieces to put together 
over time, you’re going to be doing a lot of  
menu diving. A LOT. And while you're in there, one 
minor design choice will bite your ankles forever.
Every face button, every bumper, and every 
trigger does the exact same action in Lorelei.  
You can press pause or select to get to the 
‘Quit the game’ menu, but besides those two,  
every button does the same thing, and that 
thing depends entirely on where you’re standing.
Are you not next to anything in particular? 
Tapping anything will then open your personal  
status screen. Next to a puzzle? Tapping will 
zoom in on the puzzle. Standing near a placard  
with information? It’ll popup so you can read it. 
Will this coffee maker EVENTUALLY need something  
from your inventory to work? It’ll open up 
your inventory. No, you don’t have it yet.
This all sounds great! The game knows exactly what 
you should want to do, and adjusts every action to  
that. There’s only one single thing you COULD’VE 
wanted to do while you’re standing there, right?
You’d never, say, want to open up the status menu 
when you’re standing too close to this clock,  
that’d be silly. So you can’t. Anything you 
do near this thing will open the puzzle. And  
since you’ve opened the puzzle, you 
definitely want to solve the puzzle  
right now. There’s no WAY that you misclicked, 
so you can’t get out of this screen until you  
try to submit an answer. You definitely 
know how to solve this puzzle, right?
Instead of having a universal action to quit 
out of a puzzle or a menu, every puzzle and  
every menu have their own unique way to exit. This 
screen you have to scroll over to the top right  
corner. This screen you have to pick an option 
in the upper left. This puzzle you have to tap  
up to get to the shackle to submit an answer. 
This one you have to highlight this middle bit.  
Hope you can find it! Sometimes you’ve got to let 
an animation play out, even when you know there’s  
zero chance the solution worked, and you didn’t 
want to be on this screen in the first place.
This is all an explicit design choice 
by Simogo. Their dev blog talks about  
wanting to make sure the game experience 
isn’t hindered by complex controls.
Quote, “An intricate meal should not 
be hindered by a complicated fork.”
That’s a great goal. But you can’t remove 
complexity forever. There can be a lower bound,  
before bad things start to happen. 
Instead of a complicated fork,  
Simogo has given players a ‘morphing, 
unpredictable fork’. Is it more complicated?  
Maybe not if you fully trust the process, 
as actions shift from context to context.  
Most of the time the game is correct, 
but not always, and when it’s wrong,  
players are going to make easy mistakes - 
the most frustrating category of mistakes.
I just completely disagree with 
the plan. One dedicated button  
to exit out of a menu is not an 
overcomplication of the interface,  
and adding it as an option wouldn’t remove the 
capability of finishing the game without it.
Again, this game is really good, and 
this is one very tiny inconvenience,  
but it’s one that appears in literally 
every interaction the game has. A penny  
might not be much, but you can still 
drown in a swimming pool of pennies.
If you’ve got a segment you’d like 
to see on the next Good Design,  
Bad Design, leave a comment! Or head 
down there to talk about how you just  
picked up Chants of Sennaar and how 
much it’s changed your life already.
Great design is about paying attention to context,  
and thinking about how each part fits into 
the whole. The more work you put into making  
every element of a game work together - into 
making UI elements fit their purpose exactly,  
into telling a consistent story, into a 
cohesive style - the better the final result.
*chill vibes from Echoes of Wisdom*