Today’s episode is sponsored by SurfShark
VPN.
Get 83% off and 1 month free using code DESIGNDOC
at the link below.
Hey, pick up the phone.
It’s your old friend Good Design, Bad Design!
We’re coming at you live on tape with 5
segments.
We’re talking about graphic design in games.
Things like menus, UI, UX, color choice, font
choice, animation, character design.
The Presentation of Information.
Oh, and remember for later that good games
might have bad graphic design, and vice versa.
I have a feeling that might come up in this
episode, who knows.
If you have a game we should feature - as good design OR bad design - post
it in the comments.
We’ve done several segments based on your
tips.
Let’s get started, right after I go on a
60 second rant about Netflix.
Did you mine through all the good stuff on
Netflix?
No, you haven’t.
Not until you’ve mined the stuff on INTERNATIONAL
Netflix!
How you may ask?
Easily, with today’s sponsor, SurfShark
VPN!
SurfShark is an app and a browser extension
that makes it look like you’re connecting
to the internet from somewhere else in the
world.
That makes it quick and easy to get around
region locking.
Open up the client, pick whichever country
you want a server to think you’re connecting
from, and there you go!
Now you can check out what’s going on on
Japanese Netflix, or Philippines Netflix.
Or practically any other country, with just
a few clicks.
Plus, SurfShark VPN protects your data from
unsecure public wifi, keeps it out of the
hands of hackers, and hides it from Ominous
Governmental Forces.
They’re up to something, probably.
Go to surfshark.deals/designdoc and use the
promo code DESIGNDOC to get Surfshark for
83% off and 1 month for free.
Curl up with some TV you’ve never even heard
of before, and protect your security with
SurfShark!
Bad Design
Artwork and UI are not the same thing.
We’ve talked about it before.
Games with great, great art - detailed characters,
fluid animation, beautiful art direction - can
still have real bad UI.
Guilty Gear Strive is one of those games,
though there is a big caveat.
As of this recording, the game is still in
Beta.
We’re actually going to talk about both
the Beta and even the Alpha, since they both
show great examples of things to avoid.
But, Arc System Works could still fix it.
Man, they need to fix some things.
Guilty Gear Strive’s characters and backgrounds
look incredible, but it’s got some weeeeeeiiiirrrrd
UI design choices that drag the game down
in both form and function.
Let’s just start with a showstopper - that
lobby system.
Arc System Works has a tendency to treat their
lobby and menu systems like little online
hub areas.
You get to control a chibi avatar and directly
challenge other players within the lobby.
I love the idea.
It’s not always the fastest way to get a
match going, but in the past it’s done its
job, it’s a nice way to chill between matches,
and it’s cute.
But in Strive it’s a functional disaster.
Instead of using the game’s cast as the
avatars, you get a bunch of generic avatar
sprites that look nothing like the rest of
the game.
This whole setup looks like a late 2000s social
game.
Maple Story crossed with Habbo Hotel or something.
Oh, and the news tab on the right takes up
over a third of the screen, and cramps up
the main lobby space.
Functionally, the lobby falls apart.
The process for challenging players is two
steps too cute for its own good.
To challenge someone, you have your character
draw their sword and face another player with
their sword drawn and kinda stand… close-ish
to them.
Everyone is running around in the same space,
friends or not, and can whip out their sword
at any time.
Challenging a specific player is way tougher
than it should be, especially with how crowded
the lobbies can be.
It’s tough to see who you’re even standing
next to.
Oh, and if you get lucky and it does work,
there’s no rematch option post-fight.
Other Arcsys games aren’t broken like this.
Guilty Gear Xrd’s arcade cabinets and the
Ring System in Dragon Ball Fighterz worked
just fine.
Strive’s system is a big step back for usability.
I don’t know what happened.
Inside a fight, the HUD is a problem, too.
The health bar design is especially weird,
and not very useful.
Under the health bar there’s a big character
portrait and two additional meters: “RISC”
and the Burst meter.
In normal fighting games, the health bar is
simple to see and read.
It should have good contrast to be easily
seen in the periphery of a player’s vision.
In Strive, the peach to pink gradient doesn’t
contrast well with a lot of the backgrounds.
The transparent black frame isn’t quite enough
to fix the problem.
Instead, all of the bars move?
And the portrait.
What?
This bar was actually way worse in the November
2019 build.
The RISC meter was a drop shadow.
A color changing drop shadow.
See the problem?
No, you can’t.
That’s the problem.
But you can see the combo counter.
And if you can’t read numbers, they’ve
got you covered too.
Overall, there’s a hard tonal shift between
the UI, where they were going for a clean
and minimalistic style, and the bombastic
personality of the game.
The UI is a little too basic and plain to
keep up with the over-the-top vibe of the
characters, and it makes the UI not really
fit in, either with the historic style of
the series or within its own game.
Parts of it kiiind of fit, but as a whole
the UI just doesn’t feel like Guilty Gear.
Don’t worry, though.
This is a Beta.
They’ve got time to fix it.
... They have to fix it.
They’re not going to release it like this,
right?
Right?
Good Design
Remakes pose a unique opportunity.
A remake can fix problems that you never had
time to fix.
A remake can let you fix problems you never
even found, but your fans had.
And if you wait long enough, a remake can
allow you to adapt a game to a reality that
simply wasn’t possible for the original.
It could be higher powered graphical chips,
or new design sensibilities that had been
fire-tested in the intervening years, or it
could be something as simple as a totally
new control scheme.
The Legend of Zelda: Link’s Awakening just
got remade last year, and thanks to its move
from the Game Boy to the Switch, Nintendo
has greatly improved what was already a good
game.
The original version of Link’s Awakening
is a classic.
A brilliant game, with one glaring caveat:
The Game Boy has two face buttons.
That’s all you get.
Everything had to be mapped to just those
two inputs.
Only two of your items in Link’s Awakening
could be used at the same time, including
your sword.
Once in a while you’d have an item like
the flippers that you could use passively,
but for most of them you’re digging through
your inventory and swapping them out constantly,
for combat and for puzzles.
Even the shield, which used to be on Link
at all times, had to be assigned to a button.
Time travel to the present, and now you have
the wide Game Boy.
I mean the Switch.
Nintendo adapted the control scheme to take
advantage.
The most commonly used items now have their
own buttons - one press for the sword, shield,
pegasus boots, and power bracelet.
The Sword and Shield buttons alone dramatically
cuts down on how often you have to bring up
your inventory.
Now you’ll just have to juggle items for
puzzles, or other more unusual situations.
The remake spruces up the UI, too.
The additional screen real estate and much
higher resolution of the Switch compared to
the tiny Game Boy screen allow for this super
clean interface refresh, which shows the same
information and covers up much less of the
game world.
It also fits in better with the UI direction
Nintendo had been taking with the past few
games in the series.
The game’s camera is also much better.
Every section of the map is now a flowing,
seamless overworld, instead of a bunch of
screens that felt like rooms.
The areas felt a little samey, and it was
easier to get lost.
Now the camera can follow the player in a
more natural way, which helps the flow of
the game’s exploration.
The camera in the dungeons is still room-based,
but it will follow you in the larger rooms.
The different environmental styles actually
provide a nice contrast between the open overworld
and the more focused dungeons that wasn’t
really there in the original.
Link’s Awakening’s remake is real good.
Not every game is lucky enough to be remade,
but when they do happen, it’s nice to see
the developers make the most of the opportunity.
Bad Design
Remember back in Volume… mrmhrm I’ll link
to it... when we talked about Hyrule Warriors’
alert design?
I found a game with another way to cause the
same problem.
Alert design is a tricky thing.
Alerts that are too quiet, or too infrequent
can let important information go unnoticed.
Just as bad though are constant interruptions.
If a game keeps trying to grab your attention
over stuff that isn’t that important, the
alerts lose their potency.
It’s called Alert Fatigue.
If too many things try to alert your attention,
the potency of any one alert gets reduced.
Doctors run into this problem if hospital
equipment is designed poorly, alerting on
too many things that don’t require action.
The alerts get drowned out into background
noise, which can make them miss the actual
important bits.
The colorful 2008 platformer ‘De Blob’
is exactly as important, if not moreso, as
every medical device, and its failure to avoid
alert fatigue is exactly as big of a problem.
De Blob CONSTANTLY interrupts players to display
new information, and not just in the Hyrule
Warriors overload-with-popups way.
No, De Blob makes you watch a cutscene.
A lot.
De Blob is a quirky 3D platformer where you
soak up paint from little robots, sometimes
you mix them into new colors, and you use
the paint to return color to a monochromatic
world.
It’s a little bit Katamari, a little bit
Jet Set Radio, and a little bit of that one
mode from Tony Hawk’s Pro Skater where you’re
painting the areas you trick off of.
It gets repetitive, but it’s still very
charming, and it’s a solid game, except
for its addiction to cutscene notifications.
Part of the appeal of De Blob is that you
can fall into a trance-like state as you go
around painting the world, but the game has
a very bad habit of knocking you out of it
with interruptions.
Scattered in each level are a bunch of mission
markers.
You go up to a marker, get a few lines of
dialogue about how horrible it is to be monochromatic
and how you should throw a can of… you…
on stuff, then start the mission.
Every time you complete a mission, you get
an unskippable 5 second fanfare, then ANOTHER
establishing shot cutscene that points you
to other missions to do.
That one’s skippable, at least, but it still
breaks up the flow.
They’re very short missions, so this happens
every 1 to 3 minutes and gets old real quick.
The world design isn’t complex enough to
get lost in really, so the notifications about
where new missions are located are redundant,
and just add to the downtime.
There are only 4 types of missions: paint
a building, defeat enemies, race through checkpoints,
or paint a special landmark - which is just
paint a big building.
You’ll get the gist of what you need to
do very quickly, so the cutscenes aren’t
even needed to explain anything.
They’re certainly not anything you need
to show in a way that locks the player out
of controlling their character over and over
again.
The game tries to deliver some story beats
during the cutscenes about liberating an oppressed
world, but it’s real, real repetitive, too.
Yeah, the game is geared for a younger crowd,
but kids can still figure out how to do a
task if they’ve already done it a bunch
of times before.
And the kids you’re catering to especially
won’t appreciate stopping the fun to watch
a same-y cutscene over and over.
De Blob would have benefitted from a snappier
and flowing arcade-y structure, closer to
Katamari or Jet Set Radio.
With the constant ‘stop and go’ pacing
that the notifications cause, it’s much
harder to get into the flow of the game.
Actually, because the game is less complicated
than Hyrule Warriors, taking that game’s
notification system approach directly might
work better.
Hyrule Warriors had so much going on that
you might miss important information.
De Blob’s notifications are pretty low stakes,
and the game provides other tools like the
Compass that can get you back on track.
With less going on in De Blob, it’s harder
to miss something important even if the method
the game uses to notify you doesn’t change.
It’s a testament to the idea that there’s
no perfect design - the same approach might
be appropriate in one context and inappropriate
in another.
De Blob could have been stronger if it got
out of its own way.
Good Design
Survival horror games can be really intense.
I mean… that’s the point, but that intensity
has to work with other game elements too.
Survival Horror games are also about careful
navigation, puzzle solving, and item management,
and it’s tough to think straight with monsters
all up in your face.
So having handy and reliable UI tools is especially
important in Survival Horror.
Resident Evil 2 Remake has done a great job
to update its map system to make it one of
the best of any game, not just Survival Horror.
It’s soooo helpful in keeping tabs on where
you need to go and what you’ve already done.
RE2 involves a lot of retracing your steps
through different areas.
The Raccoon City Police Department is really
a big navigational puzzle.
As you find tons of supplies and keys to access
new rooms, you’ll have to plan things out
to travel efficiently.
RE2’s map keeps track of everything you
need.
Rooms update all the time as you find items
and points of interest, like environmental
puzzles and locked doors.
The color coding is fantastic - black for
rooms that haven’t been explored at all,
red for rooms that have been visited but still
contain important items or points of interest
to deal with, and blue for rooms that you’ve
fully cleaned out.
The icons give more specificity for what is
left to do in each room and where key items
are, once you’ve spotted them.
Did you find an herb but don’t have room
in your pack for it?
No problem, the game will make a note of it
automatically.
This works for puzzles and locked doors, too.
Even down to denoting the specific type of
lock after you’ve examined it - chains that
need a bolt cutter, or locks that require
a specially shaped key all have their own
icon.
The map even marks the open windows that let
new zombies in, so you can board them up and
create a safer route, if that’s how you
want to play.
It’s a tool that gives you more control
over strategizing your routes and tactics,
and helps narrow down where you need to go
next.
It goes from a nice-to-have to a requirement
once the Tyrant gets involved later on.
The inventory system got refined in the remake,
too.
It’s not as thoroughly reimagined as the
map, but things are much snappier than in
the original game.
You get better notifications when key items
are no longer useful, with this checkmark.
The health indicator also gets a nice little
upgrade from the original.
It notifies you of any status changes after
taking damage.
No more checking the menu or looking at your
character’s walk cycle to get that information.
It’s very minor but it helps keep the interface
from being too cryptic or intrusive.
Resident Evil 2 Remake’s interface got a
major facelift.
It’s super practical, way more efficient
at communicating information, and it all still
fits very well with the balance of tension
and control that makes up the core of any
good Survival Horror game.
Bad Design
The new Animal Crossing is real good.
There’s so much stuff to do.
Filling out the museum.
Paying off and upgrading your house.
Collecting beach garbage.
Terraforming and decorating your island.
I can really sink... well over an hour…
in here… just doing this.
Wait a minute.
It shouldn’t take this long.
Animal Crossing’s vibe is charming as hell.
It’s quaint, it’s polished to the max,
but its UX is so inefficient, and it has been
for 20 years.
Maybe a little bit changes from game to game,
but at this point menu inefficiency is a pillar
of the series, right next to Tom Nook.
The inventory is where everything happens.
Opening and using the inventory is as core
to Animal Crossing as jumping is to Mario,
but for every game in the series it’s always
felt clunky and off.
Inventory space has been the chief complaint,
and in New Horizons they’ve FINALLY gotten
around to addressing it.
You’re allowed to work towards inventory
slot upgrades, which is great, but it’s
been needed for so long it feels like a consolation
prize.
And that was only 1 issue.
Even with the inventory space expansion, it’s
still about as slow and clunky to use as it
was 20 years ago.
Animal Crossing’s biggest problem is how
convoluted it is to do anything.
In a lot of cases, Nintendo uses the extra
work it takes to do actions to add a bunch
of charm to the game, but not always.
Sometimes basic actions that should only take
1 or 2 inputs to complete end up taking like
5.
Let’s say you want to plant a few trees.
You’ve got a stack of 10 fruits and you
want to take 3 off the top to go plant them
by the river, and have some space left over
to fish a little longer while you’re over
there.
Step... eh. 0:
You need 4 empty pocket inventory spots
to get a stack of 1 thing.
If you only have 3 slots open, it’s way
more annoying to do.
Step 1: Take all 10 fruit out and put it in
your pocket inventory.
Step 2: Leave the stored inventory screen.
Go to your pocket inventory.
Step 3: Highlight your stack of 10, select
‘Grab One’ three times, and stack each
of those manually onto each other to make
your new stack of 3.
Don’t forget to put the leftover fruit back
in storage.
Ok, time to start your day annnnd it’s night
now.
These issues crop up more with certain features.
New Horizon includes a new crafting system,
which has been a long time coming and is pretty
fun, but the crafting has just as many annoying
quirks as the rest of the game’s inventories
and menus.
In order to craft anything, you need materials
on you, even if you’re crafting in your
home with access to your entire storage.
So off the bat, you’re hopping from storage
to the crafting table to make anything.
Now with your items, approach the workbench,
RE-confirm that you want to craft and that
you don’t want to customize, pick what you
want to craft, and start mashing ‘A’ to
speed through a crafting animation.
They had the foresight to allow you to speed
up the animation they knew took way too long,
but they didn’t bother to let you skip that
step.
Congratulations, you’ve made…
a garbage.
Do it again if you want another.
No bulk crafting, that would be too convenient.
Now go back to your pocket and put everything
back in the box, one item at a time.
Nintendo also brought over everyone’s favorite
mechanic from Breath of the Wild - item durability.
At least in Zelda you could argue it’s to
get players to use a variety of tools.
But a shovel’s a shovel.
Ain’t nothing else gonna dig that hole.
Having a shovel, bug net, or other basic tool
break in Animal Crossing is a pointless waste
of time.
Oh yeah, and to craft a nice tool you have
to spend a bunch of time to craft each of
the flimsier tools, because they’re material
components.
Like you’re dipping this terrible fishing
rod in molten iron and getting a good one
or something.
Don’t worry, it’ll break, too.
Animal Crossing’s menus waste your time.
Sometimes it’s done to be charming.
Once in a while it is, but way more often
it drags the game out and keeps you from doing
what you wanted to do.
Menu efficiency is not the flashiest topic
in UX design, but getting these fundamentals
right pays huge dividends in the final experience.
*chill vibes outro from Animal Crossing: New
Horizons*