Hey...guess what?
It’s time for another Good Design, Bad Design,
where we talk about graphic design in games.
A game’s graphic design is a close cousin
to a game’s art overall, but graphic design
is focused on visual communication.
Things like menus, UI, camera work, color
choice, font choice, animation, character
design.
The presentation of information.
Also, keep in mind: good graphic design can
happen in bad games, and good games can have
bad graphic design.
So with that said, let’s get going.
Good Design
After the graphic design mess that was Smash
4, the menus and interface of Super Smash
Bros Ultimate wins the award for ‘most improved’.
Smash Ultimate's style and presentation is
more striking this time.
Series director Masahiro Sakurai is on record
saying that he took notice of Persona 5’s
dynamic interface and it shows.
Sakurai's Persona 5 inspirations shine through
in the new victory screen animations.
The composition and the way everything snaps
into place take major cues from Persona 5’s
All-Out attacks, and they look fantastic.
The main menu layouts and transitions are
sleeker, again taking inspiration from Persona.
The transitions are quick and dynamic, stylishly
moving from menu to menu.
The camera zooms in and uses the negative
space of the option icons to frame each sub
menu.
It’s a clever balance of style and functionality.
I mentioned in very first bad design segment
that Smash 4's organization and visual hierarchy
were a mess, so it's great to see Ultimate
make some major improvements.
The sub-menu options are placed where they
should be.
Things are much easier to find.
The most prominent options are ‘Smash’
and ‘Spirits’ which hold the main local
and single player adventure modes respectively
but the options also don’t overpower the menu.
They even changed the 'Games and More' section
to an organized collection of the old classic
game modes, away from the earlier game’s
random hodgepodge of options.
I still hate that title but hey it’s accurate
now.
The in-game HUD got great quality of life
improvements.
There are new UI elements like a stage map
to show how close you are to blast zones.
They also added new elements for character
specific mechanics like the Inkling’s ink
meter, Villager’s pocketed items and Robin’s
weapon durability.
The end of a match even spices things up with
a dynamic zoom in on finishing blows.
Smash Ultimate's interface is so much better,
but the usability still has some room to improve.
So, it’s time for a Tiny Bad Design.
Tiny Bad Design
There are a few little things that make navigation
feel just a bit more cumbersome than necessary.
Saving your custom rulesets is a great new
feature but you can’t make minor edits like
item settings, stock numbers or the stage
Hazard toggle in the rules from the character
select.
Seriously, what’s up with that hazard toggle.
It should’ve just been a fourth stage option,
next to the Omega and Battlefield forms.
The new Squad Strike is a really cool mode
but it takes too long to set up.
It should've been treated like a normal stock
smash mode, where you just pick multiple characters
for each stock.
It didn’t need these extra menu options.
Sorting and picking out spirit loadouts for
the zillion spirit battles in the single player
is also a little too slow and tedious for
how many options you have to pick from.
Also have fun setting the music frequency.
All of a series’s stages share a tracklist
but each stage has its own song frequencies.
There are 16 stages from the Mario series
with a list of over 90 songs to sort through
for EVERY
SINGLE
STAGE.
The song frequency slider gives way too much
granular control, which isn't THAT bad by
itself, but it takes too long to set a value.
Then you have to do it for every song in this
huge list.
It makes setting up songs take way too long.
Most people would’ve been happy with a coarser
control, with maybe 4 or 5 frequency options
like 'Play Never', 'Rarely', ‘Sometimes',
or 'Play Frequently'.
It's a great example of how settings meant
for power users can degrade the experience
for non-power users.
In the end these negatives are mostly just
nitpicks.
Smash Ultimate should be applauded for the
good work it has done to fix its menus, but
it's a reminder that no matter how good a
game is or how far it has come, there will
always be more to do.
Bad Design
Deadly Premonition is janky.
The gameplay is janky.
The art style is janky.
Sound design?
Janky.
Writing?
Kinda fun...but still janky.
And its interface?
Suuuper janky.
Ugly type treatment.
UI elements that clash with each other.
Low resolution art assets that get blown up
into a blurry mess.
Deadly Premonition’s UI is full of inconsistency.
Clashing UI elements can stick out in ways
that take your audience out of the experience.
A majority of the UI elements in Deadly Premonition are wildly different.
We have the character’s
name in the upper left corner in a small,
thin serif typeface.
Then in the lower right, we have this bold,
italicized and outlined font for the weapons.
Above the weapons is this ammunition counter
in a narrow typewriter font without any contrasting
UI elements, outlines or drop shadows to keep
the text from blending into the background.
For the dialogue, item description and button
interaction text, they use the same typewriter
font from the ammunition counter but now with
a drop shadow for contrast.
Why is that not on the ammunition counter?
The deeper you dive the weirder it gets.
Here are some rough looking bonus medal pop
ups for when you perform special actions like
headshots or...Agent Honor?
Whatever that is.
There are brackets placed around every key
item name for...reasons?
Why do these button prompts at the bottom
line up but these don’t?
Why are these ugly character status bars OVERLAPPING the items folder?
There’s plenty of empty space beneath it.
Some elements will use skeuomorphism like
these office folders and crumpled paper and
other elements will just use black boxes...or nothing.
Even similar UI elements will have different type styles.
Both the items and mission list sub-menus
use an office folder as part of the design.
That’s all fine, but why is the style on
the subheader type so different.
Some items in those black boxes will have margins,
and others just don't and look like they're highlighting something in a Word document.
Over and over, Deadly Premonition shows what
happens when a game refuses to commit to any
one style.
Good Design
Communication is so important in team strategy
games.
But, lots of players mute voice chat, don’t
have a microphone on their system, can’t
understand what you’re saying due to a language
barrier, or just don’t want to talk.
So how can you take a game that relies on
team communication and design it around the
realities of voice chat?
The ping tool in Apex Legends is brilliant.
It’s a simple way to take most of the tactical
information you’d normally share over voice
chat and cram it into one button press.
It’s not the first game to have a ping system,
but they’ve made it more fully featured
and easier to use than other games.
You can tap the ping button while your aiming
reticle is hovering over a location, and it
might tell your team to group up over there.
Pinging on an enemy will highlight their last
known location for the rest of your team.
You can ping weapons, armor, upgrades, health,
or any other pickups too.
Your character in game will shout key info
like the level of the armor or add-on and
leave a marker on your teammates HUD showing
the item’s location.
Players can respond by pinging the HUD marker
themselves to call dibs and keep the marker
on screen, and can even easily thank whoever
left the marker.
Just like the Overwatch end of match endorsement
system, it’s a tiny psychological nudge
that promotes better sportsmanship and team
cohesion.
No matter who your teammates are, their skill
level in the game, or their hardware setup,
they can help the team out with just 
one button press.
The coolest part of the system might be how
it gets around language barriers.
By being a go-between for team communication,
the game can take a ping sent from a Canadian
player and localize it into Portuguese for
their Brazilian teammate.
Raw voice chat alone could never make communication so easy between teammates
who speak different languages.
The devs spent months playtesting the game
with random names and no voice chat to emulate
playing online with strangers.
They iterated on the game with the lessons
learned in those sessions and through a lot
of hard work, came up with the friendliest
team communication tool I’ve ever seen.
There’s a rule of thumb in design that you
can tell you’ve found a good solution if
it solves a lot of problems at once.
The ping system compensates for teammates
missing or unwilling to use voice chat, helps
communicate complex information, and solves
a cross-cultural communication barrier.
It is good design.
Bad Design
Most RPGs deal heavily with character progression
and management.
For most of them, that means fiddling with
stats, equipment, and skills inside menus,
from the start of the game to the end.
Since you're in them so often, players notice
when RPGs have rock-solid menus and navigation.
Bad menu design sticks out and feels worse
the more you have to use it.
The first Mass Effect is amazing!
But its menus and UI are not.
It’s not broken.
It’s not the worst interface I’ve ever
seen.
But aesthetically it’s bulky and bland.
Functionally, it’s inefficient.
The equipment screen is especially bad in
the console versions of the game.
It’s not well organized and the screen space
is used so inefficiently.
Going from left to right, we have 3 core elements,
the character preview, the equipped item with
stat details, and your available inventory.
Your items are listed in a single column with
just 5 pieces of equipment shown at once.
There is no ‘NEW’ marker.
While inventory is divided by type, you can’t
sort items.
Repeat items don’t stack, so you’ll see
a dozen copies in the list one at a time,
which wastes space that you could have used
to show something, anything else.
The inventory management tools are lacking,
and the game CONSTANTLY gives out more stuff,
so you’ll have to take time to clear up
inventory space.
Not to mention, every time you discard equipment that's placed lower on the list
you're brought back to the very top,
forcing you to scroll back down.
They don’t make inventory management that
quick and easy, and it’s definitely not
fun, so it feels like a waste of time.
Each item in the list wastes a ton of screen
space.
Every item has two lines of text: the item
name and the category like 'assault rifles',
'pistols', etc.
Everything is sorted by category, so why is
this name here taking up space?
This second text line is redundant.
Even without changing the rest of the design,
you can show twice as many items if you cut
out the redundant information.
The character management menus have problems
too.
You can’t manage the inventory or skills
of any of your reserve party members.
You can’t compare equipment, so it’s a
mystery if your new stuff is better than the
reserve party’s old stuff.
You have to go back to your ship, swap out
your party members, and THEN manage their
equipment and skills.
It takes forever, and if your reserve party
was just always in the menus it’d be so
much faster.
You can only sort through everyone's inventory at once
by going to their lockers that are located on the lower decks of your ship,
which isn't a real solution.
Mass Effect is obviously not a bad game.
Looking at the scope of the entire project,
from the 2007-era AAA graphics to the deep
worldbuilding and storytelling, inefficient
menus are a minor problem.
But because of how much time you spend in
them, the inefficient and dated design of
the menus have an outsized impact.
Good Design
A game's user interface can be governed by
its control scheme.
A UI that works great for one control scheme
might be terrible for another.
Thanks to its control and UI changes, Pikmin
brilliantly adapted the RTS to consoles at
a time when there weren’t many great console
RTS games.
First, a quick history lesson.
Real-time strategy games and the PC are made
for each other.
Like, literally.
The genre has been refined for decades with
mouse and keyboard controls in mind.
Lots of popular real time strategy games from
the 90s were ported to consoles, but they
were pretty awful.
Starcraft 64.
Eugh.
Command and Conquer.
On the N64.
Eugh.
The ports are slow and clumsy, and don’t
feel much like the games they’re trying
to emulate.
So what was tripping up all these console
RTS ports?
It starts with the controls.
In games like Starcraft or Age of Empires,
players click on units from an isometric view
above the action.
You play inside a button-rich frame full of
buildings to build and tactics to use.
The UI leans into the biggest strength of
PC mice - quick and accurate cursor movement.
So, when the games were ported to consoles
there was an immediate problem.
Analog control sticks and mice don’t behave
the same.
Control sticks don’t have the same precision
or speed of a mouse.
A console port originally designed for PC
controls has to compensate.
Traditional RTS games fall apart without high
precision, so cursor movement had to slow
down instead, and because of that the early
console RTS ports slowed down too.
To make a console RTS work, Nintendo had to
rebuild from the ground up.
Start with the platform’s strength.
Character control works great on controllers.
But if you’re going to make a radical change
like centering an RTS around a character,
you’ll have to radically change the UI to
match.
In Pikmin, Captain Olimar and his target reticle
fill in the role of a cursor.
Instead of selecting units by clicking and
dragging to highlight them, you whistle over
pikmin with the reticle.
To replace a click-drag to select units you
hold down the whistle button instead.
The radius of Olimar’s whistle gets wider
and you can call over groups of pikmin at
once.
To give pikmin commands, press a button and
Olimar tosses them over to where your reticle
is placed.
Depending on what the pikmin lands on or is
near, they’ll automatically pick an appropriate
task whether it’s carrying objects back
to your base, breaking down walls or attacking
enemies.
Pikmin’s informational UI is very light,
lots of info is condensed into just a few
elements.
Screen space is used very efficiently, especially
in Pikmin 3, which lets the world fill the
screen instead of needing a heavy frame around
the action.
The UI is more diegetic through the character
design.
Olimar sticks out among the swarm of pikmin with his glowing antenna.
Instead of chevrons for upgraded units in
a game like Red Alert,
the level of strength of an individual pikmin is represented with leaves, buds and flowers
at the end of their stem,
which works
great thematically and makes it easy to see
what sort of pikmin you’re dealing with.
The holographic-like visuals on your cursor
and whistle radius contrast well against the
varied environments and in Pikmin 3, they
even change color depending on the type of
pikmin you’re about to throw.
You even get a nice throwing arc to help you
precisely target your pikmin tosses.
Micromanaging and multitasking are core to
an RTS, and all of these UI changes don’t
stop that core from being in the game.
But they do smooth over the other, less essential
features and quirks of PC RTS games that don’t
work as well with a controller.
No, Pikmin isn't as complex of a game as Starcraft
or Command and Conquer.
But it's still fun, and the UI changes and
focus on character control let Nintendo make
a game for a console that kept the feel of
an RTS and let them intr oduce the genre to
a new audience.
Bad Design
Hmm, I’m not sure what game to do for the
last Bad Design segment actually.
Welp, better break out the old Bad Design
detector here…
Let’s see what we got…
*slow beeps*
*medium beeps*
Hmm, interesting
*slow beeps*
*fast beeps* Ooh!
Oh wait a minute… that one might be toxic.
Mike, in background: You don’t know what
you’re messing with!
*slow beeps*
*very fast beeps*
Jackpot!
Let’s crack this one open and see what's insi-
OH MY GOD
*jarring menu noise*
Yeah this counts.
Ehrgeiz is a beautiful mess.
It’s that Square fighting game that has
Cloud and Sephiroth in it.
And it sucks.
There’s not that much here but what is here..ooouugggh.
Smash Ultimate had menus inside menus, but
Ehrgeiz took it literally.
It looks ridiculous.
Some of this is skeuomorphic and some is not.
The name of the game is in two places in one
image.
The select character menu doesn’t show you
the character list and makes you scroll through
everybody.
Here’s a totally different character select
menu.
Here’s ANOTHER totally different character
select menu.
Then the game HUD comes out of nowhere and
is fine.
Look at that, that’s a normal fighting game
HUD.
Wow!
Let’s see what the single player mode is.
Excellent.
Let’s get back to that sound for another minute.
*jarring menu noise*
Yeah.
Yeah, this is like novelty-bad.
God bless the designers.
*chill vibes outro music from Super Smash
Bros. Ultimate*