Today’s episode is sponsored by Squarespace,
the all-in-one platform to build a beautiful
online presence.
Get 10% off your first purchase with the offer
code DESIGNDOC.
Hey hey, we're back with the 6th installment of
Good Design Bad Design.
Don't worry if you haven't watched the others,
you can jump right in here and catch up later.
We're looking at the highs and lows of visual
communication in games.
We’re talking about things like Menus, UI,
Camera Work, Color Choice, Font Choice, Animation,
Character Design.
The presentation of information.
As always, bad graphic design doesn’t make
a bad game, and vice versa.
And with that, let’s begin.
Good Design
Mario Maker is a game focused on one thing.
Making Mario levels.
Not little rinky-dink Mario levels.
Ones that can be mistaken for the real thing,
if you’re a good enough level designer.
You can do that thanks to the game’s stellar
toolset.
There are countless games with creation tools
that let you make levels, but most have a
high barrier to entry.
For most games it takes lots of time and frustration
to create something worth playing.
Mario Maker avoids almost every one of the
pitfalls that other level creator toolsets
fall into.
But how?
Step One: have well-defined problem boundaries.
Mario Maker is lucky here, since 2D Mario
platformers are tile-based.
That might sound limiting compared to a more
open-ended game like LittleBigPlanet, but
it actually helps make user levels feel right.
You only have so many things that each grid
square can do, and they connect to the rest
of the level in predictable ways.
I love LittleBigPlanet’s Popit menu system,
but it was best at organizing an ocean of
options.
LittleBigPlanet still made you do a lot of
troubleshooting to get complicated objects
and ideas to work.
Compared to LittleBigPlanet, in Mario Maker
you spend less time wrestling to get your
level geometry right.
You don’t have weird collision glitches.
You don’t have to check for unexpected cliffs
or bumps in your terrain.
Your custom objects don't break at random.
There’s just way less troubleshooting in
general with a tile-based game like Mario
Maker.
It makes designing levels easier and faster,
which helps beginners get into designing their
first levels, and helps advanced users focus
on the unique gimmicks of their top-tier course
designs.
Step Two: clean up the interface.
The object hotbars are more streamlined in
Mario Maker 2.
As I talked about in the Inventory UI video,
getting your most commonly
used actions in easy-to-access places makes
the UI feel snappier.
The Mario Maker 2 hotbar lets you get at the
last 12 objects you’ve used, and you can
pin favorites to the bar at any time.
You no longer swap between different rows
at the top like you did in the first game.
Finding an unusual tile is easier in the second
game too.
You don’t swap between rows of objects anymore.
Instead, you can more easily dive into a specific
category of object, like Terrain, Items, Enemies,
and Gizmos.
A radial menu pops up and gives you more space
to look at these unfamiliar or unusual pieces
and pick the right one.
Less time fiddling with the menu frees up
more time for making and testing your levels.
Step Three: cater to power users.
Great level editors need a depth of functionality
that can be discovered and experimented with.
Most of them, even mediocre ones, do provide
the deep functionality that power users want,
but it’s often buried, or otherwise clunky.
Exposing that functionality in a way that
isn’t a pain to use is an extra step that
puts Mario Maker into a higher tier.
Mario Maker 2 made the object modifiers much
easier to access.
Before, the modifiers were treated like little
secrets, like when you’d shake an enemy
or give it an item to change its properties.
Not very discoverable.
If you put the modifiers in entries in the
radial menu, things would get messy pretty
fast.
Instead, they went with a cleaner option.
Now you can just tap and hold on to the part
and see the available modifiers right there.
If you’re unfamiliar with your range of
options, a list of all of them right in front
of you can let you create things that you
wouldn’t have thought of otherwise.
Good level creation tools need both simplicity
and depth.
Mario Maker, and the tweaks made in Mario
Maker 2 make it the gold standard for user-friendly
level creation.
Bad Design
How do you know how to do something?
As a player I mean.
Well, the game could just tell you, like in
a tutorial.
It’s effective, but tutorials can easily
slow a game down.
Better is if a player can just intuit what
to do.
Set up the look of your world right, and you
don't have to tell your players a thing.
The Witness is really good at this.
It sets up a consistent symbolic language,
then uses those symbols and little leaps of
logic to set up the deeper puzzles on the
island, all without any text.
Zelda does a simpler version of it.
Cracked rocks will always be blown up with
bombs.
Eyeball patterns can be shot with arrows.
Grated surfaces can be hit with the clawshot.
White diamonds are targets for the boomerang.
Creating a consistent visual language is super
effective at getting a message across implicitly.
But what happens if your game isn’t good
at sticking to its own visual language?
Well, that's Yooka-Laylee, unfortunately.
In a lot of ways, the game is a decent successor
to Banjo Kazooie.
But its visual language can be very inconsistent,
and detracts from the game.
Just like Banjo-Kazooie, Yooka Laylee is a
collect-a-thon.
You go through sandbox environments, collecting
‘Jiggies’...
I mean ‘Pagies’ to open new places.
Each Pagie is tied to an objective you complete
in the world.
Lots of objectives involve overcoming obstacles
by learning new abilities.
Gliding across gaps, rolling up steep hills,
ground pounding switches, there’s lots of
abilities to learn and use.
But the game can be pretty bad at signaling
how and when to use some of its moves.
Take ‘Sonar Splosion’ and ‘Reptile Rush’.
One is a sound wave with an area of effect,
and one is a spin dash move.
But they’re both used at different times
to shatter blocks and walls made of glass.
You learn Sonar Splosion in a world that holds
a ton of these glass cubes.
The description even says ‘Don't use near
glass.’
Great, so this breaks glass, right?
Shatter the glass panel on this arcade cabinet
in the hub world to find a Pagie.
Yeah, that seems to work.
You head over to the pipe where there’s
another Pagie.
Ok time to break out the move and… wait
what.
Why didn’t that work.
THIS glass wall requires the other move, Reptile
Rush.
It’s in the next world over.
When you learn it, there are a bunch of other
glass walls to break with it.
Ok, I guess this move breaks glass walls.
Over at the end of the section there’s another
Pagie on top of a bunch of glass cubes.
Ok, well if the rush move just breaks glass
walls it’s time to break out the Sonar Splosion
again… nope!
It’s the only time in the game where Reptile
Rush breaks glass cubes!
That makes sense!
So in summary, THIS move is used to break
glass walls, and not glass cubes.
Except it’s the only thing that can break
THESE glass cubes.
THIS move is used to break glass cubes and
not glass walls.
Except it can break THIS glass wall, and it
can’t do anything to THESE cubes.
Crystal clear.
It’s not just a problem with these two moves,
visual language consistency problems keep
cropping up throughout the game.
There’s another system where you can lick
some objects to gain their properties.
Lick honey to stick to slopes.
Lick a cannon ball to become heavy and resistant to wind.
Lick… coals?!
To become warm enough to go through cold environments.
That sort of thing.
But there are rooms where they don’t follow
their own logic.
Here’s one with 3 metal slopes.
2 of these you can roll up just fine as you
are.
On one you have to be sticky to climb it.
Same metallic texture.
You figure out which is which.
Yooka Laylee’s inconsistent visual language
makes it harder to predict whether your puzzle
solution idea will work out or not.
Predictions are based on consistency, and
without that consistency in the internal logic
of the game, puzzles feel arbitrary and annoying.
Because of the muddied, inconsistent, or just
straight up absent visual language of the
objects in the game, you can’t intuit at
a glance what objects have what properties,
so you start to not trust the game.
Now you’ve made a guessing game, which is
frustrating, and detracts from the fun of
exploration.
Because of a lack of consistency, Yooka Laylee
undercuts itself.
Good Design
If you want to make a good game UI, one of
the most basic rules is to be clear.
Give a clean run-down of the information your
players need to navigate with confidence.
But, some of the fun in games is uncovering
mysteries and revealing an unfamiliar world.
Well those sound like opposites, shoot.
Welp, time to give up.
Nah, just kidding.
One complaint that comes up for lots of open
world games is that they don’t let players
get lost and discover things on their own.
Even the kinds of open world games that seem
tailor made for exploration and discovery
can feel hand-holdy sometimes.
Mini-maps, objective markers, and pathfinder
tools work great for pointing you to your
next destination, but they also take some
of the magic out of exploring the world.
So it looks like we need some balance.
You know what game nails that balance really
well?
Hollow Knight.
Hollow Knight gives great navigational tools
to avoid turning wanderlust into frustration,
but then also holds the tools back a little
to let you explore at your own pace.
It’s all about the map system.
When you first start Hollow Knight you have
no map at all.
You’re exploring the Forgotten Crossroads
blindly.
This first area is structured so that you’re
guaranteed to come across the Cartographer,
who sells you a map of the local area.
But that map is only half finished.
Some areas of interest are marked, but nothing
else.
You don’t even know where YOU are located.
The map can be filled in bit by bit by upgrading
at the cartographer’s shop.
A quill that lets you update and add unexplored
areas when you take a rest on a bench.
A charm that marks your current location.
Colored markers to dot the map with yourself,
to mark whatever you’d like to remember.
Special markers that tag NPCs, fast travel
locations, other benches, and more once you
stumble on them.
Even after purchasing all of the map upgrades,
you’re still going into a new area blind
until you find the cartographer again.
The map system limits are designed to encourage
players to explore, get lost, find something
unexpected, and develop their own familiarity
with the land of Hollownest.
The game means for you to get a little lost,
so it provides just enough waypoints, rewards,
and navigational options to guide you in the
right direction if you get in over your head.
They even spell out their philosophy when
the cartographer introduces himself: - ‘I’ve
a fondness for exploring myself.
Getting lost and finding your way again is
a pleasure like no other.’
It’s a cohesive design philosophy that the
game successfully carried out.
Hollow Knight rarely tells you where to go,
but it always rewards you for venturing forth
yourself.
Bad Design
Hyrule Warriors isn’t the most complicated
game in the world.
Mash Y and sometimes X to clean these mooks
off the map like it's a tile floor, and watch
that KO counter go into the thousands.
It's soothing.
Sometimes, while you're mashing buttons, you'll
get an objective to do.
Take over a base, protect someone, find hidden
gold skulltulas.
Then you’ll get another.
Then another.
Then 3 more.
You're expected to juggle a bunch of mandatory
and optional objectives at all times, which,
fine, that’s part of the game.
But it makes knowing the status of those objectives
pretty important.
Unfortunately, Hyrule Warriors could use another
pass on its alert design.
It isn't the only musou game with this problem,
though it doesn’t make much of an effort
to fix it either.
Alerts pop off ALL THE TIME, but you can only
see a single alert on the screen.
For slower segments of the game, it's not
so bad, but in more intense sequences it's
easy to have a half dozen pop up at the same
time.
Minimap icons flashing, audio chimes wailing,
everything needs your attention right now.
If you're just watching someone else play
the game it doesn’t look that bad.
But, if you’re controlling the game, it's
hard to focus on all the things the game wants
you to focus on.
You’ll be focused on one objective, then
something significant will happen somewhere
else and you’ll get flooded with messages
you can’t address very well.
Each alert is treated visually as roughly
equal in importance, but not all of them are.
Since you can't manage the flood of alerts,
you eventually tune them out, and that's how
you miss something important.
Sometimes you’ll get a popup that you failed
an objective you weren’t even aware of - you
missed the first alert.
Oh yeah, and character dialogue shows up in
different popups, too.
It’s unvoiced, and disappears after a few
seconds.
If you were preoccupied with, you know, the
action part of the action game, you could’ve
easily missed some contextual information
or flavor text.
Now you can go back to the pause menu to read
some of the popups, but that completely takes
you out of the game's flow.
The menu's kind of a mess anyway.
The information you want is spread out in
a bunch of locations, and their names can
be misleading.
What if you wanted to check on the current
status of your character?
'Current Status'?
Nope, that's Win/Lose conditions...okay.
How about finding the status of the other
units...maybe it’s in “Warrior info”?
Nope!
That’s just about your current character.
What you wanted was in 'Battlefield Info'.
Sure.
This menu could easily be more efficient by
combining some options.
You can rearrange this main screen to fit
the win conditions and a mission list.
Battlefield Info and Warrior info could be
combined and renamed to something like “Units”
or “Warrior Status”.
These aren’t big tweaks, but they help get
information to the player efficiently.
That’s the #1 job of a good UI.
Another revision of the alert design and information
hierarchy would have done Hyrule Warriors
a lot of good.
Good Design
Warioware is about speed and adaptability.
Not just for the players.
The game’s UI has to be just as fast at
telling the player what’s about to happen.
The game is a non-stop rapid fire onslaught
of teeny tiny microgames and trying to do
something in about 5 to 10 seconds.
Get through enough microgames and you’re
confronted with a more elaborate “boss”
stage.
The game has an interesting design challenge:
how can you teach someone what they’re supposed
to do in the literal seconds they’re given
to complete the task?
Every microgame has to be simple and intuitive
enough to teach players 4 things: who they
are, where they are, what their goal is, and
how to achieve that goal, and they all have
to do it in the blink of an eye.
Here’s how the cycle works, with WarioWare
Smooth Moves as an example.
From a ‘hub’ screen, you’re shown how
to hold the controller.
It locks in a particular form of action that
you can do.
Button pressing, shaking, or other movements
will start to crop up in the player’s mind
based just on how they’re holding the controller.
The game begins, and the game gives you a
very short command.
That’s your goal.
It’s displayed in the center of the screen,
in a bold, easy to read white text on a black
outline, emphasizing the singular importance
of the goal.
The command used is always very action-oriented,
and concise.
From there, the game throws you into some
ridiculous looking scenario like picking a
nose, helping grandma put on her dentures
or giving a disturbingly human looking Wario
a clean shave.
Compare these microgames to something like
Mario Party.
Mario Party has plenty of minigames to learn
the controls for, but it has a separate instructions
screen before each game starts.
The Mario Party minigames are a little deeper,
with extra buttons and multiple roles for
multiplayer, but they aren’t that much more
complicated than Warioware microgames.
The instructions screen in Mario Party isn’t
really intrusive, but if you did the same
thing in WarioWare you’d completely undercut
the frenetic nature of the game.
You’d have nothing.
Actually, you’d have Game & Wario, which
is adjacent to nothing.
It’s a very tight set of criteria that each
WarioWare microgame needs to meet in order
for the game to work.
The fun of WarioWare is mostly in figuring
out what to do next.
Given clear instructions and some brutal time
pressure, get it done.
The game turns into an intricate version of
hot potato, part safecracking, part speedrun,
and it’s all over before you know it.
You’re back at the hub screen.
It’s on to the next game, but just a little
faster this time.
It’s a brilliant, consistent, and rhythmic
cycle that pushes the limits of how fast a
game can be taught to the player.
Bad Design
It’s time to playyyyy…
TOO!
MANY!
FONTS!
The only game show where you win by having
too many fonts.
We’re playing with 4 contestants today.
First up: Tenchu Stealth Assassins.
Let’s look at the loading screen.
Oof.
Yep, that's too many fonts.
1,2,3,4 of them.
And bonus points for a hideous typeface.
Second up: Dissidia: Final Fantasy NT.
Oof, that wavy baseline is pretty rough.
There’s a few fonts here, but they’re
pretty understated.
I dunno...
OH.
There we go.
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.
Excellent.
That’s a tough mark to beat.
Third to go is Xenoblade Chronicles 2.
Wow, that’s a lot of text.
But… wait… how many fonts are there actually?
1?
Sorry, you’ve got the spirit, but that’s
NOT ENOUGH FONTS.
Better luck next time.
And finally, House of the Dead.
Aah.
Oof.
That’s a lot of bad contrasting fonts.
OOF, even more.
All of these screens are repulsive!
MY GOD. YOU’VE DONE IT!
THIS IS
TOO!
MANY!
FONTS!
Now you face Iron Chef Gungnir in the bonus
round.
Too bad House of the Dead.
Gungnir wins again, and is now the 90-day
champion.
See you next time on:
TOO!
MANY!
FONTS!
This episode of Too Many Fonts has been brought
to you by our sponsor Squarespace.
We’ve built a few websites over the years,
and in our experience Squarespace is by far
the easiest way to get a killer looking website
up and running extremely quickly.
They’re a one-stop shop, with domain registration,
easy drag and drop tools, no plugins necessary,
and great traffic monitoring tools so you
can watch all those sweet page views roll
in.
Go to squarespace.com for a free trial, and
when you’re ready to launch, head to squarespace.com/designdoc
and use offer code DESIGNDOC to save 10% off
of your first purchase of a website or domain.
*chill vibes outro from A Hat In Time*