It's that time.
It’s your birthday!
No wait, wrong card.
It’s Good Design, Bad Design Volume 8.
If you’re new to the series, welcome. Don’t
worry, you can start here and go back to the
others later. Today we’re looking at 4 examples
of good and bad graphic design in games. It’s
all about visual communication. Things like
menus, UI, UX, color choice, font choice,
animation, character design. The Presentation
of Information. There can be good games with
bad visual communication, and bad games that
do things well. If you have any suggestions
for games you might like to see covered here
in a future volume, let us know in the comments!
But first, a word from today’s sponsor,
Audible.
I’m in a book club with some friends and
lately I’ve been using Audible to keep up.
It’s super convenient. I’m recommending
two sci-fi audiobooks:
If you’re looking for an easy breezy, Star
Trek style romp through space with my favorite
depiction of faster than light travel, try
The Long Way to a Small, Angry Planet by Becky
Chambers.
But it’s not nearly as angry as the planet
in my second recommendation. If you want a
verrrry dark and gritty Hugo Award winner,
try The Fifth Season by N. K. Jemisin.
Now’s the perfect time to start, too. Audible
is giving a challenge to current and new members
right now. Finish 3 audiobooks by March 3rd
and get a $20 Amazon Credit. There’s nothing
to enter, Audible automatically keeps track
of your progress.
Go to www.audible.com/designdoc or text ‘DESIGNDOC’
to 500 500 and start listening with an exclusive
30-day free trial, one free audiobook of your
choice, and 2 Audible originals absolutely
free.
Good Design
Every year around the holidays I get back
in touch with my high school and college friends
that have moved around the country. These
end up turning into big get-togethers, a dozen
or more people, and for each of the past several
years there’s one game we always break out:
The Jackbox Party Pack.
Jackbox is not one thing, but collections
of, well, they aren’t quite ‘mini-games’
but they’re smaller-scale sets of games
bundled into a yearly pack. The lineup changes
from year to year, but they’re all designed
around a few principles. They’re meant for
multiplayer audiences, and most are designed
for up to 4, 8, or even more players. Most
games also involve a drop in, drop out audience
participation component. It’s great for
allowing Twitch streamers to play with their
fans, but it’s also perfect for big parties
or family reunions.
Jackbox's UX is absolutely ingenious.
It’s practically the perfect party game
thanks to its focus on inclusive design.
Inclusive design is concerned about not putting
up unnecessary barriers for people to use
your product. For a game, it can mean thinking
about how to reach the widest audience possible
and making sure they all can have a good time.
It’s close to the idea of accessibility,
which is focused on things like colorblind
modes, screen readers, large text, or other
things that help people with special needs
enjoy a game, but inclusive design is a little
more generalized.
Designing for inclusivity can just mean making
something easier for anyone to use. Pass-the-controller
multiplayer modes are more ‘inclusive’
than 8-player Smash Bros. Just because you
don’t need as much hardware to get the job
done. Inclusivity can also mean you don’t
need specialized knowledge or experience to
play. Tetris is more ‘inclusive’ than
Final Fantasy in a sense because you don’t
need to be able to read to fully understand
what’s going on, just line up the blocks.
Inclusivity can also mean the game’s experience
is literally available for as many people
as possible. A board game that can accommodate
2 to 6 players is more inclusive than a game
that only works with a group of 3. It doesn’t
mean there won’t be some decisions that
may exclude some people, but if you’re designing
for inclusivity you’ll at least be mindful
of your choices and try to keep your audience
as wide as possible.
The games are designed to be played through
a web browser, but almost any web browser
will do. Start the game on a computer and
tell everyone else to get to a web page on
their phone. Any phone. Android or iOS. Your
aunt’s phone from 7 years ago with the cracked
screen. Even that weird HP Touchpad you have
lying around will probably work. The game
can be played on a TV screen everyone’s
gathered around, or on a stream on Twitch
or Discord with people around the world just
as easily.
Even once the games start, Jackbox’s UX
is across the board incredibly simple, designed
with the barest minimum of interactions to
play. Quiplash, Dictionarium, Fibbage, and
Split The Room ask you to type out an answer
to a prompt, to lie to, or to make jokes at
your friends. Tee KO and Drawful have you
draw pictures with just your finger and a
touch screen or with a mouse. Trivia Murder
Party and You Don’t Know Jack are trivia
games where you press a button to answer.
Fakin’ It and Push The Button are games
that mostly involve talking to and observing
your friends outside of the game entirely.
These simple mechanics are mix-and-matched,
and combined in other games, but each game
draws from a very simple set of interactions:
Type something. Draw something. Press a button.
Talk to your friends. Almost every
person on almost any device is already capable
of doing that without a learning curve, or
expensive hardware, or familiarity with the
design language of video games.
Jackbox’s incredibly low barriers to entry,
both physical and with a player’s experience,
and the flexible design that accommodates
a large number of players, opens up the game
as an experience that can be shared with everybody.
Be it a group of five, a party of fifteen,
or a stream of five hundred. It invites people
to play with the group, and can snowball on
itself, and before you know it the entire
house is gathered around and having a blast
together, in a way that’s very hard to find
in other forms. Jackbox’s design is supremely
inclusive, and makes Jackbox the ultimate
party game.
Bad Design
The original Xenoblade Chronicles is one of
the best JRPGs. I’m so happy they’re
making a Definitive Edition, because now there’s
a chance to fix the original’s biggest flaw,
its interface. Xenoblade Chronicles is essentially
a single player MMO, similar to Final Fantasy
XII. But the interface is kind of a cluttered
mess. Some of it can be chalked up to taking
after an MMO. There’s a mountain of quests
to complete. Items and equipment to collect.
Places to explore. People to meet, and enemies
to take down. The systems and mechanics are
tied together in ways that can't easily be
cut. But I want to focus on something else.
We need to talk about the combat UI.
Xenoblade's combat interface floods the screen
with UI elements. The left side is taken up
by your character’s status windows and this
party gauge. The bottom is a hotbar with all
of your combat arts and room for a description
beneath. The right side has your map, control
prompts, and notifications about status effects
and other miscellaneous information like when
characters gain affinity. The center is filled
with huge status windows and little health
bars. Not even kidding, literally half the
screen is covered in UI elements. Even some
of the parts that AREN'T covered are wasted.
A little corner stranded on an island, in
the middle of a sea of UI.
So the issue is that we have too many elements
right? Maybe we just drop a bunch of them?
Well, no. Most of the information is important
and useful. In fact, I wish there were a few
more things on display, like an objective
list for sidequests. It's a complex game.
It’s mechanically deep. It was always going
to have a busy interface. Though they do get
credit for not pulling a Battleborn, making
all of the elements fight for your attention.
The more fixable problem is how inefficient
everything is.
Take the party status windows. Starting from
the bottom we have your character’s level
and two bars, the orange experience bar, and
the thinner yellow skill points bar. There’s
the character’s HP and to the upper right
is a nice character portrait. The upper left
holds icons for buffs and debuffs. So the
biggest problem areas here are the character
portraits and the two bars. The portrait is
actually a mechanic, the Tension mechanic,
which influences the character’s accuracy
and crit rate. The portrait, though, can be
easily scaled down and simplified. Maybe convert
the Tension aspect into a small bar or maybe
a shape that changes color if you really want
to save space. The EXP and SP bars aren't
that important mid-combat and could be either
condensed or cut. Just put that information
in the stats screen. None of these changes
are that major, or even all that necessary
by themselves, but fixing the little inefficiencies
add up to save a ton of space.
Compare it to Final Fantasy XII, a similar
MMO-like single player RPG from roughly the
same era. It’s not nearly as messy. Character
status and your command menu are in the bottom,
bars are thin, text is cleanly aligned, corners
are better used and elements don’t have
excessive margins. Of course, Xenoblade’s
interface may not be able to get to the same
level without compromising some of its mechanics,
but being a bit more condensed and displaying
information a little more cleanly is
totally doable in the Definitive Edition.
If they can pull that off, it may just turn
a great game into an amazing one.
Good Design
Did you know, Cuphead has amazing animation?
I know, crazy right? As a shoot em up that
perfectly captures the aesthetic and spirit
of old fashioned “rubber hose” era animations
like those from Max Fleischer, it’s pretty
safe to say that the artists at MDHR understand
the 12 principles of animation. But, beautiful
animation doesn’t necessarily make for a
great gameplay experience by itself. Games
are interactive. They require form AND function.
In action games, the gameplay revolves around
observation and reaction. Learning, and, well,
action. In Cuphead, you're observing and learning
boss attacks. Reacting to patterns and acting
to get your character out of harm's way. The
12 principles of animation are being used
to make the game look amazing, but one of
them pulls double duty and makes the game
feel as good as it looks. Anticipation.
You probably know what anticipation is when
you see it, but maybe you haven't labeled
it in your mind yet. Top-quality animations
divide nearly every action into three phases:
The Anticipation, The Action, and the Reaction.
The anticipation is the announcement for what
a character is about to do. It sets expectations
for the viewer and prepares them for the following
action. Big anticipated movements telegraph
big exaggerated actions. They make the main
action look more believable and easy to follow
for the audience. The rubber hose era that
Cuphead is emulating is cartoonishly overloaded
with anticipation, like, even for a cartoon.
But that's fine, because action games need
all the anticipation they can get.
Cuphead is centered around its boss fights.
Each boss has a bunch of attack patterns that
fire off bullets to avoid or characters to
dodge. Each attack is custom-animated to give
each a unique look and feel. In those attack
animations, the anticipation is an incredibly
important step. It’s where the game signals
to the player what’s about to happen, and
from a gameplay angle it also signals to the
player what they will have to do next to avoid
getting hit. The proper level of anticipation
is how the designers tuned how difficult and
how fair each of the game’s boss fights
are. The unique look of the anticipation of
each attack’s animation reveals what’s
about to happen. The length of the anticipation
often corresponds to how devastating each
move will be to the player, or how long they
will have to deal with the attack. If the
boss fires off a projectile, the projectile
itself is an ongoing warning, so that attack’s
anticipation is usually pretty short. Attacks
with a wide area of effect, or a tricky pattern
to dodge will have longer anticipation stages,
so players have more time to get out of the
way or prepare for the upcoming pattern.
Without balancing the anticipation of the
animations, the motions look cheaper, but
the gameplay suffers even more. They would
feel drawn out and dull if they gave too much
leadup for a wimpy attack. Or sudden and cheap
if they were too short for a full-screen laser.
Players might have to resort to memorization
or luck to figure out how to get through a
fight alive. Cuphead is a difficult game,
but the way it warns players lends itself
to feeling fair. If it had lost that feeling,
it would feel difficult, but cheap, and would
feel more unsatisfying to play through. The
telegraphs aren’t there to tell you immediately
what’s about to happen, but they are meant
to reduce the number of times you’ll have
to play a boss to familiarize yourself with
how the fight is supposed to go. It helps
you overcome the challenge through recognition,
repetition, and skill.
There’s another interesting wrinkle to the
anticipation in another set of animations
in the game. Your own. The animations for
Cuphead himself have very little anticipation
for the basic actions you take as a player.
It’s all very snappy. When Cuphead jumps,
he doesn’t slightly crouch down for a few
frames to build up power in his legs. He just
immediately enters his jumping state. When
he dashes, there isn’t any preparation or
winding back. He just goes right into a diving
pose as he moves forward.
But, remember what anticipation is used for. It's
to prepare the viewer for the action to follow.
But in this case, the viewer is you. You told
Cuphead to jump. You know what's coming, so
you're already prepared for the jump to happen.
You don't need as much anticipation, so the
movement is still believable to your eyes.
It's not as pretty, sure, but it's well worth
the tradeoff to make Cuphead feel quick and
responsive to control.
Cuphead’s animations are second to none,
and through knowing when to use and when to
break some of the 12 principles of animation,
MDHR has made a game that looks amazing, and
plays even better.
Bad Design
Coming up next: Chime Sharp on tonight’s
episode of Zero Contrast Theater.
So, anyone remember Chime? No? It was this
cool block puzzle game. You put blocks on
a grid while a music measure loops around
the board. As it passes through each block,
it adds in a sample from the level’s song
to build the soundscape piece by piece. Once
you have a solid 3x3 square, you expand those
blocks, and fill out the grid as much as possible
before time expires. It's a simple game once
you get into it, and the first game felt pretty
good, though it didn't have all that many
songs to choose from. When a sequel was in
the works it seemed like a perfect opportunity
to make Chime into a hit.
The sequel, Chime Sharp, is fundamentally
the same game just with more content. Oh,
and the UI is a lot worse. Whoops. Front and
center, this is some of the worst contrast
I've ever seen in a UI.
The board for each song uses a unique color
scheme with most of the color choices being…
questionable. The color schemes swing wildly.
Sometimes the colors are so intensely saturated
that it just hurts to look at. Sometimes the
contrast is fine with white text on a dark
background but then you have light gray text
on a light background. Then this gradient
shows up, destroying whatever contrast is
left. The original Chime didn’t have this
issue because while the blocks are a different
color for each level, the background would
always be a very dark shade. It created visual
consistency and avoided contrast problems.
The sequel uses thin white line strokes, and slight opacity
changes for its typography, and seems to be
going for a more elegant look. But thin lines
and bad contrast don’t mix.
The contrast problems aren’t even just an
aesthetic issue. You know how most modern
Tetris games will show you the next several
pieces? After some time you can tell what’s
coming up by just seeing the shape’s unique
color in your peripheral vision. The original
Chime shows your next piece at the top and
the thick block outlines made it fairly easy
to see what was about to show up. In Chime
Sharp, the next three pieces are shown in
small, thin outlines. It's almost impossible
to see in your periphery, lost in a light-on-light
contrast nightmare. I honestly forget that
this UI element is even there when playing.
Plus they lower the opacity for the boxes
in the second and third spots, making bad
contrast problems even worse. The time limit
has the same problem. It's a bar meant for
your peripheral vision, but it just gets lost
in the background. Magenta on top of ... another
... magenta. Come on.
Chime Sharp is a surprising revival, but consistently
poor readability and some bad color palettes
make a promising game into something you hate
to see.
*chill vibes outro from Tetris 99*