The clock strikes 12.
It’s Good Design, Bad Design Volume 12.
Like always, we’re taking a look at graphic
design in games.
Things like menus, UI, UX, color choice, font
choice, animation, character design, anything
that deals with the presentation of information.
Remember that these segments aren’t game
reviews.
Bad graphic design can show up in good games
and vice versa.
Today, we’re prepared to deliver 4 parts.
After watching them all, stop by the comments
and let us know of any hot new good designs
and scary old bad design candidates you’ve
seen around.
New ones are tough to find.
But there’s one thing scarier than bad typography.
CASSETTE TAPES.
Oh, wait.
It’s today’s spooky episode sponsor, The
Magnus Archives.
It’s a VERY popular horror anthology podcast.
Think of the game Control or the SCP Foundation,
but an audio drama.
It’s won a zillion awards, including from
the BBC.
It has millions of downloads and a devoted
cult.
Fandom.
Cult fandom.
Examine what lurks in the archives of the
Magnus Institute, an organization devoted
to researching the esoteric and weird.
Individually, the episodes are unsettling,
and together they form a horrifying picture.
As they explore the depths of the archives,
something starts to look back.
Maybe it’s Ehrgeiz.
*Ehrgeiz noises* Aah!
You’ll find out soon enough - they’re
gearing up for the thrilling finale on March
25th, 2021, so now’s the perfect time to
jump in.
Open up your podcast app of choice and search
for ‘The Magnus Archives,’ or visit rustyquill.com
to get started.
Go listen!
Good Design
There’s a tension between how immersive
your game world is and how much UI the game
uses.
Often, the more intrusive your UI, the less
immersive the game world tends to be, but
minimal UIs come at a cost, too.
Games with minimal menus are tougher to design.
Take level selects for example.
It can be tougher than you’d think to make
a level select diegetic, where it’s a natural
part of your game world.
The concept of a level select often just doesn’t
fit in neatly.
It's a convenient catch-all technique to just
stick the level select in a menu, but they
can be a little klutzy to the aesthetic your
game is trying to build.
Knowing just what to shove in a menu and how
much to create within your game world is a
tricky balance, and every game designer has
to decide where on the spectrum their game
fits best.
The Mario series has gone on for so long that
you can see Nintendo experiment with the level
select system in each game and watch what
happens as the pendulum swings back and forth,
back and forth.
Back and forth.
Mario 1 and 2 were very linear games, with
just a few secrets that let players skip ahead,
but not really much of a level select system.
Mario 3 was the start of how the ‘Course
Clear’ style Mario games would be structured,
where it implemented an actual level select
as a collection of world maps.
They have themed menus with nodes located
everywhere you could play.
To help keep the world maps more interesting,
they included features like the Mushroom Houses
and Airships that added variety to how you
progressed through the game.
Super Mario World went further, with a single
interconnected world map divided into multiple
regions and cranked up the number of hidden
paths to find through secret exits.
There was even an entire extra star world
with crazy bonus stages if you could find
it.
But there was always a very clear distinction
in that era between where you selected a level
and where you played a level.
That would change as the pendulum swung first
in the transition to 3D.
The level selection changed from the linear
‘Course Clear’ style to more of an open
sandbox.
Mario 64 had no overworld map.
Instead, it had one of the first immersive
hub worlds, where menu and core gameplay were
fused together.
Instead of selecting level nodes, you find
portals to stages in a castle full of secrets.
There was still a little bit of a distinction
between menu and game as you selected a star
upon entering a course, but the lines were
blurring.
It’s not as efficient to navigate as the
earlier menus, but the hub becomes a fun stage
in itself, as interesting as any others.
It cut out having to return frequently to
the menu screen, which kept you in the same
mode of play for longer and added a new exploration
element to deepen the experience.
Mario Sunshine polished the same approach,
but the Hub World style wouldn’t stick around
forever either.
The pendulum swung back towards Course Clear
in Mario Galaxy, which used a solar map system
that packed multiple stages into domes that
you’d access from the hub.
Starting with New Super Mario Bros, Nintendo
leaned more and more on the Course Clear style
for the next decade.
The New Super Mario Bros sequels, Galaxy 2,
and the Super Mario 3D series went back to
the Mario 3 world map concept and simplified
it.
Fewer secrets, more of a straight stage select.
But the pendulum swung again.
In 2017, Mario Odyssey would mix the Hub World
style back in a little more.
The main levels were presented in a linear
list on a world map, but the levels themselves
were similar to the hubs of Mario 64 and Sunshine:
sandbox-style objectives mixed with multiple
secret portals to isolated gauntlet stages
that looked a lot like what you'd find in
the Course Clear games.
But even as the series was leaning more towards
the Hub World style, it hadn't embraced minimal
menus as much as it could have.
Going between stages was never seamless.
The star and shine select menus in Mario 64
and Sunshine weren’t very intrusive, but
if you could remove those last vestiges of
a menu, you could have a more naturally flowing
adventure.
And so they did, with Bowser's Fury.
It has no level select menu at all.
Instead, every individual level lives in a
seamless open-world design that you can traverse
freely.
You can flow from objective to objective without
ever stopping to head back to a menu.
With the change, the game world is a lot more
sprawling, so they needed to add better navigation
features.
The sections of the world use landmarks to
help get your bearings.
Every stage starts with this little cat-shaped
arch, and the end is marked with a lighthouse,
which works as a vantage point that lets you
see the start of the next stage from the top.
The Giga Bell statues that are placed between
the levels also provide solid anchor points
for each of the 3 major “regions” of the
world.
With these landmarks alongside the distinct
designs of the levels themselves as well as
Fury Bowser’s shell at the center, it’s
next to impossible to get lost.
Traveling between the islands is super smooth
thanks to being able to ride on Plessy who
is always just around the corner no matter
where you are.
At no point while playing are you taken out
of the usual Mario gameplay to go fiddle with
a menu, and neither are you missing the convenience
of the menus they’ve taken out.
Nintendo spent the time to lay out the stages
and set landmarks to make the menu redundant,
with only a Fast Travel option once you’ve
cleared the game.
For taking the time to make the world seamless,
Bowser’s Fury has become my favorite Mario
world to travel through.
Bad Design
TYPOGRAPHY.
For text boxes, goal number one is to make
the text as readable as possible.
Goal number two is to do it in style.
It’s easy to only focus on the second goal,
though.
Style is fun, but style that breaks readability
destroys the entire purpose of the text in
the first place.
Almost every standard typeface will fit the
first goal just fine, so it’s easy to assume
that a font is automatically readable.
But that’s survivorship bias in action.
Any typeface that survives long enough to
become popular will also tend to be very readable.
If you’re making your own custom font for
stylistic purposes, you’re sailing in uncharted
waters.
And the fastest way to get eaten by a typographic
sea snake is to take a display font and use
it for everything.
Display fonts are the typefaces you see for
things like titles and logos.
They can be simple but they're usually customized
to hell and back to evoke a particular style.
You might want to combine just the right kind
of serif, line weight, geometricity, and dangly
effects and flourishes to fit with exactly
what your game is all about.
I’ve got someone I’d like you to meet.
His name is Vexx, and he’s an 18-year-old
platformer.
The early 2000s overflowed with ‘edgy’
platformers: the successful Jak II, the less
successful Shadow the EdgeEdge, and the much,
much less successful Vexx.
I like to call it Super Blahrio 64.
They even stole the Metal Mario powerup.
But let me tell you, the game made some typographic
CHOICES.
Look at that display font in the logo - Points
everywhere, a unique ligature to join the
two X’s together - it evokes a generic fantasy
edge vibe.
It’s fine as a display font.
It wouldn’t be right as a dialogue box font,
, so they didn’t use it.
Instead, they made a totally different crazy
custom font that’s not suitable for dialogue
text.
The dialogue in Vexx shows up as alien glyphs
that rotate letter by letter into the actual
letterform.
It’s meant to suggest seeing a foreign language
being translated right in front of you, but
it feels more like a bad PowerPoint animation
choice.
The effect loses its impact very quickly,
but it’ll be there for the whole game.
The body text font itself is also custom,
and also not great.
The text is in small caps, where every letter
is a capital, but the actual capitals are
just scaled up a little.
In tone, it looks like everyone in the game
is shouting.
To emphasize specific words, games will usually
either change text color, or sometimes they
will use all capital letters.
Guess which one Vexx decided to do?
It shouts louder.
All caps on small caps.
It doesn’t contrast nearly well enough to
be effective.
In normal text, the font isn’t really readable
either.
There’s inconsistent kerning, different
line weights on the anatomy of every letterform,
and mismatched baselines and heights.
Look at this W and this R to get the sampler
pack of all the typography mistakes here.
It’s possible to use the font for a style,
but for long stretches of text, it’s more
challenging to read than it needs to be.
Even if you like the way the font looks, the
inconsistencies aren’t contributing much
to the style, so cleaning up the font a little
would make the end result much nicer.
Vexx’s font choices aren’t so bad to make
the text unreadable.
They were going for flair, and in small doses
like in the logo their choices make more sense.
But for long stretches of text, the inconsistencies
outweigh the charm, and make the game’s
presentation feel sloppy.
Good Design
How does something become better than the
sum of its parts?
The easiest way is to have those parts support
and play off of each other.
I've been playing some Opus Magnum lately,
another one of Zachtronics' games like Spacechem,
where you build a machine to make little molecules,
one bond at a time.
Something like Baby's First Chemical Kinetics,
I guess.
It's fun, and there's some excellent UI in
the end-screen histograms that show you how
efficient your machines are compared with
your friends and the rest of the world.
But that's a topic for another day.
I want to talk about how Opus Magnum melds
its animation and soundtrack through its clockwork
design.
Some games work with their soundtrack more
than others, of course.
Any rhythm game is built around things happening
in time with the music.
A game like Opus Magnum, though, doesn't strictly
need to do that to work.
The gameplay is built around elements of a
machine moving in precise timing, moving mechanical
arms that hand elements off to each other,
and do so as quickly, or in the smallest area,
or with the fewest number of parts as possible.
The fun is in figuring out how this dance
will work, so the machinery bits don't collide
together by being in the wrong place at the
wrong time.
Once you figure it out, you can make that
dance again, but faster, or smaller, or cheaper,
without stepping on anyone's toes.
If you get it right, you can make some stunningly
beautiful machines.
The game even comes with a built-in GIF maker
to show off your work, and they can be hypnotizing
to watch.
But the thing that elevates it all is how
the animations work in rhythm with its soundtrack.
Since the game is so tied to rhythm and timing,
it's natural that its animation meshes nicely
with its music and sound effects.
*sound effects and music from Opus Magnum*
The soundtrack always feels like it's going
along with the animation.
The way a successful machine speeds up in
time.
The music choice that is fairly heavy on percussion.
The on-the-beat impacts of a completed molecule
going into storage, the chirps when a new
bond is formed, even the collisions when you
screw something up just feel ‘on time’.
It's viscerally satisfying and adds detail
that wasn't required to get the game finished
but made it feel far more polished.
The game might look chaotic at first, but
the attention to detail to sync the audio
and visuals helps make Opus Magnum a finely-tuned
machine.
Bad Design
The Witcher games are beloved for their compelling
stories and characters, but it's no secret
that getting into the series is an uphill
battle.
Most players start with either the second
or third game, and that's for a good reason.
The first Witcher is a ROUGH start.
The last two games are outstanding, and the
devs spent a lot of time polishing them both,
but the first game is missing a lot of that
polish.
Check out these layouts.
The one weird trick to getting a decent-looking
layout is to have consistency.
There needs to be some internal logic in the
placement, spacing, alignment, and order of
elements, and you have to stick with it.
You can stray from those rules to make a point,
but it'll start to make the whole layout look
sloppy if you do it at random.
Menus that look chaotic but appealing will
usually have some consistency if you look
hard enough for it.
The Witcher’s menus fall flat because of
a bunch of little inconsistencies.
The menus have this quasi-Xbox Blades radial
design that only uses two-thirds of the screen.
The Hero menu has stat categories that half-heartedly
follow the curve.
They don’t align with the curve of the background
image, nor with each other.
The Inventory screen conforms to the curved
design the least.
It sticks to a more grid-based structure and
probably is the best-looking menu in isolation,
but it doesn’t really look like part of
the set.
It's not a super pretty menu.
Some elements are misaligned, and this gross
red motif muddies things up a bit, but it
does its job relatively fine.
The Journal menu holds some of the weirdest
and least consistent design choices.
It’s divided into 8 submenus for different
game concepts, and each is just a little off.
The lists on the left ignore the radial background
and are just left-aligned.
Some submenus have little green buttons that
sort quests by chapter, and they follow this
decorative wavy line, sort of.
Some other buttons are squared up in a grid.
The Alchemy screen even has elements that
just go off of the background entirely.
It’s not just the alignments that are inconsistent.
Each submenu uses a decorative picture that
fits with its category, but the choices seem
kind of weird.
The Quest menu shows half of a face on the
left, but another menu will use a less cropped
version of the same picture on the right.
This is the only image on the left side for
some reason.
The Locations, Glossary, and Tutorials tab
all just use Geralt's face as a decoration.
They aren’t all unique, and they aren’t
all the same, seemingly at random.
It undercuts the decorative flourish the element
is supposed to provide, so why have it there
at all?
The decorative elements don't look that great
anyway and make the text above them harder
to read.
It's going for... something.
But it's not coming together.
The UI isn’t just full of clunky decoration.
It’s functionally weird, too.
Many HUD elements are too small to see easily,
especially if you're trying to play the game
from a couch.
This HUD is organized pretty well: status
info in the upper left, icons for your gear
under that, and some sensible hierarchy in
how sub icons show up in combat for the stances
you can swap between.
It's just that the buttons are so tiny.
There's a ton of empty space the icons could
use - should use - but don’t use.
The other UI elements have plenty of their
own quirks, too.
The mini-map is a micro map, letting you only
see a small portion of the world.
The battle text is tiny.
The sword icon the combo system depends on
is tiny.
The status buff icons are faded too much.
Almost every part of the UI feels just barely
off, and the small issues add up.
The Witcher's menus are a death by a thousand
tiny cuts to create a UI that could have used
another pass.
*chill vibes outro from The Witcher 3*