HELLO PARTICIPANT, IT HAS BEEN SLIGHTLY UNDER
ONE YEAR.
I’m contractually obligated to invite you
to the 14th volume of Good Design, Bad Design,
where we talk about the good and bad of graphic
design and visual communication in games.
Things like menus, UI, UX, color choice, font
choice, animation, character design - the
kinds of things that touch on the Presentation
of Information.
Today, we’ve got some tutorial stuff and
some things that might get lost in translation.
You can start here and view the other volumes
later.
Also, remember that these segments aren’t
reviews.
Good games can have bad design components
and vice versa.
Got it?
OK, let’s start.
By paying the bills.
Today’s episode sponsor is War Thunder!
War Thunder is a free-to-play military vehicle
combat game on PC, Xbox Series X and S, PS5,
and the previous generation, and it’s fully
cross-platform.
I lean towards the plane combat.
I love the aerial dogfighting, flying next
to a bunch of wingmates to take everyone out.
But if tank combat is more your style, War
Thunder has you covered.
Or if you’re into battles on the high seas,
hey look, they’ve got battles on the high
seas.
Play with over 2000 historically accurate
tanks, helicopters, planes, and ships from
every era over the last century.
Click the link in the description to play
War Thunder for free.
Get a free bonus for registering, too.
Sign up now, and you get a premium aircraft,
tank, and ship and a seven-day account boost
to get you started right.
Thanks, War Thunder!
Good Design
Nothing says ‘Presentation of Information’
quite like a tutorial.
That’s like its whole job description right
there.
When you think about a tutorial, you think
about something at the start of the game that
tells you how to play, right?
That’s very important, but that’s not
the only place where a tutorial can be useful.
A tutorial’s job is to teach a player how
to do something, especially if that something
is subtle, or not intuitive, or tricky to
understand in some way.
For games with a lot of nuance to the combat,
you can’t teach everything all at once.
The finer points will go right over a new
player’s head.
But at some point, the subtle lessons have
to be taught.
What can you do to make some great tools for
learning a game without sticking it all in
a front-loaded tutorial?
Splatoon 3 had to figure out a way to do just
that.
Splatoon 3’s opening tutorial is quick and
painless.
It’ll take you through the basics of the
game at your own pace.
If you’re familiar with how Splatoon works
already, there’s even a shortcut where you
can use the more advanced Squid Surge ability
to climb up this wall and skip most of it.
But the beginning tutorial is just… the
beginning.
Splatoon 3 is full of complexity.
The game isn’t just about splatting everyone
you see.
You’ve got ink coverage, spray patterns,
weapon range, damage output, and secondary
weapon pairings.
There are just a ton of important things to
teach a new player, and front loading it all
is not going to work.
The weapons in Splatoon 3 are very inventive,
and they’re not all things you can just
understand inherently how they’re going
to operate.
You need hands-on time to get a feel for things,
and what better place to do it than in the
match lobby?
Splatoon 3 overhauled its match lobby to double
as a hands-on training ground.
The previous games had training rooms but
you had to go there yourself.
Now, while you’re waiting for a match, or
for your friends to get online, the game gives
you a space to test out every aspect of your
current loadout.
You’ve got stationary dummies for damage
output, a huge floor to see how your weapons’
spray charts work and how much ground they
can cover quickly.
There are moving targets to practice your
tracking.
The damage output numbers hovering over targets
are a great graphical way to tell you exactly
what you need to know about your new kit as
you use it.
As you play the game and unlock something
you’ve never tried before, it’s a quick
thing to swap your loadout and get first-hand
practice to see how a weapon works and how
you can work it into the next match.
And since you’re already here waiting for
the match to start, you might as well tinker
around with it a little.
The different game modes have their own unique
spin on the idea.
The Salmon Run lobby is like the normal game
lobby, but it also lets you practice the unique
Salmon Run mechanics while you wait.
There’s an egg and basket for the egg throw
ability.
There are different-sized targets so you can
practice against the salmonid enemies.
You can even go into an empty map and practice
against the special ‘Boss Salmonids’ one
at a time, without the chaos of the other
enemies getting in your way.
Splatoon 3’s new lobby system makes it easier
to practice, and helps give you the information
you need at the time you’re ready to take
it in.
Bad Design
Getting the right info to players at the right
time is the goal of any tutorial, but it’s
a tough goal.
The most common ways to screw it up are to
tell the player way too much or way too little.
On one end is Sonic Unleashed.
The Wii version.
The 360 version is a totally different game,
and its tutorials are just fine.
The Wii version has short, isolated tutorials
for every concept the game has.
That sounds fine until you find out that the
list of concepts includes turning left and
right.
Every tutorial forces the game to load a new
sectioned-off area of the first stage, and
your companion character goes into a speech
about what to do, no matter how basic the
idea is.
Even if you’re already doing it.
Complete this microscopic stage to prove you
know how to jump, then how to turn, then like
5 or 6 more of those.
There’s no out and no shortcut you can take
to prove you know what’s what.
Oh, and you get to go through this whole process
again when you get to the second gameplay
style.
Now, being overly cautious with tutorials
isn’t a terrible idea, especially for a
game that will be played by a younger audience.
You never want to throw a player into a do-or-die
situation without giving them the tools to
get through it, and your tutorial has to work
for players who have very different levels
of skill with playing games.
Being thorough guarantees that everyone will
prove they know even the most basic concepts
before they can get stuck somewhere.
The problem in Sonic Unleashed is just about
the degree of ceremony for the littlest things
that bog down the process.
The loading and unloading, and the unskippable
nature of it all make it a chore to get through.
On the other end is the tutorial in Driver.
It’s bad.
Or rather, it would be bad if it existed.
It’s bad by default.
The original Driver has a notoriously hard
opening sequence.
The first mission puts you in a car inside
a parking garage.
You play as an undercover cop trying to get
inside a crime ring by posing as their wheelman.
To pass their test, you have to check off
a list of driving stunts one by one.
Ok, no problem…
wait.
There’s also a timer.
That’s a pretty short timer, too.
Uh oh.
So…
HOW do you do these stunts?
Why isn’t this burnout working?
What do you mean by ‘Slalom’?
Yeahhhh, good luck!
When you’re in the parking garage, there
aren’t any instructions, or how-tos, or
even a way to see if you’re doing the stunt
in a way the game recognizes.
It’s pretty easy to look like you’ve done
a reverse 180, but not the right kind.
Until you complete the tasks while darting
around - without wrecking the car on the poles,
mind you - you’re stuck here.
The parking garage stage won’t tell you this,
but the manual says you’re supposed to have
done the separate ‘Training’ mode already,
where you get to watch the game do the stunts
for you.
Even the fact that there IS a training mode
is a little tough to find in this stylish
main menu.
You have to resist the temptation to go right
into the game.
The parking garage segment is a test with
no instruction, throwing whoever shows up
directly into the deep end.
Without clearly steering a new player into
where the game expects you to pick up the
right info, Driver’s opening chapter can
easily leave players stranded on the side
of the road.
Good Design
Games about mystery are fun.
Uncovering secrets to find the truth is incredibly
satisfying, but that type of game is trickier
to make than most.
When you're trying to build a game about the
joy of exploration, discovery, and mystery,
how you roll out information to players can
make or break the whole thing.
On one side, you can't be handhold-y.
The more you have a game point out, the less
of that core discovery is left for players
to do.
But if you don't point out enough so a player
could connect the dots themselves, that feels
like a frustrating game where puzzle solutions
come out of nowhere.
You need a light touch if you want the player
to have a good time connecting the dots.
Tunic finds that balance.
Tunic is a game all about discovery in a fashion
similar to the original NES Zelda.
You wash up on a beach in a mysterious land
and are expected to figure things out from
there.
You have a large amount of freedom of where
you can go at the start, including places
you aren't prepared for yet, and everything
you find on the island is part of a big mystery
to solve.
Tunic's nods to the original Zelda go beyond
the aesthetics and non-linear structure, though.
The game gives little clues through collectible
pages of an in-game instruction book.
The book's graphic design harkens back to
physical instruction books.
There are even little marks drawn in pencil
that make it look like someone else had been
playing the game and making notes along the
way, and you’re just picking up where they
left off.
These manual pages all have tiny pieces of
information about the world, the game's mechanics,
and special features you have to connect yourself.
There's info on where key items are, how to
upgrade your stats, maps of dungeons, combat
mechanics, enemy behaviors, and tips.
The manual isn’t just written normally,
though.
A lot of it is in a symbolic language that
you have to decipher over the course of the
game.
The whole thing is a nod to the bygone era
of instruction manual tutorialization, where
games sometimes relied heavily on the physical
books that came with most games rather than
putting necessary information to play within
the game itself.
Yet, the game figured out how to update that
concept to work in a modern context.
Tunic strings you along with a collectible
that does that job and helps keep the game’s
structure from becoming too frustrating to
play.
All the information you need is right there
in front of you, but not exactly when you
need it, and not in a way you can just read
without working a little for it.
If you took away that extra decoding step,
the game would feel like it was spoon-feeding
you answers.
Take away the manual entirely, and the game
would be unbelievably obtuse.
By making the instructions part of the mystery-uncovering
process, Tunic put in a lot of work to present
its information carefully, preserving the
mystery and making it fun to solve.
Bad Design
Symbols are tricky things.
They’re all little games of misdirection.
Any time you use a symbol to communicate something,
you’re relying on whoever sees it to infer
your meaning without explicitly explaining
what it is you mean.
Even in the best conditions, that’s gonna
be super prone to miscommunication.
But when you’re working in a medium like
video games, where the product is usually
meant to be translated and localized across
dozens of different cultures and languages,
the risk of miscommunication goes up exponentially.
Not every symbol means the same thing across
cultures.
Symbols are prone to getting lost in translation
- the visual equivalent of a pop culture reference,
if you don’t think them through all the
way.
Like this fun lil’ guy.
Most of my audience is in the English-speaking
world, so you might not know what this means
in Japan.
To me as an American, this conveys the essence
of Sprite.
Mmm, Sprite.
But this is called the Shoshinsha mark, and
it’s the universal symbol for ‘This car
is driven by a new driver’.
In Japan, that symbol has become so ubiquitous,
it’s turned into a symbol that tries to
communicate the idea of ‘Noviceness’.
In Japanese games, that inferred meaning pops
up a lot.
Like in Splatoon.
The background of the first name plate you
get in Splatoon 3 has the Shoshinsha mark
as part of its design.
It’s evoking that the player is a beginner.
To the Japanese.
To everyone else, it’s just a cool design
flourish thing.
It got swapped out from the ‘Are you a first-time
player’ screen in Kirby Super Star.
It was used in some DDR games to indicate
songs in the lowest difficulty mode that were
especially easy to play.
It’s in Katamari Damacy as… oh, they’re
just stickers here, that’s fine.
Now, this isn’t a bad design as in its ugly
or anything, it’s just that this symbol
is not able to communicate the idea it’s
trying to communicate when it goes across
cultures.
The Playstation controller layout ran into
another example.
The cross and circle symbols are widely used
stand-ins for ‘Yes’ and ‘No’ in Japan,
which doesn’t perfectly match up with their
meanings outside of there.
The circle is located on the right side of
the 4-button layout, which is not where the
usual ‘confirmation’ button was located
on popular consoles of the time.
Often, that’s what you’d hit if you wanted
to cancel.
Without that cultural connection of a circle
meaning ‘Yes’ and without the implied
layout hints of which location is for confirming,
games that were localized all had to fend
for themselves.
You got a mishmash of some games leaving the
circle button as confirm and some switching
it to cross.
Worse yet, since their functions are directly
opposed, if a player were to auto-pilot, they
could easily do exactly the opposite action
from what they wanted to do.
A couple years ago, Sony made the non-Japanese
behavior the standard for everybody, including
Japan.
I’m sure that’s not confusing for anyone.
Of course, translation can run into a similar
problem sometimes.
Kanji are symbols too, in a way.
When they’re partially used as decorative
elements, they are sometimes just left untranslated.
Each monado symbol means something specific
in Xenoblade, though trying to localize it
in-game might not work too well.
If you saw ‘BUSTER’ written on the sword
instead of this, that doesn’t really have
the same visual pop.
Remember that localization isn’t just about
translation.
These sorts of symbolic, cultural and contextual
quirks are part of the job, and make each
game a unique challenge to release in a new
market.
Head down to the comments.
We’re looking for new ideas for the next
episode of Good Design, Bad Design.
If you’ve got a beautiful, artistic game,
some clever UI system you haven’t seen before,
some real disastrous menu layouts, or anything
else you want us to talk about, let us know.
We’ve got other episodes in the playlist
at the end of the video if you’re looking
for inspiration, or just want to see us tear
down Gungnir’s fonts again.
That’s always fun.
*chill vibes outro from Splatoon 3*