Welcome back to another installment of Good
Design, Bad Design where we look how games
approach graphic design.
While there’s a lot of overlap between the
two, good graphic design isn't exactly the
same as good art.
Good graphic design covers things like menus,
UI, camera work, color choice, font choice,
animation, character design.
The Presentation of Information.
We have 6 more examples today, and while some
of these examples get into concepts that are
connected to each other, they aren't strictly
paired up.
Also, remember that beautiful games can have
bad graphic design and vice versa.
Games with bad graphic design aren't necessarily
bad games, but good graphic design can help
make a good game into a great one.
Ok, let’s begin!
Good Design
It's been years since we had a flood of game
series making the jump from 2D to 3D, but
it's easy to forget how important that period
of gaming history was.
So much of what we think of as standard in
today's games was first designed in that era.
There are a select few games that stand out
as the best of the best in 2D to 3D conversion
Mario 64, Ocarina of Time, and I'd argue
Metroid Prime belongs right next to them.
The beauty of Metroid Prime's 3D adaptation
is not just that it kept the classic structure
and exploration intact.
It's in how it kept the same atmosphere and
sense of isolation that makes up Metroid's
identity.
To maintain the atmosphere, the designers
at Retro Studios had to make some big changes.
3D could let them make a stronger connection
between the player and Samus, but they would
need to overhaul how the game was presented.
They had to put the player into Samus’ shoes
or more accurately, her head.
Metroid Prime’s helmet HUD is more immersive
than the HUD of the 2D Metroid games.
It still shows all of the same info from the
2D games - energy meters, missile ammunition,
and maps - but now it adds new elements like
lock on indicators, hazard meters, weapons,
visors and radar.
Elements that feel like what Samus would actually
use, building that information right into
her visor.
The new visor framing lets the designers add
some interesting mechanics, too.
After taking some... weird input from Miyamoto,
Retro added things like the x-ray and thermal
filters, and then used them for puzzle solving.
The filters wouldn't have made sense without
the first person view and visor framing, but
they also added another layer to the environments
and the feeling of a more realistic space
for Samus to travel through.
The visor's scanner was new too, and gave
a way to show optional gameplay tips and storytelling.
There are so many other little touches that
strengthen the connection between the player
and the character.
Lots of these techniques are common now, but
for the time it was a real step forward in
immersion.
Flashes of light will reveal the reflection
of Samus’ eyes.
The way the helmet slightly shifts as you
look around.
The alien splatter from exploding enemies.
The electrical interference from taking damage.
The raindrops that INCREASE in frequency as
you look up in the rain.
The line between the player and Samus is blurred,
done as realistically as they could with the
hardware of the day, and the change in perspective
immerses Metroid Prime’s players in the
same atmosphere and sense of isolation that
made the series a classic in the first place.
Bad Design
So...Hover was a thing.
Oh I’m sorry
*papers shuffling*
Hover: REVOLT
OF GAMERS… mmm.
Hover is a multiplayer focused open world
parkour game that was pitched as a spiritual
successor to Jet Set Radio.
It's got the premise, art style and music
to match.
But the UI design is… eeeeuuaaaggghhhuuugh.
Hover's UI design is impractical and sloppy.
There are big, sweeping problems with almost
every element in your HUD.
The objective list only shows 3 and a half
objectives and you can't choose which objectives
to track like in, say, Borderlands, or most
other quest-driven games.
There’s a Crazy Taxi style waypoint arrow
that points towards either your next objective
or the nearest quest giver.
Annnd it can flip flop between the two at
a moment's notice and there’s no way to
lock it to an objective or waypoint.
There are things like the chat log and player
list that don't need to be on screen all the
time.
But they are.
All of these text boxes aren't scrollable
without pausing the game, and it's pretty
clunky to take up screen space all the time
to just see the last thing someone said.
Then there’s the area map that’s hands
down one of the worst maps I’ve ever seen.
Just look at it.
There’s no detail.
Only a few of the landmarks are shown with
these city walls at the edge of the map and
these two highway roads.
These other signs don’t really tell you
anything and with the world’s vertical design
it’s hard to tell where the quest givers
actually are.
Inside each UI element is another problem.
Hover uses a tiny, crowded font in different
backgrounds that make the game's text difficult
to read.
Here's a quick typography lesson.
There are three main kinds of spacing.
There’s ‘kerning’, the spacing between
a pair of letters, There’s 'tracking' which
is the letter spacing applied evenly to a
group of letters and there is 'leading' which
is the vertical spacing between lines of text.
A graphic designer can adjust these properties
for different stylistic effects and it's a
subtle part of what makes good and readable
typography.
But you can royally screw it up too.
Hover's text tracking and leading are both
uncomfortably close.
The font they use throughout the game has
some weird design choices for some of the
letter shapes.
The 'r' and 's' are tiny.
The 'o', 'a', and even ‘g’ could easily
be mistaken for each other.
The cramped typeface doesn’t match well
with the game’s tone and was clearly designed
around the PC.
The type is the same on the console versions,
where there have been tons of complaints about
how small the type is, especially on the Switch.
The header typefaces in the other UI elements
also have sloppy typesetting and placement.
The hard-to-read font is then put on a semi-transparent
background, which makes it even harder to
read - especially when it covers the glowing
game environments.
Yes, you can get used to the interface, but
one of the points of good design is to get
information to someone easily.
Hover's UI design makes it tougher to play
the game and there’s no good reason that
that should be the case.
But even if Hover has some major problems,
at least it gave the world a couple new Hideki
Naganuma tracks.
[music from Hover]
Ahhhhh.
Maybe Hover's not so bad.
Eugh, nevermind.
Good Design
Journey was a major influence for me wanting
to study graphic design.
It’s masterful in its minimalistic storytelling
and that minimalism bleeds into all of Journey's
design.
Journey has no traditional UI, but there’s
one piece that helps drive its players through
the game in a way that works perfectly with
it's narrative.
I’m talking about the scarf.
Love that scarf.
Hidden throughout Journey are these ancient
glyphs that, when collected, magically transform
into an elegant red and orange scarf.
The scarf pattern represents energy that allows
you to jump.
As you jump, your energy depletes and is only
refilled by touching other pieces of fabric
like these bridges, cloth creatures or another
player.
As you go through the game and find more of
these symbols, the scarf expands and so does
your energy.
Find enough symbols and you’re basically
able to fly.
You don’t actually need a long scarf to
finish Journey but it gorgeously flows in
the wind and the jump feels so empowering.
The scarf is valuable for the mechanics it
provides, but Journey is a game about meeting
random people and helping each other through
the experience.
Without words or numbers or titles, the scarf
becomes a symbol for a player's experience
in the game.
Jumping could’ve just been tied to a stamina
or MP bar in the corner but by making it part
of your character, it connects the player
to the narrative and is a starting point for
random players online to form a bond with
each other.
The hidden glyphs give you a reason to explore
and to cooperate, with the more experienced
players guiding newer ones to the glyphs.
All just for a bigger scarf.
Without words and without a traditional interface,
Journey's designers give an item that feels
like a gift and a reward.
The presentation of Journey’s scarf is a
lovely design and is part of the foundation
of an ambitious, wordless narrative.
Bad Design
Video Games have a quirk that makes them trickier
to design.
The fun of a game often comes from overcoming
a challenge.
But, for single player games, a game designer
has to design both the problem and the solution.
They create the villain, and the hero.
The burning hospital, and the firehose.
Wait, this makes game design sound like an
extortion racket.
Huh.
Anyway, the tricky part is in the balance
- if the problem overwhelms the tools used
to solve it, the game becomes frustrating.
If the solution is overpowered, the game can
become boring.
It's easy to think of something like an overpowered
weapon or a broken magic spell that can upset
the balance of a game, but it's not just a
problem for systems based around numbers.
Overpowered tools can also compromise other
elements of a game's design, like its UI and
art direction.
A perfect example of this shows up with Detective
Vision in Batman: Arkham Asylum.
Detective Vision is a visual filter that lets
players get a clear view of the environment,
highlighting the location and status of enemies
and key interactables through walls.
It’s incredibly useful.
In fact I’d argue that it’s almost too
useful.
There are no gameplay downsides to flipping
it on and there’s nothing that keeps you
from using it all the time.
Many players develop a reliance on the tool
because without it, they feel blind.
Without it, enemies and objects are so much
harder to see and track.
Players rarely turn the mode off in order
to keep that sense of tactical control over
the situation.
It fits Batman's style, but you are looking
at the game through an ugly filter that hurts
the game's presentation and atmosphere.
Rocksteady tried to tweak the later Arkham
games by obscuring even more of your surroundings.
They wanted to encourage players to toggle
Detective Vision off, but it was still just
too useful, and a lot of players kept using
it as a crutch.
Batman isn’t the only game with something
like Detective Vision.
Similar visual filters in other games are
pretty divisive among fans.
Some see it as a lazy way to bypass environmental
design issues.
It's a patch over a common problem for games
with more realistic art styles.
Key objects can blend into the environment,
and it can be tough to know what you can interact with.
THIS without a highlight is very easy to miss.
Some games like Insomniac’s Spider-Man strike
a better balance visually by showing the information
you'd get from a detective vision mode without
covering up the rest of the picture.
It's another tough balance to strike, and
there are no straightforward answers or even
universally loved ones.
But at the very least, useful interface tools
like Detective Vision shouldn't obscure a
game's art direction.
Good Design
[music from Pyre]
Top tier visual novels like Ace Attorney,
Doki Doki Literature Club, Danganronpa or
Supergiant Games’ Pyre live and die on how
they tell their stories.
I like Pyre's fantasy basketball element,
but I think the game is at its best during
the downtime between matches, where you're
learning more about the Downside and its residents.
The way Pyre presents its backstory is excellent,
with its gorgeous typography and artwork but
also with the subtle decisions that Supergiant
has made to make the reading experience feel
effortless.
The best visual novels, like the best stories,
reveal themselves at an even rate.
Fast enough to keep your interest and in bite-size
pieces to not overwhelm readers.
Visual novels only have a few tools to use
to pace the game - their story is primarily
told through their text boxes and one of the
ways to affect pacing is through the line
length inside those text boxes.
According to Joseph Humfrey, a UX designer
at the game developer Inkle, as a rule of
thumb, the optimal line length should be about
5 to 15 words per line to keep the dialogue
from feeling long winded or too wordy.
Shorter dialogue chunks work great with Pyre’s
emotive character portraits.
It's not a technique unique to Pyre, but the
shorter text segments let the character expressions
change more frequently, and let little visual
flairs punctuate specific moments of the story
with much more precision.
Having longer text chunks would make these
expressions a little clunkier, with either
a longer wait for a tone change or a disconnect
between the emotions being shown in the portrait
and the emotions in the text.
Pyre also does a great job with describing
people, places, things and concepts with highlighted
keywords.
Hover over these highlighted words to get
a deeper explanation, without an immersion-breaking
script change where the characters explain
concepts they would naturally know about.
It's also a great way to help people who might’ve
put the game down for a while get back up
to speed quickly, without having to detour
to a long encyclopedia entry or story recap.
The rollover boxes are used for non-dialogue
information too.
Rolling over the environment shows flavor
text and extra details describing what your
characters are doing.
It's not plot-critical stuff, so making the
player seek out that information specifically
is a good idea.
But making it still easy to access is a stylish
and elegant way to present all the little
details that make Pyre a vibrant world.
Bad Design
Pop quiz.
Can you spot the UI problems in Gungnir?
I bet you can!
Ready?
Go!
[game audio from Gungnir]
Did you see the problem?
Was it...
everything?
Gungnir has one of the busiest, most disjointed,
unintuitive and intimidating interfaces that
I’ve ever seen.
Gungnir is a fine enough strategy RPG up there
with Final Fantasy Tactics and Disgaea but
the UI just leaves an awful first impression
that makes everything seem more complicated
than it really is, and scares away potential
players.
We could just nitpick parts of the design
(and we will) but Gungnir’s core problem
is that it has some horrendous visual hierarchy.
Visual hierarchy is all about arranging your
content in a way that implies the importance
of each piece.
A well designed hierarchy makes information
more organized and digestible.
Fonts, type sizes and compositions can be
tweaked to help naturally lead the player’s
eye around the screen to give them a better
understanding of what's important and what's
not as important.
This upgrade screen from Moonlighter has a
nice hierarchy.
The player’s options on the left are the
most prominent elements, followed by the upgrade
description on the right which leads your
eye from top to bottom with an image of the
upgrade, the upgrade title, the price, and
a detailed description.
Simple and easy to read.
You know where to look.
Gungnir’s the opposite.
It floods you with information and while most
of it does matter, there's no clear pattern
to why the information is laid out as it is,
and there’s tons of conflicting signals
and redundancies that clutter up the screen.
It takes more than a few seconds to really
know what you’re looking at.
Gungnir's tutorials could have helped clear
things up, but they only do so much to teach
you what all of the game's elements mean.
There are soooo many systems at play here,
and if they're all screaming for your attention
it gets bewildering very quickly.
I think Gungnir was going for style, but you
can't create much of a style by just flooding
the screen with as many elements as you can
think of.
Look at something as simple as the opening
battle screen that gives you the conditions
for victory and defeat.
Here we have 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10,
11, 12, 13.
13 different type treatments here.
Elements that should be grouped together are
styled in a way that separates them and everything
is misaligned.
It’s just basic win-lose conditions.
There doesn’t need to be this much text.
The character stats screen has tons of pointless
infographics that are less clear than a simple
numbered stat.
You seriously DO NOT need these bars or arrows
here.
Gungnir is a prime example of why graphic
design matters in games.
The busy and convoluted nature of the interface
is a wall that will inevitably turn some people
away and those who can look past it, still
have to work around it.
Good graphic design can be subtle, and sometimes
hard to nail down, but it's something worth
studying and something that all games can
use to put their best foot forward.
[Chill vibes outro music from Metroid Prime]