Congratulations on making it to the 11th installment
of Good Design, Bad Design.
Or you skipped straight to this one.
Either way works.
You can start here and catch up on the other
episodes later.
Like always, we're going over more case studies
of video games that showcase good and bad
principles of graphic design.
Graphic design covers things like menus, UI,
UX, color choice, font choice, animation,
character design.
The Presentation of Information.
Also, remember that good games can have bad
graphic design and vice versa.
I'm taking some of my favorite games to task,
so don't sweat it if your favorites are in
a Bad Design.
If you have any suggestions for games you’d
like to see in a Good Design or a Bad Design
let us know in the comments.
Just to shake things up a little, this episode
will pair up concepts, one good and one bad
segment for each.
First up is the pairing of money and this
sponsorship.
What if I gave you 5 minutes to stop elite
super-hackers from seeing your downloads,
bank info, files and other internet activities,
but you needed to do it WHILE you watch region-blocked
streaming content?
Impossible!
What kind of super-service could do those
things?
Oh my God, it’s today’s sponsor, ExpressVPN.
ExpressVPN is a layer of protection that keeps
prying eyes away from your data and ensures
that 100% of your internet traffic is encrypted,
which keeps you safe at even the sketchiest
of public WiFi hot-spots.
But my favorite part is how easy it makes
it to get around region locking on streaming
services like Netflix.
With just a couple clicks, ExpressVPN lets
me change my online location and explore different
Netflix libraries around the world, which
gives me access to thousands of new movies
and TV shows.
I can connect to UK servers and watch Fawlty
Towers and Top Gear on Netflix with super-fast
streaming speeds.
That’s worth it right there!
ExpressVPN is the top-rated VPN provider from
CNET, The Verge, Wired, and many more.
Find out how you can get 3 months free by
clicking the link in the description below:
https://ExpressVPN.com/designdoc Thanks, ExpressVPN!
Good Design
Not everything in a game is meant to be interactable.
Since games are a constructed, unfamiliar
space, game designers need to signal in some
way which parts of the game world are interactable
and which ones aren't.
Without that signal, what is and is not an
important object will be confusing to the
game's players.
Way too many old point-and-click adventure
games made key items look just like the background
scenery, which frustrated players.
So many games did it that they invented a
term for it, the 'Pixel Hunt.'
No one wants a pixel hunt.
So if you're making art assets for a game,
you'll need to do something to differentiate
interactable and decorative items.
But what can you do?
And how do you make a signal that doesn't
look so out of place that it breaks immersion?
You've gotta be subtle.
One technique you'll be familiar with is parallax.
This is used all the time in platformers.
For background elements in 2D games, parallax
is super useful to signal which parts of the
scene are in the distance.
Parallax refers to how background elements
will move at varying speeds, which emulates
how objects far off in the distance will hide
behind closer elements.
Implicitly, the distant items won't be interactable
to your character, so that alone helps signal
that those objects are decorative.
Another great way to indicate distance is
through desaturating colors.
Desaturated backgrounds make it look like
you're seeing them through an atmospheric
haze, which again suggests a lot of space
between you and them thar hills.
NES Mario 3 hills?
No haze, mostly no parallax.
It just looks like scenery for a... stage...play…
Huh.
Games like Guacamelee, though?
Parallax and desaturation.
Look at that.
That's way back there.
For foreground elements, signaling that an
item is interactable is a little more free-form.
Let's look at HAL Labs' Part-Time UFO.
You fly this little UFO around and use your
little crane to pick up little objects to
complete little jobs for a little money.
So figuring out what parts of the world can
be picked up with your crane is incredibly
important for the game's art direction to
make clear.
Part-Time UFO does it by playing with the
color saturation and the outlines of the objects.
The game's backgrounds have a ton of charming
animated characters and fun scenery to give
a lot of personality to the locations, but
those elements are not supposed to be interactable.
They use parallax scrolling and desaturation
to suggest distance, and that distance also
implies that you're not going to be picking
up this crazy circus dolphin with your crane.
Objects in the foreground, however, are differentiated
by their outlines.
Items you can pick up have heavy black outlines.
It's an easy signal that highlights without
distracting.
Non-interactable objects have thinner outlines.
After you get used to the signal, the game
will play around with the expectation it sets.
This sumo wrestler has a thick outline, except
around the arms.
He can't be picked up by his arms.
The game's visual design language consistency
signals a lot of subtle rules of the game
world without stopping and telling you directly
with a tutorial or something.
The game will also hide secret interactable
objects in the background and hint at them
with hidden goal images.
The items intentionally blend into the background
a little, but the outlines are your clue that
they're still interactable.
It creates a nice 'aha' moment when you spot
it, all thanks to the game's consistent visual
language.
Part-Time UFO's use of outlines, parallax,
and desaturation help clarify the gameplay
while giving the art directors plenty of leeway
to let the game's quirky charm shine through.
Bad Design
When contrast goes wrong, it can go really
wrong.
Bad contrast issues can cause a chain reaction
that might make the game itself practically
unplayable.
Like Sonic Lost World.
Sonic Lost World has bonus stages that play
like a circus-themed Breakout.
But it's on the Wii U, so you have to use
the Wii U gamepad touch screen to move the
platform with your finger.
You launch Sonic and Tails into the air, so
they hit some balloons that break open and
free the animals within.
Sounds like a perfectly decent bonus stage
so far.
Now destroy all the contrast.
It's really, really easy to lose track of
your player characters.
The game's camera on the TV half is zoomed
out to see the entire stage at once, making
your characters super tiny.
The camera is slightly zoomed in on the gamepad,
but the characters are still very small, and
the camera is tied to the platform you control,
so you can't see the whole field there either.
Neither screen is ideal to use.
When you launch, your character goes into
their ball form.
There's a little glow around your characters
that does do a little bit to help you keep
track of where you are when you're starting.
Then you hit a balloon.
Where's Sonic?
Your character immediately exits their ball
form, changing the silhouette you were tracking
from a ball to a tiny amorphous noodle arm
sprite with a lighter color palette.
But no time to care about that because there's
literally animals and fireworks bursting out
from exactly where your character sprite is.
The animals are a little bigger than your
character and even obscure the screen.
The most important thing the player is supposed
to track is being covered up by glorified
confetti on top of a neon, warm-colored circus-y
background.
And now you lost.
Of course you lost.
You never had a chance.
But even good games can get the color contrast
wrong.
Controversial opinion incoming!
Get ready for it…
Tetris Effect has contrast problems.
I love the game, and it's an incredible audiovisual
experience through and through, but it's definitely
not my first choice if I just want to play
some Tetris for Tetris' sake.
Usually, Tetris games are very good with color
contrast.
Take Tetris 99.
Bright, clear, colorful pieces on a plain
dark background.
Each piece is color-coded, so you know what's
coming next just from catching a glimpse in
your periphery—great contrast, easy to read.
Tetris Effect is sometimes that good, but
also sometimes the exact opposite of that.
Some of the stages and themes forego clarity
to develop a certain vibe.
Pieces are usually not color-coded.
The particle effects for clearing lines can
be intense, which is again great for setting
a vibe but not great for clarity.
For less experienced Tetris players on more
difficult stages, the theming can get in the
way of planning ahead and seeing precisely
what you need to do to persevere.
Now even though the contrast is clearly an
issue in places, I can't fault Tetris Effect
too much.
These problems are sacrifices made in service
to a greater purpose.
Tetris Effect is supposed to be a trance-inducing
journey through artistic landscapes, with
Tetris there to help you zone out and get
into the groove.
If I want to play Tetris with clear eyes and
a full heart, I'll boot up Tetris 99.
But if I want a Tetris EXPERIENCE, then the
contrast problems are a small price to pay
for the bigger effect.
Depending on your design goals, if you want
to go for something spectacular and stylish,
you will often risk sacrificing readability
to some extent.
Sometimes you can work a little harder and
strike a solid balance, but sometimes you'll
have to make a tradeoff.
Just make it worth it in the end.
Good Design
Whenever you hear someone talk about how ‘polished’
a game is, it can sound pretty vague.
What is polish anyway?
It’s a lot of little things, but a big factor
contributing to how ‘polished’ a game
feels is its animation.
Traditionally, there are 12 principles of
animation, and back in Volume 8, we analyzed
how Cuphead uses one of them, Anticipation,
to make the gameplay feel excellent while
staying true to its cartoon aesthetic.
But Anticipation isn’t the only principle
you need to adapt to make good game animations.
Let’s start at the top.
The 12 principles of animation are a list
of techniques that help an animator make more
realistic, livelier, and more exciting animations.
They are:
Squash and stretch, which helps give an animated
object a sense of material and weight.
Anticipation, which helps the viewer prepare
and predict the action to come.
Staging, the presentation or framing of an
animation.
It helps make clear what’s important in
a scene.
Pose to Pose and Straight Ahead Action, which
are ways for an animator to think about what
to draw to make an object move from one position
to another.
Follow Through and Overlapping Action, which
gives an animated object a sense of realistic
physics, and therefore more natural motion.
Slow In, Slow Out, which also anchors an object
in realistic physics and helps keep the movements
from feeling too jerky.
Arcs, which emulates how real motion tends
to follow… arcs.
Not kidding.
Animating in straight lines can look weird.
Secondary Action, where moving multiple parts
of an object at once helps make the animation
more interesting to look at.
Timing, which dictates how fast it appears
an animated object is moving.
Exaggeration, which can be more interesting
than 100% realistic movement, and helps leverage
animation’s greatest asset - its ability
to create its own reality.
Solid drawing, which helps make a 2D drawing
look like it’s a 3D object.
And Appeal, which is pretty much just making
your character cool.
There are a ton of great videos that go into
much more detail about the basics of the 12
principles, especially how they apply to traditional
animation.
But for now, let’s see how the principles
are put to use in a game.
How about Hyper Light Drifter?
Hyper Light Drifter’s animation is great.
But it’s easy to overlook WHY it looks great.
It’s not because the pixel art is beautiful,
even though it is.
The secret sauce is how Hyper Light Drifter
nails the fundamentals, and just because they’re
fundamentals doesn’t mean they’re easy
to do.
Let’s look at the two major actions you’ll
be seeing throughout the game: the dash and
the basic sword attack.
The dash action is only 4 frames long, shifting
between 3 different sprite poses and 8 frames
of recovery at 30 FPS.
In that tiny number of frames, they cram in
a ton of principles.
From idle, the character goes into their dashing
pose immediately.
Like in Cuphead, the Anticipation for a player
character is absent, which makes the character
feel much snappier, and isn’t as necessary
because it’s the player themselves choosing
to start the motion.
The player knows what’s coming next without
the Anticipation.
There’s exaggeration on the back leg to
emphasize the speed of the dash.
The overlapping action on the cape implies
how the air is being pushed into it.
Two frames are used on this same pose, and
the cape follows an Arc downwards as it falls.
The next frame is the end of the dash, with
the character bringing both legs back in as
he prepares to stop, going from stretch to
squash.
This frame transitions into the longer recovery
phase of the move.
For the first recovery frame, the Drifter
shifts his pose as he’s coming to a sudden
stop and shifts his weight back with legs
planted firmly in the ground.
The difference between this frame and the
last sells us on the speed of the action.
He stays in this pose, and some more overlapping
action happens with his cape as it flutters
forward for a few frames, implying the cape’s
weight and volume through solid drawing.
The last few frames show the Drifter returning
to his idle pose, ready to be controlled again.
It's a super basic animation, but it's very
fundamentally sound.
It's enhanced by special effects that help
emphasize and sell the dash's speed and supernatural
power and helps make it more readable in the
middle of a fight.
The red line follows the Drifter and an afterimage
draws your eye in the direction of the dash.
The masked animation of a diamond symbol also
plays with a visual motif present throughout
the game and gives a handy little reference
point for the dash's distance.
Hyper Light Drifter’s slash is an even shorter
animation: 10 frames total.
There is a little anticipation in the first
frame, which helps add to the feeling of momentum
and power the slash has.
The second frame has a clear, full arc with
a beautiful cyan smear frame.
The third frame transitions to the recovery
phase with the sword behind the character's
back with more overlapping motion on the cape
for the next 4 frames, similar to the dash.
The small number of frames is an application
of timing, and it actually helps make the
slash feel punchy and quick - exactly what
you want for a commonly used move like the
basic slash.
The extra frames of recovery at the end both
act to embellish the motion with overlapping
action on the cape but also create a little
space to let players follow up with additional
slashes without having to return to the idle
pose for each, which would look very stilted
and awkward.
With so few actual animation frames, though,
it helps to exaggerate and embellish to really
sell the action.
The smear frame with the sword arc is a good
start, but you can do more.
When you actually land a hit on an enemy,
Hyper Light Drifter sells the impact with
a screen shake and blood spatter animation
to confirm the hit and freezes the Drifter
on the first recovery frame for about 5 frames
before resuming the animation like normal.
Quick and easy, no extra work required for
the animators, but it's still very effective.
Each of these animations happens in the blink
of an eye, but by cramming them with solid,
fundamentally sound animation techniques and
impactful special effects and embellishments,
Hyper Light Drifter's animations are economical
and outstanding.
But what does it look like when you DON’T
stick to the principles?
It’s probably fine… right?
Right?
Bad Design
You ever see that image of what cookies look
like if you skip one of the ingredients?
Let’s do that for animation.
While not necessary for every animation, squash
and stretch is great for emphasizing speed,
weight, elasticity, and impact even when used
sparingly in more realistic animation.
Without it, an animation might not be as punchy,
satisfying, or expressive, maybe even a bit
dull.
No anticipation is OK for player characters
in action games, but not for computer-controlled
characters.
If you want to make a cheap boss in an old
fighting game, though, there’s no easier
way to do it than to take normal moves and
remove the anticipation.
No staging can mislead and confuse players.
If you don’t emphasize the important bits,
they will get lost in the shuffle.
Or if your camera glitches out and points
somewhere it shouldn’t, that’s bad staging.
If you pick the wrong technique in pose to
pose and straight ahead action, you can make
inconsistent and unnatural movements.
Straight ahead action works well for effects,
and pose to pose makes it a little easier
to animate characters in action.
No pose to pose can tend to make characters
kinda… do their own thing.
Like animation improv.
Maybe you can pull it off better than this,
but no guarantees.
No follow through and overlapping action make
animated objects look less real.
Hair and cloth are especially prone to seeming
off without it.
It also can highlight keyframes rather than
making them blend in with the rest of the
action.
No slow in, slow out is the quickest way to
remove the feeling of real-world physics from
an animation.
Acceleration and deceleration look way more
natural than an immediate start or stop.
Without decent arcs, your characters might
look unnaturally stiff.
Starting with a motion-captured performance
or using references can get rid of a lot of
this problem, but without it, you’ll have
to do a lot of subtle manual work to not make
your characters look like frozen robots.
Leaving out secondary action gives a certain
‘bad Flash movie’ vibe to the whole thing.
Don’t do that.
Unless you’ve got like an action figure
aesthetic going on, I guess that could work.
If you don’t use timing... well, literally,
it’s not animation anymore.
BAD timing, though, makes actions feel like
they have way less or way more ‘weight’
and ‘impact’ than they should.
No exaggeration is actually totally fine,
but stylistically it’s a little dry.
Rotoscoping is pretty much no exaggeration
animation.
No solid drawing makes your character look
like a shapeshifting blob.
Ahh!
Zelda again!
And no appeal is how you get this guy.
Not every game is going to get all of these
fundamentals right.
Plenty of great games have some janky animation
in there.
But if you study the fundamentals of animation,
you’ll have a better sense of what rules
you can break and when.
I put a link in the description for a video
with more detail on the 12 principles if you’re
interested.
Apply them well, and you can elevate your
game to a new level of polish.
*chill vibes from Tetris Effect*