Hey!
We’re launching a Patreon!
If you would like to help support the channel,
there’s a link in the description below
and at the end of the video.
Thank you to all our Patreon supporters.
[Music from Sonic Mania]
Welcome to the 3rd Edition of Good Design
Bad Design, where we look at how games approach
UI, UX, and graphic design.
Things like menus, UI, camera work, color
choice, font choice, animation, character
design, the presentation of information.
While graphic design and art are tied to each
other, a great artist isn’t necessarily
a great graphic designer.
Beautiful games can still have graphic design
elements that are cumbersome, ugly, or simply
incohesive with their respective games.
Great graphic design and presentation is almost
never the most important part of a game's
success but it can be the little extra thing
that pushes a 9 to a 10.
Oh, and one more thing before we start: these
examples aren’t necessarily paired up, but
there are a few parallels you can spot.
Let’s get to it!
Good Design
[Music from Persona 5]
It's time.
Persona 5's incredible UI is the inspiration
for this series, so it deserves its own segment.
Persona 5’s UI is an excellent mix of style
and functionality.
It isn’t necessarily a reinvention of anything,
instead it’s a stylish refinement of the
same sort of menu systems used in other games.
But the work done is SO good, it elevates
a very good JRPG into something astounding.
When there are people cosplaying as your menus,
you've done something right.
P5’s UI stands out partially because of
how well it’s tied to the game’s major
themes.
P5 is about thieves, will-power and rebellion.
It’s full of visual motifs to match those
themes - the ransom lettering used in the
main menu headers, graffiti, CG animations
of Joker swinging around between menus, and
aggressive motion graphics with tons of thick
and angular shapes.
The menu layouts creatively break many conventional
graphic design rules without looking ugly
or compromising functionality.
Individual words and letters in the headers
and subheaders of the type are ‘cohesively
incohesive’ in design with a varying baseline,
type size, and deliberate misalignments.
Breaking typographic rules like this can be
really easy to mess up but Masayoshi Sutou,
his team and the localization team pull it
off seamlessly.
The combat UI is stylish too, and it makes
the combat more engrossing.
Every option in P5 can be reached by a single
button, which lets battles flow smoothly - much
better than most traditional JRPG menus where
you're scrolling and picking everything.
The countless motion graphic and character
animations that play as you go through your
options makes selecting your next move feel
more visceral and satisfying.
The offset red silhouette that surrounds your
characters is a brilliant way to highlight
your character and connect it with the framing
of the battle UI.
Even if the novelty of these animations wears
off, the spectacle doesn’t get in the way,
distract or slow down the action.
P5's design is both high quality and high
quantity.
It goes above and beyond what it had to do.
While not every game should be this upfront
with its UI, Persona 5’s graphic design
is a selling point and the game wouldn't be
as memorable without it.
Bad Design
There was a time that I felt that Sonic Chronicles
was a good game.
I no longer feel that Sonic Chronicles is
a good game.
It’s a barely passable intro to JRPGs, but
really it's a boring slog.
But we’re not here for a full on review,
I just want to dunk on the presentation.
Because it’s unfinished.
The hand drawn environments are nicely rendered
but they feel SO BAD to explore.
They make the rough 3D models on top of them
look way worse.
These bad flash animation motion comic cutscenes.
Some character portraits seem like they were
designed for a different game.
The portrait outlines are inconsistent with
some portraits randomly using a different
outline color or just straight up not having
one.
The game is built for touch screens, but the
buttons are tiny for some reason.
Special moves use action commands that are
basically a poor man’s Elite Beat Agents.
There's no 'juiciness' to the execution either,
which makes them unsatisfying to hit on time.
THESE EYES?
THESE EYES!?
What’s with these eyes?
The presentation’s ROUGH.
Yes the game's on the DS, but that doesn't
mean it can't be better.
Hotel Dusk, The World Ends with You, Feel
The Magic, Elite Beat Agents.
These games have solid presentations despite
the limitations.
Well at least Sonic Chronicles looks the way
it sounds.
*dissonant audio*
Good Design
As much as I like the flash of P5, I also
love minimalistic UI design.
The more a game can strip away, the easier
it can be to focus on what matters.
If the game is still great and easy to understand
when there’s nothing left to cut, you know
it's built on a fantastic foundation.
Mini Metro is a game born from minimalism.
In Mini Metro, you manage a series of metro
stations through an interface inspired by
Harry Beck’s London Underground Tube Map.
You route out a number of colored transit
lines across stations represented by basic
shapes.
These stations will slowly appear over time
as either triangles, squares or circles or
rare stations with unusual shapes like crosses,
stars, or wedges.
As time ticks away, customers appear as tiny
shapes, and try to travel to their matching
station through your train lines.
Leave too many people waiting for a train,
and it's game over.
The challenge of Mini Metro is keeping your
transit lines running efficiently for as long
as possible with the limited amount of trains,
transit lines, and tunnels you have to work
with.
Mini Metro is brilliant at conveying a lot
of information in a chaotic, time sensitive
game, while keeping a minimalistic design.
Key information is easy to spot yet subtle
like how the game displays the overcrowding
mechanic.
A misaligned customer represents the station’s
capacity limit.
Any extra shapes will impatiently bounce around
as a radial time limit starts to fill up.
The music is soft ambient tones and very subtle
alert sounds that warn without distracting.
The iconography and typography here are as
clean as it gets and the framing always flows
smoothly.
The game never once cuts between the menus
and gameplay, instead it uses an assortment
of pans, blurs, and zooms for its transitions.
There aren't any jarring scene changes within
the game either.
There's a constant, barely noticeable zoom
out as you play, slowly revealing more and
more of the map where new stations may appear.
Without noticing it, the tiny corner you started
in slowly evolves into a vast network.
Mini Metro’s UI needs to be simple so things
don’t become too overwhelming as it gets
more hectic as you gain new train lines and
stations.
Its beautiful and recognizable aesthetic helps
players focus on what matters.
It’s a high speed management based puzzle
game stripped down to its essential core.
Bad Design
Functional UI is important, but it's really
a bare minimum.
Better are cohesive UIs, ones that feel like
they belong only in THEIR game.
Mortal Kombat X is totally solid as a game,
but its interface doesn't match with its identity.
In their recent games, Netherrealm Studios
uses a minimalist design.
It’s full of elegant white graphics and
serif typefaces to create a clean and sleek
design and it’s not BAD.
It’s not a fundamentals problem, just a
stylistic one.
The HUD during fights functions well and keeps
things focused on the action.
But for a game whose brand is over the top
violence a reserved UI comes across as a little
bland and is a mismatch in the context of
Mortal Kombat.
It saps the game's adrenaline a little bit,
both for players and for people watching at
home.
The character select menu has two rows of
portraits where everyone looks straight at
the camera with a default facial expression.
It says ‘School Picture Day’, not ‘Death
Tournament’.
No special framing, no visual motif, just
character models showing up top.
The main menu is functional, but looks like
two ideas were merged - one based around panels
and another based around a simple column of
options.
Like they couldn’t decide on one so they
used both.
The panels show the Faction War mode, DLC,
and the Living Towers mode, with the DLC store
front row center.
Gross.
Especially if you’ve just bought the game.
It’s weird that the other two panel options
have their own spot, Faction War and Living
Towers feel like they’d belong in other
submenus.
But then the DLC store would be on its own.
Maybe that's worse.
Some of the menu options are hard to read
as the white serif type treatments blend into
the background, even with the dark gradient.
There are other problems with the typeface
like in the Fighter Card menu which houses
one of my typographic pet peeves: dark text
on a dark background.
DUN DUN DUUUN ...don’t do this...just don’t...it
doesn’t read well.
These are minor issues, definitely not deal
breakers, but they do add up.
Minimalism can be a great design tool but
in this case it just doesn’t mesh with what
MK represents.
MK9 does this a million times better.
YEAH GET SOME!
Good Design
Nier Automata might have the strongest implementation
of diegetic UI I’ve ever seen.
It's not just that it’s a part of the game
world.
The UI is weaved into Nier's narrative and
elevates the experience to something that
could only be told effectively as a GAME.
Designed by Platinum’s Hisayoshi Kijima
under Yoko Taro’s direction, Automata’s
UI on its surface is put together quite well.
Both the main menu and the in-game UI use a
monochromatic beige color scheme that contrasts
well against the browns and greys of most
of NieR’s environments.
This color palette is a key part of Automata’s
visual identity and matches tonally with the
game and its characters, the emotionally suppressive
YoRHa units
The layout and type treatment are cold and
systematic, but the beige colors make the
UI surprisingly warm to look at.
An additional red-orange highlights either
critical information like new menu items or
various threats like damage within the life
bar.
This color scheme also matches the hacking
minigame to, as Kijima states in his developers
blog, “give the game a unified visual identity”.
The color scheme created some design challenges
- the use of other colors was very restricted.
In order to convey information like stat changes
within weapons, Kijima had to rely on other
things like transparency and thickness in
the type.
Small touches like a transparent grid texture
and shading near the edges go a long way to
make the menu feel less abstract and more
physical.
The UI is very solid, but that's not the amazing
part.
NieR Automata is one of the few games that
use UI as a core storytelling component.
The menu isn’t just an abstract interface
that’s exclusively there for the player.
It is the literal OS for YOUR characters,
2B and 9S.
Your settings, equipment, abilities, datalog,
and more are tied to how your characters function
in universe, not as a breaking of the 4th
wall.
9S: 'Ma'am? Are you there?
Can you hear me? Uh, helloooo?
Go ahead and adjust your settings so you can hear me, all right?'
My favorite part of NieR’s diegetic approach
is just how customizable it is.
Every UI element is treated as a “chip”.
Similar to the AP system in Kingdom Hearts,
the player is given a limited amount of space
for equipping color coded chips that grant
abilities, boost stats, or more uniquely,
display UI elements.
Health bars, experience bars, minimaps, markers,
cooldown indicators, enemy health and level
displays?
Each of these can be toggled at the player’s
preference.
Giving up these UI elements to open up space
for other chips gives Automata an unusual
avenue to play with risk vs reward.
It also ties the UI to the world and bridges
the gap between the player and the character.
When characters are hurt or hit with an EMP
blast, their health bars freak out, enemies
get mosaic’d out, visual filters are applied
to overwhelm and confuse your senses.
Some status effects disable your UI’s functionality.
NieR’s UI goes beyond just being a useful
interface and is used to great effect in its
narrative.
And without spoiling anything, it adds an
extra punch to key moments that couldn’t
have been done in any other type of media.
NieR shows just how much untapped potential
there is in the interaction between storytelling
and UI.
Bad Design
Fable 3 is...ambitious?
Let’s go with ambitious.
It's a Peter Molyneux game, so it comes with
the territory, but it’s especially true
with Fable 3’s menu design.
Unlike its predecessors, Fable 3’s interface
is diegetic.
There isn’t a traditional menu for managing
your character and inventory, not even a simple
pause menu (save for story events).
Instead when you hit the start button, your
character is magically teleported to a small
in-universe hub area, the Sanctuary.
This is where all inventory management is
handled and it feels pointless and terrible.
The Sanctuary is unnecessary and breaks the
game’s flow.
Having to walk around a hub for item management
accomplishes nothing that a traditional menu
couldn’t have done more effectively.
It doesn’t make the game more immersive
either.
It's jarring to have this weird pocket dimension
that you can just teleport to at any time.
Some games, like a lot of Zeldas, handle in-universe
menus just fine.
But you don't usually see it for a MAIN menu.
The main menu is just used too frequently,
so this approach then turns the menu from
something quirky to something tedious.
It’s an extra step that could’ve been
resolved with a normal menu, like in Fable
2.
Now don’t get me wrong, Fable 2’s menu
is no prize either but at least you could
still navigate it!
Some of the better diegetic menus like NieR
or Dead Space still work as more traditional
menus.
Fable 3 tried to be cute and took the idea
a bit too far and because of their effort,
you can now get trapped in the pause menu.
The sanctuary isn't the only problem - Fable
3’s UI is bad across the board.
There's no simple mini map to help get your
bearings.
The infamous sparkling trail only works SOME
of the time.
The shop menus are ugly with awkward empty
space and poorly displayed items.
Most interactions require you to hold the
input which both feels and looks clunky.
The minigames...
Pie Maker: 'You’ll have to pay for that.'
And the Road to Rule is an overly elaborate
skill tree that wastes your time by having
you run across and slowly open chests for
perks.
Fable 3’s UI IS an ambitious concept but,
it’s fundamentally flawed and is only made
worse by a poor execution.
Where NieR Automata’s diegetic interface
is deeply tied to its core and greatly enhances
both the game and story, Fable 3’s sanctuary
is clunky and ultimately adds nothing.
It seems as if it was made just for the sake
of it, and while it's admirable to try something
new, the most succe ssful new ideas are not
only ambitious, but purposeful.
Aim for both.
[Chill vibes outro music from NieR: Automata]