Honk.
We did it!
It’s the 50th episode of Design Doc, and
what better way to celebrate than with the
10th episode of Good Design, Bad Design.
Good Design Bad Design X.
The X stands for xtreme analysis of graphic
design and visual communication in games.
Xtreme menus, UI, UX, color choice, font choice,
animation, character design.
The xtreme presentation of information.
Quick reminder on the ground rules: Extremely
bad graphic design doesn’t mean it’s an
extremely bad game, and vice versa.
And we got an extremely good sponsor for this
episode.
If you want to learn how to make your own
extremely good designs, check out Skillshare!
Ok, I’ll stop with the X now.
I’ve been looking to learn some new skills
while I’ve been stuck inside, and Skillshare
has been a fantastic help for me.
Lately, I’ve been going through a class
called Logo Design With Grids: Timeless Style
from Simple Shapes.
It’s a fantastic set of tips and tricks
to help you create great looking logos with
just a pencil and paper.
George Bokhua takes you through the fundamentals
of logo design, why the grid is such a powerful
graphic design tool, and how to put the finishing
touches on your designs to make them polished,
professional, and versatile.
Skillshare is filled with amazing classes
like this.
They’re an online learning community with
classes covering animation, illustration,
music, creative writing, and dozens of other
topics for you to explore.
With Premium Membership, you get access to
EVERYTHING for less than $10 a month.
But even better - today you can get a free
trial of Skillshare.
The first 1000 people to click the link in
the description will get a 2 month free trial
of Premium Membership, so you can explore
your creativity.
Join Skillshare, it’s really good!
Good Design
One of my favorite things to do for a Good
Design, Bad Design segment is to highlight
visually gorgeous games that may not have
gotten their due.
I had heard a lot of praise about Gris’
art direction but it wasn’t until I finally
played it that I knew I had to highlight it
here.
Gris is gorgeous.
It’s a puzzle platformer with an atmospheric
story, and it’s definitely going for that
‘short art game with amazing visuals’
niche that games like Journey and Sayonara
Wild Hearts have filled before.
And it totally sticks the landing.
In Gris, you play as a shapeshifting girl
making her way through a ruined world, and
slowly restoring color to it as she goes.
And just like Journey, the game is centered
on visual and environmental abstract storytelling.
This one’s about the five stages of grief.
Fun!
The game part of Gris is a little bit more
developed than Journey, but Gris’ fantastic
art direction strikes just as impressive of
a balance between form and function as Journey
did.
First, Gris is a nearly wordless game.
There are a few controller prompts for new
abilities, but the game communicates most
of its mechanics through its visuals.
Gris uses visual cues and framing to direct
players through its environments, in both
subtle and overt ways.
In one early section, you have to move between
sheltered areas to avoid being caught in a
red sandstorm.
As the storm approaches, propellers spin,
banners blow and then a deep red washes over
the screen as the wind begins to howl.
Areas with a contrasting dark red background
lead the player to seek shelter within.
As new mechanics are introduced it’s not
long before more visual cues make it clear
what you must do next, even if the game isn’t
explicit about it.
But the game’s visuals also create a problem
the developers had to design around.
The flat art style makes it trickier to show
navigation cues.
The game’s heavy use of monochromatic color
schemes at the start makes it even tougher.
It’s really important to make it clear what
is and isn’t interactable in this sort of
2D environment.
The developers carefully adjusted the saturation
and brightness of the environmental colors
to highlight the solid objects, versus the
ones that are just window dressing.
In dark areas, or in places with a lot of
dark outlines, some platforms will have a
thin white line to differentiate it from background
elements.
Sometimes the difference in saturation is
extremely subtle like with these staircases.
The color for the stairs in the background
layer is made slightly darker and desaturated
compared to the foreground.
It contrasts just enough to be effective and
not distracting.
Without such a clear but understated element,
the game would either have to compromise on
its art style or on its wordless conveyance
to be playable.
There’s no glowy, flashy tutorial arrows,
but their subtle approach works all the same,
and the art style is more cohesive as a result.
The game uses shapes to communicate navigational
cues, too.
The funnel-like shapes and cracks point towards
an opening in this ceiling.
These cracked objects that the player can
break through are subtly different than the
other cracked decor that just provide ambiance.
Look at the difference in size and the number
of line strokes.
Other mechanics all have their own visual
cues, floating red butterfly-like creatures
that you perform super jumps off of, these
blocks of floating water that you can swim
through feature those same hard white lines
from earlier, only this time it’s on all
sides of the object.
Gris is full of examples of this meticulous
attention to detail that the team at Nomada
Studio had to put into each environment to
make a game that not only looks good, but
plays well too.
Gris is a great case study in how to convey
mechanics and seamlessly direct players in
an art-focused game without ever compromising
the art direction that makes the game stand
out.
Bad Design
Brand consistency is important.
We made a whole episode about Game Design
Rebrands, but that was about a series’s
game mechanics.
Today I want to talk about the brand IDENTITY
of one series.
The point of a brand is to clearly communicate
to an audience just what a player can expect
from a game.
Games with ‘Mario’ in the title are going
to be family-friendly.
And probably will feature Mario unless the
rest of the title says otherwise.
Consistency is the thing that helps make that
bit of communication happen.
But one beloved series is so inconsistent
and ineffective at branding that we’re gonna
do a little experiment.
I’m talking about THIS.
THIS is called ‘Puzzle League’.
I’d bet a lot of you watching at home have
never heard of that name, and would call it
one of three other things.
That’s a major branding failure.
Puzzle League’s branding has been wildly
inconsistent for a quarter century now, and
it’s killing me.
Back in 1995 Nintendo released a SNES puzzler
in Japan named Panel de Pon.
It’s really good.
Nintendo wanted to bring the game to the West
in 1996, but they believed that the game’s
‘Magical Girl’ theme with fairy characters
wasn’t going to fly.
They probably weren’t wrong - there wasn’t
a lot of Western commercial success in the
‘Magical Girl’ space at the time.
Sailor Moon had only just been localized in
North America a year prior, and wouldn’t
really gain traction until the end of the
decade.
But if they were going to rebrand it, what
would they rebrand it to?
Well, it’s a puzzle game.
What’s hot in puzzle games in the mid 90s?
Hmm… t…
Tet…
Tetris?
Tetris!
And you attack your opponent.
Let’s call it Tetris Attack.
Done.
Call the Tetris Company guys.
Get the rights to Tetris.
*overhead PA activation noise* Uhh sir, this
has nothing to do with… *cut back* Good
news, they said yes!
Tetris Attack!
With the name taken care of, the fairies were
replaced with Yoshi characters.
Sure.
Good, done, here’s the box.
Here’s a fun game, where on the box is Yoshi
featured?
Time’s up.
Found him!
Make a Game Boy port.
Good.
In 2001, Nintendo released a sequel on the
N64.
North America and Europe only.
It’s a refined version of the game format,
with better difficulty options and AI and
the same core gameplay you know and love.
So Tetris Attack 64, right?
No.
No Magical Girls, no Panel de Pon, no Yoshis,
no Tetris, no Attack.
Know what’s cool in 2001?
Pokemon.
Put Pokemon in there.
The sequel to the Yoshi-filled Tetris Attack
is called Pokemon Puzzle League.
Now make a Game Boy Color port too.
And... change the name again.
Yes you heard me.
Call that one ‘Pokemon Puzzle… uh...
Challenge’.
Now what about Japan?
Was there an N64 version of Puzzle League
on the way?
No.
There was a plan for a direct sequel to panel
de pon on the N64, but that version was cancelled.
In 2003 it resurfaced on the Gamecube as a
part of the Nintendo Puzzle Collection with
a port of Dr. Mario 64 and a remake of Yoshi’s
Cookie.
They returned to the Panel de Pon branding,
so good on them for Japan-only consistency
at least.
In the West, Puzzle League wouldn’t be seen
again until the 2005 GBA release of ‘Dr.
Mario and Puzzle League’, another compilation.
Is it a Dr. Mario-themed Puzzle League?
No.
They don’t even keep Pokemon around from
the last game.
They definitely don’t go back to the ‘Tetris’
brand.
You get unflavored Puzzle League!
In 2007 a standalone Puzzle League game finally
comes out: Planet Puzzle League.
Does it build on any of the other three previous
brands the series has had?
No.
It’s built on nothing.
Again.
It’s a more stylish nothing, but it ain’t
no Lumines.
Oh, and in Japan they called it Panel de Pon
DS.
Does it have fairies?
No.
There was an unlockable SNES theme, but only
in Japan, and it definitely wasn’t on the
box.
Instead Japan got the most generic box art.
Which is still better than the Western version.
You know your box art is good when you feature
the console it’s on on it.
Puzzle League Express would come out two years
later on DSiWare, which was just a smaller,
downloadable version of the same game.
Then, silence.
Seven years of no new developments in the
Puzzle League franchise.
Until 2016, where it appeared again in, you
guessed it, a free update for Animal Crossing:
New Leaf on the 3DS, three years after the
game had been released.
Is it a good version of the game?
No.
It’s really slow.
If you’re keeping track, so far that’s
4 title name schemes, 4 different character
mascot franchises, plus two generic ones,
over just 6 different games.
Maybe a few more, depending on how you want
to count it.
I’m not even sure how exactly to count it.
Whoops.
The worst part is it’s very unclear how
the series can begin to reconnect the brand
with its roots that made it so popular in
the first place.
The Tetris Company is a famously tough negotiator
for licensing rights to the Tetris name, which
is why the SNES Nintendo Switch Online service
was stuck with putting out the Panel de Pon
version of the game.
An untranslated Japanese-only ROM made more
sense to put out in the West than to deal
with licensing the Tetris name again.
So now we’re stuck with ‘Puzzle League’
as the series name.
It doesn’t evoke any of the game’s mechanics
or feel, and it barely connects with the games
the series is actually best known for.
It sounds like a placeholder name, and a three
decade long series of missteps make a mountain
that the Puzzle League brand might never get
out of.
Good Design
I love detective games.
Phoenix Wright and Danganronpa are my jams,
but I always felt that the ‘detective’
part of the detective game could use some
work.
The part about solving the mystery is usually
a little railroaded, or abstracted away as
a little puzzle or something.
A straight-up game of deduction isn’t the
easiest type of game to pull off, for a bunch
of UX-related reasons.
But Return of the Obra Dinn went for it, and
I love it.
Obra Dinn is a game where you play as an insurance
agent in 1807 investigating a ghost ship that
suddenly appears after being missing for 5
years.
60 people were on board at the start of its
voyage, and it’s your job to figure out
what happened to each and every one of them.
With this magic pocket watch.
Aboard the ship, you can find someone’s
spooky skeleton and use the pocket watch to
see that person’s final moment, and hear
what else was going on around them at the
time.
The game is about working backwards through
these vignettes, and carefully deducing who
the unfortunate soul was, how they relate
to the rest of the crew, and figuring out
their exact fate.
Unraveling the whole mystery is a big project,
but the game has a handful of tricks that
makes it much more manageable.
Obra Dinn is fantastic at breaking the task
down to small pieces.
One of the biggest UX problems the game has
to wrestle with comes from its scope.
It has to keep its cast of 60 from overwhelming
the player.
You’re given a couple of illustrations at
the start with the entire crew.
Over a bunch of scenes you’re going to have
to keep track of who relates to who, where
each person was or where they could have gone,
and suss out the little details, sewing together
partial fragments for each character until
one at a time their fate clicks into place.
If it were all unstructured scenes, it would
be extremely easy for players to become lost
in the details.
But Lucas Pope did a great job to segment
off the overarching goal into digestible pieces.
The story works backwards through time, so
you start off with the last few remaining
crew, and solve some of their stories first.
Examining a character will show you their
illustration in the photo and let you navigate
directly to where you mark down their fate
and identity.
But, not all characters can be solved in the
vignette they’re introduced.
The game will blur out the face of anyone
that it knows you don’t have enough information
to resolve.
This keeps players from spending time to solve
an unsolvable mystery.
The game encourages deduction over randomly
guessing identities and fates by not confirming
an answer until you have three correct ones.
The tutorial does a great job at explaining
those mechanics, and also setting the game’s
expected pace and tone.
This is a game meant to be savored and thought
through, and that expectation is clear right
from the start.
But the game’s biggest ‘wow’ factor
is its art style, which needed to be carefully
designed to resolve some UX problems, too.
Lucas Pope talked about it at a GDC Q&A as
well as in his devblog.
The art style is the very first thing he nailed
down, and the gameplay was built around it.
The game uses what Pope calls a ‘1-bit’
style, and it’s directly inspired by Macintosh
games from the late 80s.
There’s even an option to switch the screen
filter to the color schemes of a lot of different
computers from that era.
But the 1-bit art style leaves the door open
to a lot of potential downsides and challenges.
An art style of just two colors can be very
intense, and can make things difficult to
keep legible.
It could have been uncomfortable to look at
over long play sessions, which would be killer
for a game about deduction, meant to be stared
at and pondered over.
To fix it, the outlines of the objects got
special attention.
All of the objects in Obra Dinn use a post-processing
shader to create custom outlines that react
to the light level of the area.
In darkness, the outlines switch to white
to keep everything legible.
The style relies on dithering to create shades
that give the environment its light sources
and texture, and help contrast between the
ship and its interactable objects.
Characters also get an ‘aura’, which helps
them stand out in some of the busier vignettes.
And to help the style succeed, one important
thing is missing: Animation.
There’s very little animation at all.
The death vignettes are fully static, and
only some particle effects and boat rocking
motions are visible outside of them.
Early on, animated scenes were considered
for the vignettes, where you would play and
replay the scenes and observe the events from
different angles.
Just not making the animations wound up being
a very practical solution.
The game was made by a team of one and they
would’ve added a ton of extra time to develop.
The dithering effect could easily go from
stylish to annoying in motion.
Keeping the scenes static helps keep everything
readable in a style that could have been prone
to readability problems, and helps change
the focus in the scene to the little details,
rather than the big sweeping action.
But even the lack of animation can contribute
to the game’s style.
Examining static scenes make you feel like
you’re travelling back to an unchangeable
past, viewing events already set in stone.
I won’t pretend that Obra Dinn’s art style
is always easy to work with.
In some cases it winds up making certain characters’
fates confusing or unclear, and not in a deliberate
mystery way.
But the work that was put into making the
style readable was well thought through.
Obra Dinn artfully dodges around so many different
ways that its style and its gameplay could
have clashed and ruined the experience, and
by executing both well it makes the game a
unique gem.
Bad Design
Oh hey look, it’s another Xenoblade game
in a bad design.
Xenoblade Chronicles X.
This game’s interface is a little better
than the original.
But it’s still not great.
The sequel fixes SOME of the problems with
the first game’s interface and UX, but it
creates some fun new ones.
Things like how your equipment menu doesn’t
have real sorting options, just a weird filter,
which makes equipping and selling items kinda
suck.
Or the party member swap system where you
have to find where everyone is scattered in
a huge city and talk to them to put them in
your active team instead of ...I don’t know
a MENU?
Like most RPGs?
But those are big issues.
I want to talk about a liiiiiittle itty bitty
issue.
Xenoblade Chronicles X fell in love with tiny,
tiny, illegible text.
There’s tiny text everywhere.
On the main HUD.
In the menus.
The battle screen element popups.
THE SOUL VOICE MENU.
THIS IS NUTS.
All of these screens are flooded with important
information and it’s so difficult to read.
Most of the normal type in Xenoblade X uses
the Futura font, which is a totally solid,
usable, competent typeface.
But there are places like this pause menu
where what they wanted to say just didn’t
fit in the amount of space they had to say
it.
They could have used an abbreviation, but
instead they ... didn’t.
They changed the font to Futura Medium Condensed
and just jammed it all in there.
The font style doesn’t do it any favors,
either.
Almost all of the game’s text has an outline
effect surrounding it.
Outlines can be a great tool to add contrast
to text, and to make it legible on a wide
variety of backgrounds.
When you’re designing a HUD, you often have
to make text look right when it’s being
shown over an ever-changing background.
Xenoblade Chronicles X is no different.
This HUD text has to work on this dark industrial
floor, this sci-fi sky, and this field of
grass, without changing its look.
Outlines can work great on busy backgrounds
like this.
But, with text this small there’s a problem.
Outlines on small text can really eat away
at the letter forms.
If the letter is just a pixel or two wide,
and the outline is another pixel wide, well
now your outline is literally half of the
letter.
The silhouette of the letter can get muddied
up, which hurts the readability of the text.
But there’s still another problem with this
style.
In menus, the text for different categories,
like stats, is light blue with a dark blue
outline on a solid dark background.
There isn’t all that much contrast between
the outline color and the background it’s
on, so there’s almost a gradient effect
going on.
The sum of the factors eating away at the
text legibility just makes this section unnecessarily
hard to read.
The white text next to it is easier to read.
The bolder typeface and better color contrast
keeps the text more legible, even if it’s
still really small.
Consistency is important to make a cohesive
style, but remember that the first duty of
graphic design is to convey information.
If your cool design isn’t able to convey
information to the player, it’s falling
short of its most basic job.
Xenoblade Chronicles X tried to fit a lot
of information in a small space, but the density
and the font style combine to make it all
tough to parse, and less accessible than it
could have been.
Good Design
Oh hey look.
It’s another Xenoblade game.
But they fixed it finally!
I love the original game, but its interface
issues are hard to ignore.
As I was writing that script, the Definitive
Edition had been announced, but wasn’t out
yet, and I was hoping that it would fix some
of the original game’s issues.
But when does that ever happen, no one ever
gets what they want - WRONG they fixed it.
The Definitive Edition upgraded the visuals,
and has a new mini-campaign, but the part
I love the most is how they completely overhauled
the game’s interface.
Monolith doesn’t have the best track record,
either, so it’s really nice to see that
they’ve now made one that’s genuinely
polished, useful and accessible.
It’s not perfect, but boy is it better.
First, let’s look at the hud interface.
The composition is roughly the same, and most
of the essential elements are still there,
but the use of space is so much better in
the remaster.
The legibility is miles ahead of the original.
The old game was in Standard Def!
Just upping it to HD let them shrink some
of the elements without sacrificing readability.
The map is cleaner.
The 3D waypoint arrow has been taken out,
and there are now nice pathways to the next
waypoint marker.
The in-game clock is now a digital clock instead
of a radial one around the… map’s edge?
Who thought that was a good idea.
Well it’s fixed.
Enemy status cards are now static and take
up the top of the screen instead of being
in the middle, attached to an enemy, which
stops a lot of overlapping element issues.
The party status is organized better and is
a lot more compact, which was one of my biggest
complaints in the original game’s Bad Design
segment.
The character portrait still doubles as the
tension gauge but is now placed over to the
left.
The SP bar is gone, which was never necessary.
An HP bar has been added and the number has
a consistent baseline now!
There’s a blank space for showing buffs
and debuffs, which is also a lot cleaner and gives more room.
The fonts are more consistent from element
to element, too.
The UI’s visual hierarchy is overall much
better in the new version, and it takes up
less than half the space of the old UI, which
leaves more visual room for the environment
and combat.
The Combat UI elements have been improved
as well.
The ways they show feedback are better.
In the game’s combat, your position matters.
Moves like ‘slit edge’ and ‘air slash’
work better when you attack a creature from
the side.
If you’re standing to the side, these blue
markers will point out that these attacks
will be more effective.
In the old game, it was a little bit of a
mystery if you were exactly attacking from
the side or front or back, which at times
made inflicting bonus status effects too much
of a guessing game.
Damage numbers contrast with the background
better and don’t overlap with each other
nearly as much.
The health bars are much thinner and less
intrusive.
The break and topple icons are much clearer
and now have a timer that tells you exactly
when they’re going to run out.
The redesign makes it much clearer across
the board to understand what’s actually
happening in fights, and makes it much easier
to strategize and use the game’s full combat
system, rather than just winging it and hoping
for the best.
There are plenty of other quality of life
improvements too.
Sidequests are much easier to track, since
they can now be tracked individually and you
can mark and navigate to nearby objectives.
It’s really helpful in a game that takes
tons of cues from MMO quest design.
The new ‘expert mode’ lets you manually
level and de-level your characters to customize
the game’s difficulty better.
The original made it pretty easy to out-level
the game’s story content.
In all aspects of the game, the Definitive
Edition has done a thorough and excellent
job to remake its own interface for the better,
piece by piece, tiny fix by tiny fix.
It still feels right at home in Xenoblade,
but they put in the work to shine the original
design to a mirror polish.
So that wraps up the first 50 episodes of
Design Doc.
Post in the comments your tips for some Good
Designs and/or Bad Designs, and we might put
them in a future episode.
Thanks for watching, and here’s to the next
50!
*chill vibes outro from CrossCode*