It’s high time for design grime. Graphic design 
that is! After, oh god, it’s been over a year,  
we’re back with more Good Design, Bad Design 
where we talk about the great and not so great  
graphic design in games. We’re looking at menus, 
UI, UX, color choice, font choice, animation,  
character design. Anything and everything 
to do with the Presentation of Information.  
Keep in mind that these segments aren’t reviews. 
Great games can have terrible graphical elements,  
and terrible games can look really slick, so don’t 
get too worried if your favorites are in here.
But first thing’s first, we gotta talk 
about your LOW SKILL DISEASE. There’s  
nothing fun about LOW SKILL DISEASE. 
It makes everything taste like bronze,  
and it can get worse in the summer. Treat your 
skill issue with today’s sponsor Skillshare.
Skillshare is the largest online 
learning community for creatives,  
with thousands of classes led by experts 
in film, illustration, design, music,  
and more. It’s a fantastic resource for 
curated, high-quality, quick lessons in  
all kinds of creative pursuits. It’s 
amazing for finding new hobbies.
I wanted to brush up on some After Effects 
skills, so I went over to the class ‘Animating  
With Ease in Adobe After Effects’, taught by Jake 
Bartlett. He goes over a lot of the finer details  
of setting up animation curves to really step up 
the look of your animations. It was super quick,  
and very well-produced. Easing is a huge part of 
After Effects, so it was good to brush up on this.
Summer’s the perfect time for finding 
something new to do for fun. You’ve  
got a hobby you’ve always wanted to try, I’m sure,  
but never followed up on. Skillshare helps 
turn the ‘I want to’s into ‘I made it happen’.
The first 500 people to use my link in 
the description get a one month free  
trial of Skillshare. Go find your favorite new 
hobby, today! Skill it up with extra Skillshare. 
Good Design
Teaching players  
how to play your game can be a big pain. 
It’s especially hard for devs that live  
and breathe their game for months or years to 
know how someone else with NO experience will  
perceive it. But not everything needs a heavy 
tutorial. Some game concepts need no explanation.
A Little to the Left is a delightful and cozy 
puzzle game about the joys of sorting. Organize  
everyday objects, as if you were tidying 
up a room, and find all of the satisfying  
arrangements. Put all these lightbulbs in a box. 
Sort your coin collection. These paint cans have  
been messed with, un-mess with ‘em. Every puzzle 
has one, but possibly as many as three different  
ways to arrange things. And how do you know how 
to arrange things? Well, just do what feels right.
A Little to the Left has practically no 
instruction. No tutorial. No dialogue.  
It relies on the player’s intrinsic sense of 
order to be the guide. As new puzzles get shown,  
it’s up to you to figure out the 
common threads between objects.  
It may be organizing them by color or 
size. One is full of uncrooked frames,  
but you line up the crooked contents of 
the frames to make them stand upright.
On puzzles with multiple solutions, your progress 
will be shown by gaining a new star for each new  
solution you discover, and the hollowed out stars 
wordlessly suggest that you have more work to  
do. Maybe you pack your stuff by color for one 
solution, and what their subject is for another.
Now, if you’re a graphic designer, you may have 
noticed that these puzzles are almost all centered  
around gestalt grouping principles. These are 
theoretical sets of psychological principles  
that designers use all the time to make all sorts 
of UI elements feel like they belong together,  
and to help people recognize patterns and 
quickly sort through information. Similarity,  
proximity, continuation, closure, symmetry, 
and figure-ground, among others, can all be  
used to make an arrangement feel intuitive, and 
one or another of these principles constantly  
show up as solutions to the game’s puzzles. Got 
a bunch of unsorted batteries and an empty tray?  
Group them together with similarity, and use 
closure to fit them in the appropriate slot.  
Use symmetry to mirror the placement of 
these colored flies on a spider web. Use  
continuation to connect lines in the texture 
of objects, or create a greater picture out  
of seemingly unrelated photos. The game is all 
about using the instincts built into all of us  
to test a player's observational skills, and 
makes deeply satisfying puzzles along the way.
That doesn’t mean these puzzles solve 
themselves. These patterns are apparent,  
but not always obvious. That’s where the game’s 
hint system comes in. It’s presented as a notebook  
with the answer scribbled over. To see the 
hint, grab an eraser and reveal as much or  
as little as you want. Need just a little hint? 
Maybe showing just a corner will give a push in  
the right direction, or verify that you’re on 
the right track. Or, go to town and reveal the  
whole solution if you feel like it. You can 
make the hint exactly as hinty as you want.
A Little to the Left is a cozy game, and its chill 
atmosphere and gameplay are helped by the sense  
that the solutions are always within reach. 
With some careful use of gestalt principles,  
the game has a very naturalistic feel for 
its puzzle design. Just do what feels right. 
Bad Design 
Effective UI depends on consistency. All of 
these elements that make up a UI are just a  
bunch of abstract shapes on their own. The 
fact that you know that THIS is a button,  
THIS is a slider - that’s heavily relying 
on your prior experiences with other UIs,  
from other games and other software. A more 
predictable UI is a more effective one.
So what happens if we start 
to erode that consistency?
Trackmania’s menus are all over the place. I 
love the game. There’s nothing wrong with the  
game part of Trackmania, the skill ceiling 
is incredible and it’s still super fun no  
matter where you are on the skill curve. But 
UI design has never been the developer Nadeo’s  
strong suit, going back to all their earlier 
Trackmania games. Yeah, this ain’t great.
The menus in the newest trackmania don’t… y’know,  
LOOK all that bad. This ain’t Crazy Bus. 
But when you start actually trying to do  
things with them, things start to feel off. 
Not broken. Not incomprehensible. Just off.
I’ve talked to a lot of people that get lost 
in these menus the first few times they see  
them. There are so many different ways 
to play, with overlapping track options,  
room options, schedule options, and very 
few of the labels make any intuitive sense.
‘Continue’ and ‘Go Now’ are your options at 
start-up. One’s a promotional thing, and one’s  
the main menu. ‘Live’ means online multiplayer. 
‘Arcade’ is your classic multiplayer server  
option, and maybe the subtitle of ‘Online Rooms’ 
might hint that that wasn’t clear from the get-go.
This Track of the Day menu lets you play against 
others, unless you’re here at specific times of  
day, where the same menu takes you to the Cup 
of the Day, which is a slightly different mode,  
but on the same track. And these day icons 
on the left and right aren’t selectable,  
even though they evoke the button shapes 
present everywhere in this UI design.
Many menus show this grid of numbers element. It’s 
a list of tracks in this playlist. Scroll over to  
the track you want to play, hit A, and you’re 
playing that track. A totally fine UI element.
Oh, look, a different menu with a grid of 
numbers for the tracks in this playlist,  
great. Lemme just scroll over here and 
press A. And press A. And press A. Nope!  
Can’t play that track. Scrolling around 
just gets you a little readout of your  
records on that track. This grid of 
numbers is instead a representation  
of the track playlist running on this server 
right now. To play, you go down here, to ‘Join  
Room,’ and you play the already-playing 
highlighted track.
The game lets you create clubs with your 
friends, where you can create playlists  
and things for y’all to do together. I’ve 
already joined one that a friend made. On  
the main menu there’s a prompt to pull the 
right trigger to ‘Go To Club’. Great. Oh,  
did you think that that would join YOUR CLUB? 
Nah, it only does that if you went into your  
club and hit this Pin icon to pin the club to… 
something? I’m not sure. If you hadn’t done that,  
‘Go To Club’ will take you to whichever public 
club happens to be in THIS corner of the screen.  
And it’s a carousel, so the club it takes you 
to will change over time. That’s what I wanted.
Different modes seem to have different opinions 
on what the important things to display are.  
I just want to see the times, man. I’ve found 
a way to show gold, silver, and bronze medals  
without a mod, but not the author medal time or 
your PB in the same box. That still needs a mod.
I’ve been rewriting this section several 
times as I’ve found secret new ways to  
show the basic info I wanted. I could easily be 
missing a way to do what I want without mods,  
but have no idea where in the menus the option 
is buried. I still think it’s kinda bad.
Is this nitpicking? Yeah, maybe. The game’s 
plenty fun enough that it’s not REALLY ruining the  
experience, and the modding community fixes most 
of the severe problems. I kinda hope they don’t  
actually fix the jank. The series has been like 
this for so long that it’s endearing in a way. I  
do love being able to create a graphical nightmare 
of a club tag. Maybe it’s not so bad after all.
Never change, Nadeo.
Good Design 
Man. You ever stop to think 
about Balatro? I do. Ahh. I  
love this thing.  It’s just video poker. Sorta. Balatro is not a complicated  
game, mechanically, and I’ve still put over 70 
hours into it.
Recently, Balatro’s developer, Localthunk, 
posted a video he saved from 2 weeks into  
development. The Jokers are missing, but you 
can still tell that this thing is proto-Balatro,  
for sure. But even though this video feels 
like Balatro, it doesn’t really feel like  
BALATRO Balatro, y’know? The differences get at 
something else I like to think about - polish.
Lots of people talk about ‘adding polish’ 
to a game. But what does that exactly  
mean? If you wanted to elevate a game by 
polishing it, what exactly would you add?
If you compare the early 
Balatro to the final game,  
you see how many improvements it 
involves, and how small they can be.
For one, there are lots more animations. 
The original feels way more static,  
and the current one is filled with movement.
Right off the bat, the title screen looks 
great. There’s constant motion. The swirling  
background is hypnotic. The New Unlocks 
exclamation icon is moving. Not constantly,  
not dramatically, just a small punctuation.
The UI elements jump off of the swirling 
background. Drop shadows on every button  
and underneath the logo add dimension to 
a flat surface. Hover over one of these,  
and it dims just a little bit. Clicks 
make a light tick sound to confirm.
Start the game, and more details appear.  
A transition animation and 
a whoosh to start you off.
Look at the motion of the cards. 
Even when they’re not doing anything,  
they’re not standing still, they’re swaying 
just a little bit. Hover over the card,  
and it’s a whole different kind of motion. It 
jumps just a touch, then pivots in the air.  
It’s never static. It even tilts along with 
your cursor, giving it a more tactile feel.
There’s animation in the popup text icon, too. 
It doesn’t just show you the text right away.  
The frame pops up first, then letters animate 
in one by one. But not the whole description,  
just the letters in the titles. 
The whole animation is complete  
in a matter of a few frames, as fast 
as you could read the info anyway,  
making sure the style doesn’t get 
in the way of the element’s purpose.
The small blind, big blind, boss levels, 
and instructions animate in with a sound.  
Selecting a blind animates in the scoring 
panel, with the most important elements  
animating in separately, overshooting 
their mark and shrinking back into place.
The cards are dealt into your hand, 
flying in from the top deck, flipping,  
and sorting themselves in place. Discards are 
tossed offscreen. Playing cards sends them to the  
middle of the screen one at a time, and one by one 
their points are totaled with a colored graphic  
behind for emphasis. The final game has a clearer 
location for the points graphics to appear at,  
and a more low key disappearing animation than 
this Windows Solitaire lookin’ jumpy thing.
One bit you might not notice at first is the 
difference in animation curves. Playing an  
animation at a constant speed is a little jarring. 
It looks nicer if the element in motion ‘speeds  
up’ to pace rather than just starting there. 
Same thing with slowing something down right  
before it gets to its endpoint. That’s called 
‘easing in’ and ‘easing out’, and if you take  
nothing else away, know that that one change will 
dramatically improve the way your animations look.
And even if you get sick 
of watching the animations,  
dig into the settings and you can 
speed them up as fast as you want.
Practically every UI element has some flourish.
The booster packs in the store have a 
sheen layer on top. Combine with the  
game’s natural wobbly idle motion, and the 
sheen effect moves around just slightly.  
It’s very understated, but it elevates the look 
of these packs. The vouchers, too, same effect.
The fire effect on the score is really satisfying. 
If you play one hand that KO’s your scoring goal  
in one shot, your score will catch on fire. 
If you go WAY over, the fire gets bigger,  
the screen shakes, and you get a louder fire 
sound effect. And it doesn’t just disappear  
at the end of the hand, the flames slowly die 
down before flickering out. Love that thing!
This isn’t everything, but you get the point. 
Balatro’s UI is a flood of subtleties - hypnotic  
motion and a pleasant drone to ease you into 
the groove. Whatever game you love the look of,  
dig into its smallest details. 
That’s where you’ll find the craft.
Good Bad Design
Now, at the beginning of each of these 
episodes I say that the segments are about  
the Presentation of Information - the process 
of communicating to the player, good and bad.  
But could you make a game that presents 
information SO BADLY, it becomes good again?
Lethal Company is everyone’s favorite 
Lovecraftian sci-fi horror party game.
You and your friends are minimally trained 
coworkers, whose job is to collect scrap  
from abandoned facilities on distant moons, 
then sell it to Jeb! to meet your quota and  
survive another few days. did I say abandoned 
facilities? I guess it depends on whether the  
Bracken is a person or not. These moons are 
filled with monstrosities and experiments  
ready to tear you apart, and they get more 
dangerous the longer you stay on the surface.
You’re ill-informed and ill-prepared for what 
you’ll find on these moons. But with your  
capable friends and an arsenal of communication 
tools at your disposal, what could go wrong?
When you start playing the game, you’re flying 
completely blind. Unless someone clues you in,  
you have no idea what the entities are 
capable of. They’re all different. Sure,  
a couple of these things are harmless. This guy 
looks scary but he won’t do much. There’s goo that  
follows you around, but isn’t too threatening 
if you don’t touch it. But then there are the  
creepy mannequins that sprint at you when you’re 
not looking. There are shining eyes in the dark,  
waiting for you to get distracted. There’s 
a knife maniac butler who is full of bees.  
There’s a big spider, that’s just a big 
spider. But it is a really big spider!
Over and over you’re thrown into 
the unknown, where you have no idea  
what could be waiting for you around 
the corner, or how to deal with it,  
if you can even deal with it at all. Make 
a few wrong moves, and you’ll get to trade  
stories with the rest of your dead teammates 
in the lobby as you wait for the next run.
It seems at first that Lethal Company is 
about survival, and it is, but not really  
in an action-y sort of way. It’s more a game 
about communication. The problem is that the  
company you work for has cheaped out. All 
of your communication tools are terrible.
All players can hear each other through 
proximity chat, but it’s not an isolated  
system. Talking can get you killed if 
you’re being stalked by the eyeless dogs,  
where making any noise will have them lunge 
towards your location. They’ll pick up on chatter,  
or even just accidental room noise. Open mics can 
be just as fatal in the game as anything else.
You can bring in a walkie to help 
warn people when you’re not close by.
But there’s a tradeoff. You’ve 
only got four inventory slots,  
and every tool you bring in means 
less loot you can carry out. Though,  
if it helps you and your friends 
survive, it could be worth it.
You’ve got a jester running loose? 
You’ve gotta tell everyone to get  
out of the facility before it pops 
and goes on a rampage. Did you bring  
a walkie to tell everybody about 
it? Good thinking… But did THEY?
If someone stays behind on the ship, 
they can monitor everyone through  
cameras and a radar screen. They can help 
by disabling some hazards like the turret,  
closing or opening doors, or teleporting you 
out of danger if they see you’re in trouble.  
Maybe they can warn you about the jester. 
They can transmit a message out to everyone,  
whatever they want. As long 
as it’s 9 characters or less.
Even something as simple as the clock. Y’all have 
to get off this moon by midnight - the ship will  
leave automatically by then, with or without you. 
The clock runs things, even if you can’t always  
see it. If you’re not outside, you literally 
don’t know what time it is. It’s very easy to  
lose track of how long you’ve got and have to book 
it back to the ship before it leaves you stranded.
Communication is the most important thing, 
but the game makes it so cumbersome to do.  
But then again, that’s the point. 
It’s a pillar of the game’s design.
Lethal Company isn’t a horror 
game. It’s a comedy game. Well,  
it’s still scary enough to be both, 
but it’s mostly a comedy. I’ve never  
played a game with more effortless 
comedy coming out of play sessions.
It’s about crossed wires and missed connections,  
just like a lot of comedies, but in deadly 
scenarios. It’s built for misunderstandings,  
and having your team’s best 
plans blowing up in your faces.
Every section of the game is 
soaked in over-the-top ironic  
ultraviolence. The environment is 
filled with booby traps and rust,  
and the entities borrow from the most cliche, 
overwrought aspects of SCP and creepypasta.
C’mon, you can get haunted by a ghost 
girl that messes with your audio,  
plays the Undertaker bells, can’t be seen by 
anyone but you, and makes your head explode. It’s  
really silly - barely a step away from literally 
putting Slenderman in here. Over and over again,  
the game’s design marries stupid horror 
and finding new and fun ways to mess  
up how you communicate with your 
friends. It’s a great combo.
Lethal Company is janky and unserious. 
But that’s the point. The clunkiness,  
the goofiness, the universal hostility - they 
might be seen as negatives by themselves,  
but in this context they all combine to make 
the whole package work. The game’s brilliant. 
It’s nice to be back talking about graphic  
design again. If you’ve got good candidates 
for the next Good Design, Bad Design in mind,  
shout them out in the comments and we’ll take a 
look. Great graphic design is about thoughtful  
details. Pay attention to the small stuff. That’s 
what really steps up the aesthetic of any game.
*chill vibes from Balatro*