It’s been ten years since the last Good
Design, Bad Design.
I’m sorry, not years, episodes.
Whatever.
It’s Good Design, Bad Design Volume 13.
Video games do in fact still have graphic
design in the current year, so we’ll keep
talkin’ about ‘em.
Like always, we’re looking at things like
menus, UI, UX, color choice, font choice,
JoCat, character design, anythi… wait, what?
JoCat: That’s right, I’M gonna help teach
you all about the Presentation of Information.
Dan: Nice!
Well if you’re here, I’m gonna go study
up on some things and come back.
And you too can learn new things with today’s
episode sponsor, Curiosity Stream!
Curiosity Stream is a subscription streaming
service with thousands of documentaries and
non-fiction titles from the world’s best
filmmakers.
Really good stuff.
It’s like Netflix or Hulu but for nerds,
history buffs and scientists.
You all like learning about the intricacies
of video games, now you can learn about the
intricacies of LIFE with shows like The Lightbulb
Moment that show you how people figured out
how to stream video online, or the history
of Mauve, the world’s first synthetic dye.
Go to curiositystream.com/DESIGNDOC for unlimited
access to the world’s top documentaries
and non-fiction series.
Use promo code DESIGNDOC and you’ll save
25% off, which means you can get it all for
only $14.99 for the whole year.
That’s way cheaper than Netflix, it’s
just $1.25 a month!
Click the link in the description below or
go to curiositystream.com/DESIGNDOC and explore
the universe on Curiosity Stream.
Dan: Alright.
While I get my stuff ready, JoCat, I’m handing
you the keys to take this out for a spin.
JoCat: OK! ...what do I do?
Dan: Take that key, move offscreen, hit the
red button, and say Good Design into the keys
and the episode will do the rest.
JoCat: Into the keys?
Dan: Yup, try it.
JoCat - Oh, O...OK.
Uh…
*JoCat, echo-y* Good Design
JoCat: Oh cool it did the graphics and everything.
Dan, from another room: I’ll be over here
if you need anything byyyyeeee.
Jocat:
Alright, time to rub my grubby hands all over
this video.
So!
For most games, the Heads-Up Display is something
done purely for the player’s sake.
It’s never really mentioned in-universe,
or if it is, it’s usually one and done.
it’s just sorta there, hanging out.
This is your health bar.
This is your ammo.
This is your map.
How do you know these things?
Ehh, you and the UI have reached an understanding.
Some games make more of an effort on explaining
how your character may know the information.
They have a magical sixth sense.
They were given a map, and this is an abstraction
for it.
They wear a powered suit that displays a floating
UI to the character… which is an abstraction
in-universe, but it’s really there, but
it’s an abstraction… oh god, my head.
This is called Diegetic UI, where the UI is
actually present in the game world and either
acknowledged or interacted with by the characters.
Like in Journey, where the scarf stands in
for your jump power and…
*Dan, shouting from another room*
We already talked about Journey’s scarf!
In this episode over here!
It’s really good!
*Jocat*
Oh, right.
Well.
... In Dead Space!
Isaac’s armored suit displays every... single…
*Dan*
We talked about diegetics in Dead Space, too!
It’s also really good!
*Jocat*
Oh.
Hmm.
Well then, uh…
Astroneeeeeeer?
We good?
*Dan offscreen*
Yeah, we’re good.
What’s Astroneer?
Sounds neat.
*Jocat*
Alright!
Astroneer is an open world resource gathering
crafting game all about exploring and expanding
on various randomly generated alien worlds.
But here’s the fun part: Astroneer pushes
diegetic UI to the absolute limit.
Nearly EVERYTHING is an element of the in-game
world.
From your oxygen and energy on your backpack
to the batteries on your tractor or rover,
to how much storage space each platform has.
The task menus on every single workstation
are diegetic.
Astroneer even takes this to the smallest
of things, like if you’re spending plant
material to power a generator, you can actually
SEE how much of the plant material is left.
If you’re gathering ground for terraforming,
the tank that contains the soil that you’ve
collected will show up as green when it’s
full.
The storage units will show each resource
you fill it with on the inside so that, if
you’re familiar with how the different resources
look, you can tell at a glance what’s stored
in there.
You can see how many oxygen tethers you have
in the bundle on your backpack that you can
place before you run out.
The workstation menus even zoom up to the
screen as though you’re pressing the buttons
on it.
You even get to flip up the safety cover on
the button like you’re about to launch a
nuke!
I am totally immersed.
Once you understand the game’s basic systems
- red circle means you can place something
there, bar means you can fill it with something
- everything else becomes second nature.
I don’t know what this Toblerone is, but
it has a power plug.
It probably needs to be powered to unlock
it.
I know that this storage unit has more storage
than this platform because there’s more
red circles, i.e. physical spots to put stuff
onto.
What’s that weird canister in the distance?
I don’t know, but it’s half-filled with…
SOMETHING.
And all this is presented with this diegetic
UI so well that the game doesn't need to say
a single word for the player to quickly understand
it.
Because it can be VERY easy to make such a
design style very clunky and confusing.
*JoCat, echo-y* Bad Design.
I always wanted to do that.
SPEAKING OF, Although Diegetic UI can enhance
immersion and stylize a game, the rules of
good design apply to diegetic UI just as much
as for non-diegetic UI.
You don’t get a pass just for trying to
be cool.
In fact, diegetic UI can sometimes run into
its own unique design problems.
Maybe the nature of the UI being in the world
will mean that the world gets in the UI’s
way, like in The Culling.
The scoreboard is displayed up in the sky,
Hunger Games style.
It’s a cool novelty, but it means that in
order to check your score you have to physically
look up there.
If you’re near a tree or a building, too
bad, you only get to see the top half of the
scoreboard now.
This also means that there’s no way to check
the scoreboard while you’re indoors.
UI that tries to be diegetic more than it
tries to be clear can lead to its own problems.
Perhaps the diegesis is way too subtle, like
R.O.B.’s rocket fuel indicator in Super
Smash Bros.
You can see it on his side, but most of the
time the characters in Smash Bros are wayyy
too small and the gameplay is way too chaotic
to even notice that it’s there.
Alternatively, it could be too cluttered,
like the inventory in The Forest.
Sure, early on in the game you only have a
handful of items and you can easily pick out
what you need.
Late in the game, though, you’ve got an
entire survivor’s backpack full of stuff.
Without proper hierarchy or gridded placement
it can be a huge chore to get used to where
everything is.
The Forest is likely doing this very deliberately
to make it feel like you’re actually throwing
together a real backpack on a real survival
trip in the forest, but would it be too much
to ask for some player control over where
things go?
At the very least over time the player WILL
eventually get used to it, but the same can
be said for stepping on hot coals.
Some Diegetic UI can look plain tacky.
Alone in the Dark 2008 shows the main character’s
health through ripped off parts of his clothing
and revealing damaged skin underneath.
Sort of.
The wounds are textures on TOP of the clothes.
Mmm.
Yeah that looks great, good job.
Hey, look at that, it’s got a clunky diegetic
inventory, too.
Or silly health bar replacements.
You all know the BLOODY SCREEN effect popularized
by modern first person shooters?
I don’t need to see what’s in my peripheral
vision, just stick some strawberry jam on
there.
Ahh, now that’s realistic.
Well, it could be worse.
It could be the health bar in Jurassic Park
Trespasser.
Diegetic UI is a tricky balancing act and
risk for a reward, where said reward can be
something incredible and elevates the game
further than the sum of its parts.
However, the risks need to be accounted for,
lest it actually detract from the game and
mean that maybe a more traditional UI setup
would have been just fine, visual style and
immersion be damned.
Dan: Hmm, I wonder if you could implement
a diegetic UI into a character creation system?
JoCat: haha yeah I wouldn't know anything
about that haha no siree not one thing.
Dan: So when did you say you’d be more free
to work on your side of this collaborat-
JoCat: COUGH COUGH OH BOY LOOK AT THE TIME
I GOTTA uuuh- GO DO SOME IMPORTANT BUSINESS
Dan: This steam notification says you just
launched Final Fantasy XIV?
JoCat: LIKE I SAID IMPORTANT BUSINESS ANYWAY
HERE’S YOUR KEYS BACK BYE
Dan: I...
I play too…I would’ve done a savage
Dan: Wait, did you lick the keys?
JoCat: BUH-BYYEEEEeeee…
*Dan, echo-y* Good Design
So last summer I found out about a little
game called Chicory: A Colorful Tale.
It’s a cute, heavily stylized game about
bringing color to the world.
No, not that one.
Or that one.
Or that one.
Nope.
Nope.
Nope.
That’s Shaun White Skateboarding.
That’s the one.
Trust me, it’s good.
It seems like total Good Design bait to me,
so I checked it out.
And it was worth talking about, but not for
the reasons I first thought.
Developed by the teams that created Wandersong
and Celeste, Chicory is a top-down Zelda-esque
action adventure game that takes place in
a world stylized like a kid’s coloring book.
The game uses a brush mechanic to do a lot
of things - not only solving puzzles and navigation
but to decorate the environment to your heart’s
desire.
There are a ton of secret unlockable brushes
and painting tools to discover in the world,
too.
The game is charming and explores themes of
artistic self discovery.
It’s a nice, pleasant time - the kind of
stylish indie title that we’ve talked about
a lot before.
Then I looked at the menus.
They’re great!
Nothing says Presentation of Information quite
like a well-designed menu.
Chicory’s menus are incredibly clear and
friendly while having deep, granular customization
options that let you tailor how you want your
game experience to go.
The menu’s text options are worded in a
conversational way that helps fit them better
to the game’s vibe rather than cryptic On/Off
commands or jargon-y text about shader options
that you might not really understand.
I mean, you still have Vertical Sync, but
that’s about as technical as it gets.
The menu’s charm got me to cycle through
all of the options just to see what the devs
had written.
For fun.
The sheer number of things you can customize
here is commendable, too.
There’s your standard options to turn off
things like screen shake, flashing effects,
and controller rumble, but there’s also
more detailed options for special situations.
If you can’t or don’t want to deal with
how fast the game can play, you can adjust
a multiple to make it slower.
Have a hard time holding buttons down?
Have a toggle.
How much health do you want?
There’s a default, but if you’d have more
fun with more health or invincibility, go
ahead.
Want special stylistic fonts and text effects
to show up or do you wanna keep it simple
and readable?
Want a warning about sensitive content?
You got it.
Do you want ‘wet sounds’?
No?
Done.
Chicory’s menu of accessibility options
make it an extremely considerate game while
still keeping its intended design clear.
Chicory also gets points for its charming
and immersive use of an in-game hint system.
The game has a couple different tiers of hints
and advice that appear in the form of your
character’s parents.
You call up Mom in a phone booth and she’ll
give you a general hint of where to go and
then will mention that your dad who over-explains
things wants to talk.
If you opt in, he will lay out exactly what
you need to do.
It’s like the cutest hint system I’ve
ever seen.
Chicory’s hint system and menu accessibility
options are considerate and friendly, well-integrated
with the game’s charm, and are a benchmark
that other games should strive to reach.
*Dan, echo-y* Bad Design
Most games have a ton of.. STUFF that they
need to tell a player.
Health bars, radar, labels, indicators, inventory,
drops, energy, cooldowns, mana, ammo counts,
boons and buffs, statuses, info dumps, warnings,
alerts, thematic decoration - there’s just
a lot that a player needs to be aware of.
There’s a strong tendency to want to cram
more and more things on screen at once, but
that’s how you get THIS.
One of the bigger jobs of a UI designer is
to figure out how to convey a bunch of information
without the UI feeling busy, overly dense,
and confusing, and a powerful tool to do that
is empty space.
Empty space might seem like wasted space.
Beginning designers often feel compelled to
just fill in empty space with SOMETHING, but
just because the space is empty doesn’t
mean it’s not doing anything.
Empty space organizes a layout.
Empty space defines the boundaries and creates
proximity between objects to help group them
together.
Tiny differences in the space between objects
can make it easier for your eye to snap right
to where a bit of information lives.
Without differences in spacing, elements crowd
together, clouding up where one space begins
and one ends.
That ambiguity can lead to confusion, which
can create that sense that a design is busy.
Time to break out the ol’ Persona 5 UI again
- no, I will not stop talking about it.
At first glance, Persona 5’s chaotic motion
graphics and hyper dynamic battle screen seem
overwhelming, but look at the empty space.
There’s a defined region for the party health
and combat options, plus a lot of space between
them and the other, different elements of
the UI.
That space groups together the items.
Different elements look chaotic, but they
don’t cover up the action on the center
of the screen, overlap with each other, or
move behind one another.
There’s tons of stylish flair, but the elements
stay in their zones to keep the screen uncluttered.
Don’t believe me?
Let’s look at some games that don’t use
empty space as effectively.
Let’s find a JRPG that doesn’t have as
much flash… let’s see…
Ephemeral Fantasia!
Oh yeah, that’s a lack of style if I’ve
ever seen one.
Ephemeral Fantasia’s combat system is pretty
basic, and it’s interface is too, but it
doesn’t use its empty space as effectively.
A lot of the UI elements can overlap in awkward
ways.
Menus on menus, information text, party status
bars, and the actual battlefield all fight
for your attention in the same part of the
screen.
You even have this camera mode indicator in
the upper right corner taking up unnecessary
space.
Just have it disappear when you’re not changing
the camera.
The game’s battle log lives in the upper
left corner and rattles off events as they
happen.
The information is often redundant with the
usual JRPG damage text and status icons, takes
up a LOT of real estate, and starts to cut
into the center of the screen, overlapping
the in-game action.
The text itself isn’t all that readable,
either, with a thin, outlined, serif typeface,
which just compounds the cluttered feel of
the UI.
What about a game with a little more flair?
Digimon World: Data Squad for the PS2 is an
RPG with an AI for each Digimon which actually
has a ‘preference’ for what moves to do
next.
Based on how the battle is going, your Digimon’s
emotions change and so will the moves it wants
to do.
Cool, so what move do you want to do...AAAHHH.
So it turns out that the more the Digimon
wants to do a move, the more times the move’s
hexagon will appear in… this lovely grid.
It’s a really interesting way to play into
the idea that your character has an opinion
of its own for how things are going, but it
can be completely overwhelming to grasp what’s
going on.
The repetition of the tiles has a gameplay
purpose, but it still makes the interface
extremely crowded, overlapping and obscuring
other elements of the UI with redundant info.
The tiles deserve points for creativity, but
probably could’ve used another pass to keep
the UI from becoming so overwhelming.
If you’re making a game UI, keep an eye
out for elements that overlap others, don’t
crowd elements together, and let your UI breathe,
and you should be able to avoid some of these
problems.
*Dan, echo-y* Good Design
Man, remember Advance Wars?
No one’s talking about Advance War… oh.
OK, never mind, everyone’s talking about
Advance Wars.
But it’s for a good reason.
Advance Wars is an incredible tactics game.
Super easy to play, hard to master, and filled
floor to ceiling with all the charm and character
you can fit in a game about endless war.
They’re probably fine.
So much of that charm comes from the game’s
excellent character design and sprite work
on both the commanding COs and the units.
Every CO has a cartoonish personality and
memorable design that adds a ton of character
and ties into their playstyles.
Sami’s urban Rambo vibe hints at her strong
infantry and capture power.
Max’s ridiculous Spongebob anchor arms signal
he’s a brute force, close-range type.
Olaf’s clearly not gonna let some snow stand
in his way.
Especially not his Japanese iteration.
Grit is tall, lanky, and laid back, just like
his… preferred unit range?
Yeah, that works.
The character designs work as a shorthand
reminder for their personal gameplay strengths.
After years of not touching the series, I
jumped back in a few months ago and it was
easy to get up to speed.
Advance Wars brings the charm to the battlefield
through its sprite work and animations.
The sprites for each unit are clear at a glance,
and between unit types have enough differences
to stay interesting.
Every sprite uses excellent iconography with
distinct silhouettes and shapes, even when
units are pretty similar.
The mech’s silhouette is broken up with
a big bazooka crossbar to separate it from
the standard infantry and designates its purpose
as a slower, anti-tank unit.
The lil’ tank is two-thirds the size of
the medium tank and can zip around the map
quicker.
From the long, thin double-barreled anti-air
and the tiny recon car to every plane and
the alien-looking Neotanks, every unit in
the game has some unique feature that distinguishes
it visually.
Add in just a hint of bouncy animation on
the map screen, and your forces are brought
to life without a lot of extra work.
The battle animations do some heavy lifting,
too.
A massive chunk of the game is unit-on-unit
violence, so putting fun animations in there
helps break up any monotony that could’ve
crept in over a half-hour-long battle.
The fights are all based on HP and percentages,
and the animations liven up something that
could’ve been very dry math.
Aside from the infantry, each faction has
a few unique unit designs that appear only
in these battle animations.
Either different uniforms or even different
types of planes and tanks, often based on
real-world military equipment.
But it’s not all THAT much different here.
That could be improved upon.
But who would make their own version of Advance
Wars?
No one.
This segment is over.
Wait, that’s not right.
2019’s Wargroove is the sort of fan-driven,
fed-up-with-waiting spiritual successor you
love to see, right next to Stardew Valley
and Freedom Planet.
It’s just Advance Wars but with a unique
setting and ten years’ worth of stylistic
and gameplay improvements, and meticulous
attention to detail in the game’s art and
animation.
The whole game is set in a medieval-ish fantasy
setting, but each faction is of a slightly
different flavor: The classic European medieval
Cherrystone, the undead armies of Falheim,
the nature-aligned Floran, and the Japanese-and-clockworks
Heavensong.
The focus has shifted, though, from the CO-equivalent
Commanders to the units.
The Commanders are unique units with their
own sprite work, but the game outdoes itself
with the diversity of its faction units.
There are a lot of one-to-one translations
from Advance Wars - Infantry become Swordsmen,
Mechs are Pikemen, Tanks are Knights, APCs
are Wagons, Bombers are Dragons, and so on
- but each unit has a much more unique design,
faction to faction.
There’s just so much detailed sprite animation
the game has to put out for each unit.
Every one of them has its own quirks and style,
beyond anything that the Advance Wars series
tried, and yet they find ways to apply different
thematic skins to a unit while still making
it identifiable as equivalent to that of other
factions.
Whether the unit is a knight on horseback,
an archer, a dragon, or a witch on a broomstick,
each keeps the most recognizable traits while
mixing in the visual quirks of their respective
factions.
The Floran knight reads as a knight at a glance,
but the knight rides a buffalo instead of
a horse.
The Heavensong dragon is entirely mechanical
but still a dragon.
The artists at Chucklefish took into account
the size, pose, clothing, weapons, and more
for each unique unit but still fit it within
a basic template for each type to keep it
recognizably a part of the set.
It’s a ton of extra work to do, but the
results speak for themselves.
Wargroove has done a great job of adding life
and variety to their units while keeping them
all feeling part of the set.
*Dan, echo-y* Bad Design
That’s weird, the interstitial card just
stopped.
Does this link do anything?
*click* Oh no.
No no no.
Oh god.
Aw crap.
Crap.
The episode is all virusy now.
Crazy Bus.
Geez, no no no.
What’s going on, what’s with the music?
No.
Spamton?
We’re not talking about Deltarune, what,
get out of here.
Ugh, am I gonna have to format my computer.
Oh my god, my HUD.
My XIV HUD!
What did they do to you?
Ugh, this is gonna be such a pain to fix.
JoCat: Hey Dan, I tossed you my car keys by
mistake and- WHAT IS HAPPENING IN THIS EPISODE?
Dan: JoCat help.
The episode’s breaking.
Find a plug or something.
JoCat: I GOT IT!
*shutdown noise*
Dan: Ahh, you did it!
Thanks JoCat.
You have canonically saved Design Doc.
I now owe you ONE COLLABORATION VIDEO.
JoCat: All right!
WELP I’m gonna go play video games when
I should really be working on a script instead.
Dan: Me too, JoCat.
Me too.
*chill vibes outro from Final Fantasy XIV*