Itch.io’s on fire
Donkey Kong is fine 
What the hell is going on?
Let’s talk about design!
We’re back with more Good Design, 
Bad Design! This is our 17th edition,  
but if you’re a newbie, this is where we 
talk about graphic design and increasingly,  
related topics in games. Things like menus, 
UI, UX, color choice, font choice, animation,  
character design. The Presentation of Information.
I hope you like some indies, because today we’ve 
got several. Don’t worry if your favorites are in  
a Bad Design segment, a game can be plenty 
fun even if it looks bad, and vice versa.
All these games we’re talking about today came 
out very recently, that’s kinda weird. I guess  
there’s a lot more you can learn this year. Like 
programming, with today’s sponsor, Boot.dev!
Even if you’re not coding all the 
time, being able to understand,  
write, and debug code is 
an incredibly useful skill,  
in any profession. Python scripts can do 
all kinds of things, if you ask nicely.
Even if you’re not looking for a new career, 
Boot.dev is pretty fun on its own, too! They’ve  
done an amazing job of breaking down the process 
of learning to program into bite sized lessons,  
while feeling like you’re playing a game - 
taking on quests, earning achievements and  
experience points, and working up the levels into 
more complex concepts and topics. If you ever get  
stuck, there’s also an official Discord full 
of real people to help you get back on track.
Programming’s really not all that different 
from a puzzle game, if you think about it,  
and Boot.dev is a cheap way to dip your 
toes in and see if it clicks with you,  
especially with their free demo. Try out 
the courses for free, and when you’re ready,  
you can get 25% off your entire first year with 
my code DESIGNDOC, if you pick the annual plan.  
They’ve got a 30-day no questions asked refund 
policy, so you really have nothing to lose. Try  
out Boot.dev today by clicking the link in 
the description below. Thanks to Boot.dev!
Does UX have to be 100% friction-free to be good? 
I don’t think so. You can absolutely have clunky,  
kludgy, obtuse, difficult, or ugly interfaces 
that make the game better despite their faults.  
Sometimes BECAUSE of them. The klunk just 
needs to be designed with a purpose in mind.
Blue Prince is an amazing onion of 
a game. It’s a chill point-and-click  
mystery with tons of roguelike elements, 
where you have to build the interior rooms  
of your late uncle’s mysterious magic 
mansion, and find clues, notes, hints,  
and objects that can help you get to the even 
more mysterious 46th room at the other side  
of the estate. You’ve got your work cut 
out for ya, kid. The house resets itself  
every day. And you have the stamina of 
a chain smoker. But if you can do it,  
you get the deed. To this straightforward house 
with absolutely no other secrets or red flags.
Blue Prince, among other things, is a game 
of economic management. Your resources are  
keys - which open locked doors, gems - which 
let you build cooler, more expensive rooms,  
steps - which let you move about the house. 
And money, which is money. You have to  
carefully manage what rooms you build, what 
doors you unlock, and which paths you take,  
as each room can impact what rooms you can build 
next. If you’re not careful about picking the  
rooms with the right layout, you might cut off 
avenues to go deeper into the house floorplan,  
and paint yourself into a corner. It’s a 
complex game of architectural management,  
but that’s only the surface layer. As 
you build out the house and gather stuff,  
you’ll find loose thread upon loose thread, 
pointing at dozens of house mysteries to solve.
This isn’t a specific example, but to give you an 
idea, a hint in the secret garden might help you  
solve a combo lock in a bedroom, or find a secret 
element you can interact with in the observatory,  
or give you the context to understand 
a letter you found in the mail room.
Unlike many other point-and-click adventure or 
mystery games, gathering clues and resources in  
Blue Prince is a very manual process, without 
a ton of in-game hints about what to do next.  
You have to keep a sharp eye out for the keys, 
gems, and coins each room holds, but also for  
hidden information, all of which you’ll have to 
pick up manually. It’s not streamlined at all.
In a game like Lorelei and the Laser Eyes, 
your character has a photographic memory,  
and can reference almost anything 
worth referencing if you dive into  
a menu. Blue Prince takes the opposite philosophy.
There’s no checklist of ‘important’ 
clues that you’ll get to keep in your  
back pocket to reference later. That’d be 
counterproductive. Part of the game is to  
figure out for yourself what is and isn’t 
important, and there’s plenty of both.
But it isn’t a super user-friendly UX. 
You’re expected to keep a notebook with you,  
writing down things you think might be clues,  
so you can reference them if you stumble onto 
something suspicious later. I’ve got a Google  
doc with 200 pages of notes and screenshots 
for each room of this house, it’s great.
Information is hard-won, and progress depends 
entirely on your own investigational skill,  
and your ability to put far-flung pieces 
together yourself. There’s tons of puzzle  
pieces lying around, so you’ll get plenty of 
practice in, but it’s always up to you to do it.
There’s a general line of thought you see in 
a lot of interface design relating to clues  
and key objects in modern games, where 
streamlined interfaces are necessarily  
‘better’. And that’s a decent rule of thumb, but 
it’s not the only way to build a good interface.
Highlighting interactable and key objects all the 
time can make it so players check out - the game  
playing the game for them. This is how you get 
that ‘Always-On Detective Vision’ playstyle in  
the Arkham games, or the scoutflies simplifying 
tracking and item gathering in Monster Hunter.
The more streamlined a game interface becomes, 
the more a tradeoff takes place. It gets easier  
for players to progress, but they’re less 
likely to remain engaged with the world,  
since each little task requires less and less of 
your attention. Whether that’s a tradeoff worth  
taking depends on what kind of game you’re trying 
to build. A little more obtuseness can be good.
In Blue Prince, the slightly clunky resource 
collection is part of the manual decision-making  
process, too. Picking up everything immediately 
might not be the right strategic move,  
depending on what exactly you want to 
accomplish in a given run, and you’ll  
have to discover the exact tactics yourself. 
But when you do, there are so many subtle ways  
for the game to reward your effort. It’s hard to 
describe here, but the rabbit hole goes so deep.
The more you understand what you’re building 
toward, and the more you plan out how to  
maximize the resources you find, the deeper 
each run gets. More rooms drafted means more  
clues you can discover, and more connections 
between rooms you can make, and slowly,  
the house-wide layers of mystery will start 
to surface. THAT process is what gets people  
to fall in love with Blue Prince, and it’s a 
process built entirely through the work that  
the player personally has a hand in doing, from 
start to finish. YOU did this. Every bit of this.
The manual UX may slow things down a 
touch, but it more than makes up for  
that inconvenience with what it does to 
the overall vibe of the game. Every step  
you take in the puzzle is one that you alone are 
responsible for uncovering, and for solving by  
your own actions. It makes for the most satisfying 
mystery-solving game I’ve played in a long time.
So I got a Switch 2, and like literally 96% of 
Switch 2 owners, I got Mario Kart World. It’s yet  
more Mario Kart, and that’s all I wanted. I can’t 
complain about the tracks. I don’t even mind the  
intermission sections that much. But you know me, 
I’m a stickler for menus, and this game kills me.
I don’t know what it is with first party Nintendo 
games, but their UI teams can’t seem to display  
big lists of things anymore. The ones in Echoes 
of Wisdom fell apart only after you filled up  
your inventory. Mario Kart’s are a problem 
from the start. Like the character select.
There’s no reason half of the three thousand 
characters couldn’t have been costume options  
in a submenu. I don’t care what you say, 
Burger Toad is not a new character. We  
already went over this in Mario Kart 8. 
Scrolling end to end to find unlocked  
costumes takes way too long.
BUT this vehicle menu IS way 
better than the reels in 8.
In the Time Trial mode, data is barebones, 
and doesn’t show individual lap times  
anymore. Racing against ghosts can be 
annoying, too. The world record and  
friend ghosts are all combined into this 
big unlabeled jumble to scroll through.
In Free Roam there are more usability 
problems. There’s tons of stuff to collect,  
but Free Roam doesn’t give you enough 
info about what you’re collecting. How  
many Peach medals are there in total? Where 
are the ones that you’ve already collected?  
How many are in each region? Who knows! 
There’s info on the Question Mark panels,  
and the costumes you still need to unlock, 
so why not everything else? The P-Switches  
and Peach Coins thankfully change color based on 
whether you’ve completed them but you’ll be better  
off looking up a 3rd party map if you wanna 
go for 100%. Also, there’s no compass. C’mon.
I’m just surprised a team that can make 
THIS is OK with menus that look like THIS.
Are these menus bad? Yes. Is it a minor point 
in the grand scheme of Mario Kart World? Sure.  
Should Nintendo be able to do better by now? 
I think so. Is this still, on balance,  
a step up from Echoes of Wisdom? …yeah. At 
least the game itself is really good. And  
how can I get mad at a game that lets 
me play as dolphin driving dolphin?
Maybe there’s still hope.
Wait, I forgot about one more Mario 
Kart thing. They borked up their online  
lobby track selection. They said 
they fixed it… they did not. But,  
that forced me to Switch 2 the second 
best Switch 2 game: Donkey Kong Bananza.
It’s good!
Bananza is kind of a crazy platformer when 
you think about it. The core mechanics revolve  
around being able to dig through the majority 
of every environment in order to find stuff  
and complete objectives. If you really really 
want to, you can literally dig a level out to  
its skeleton - this greenish indestructible 
stuff that works like bedrock in Minecraft.  
But even though it seems to be built on the 
idea of shaping and destroying every stage,  
Bananza is still a collect-a-thon at heart. 
But then… how do you make a 3D collect-a-thon  
platformer where half the stuff you’re 
looking for is hidden underground?
Bananza on its surface is not too 
dissimilar from Mario Odyssey,  
with a few structural changes. Mario didn’t have 
character progression, but Donkey Kong now has…  
a skill tree! You collect bananas and fossils that 
enhance DK’s abilities, or unlock cosmetic pieces.
All the stuff to collect is scattered 
in different underground layers,  
which are huge, densely-packed sandboxes 
with a ton of verticality to dig through.
The bananas, and especially the fossils, are 
mostly secreted away underground. Some are  
on the surface, but for most, you’ll have to 
navigate through solid material to find them.
There’s never been a more ‘find the 
needle in the haystack’ collect-a-thon  
than this. It could’ve been very 
easy to lose your way in here.
Nintendo’s in-house development 
team had to figure out how to make  
traversal and navigation tools that made 
digging around as painless as possible.
First of all, moving around is a breeze. DK 
can climb most surfaces and can punch in any  
direction at any time, so digging your way 
around and back up to the surface is rarely  
a problem. Getting lost isn’t an issue 
either. DK can clap to do a sonar pulse  
that both grabs nearby pickups like gold, and 
more importantly, highlights key objects and  
collectibles that might be hidden nearby 
- either underground, or behind a wall.
The physical movements and the degree 
of x-ray vision that the camera itself  
has could’ve been a problem in a 
game like this. Just look at how  
annoying wrestling with the camera in 
Mario 64 is when it hits solid objects.
What to show and what to hide when 
there’s lots of stuff between the  
camera and the character is not 
an easy problem to deal with.
As you dig around in Bananza, the camera goes 
slightly out of bounds, exposing other objects,  
underground caves, and other terrain, including 
the indestructible skeleton of the level,  
and even other tunnels you’ve dug up. 
The game shows you clear boundaries and  
landmarks all the time, so you can keep track 
of where you’ve been and where you’re going.
Not only does the game have to deal with showing 
the weird and ever-changing physical space,  
but it also has to design the visuals 
for the layer on top of that - the  
markers and guidepoints the game uses 
to point you in the right direction.
This game has tons of objectives to do, 
but putting all of them on screen all  
the time would’ve cluttered this interface up 
immensely. To get all this cruft out of the way,  
you can keep track of your objectives by singing, 
which brings up tons of waypoints. Some for your  
current big objectives, but also for marked 
collectibles you know about through treasure  
maps. Since half of this game is underground, 
it could’ve been easy to make it confusing as  
to where exactly objectives were located in 
3D space. The singing tool helps highlight  
that there’s almost always something for you 
to do close by, and you’re never left to work  
through a ‘needle in the haystack’ problem 
where you have no idea where to go next.
I do like the 3D map in the menus, too. 
It updates as you tear down the level,  
and points you in the right direction. On the 
off chance that you’ve destroyed TOO much, where  
you can’t get to where you need to get to, you 
can always just manually reset the terrain too.
This Donkey Kong game bananafits from the 
careful work put into all its navigation tools,  
to make the physical properties of the 
world not get in the way of the fun of  
navigating the world. Nintendo has built a 
game that’s both topographically complex,  
yet easy to interact with. You can 
turn your brain off and go full ape.
I really, really like Rocket League. It’s just 
car soccer! It’s got a rock-solid physics model,  
pretty good netcode, and a sky-high skill ceiling.
But what if Rocket League 
was soccer… soccer? Welp,  
the studio that made Sifu changed gears 
completely to make just that, with Rematch.
Rematch puts you behind the steering wheel of one  
soccer player, in matches 
of 3 to 5 people per side.
But the rules in Rematch aren’t quite the 
same as real soccer. There’s no offsides,  
for example. You can hang out the whole game 
right next to the goalie if you want. It’s  
just a free-for-all of players on a field, 
and whichever side can score the most will  
win. But even without the exact ruleset, the game 
comes with a lot of the tactics of real soccer.
Since everybody playing is 
controlled by a real person,  
y’all are going to have to figure out 
how to play without the ball. And for  
the love of God remember to pass to your 
open teammates. Like me. Please. Come on.
I mean, I don’t watch a ton of real soccer, 
but it does feel to me like a decently faithful  
recreation of the beautiful game. Positioning 
and spacing matters a lot. Aiming accuracy,  
one-on-one moves, and coordination 
with your team can have you running circles around  
your opponents. It can be flashy and very fun when 
your whole team gets a touch right before a goal.
  
What a simple, brilliant idea for a competitive 
online game. Ahh. How’s the netcode?
Oh no.
Rematch feels like a throwback from 2002.  
I haven’t seen a modern game 
this hitchy in a long time.
‘What does this have to do with graphic 
design?’ you say? Maybe it’s a stretch.  
But this awful netcode does play on the idea of 
‘The Presentation of Information’. This game is  
all about positioning and anticipation. Maybe 
it’s not as fast-twitch as a fighting game,  
but it’s still just as important to be able 
to read the situation and be confident in  
what’s happening. To execute on any actual 
plan, you need to know where the ball is,  
where everyone is standing, and where you should 
try to run to. This layer of netcode jank makes  
it so you are never quite fully confident about 
where the ball is, or where the goalie will be.  
If you lose the ball, was it your mistake, or 
did the game not show you the right info? The  
constant second guessing is not a good place 
for a competitive multiplayer game to be.
But if you STILL don’t think that’s graphic 
design-y enough, I’m sure I can find something.  
Uh… hmm. OH, got it! Alright, check this 
out. Rematch’s control prompts are jank,  
but they’re jank in a VERY SPECIFIC way! Up 
here. Why would you put ‘A’ and ‘E’ as your  
left and right submenu toggles when using a 
mouse and keyboard? The controller maps it  
to left and right bumper, but ‘A’ and ‘E’ aren’t 
positioned in the right place for that. Why’zzat?
Can you guess why if I told you that the 
developer Sloclap is a French studio?
Here’s the layout of a keyboard. ‘Q’ and ‘E’ would 
make the most sense as a pair for left and right  
on a QWERTY keyboard, right? They don’t got QWERTY 
keyboards in France. They got ‘AZERTY’ keyboards.  
Look at that. NOW 
‘A’ and ‘E’ make sense. It’s a localization  
issue. They hard-coded the keyboard bindings 
to be French. How’s that for graphic design?
This footage is almost all recorded right 
after the recent patch, too. I’m sure it’ll  
improve - I HOPE it improves - but I’m 
playing this under protest. When it works,  
the game’s amazing, but going 
from Rocket League’s netcode to  
THIS is a gigantic step backward. 
Maybe check back in a few months.
Alright, it’s time to tear this friendslop 
down a couple… wait, Good Design? Really?
Huh. At first glance, Peak can seem like just 
another goofy flavor of the month co-op game,  
but it does a few clever things with 
its interface and visual design that  
help make it a surprisingly good, 
and easy-to-learn, climbing game.
Peak is a pseudo-Roguelike-survival-climbing 
mashup, where, after your plane goes down,  
your only shot at rescue is to climb up a series 
of biomes to get to the title card, and get saved.  
The mountain is the same for everyone playing, but 
a new one gets created every day, so the game is  
about reading the landscape and finding a viable 
route to the top - with or without your friends.
There’s only one limiting factor. Well, two, 
with the fog, but just don’t be slow and you’ll  
be fine. They condensed all the other limiting 
factors into one clever little bar at the bottom  
of the screen. This is your stamina bar, and 
like in Breath of the Wild, you can only climb  
for as long as your stamina will let you. But 
everything you do might impact the size of  
that bar. Every negative status will take a bite 
out of it. Hunger, fall damage, poison, burns,  
cold, spooky, sleepy, and heavy. You have to 
manage your inventory, watch where you step,  
and be careful not to fall too far in order to 
keep your stamina bar high and make sure you  
have the strength to climb up the routes you spot. 
Short bursts of climbing are your go-to move, but  
sometimes the only way up is to slap a band-aid 
on, eat your toasty marshmallow stick, and grit  
it out to make the next landing. Your friends can 
lend a helping hand, too. Better keep them around.
Each form of damage is represented 
with its own icon and color,  
and each bar segment is distinct from the 
others, so it’s easy to take a glance at  
the bar and know exactly what you need to 
do to feel good again. When you take a hit,  
the screen will pulse with that color, 
to really reinforce the cause-and-effect  
of what you’re doing, and to make sure 
you’re kept aware of your changing limits.
I love the stamina bar here. It’s such an 
intuitive way to take a half dozen unique  
statuses and make them all impact the game’s 
biggest mechanic. And this system does make  
every one of these statuses feel like they 
really, actually matter, in an equal way.  
A little hunger is something you can power 
through, but if you let these little chip damage  
bits add up, you’ll really start to feel it as 
you try and fail to get to platforms you would’ve  
easily gotten to if you weren’t half dead from 
an errant land mine, or took a walk in the lava.
Environmental hazards are often color-coded 
to the bar as well. Purple is poisonous,  
like the blotches on this poison ivy. 
Deep blue ice is too cold to touch,  
and glowing red rocks of magma will soon burst 
into flames in front of you. Also don’t touch.
Making this game easy-to-read in general 
was clearly a visual design priority.  
Besides the bar, it also shows up in 
the weather hazards in some biomes,  
like freezing directional winds. 
Bold colors, simple systems.
None of this is complicated, but it doesn’t 
have to be. Like many bits of great design,  
using basic color coding for a whole 
range of effects and mechanics is simple,  
but it solves a whole bunch 
of problems at once. Good job!
And that’s it, that’s all the 
design out there. If you want  
to broadcast your personal design 
opinions, you now have TWO options:
One, check out our new Good Design, Bad Design 
stickers! Bam. You can slap these on anything.  
We’ve got a few other new stickers in the store 
too, so check that out to help support the show.
Two, head to the comments and let us know about 
games you want us to put into future Good Design,  
Bad Design episodes. Since we’ve started doing 
this series, it’s been getting tougher to find  
truly terrible graphic design in commercial 
games, so any tips we get are appreciated.
Great design doesn’t have to be a monumental 
thing. It doesn’t have to be flashy or  
complicated. It can be simple, understated, 
or just really convenient, and improve a game.
*chill vibes from Vividlope*