I’m a big fan of games with interesting
high concepts.
Premises that grab your attention by themselves.
With a good enough high concept, even a game
that doesn’t do anything new with its gameplay
can be a compelling and super fun experience.
But, a game works even better when it can
be paired with gameplay that harmonizes with
that high concept, to make a good experience
unforgettable.
That’s easier said than done.
A great high concept is a fantastic starting
point when making a new game, but developing
it into a real, playable, fun game is a lot
harder.
There’s a game that I’ve been playing
lately that underscores this perfectly.
Let’s talk about Battle Chef Brigade and
see how Trinket Studios took a stellar idea
and adapted it, for better and for worse.
Battle Chef Brigade is… well, it’s a lot
of things actually.
It’s part Iron Chef, part 2D brawler, and
part Match 3 style puzzler echoing Puyo Puyo
and the Puzzle League series, with a quaint
anime style, sparse in animation, but with
a whisper of that Studio Ghibli charm.
The game takes place in a society built around
the Battle Chef Brigade, a league of super-chefs
who serve as judges, investigators, scientists,
bodyguards, and of course cooks.
You play as Mina Han, who is driven to leave
her sleepy country town to compete for the
right to join their ranks.
To get in, she’ll have to prevail in a yearly
tournament heavily inspired by the 90’s
Japanese cooking show Iron Chef.
A 1 on 1 competition with picky judges, philosophizing
on cuisine, and an eccentric chairman running
the show.
The tone is light and upbeat, and the characters
are all very likable as Mina and her newfound
friends deal with the ups and downs of the
competition and discover hidden secrets of
the other Battle Chefs and of the world.
The setting feels cohesive and lived-in, and
the narrative makes the single player campaign
way more interesting than most other single
player puzzle games.
Start to finish, the game is really fun, and
I recommend it for its interesting premise
and varied design.
It’s good! *whispers* But now let’s talk
about how its bad
As you spend more time with the game, some
things might start to feel a bit… off.
Out of place.
Tacked on.
Given the game’s Iron Chef premise the world
the game exists in feels appropriate, the
Ghibli-esque style makes sense, the narrative
structure is fine, but the gameplay mechanics…
something’s off here.
So what’s going on that makes the combat
and puzzle sections feel a bit disconnected?
Battle Chef’s gameplay flips between two
halves - hunting and cooking.
When you face off against another chef, you
need to literally hunt for the ingredients
you need to cook in a 2D brawler akin to Odin
Sphere, Dust: An Elysian Tail, or Guardian
Heroes.
Slaying a dragon or slashing a sunhat tomato
will let you pick up ingredients to take into
the kitchen.
Once you’ve gathered your ingredients you
can start preparing your dishes in the game’s
cooking mode.
Here, you drop ingredients in one of your
cooking vessels - a 4x4 board.
Each ingredient is made up of a few ‘taste
gems’, essentially elements.
Light up the fire and move a cursor around
to ‘stir’ the board and swirl around the
gems.
Line up 3 gems of the same flavor and they’ll
combine into one ‘upgraded’ gem, which
you can do again up to a level 3.
Each cooking vessel can give you bonuses like
only matching two gems to upgrade, or slowly
upgrading gems automatically.
Keep adding ingredients, stir to upgrade,
maybe combine two dishes into one, try to
keep the poison out of your dish, match the
flavor profile with the judge and serve before
time runs out.
The combat is not the best with some really
bad hitboxes, imbalanced movesets, and a very
limited scope.
You can pick up a few different combat moves
in the store to try out, but your moveset
is pretty complete from the beginning of the
game.
The game’s cookable monsters are pretty
limited too - less than a dozen types per
map.
The ingredients you get for slaying a monster
drop randomly which makes piecing together
a strategy a little less predictable, but
not really in a fun way.
Every monster spawns in the same place, so
it doesn’t really feel like hunting the
wilds for what you need either - it’s ‘go
here for the wind fruit, over here for the
armarock spawn, and here’s the sauce chest’.
Every round.
The combat section also tries to incorporate
an interesting ecosystem idea.
If you kill a monster and let the ingredients
get eaten by other monsters, new ingredients
can appear.
Birds lay eggs, plants turn into bugs, and
so on.
A living ecosystem could be an interesting
risk/reward system when combined with the
round timer, but the game doesn’t give enough
of an incentive to use it.
The ingredients you get are not that special,
and they can take too much of your limited
time to set up.
Back over in the cooking section, the game
feels a little off here, too.
Battle Chef Brigade is clearly inspired by
Puzzle League - a fantastic series of tile
swapping match 3 games.
But Battle Chef Brigade changes a lot of the
underlying strategic elements.
Tetris Attack for example, has only 5 or 6
different gem types and a bigger board to
use.
The board in Battle Chef Brigade feels claustrophobic
in comparison - a 4x4 grid with essentially
11 different gem types feels crowded and hard
to make matches in.
The strategy in all Puzzle League games centers
around carefully setting up combos and clearing
a bunch of gems in big chains, which then
sends hard-to-clear garbage blocks over to
your opponent’s board.
There are combos in Battle Chef Brigade as
well, but they don’t cause blocks to be
sent over to mess with your opponent.
Setting up chains of clears doesn’t build
the combo and the combos only help upgrade
a gem one ‘level’, which isn’t that
tough to do normally, and can be done easier
through some other tools like slow cookers.
The combo system is just… there.
Left over.
Even some of the mechanics feel like an echo
of another design.
For example, you have to light the stove after
adding ingredients to start matching gems.
Doing that as a separate action might have
made more sense if combos had to be carefully
set up, and then you could trigger the start
of the chain.
If combos don’t matter as much, then that
design choice feels out of place.
The tweaks made to the mechanics in the cooking
section make the game have a problem with
its first-order optimal strategies - the best
moves to make don’t change much game to
game, and make the game a bit too predictable.
Unlike Tetris Attack, you and your opponent
don’t really interact in Battle Chef Brigade.
There’s nothing you can do to sabotage,
or even to know whether or not your dish is
better than your opponent’s while you’re
making it.
Your opponent is not much more than a points
threshold.
Your best bet is to always make a board that
looks something like THIS or something like
THIS.
Get close to that and use the right color
gems for each judge, and you’ll win every
time, even on the hard difficulty.
Mix in some of the bonuses for special recipes
like an all vegetarian meal, and you’ll
be like...
Fantasy Anime Julia Child.
Target a few specific ingredients, mix them
together in the same way, and you’ll just
win.
You don’t have to adapt to anything.
Tetris Attack makes you adapt.
Puyo Puyo makes you adapt.
But in Battle Chef, it feels more like you’re
following a recipe.
*in background* M: HAHA, GET IT???
M: DO YOU GET IT?
D: I…
M: Do you get it??
D: I get it.
M: Do y… ok, good.
So yeah, the game’s brawler and puzzle mechanics
are a little disappointing at a strategic
level, but if you know the game’s development
history it’s at least understandable.
In 2014, Battle Chef Brigade was funded on
Kickstarter, making $100k on a tiny $38,000
goal.
The Kickstarter shows off the game’s great
visual style, and its unique theme, but if
you look closely at the pitch video you can
see how the game’s mechanics progressed.
In an interview with Monster Vine, Eric Huang,
head artist for Trinket Studios, said he had
fallen in love with Guardian Heroes’ 2D
combat and knew he wanted that style in Battle
Chef Brigade.
The Kickstarter video shows off the hunting
section of the game, which seems largely intact
in the final product.
But the cooking side is completely different!
It wasn’t a match 3 game.
There were references to sweet and sour flavors
instead of elements.
Very little of what was shown in that video
made it into the released game.
Huang says that the puzzle side was the last
thing to get nailed down - “In order for
us to get to the idea of food done in a match-3,
it actually took us a year because we tried
so many different things.
Our first tries at cooking systems were way
too cumbersome, and not fun to play.
So finally we decided how we abstract the
flavors of our ingredients into elements like
fire, water, earth.”
A year before release they gave out a demo
to Kickstarter backers.
In the demo, the match-3 mechanics are shown
off, but some of the cooking vessels had the
tiles move around like Yoshi’s Cookie, as
shifting rows and columns.
The combo system actually did matter more
and contributed to your point total.
Nailing down the final design of the cooking
half of the game wasn’t done until after
that 2016 demo.
That could mean the developers had less time
to fully play test the game with an eye toward
the strategic depth of the system they had
created, and could explain why the game’s
mechanics don’t mesh quite as well when
compared to a more focused puzzle game like
Tetris Attack.
Borrowing elements from other games can be
a great foundation to build from, especially
on a time crunch, but the balance of a game
can be very delicate.
Take away game elements, change context, or
add too many new ideas and that foundation
can crack.
Despite the problems in hunting and cooking,
the really interesting thing is that the game
still works.
Just barely.
The key is how the game forces you to keep
shifting gears.
Put this on the stove, then quick get more
stuff, now your bag is full so drop it off
in the kitchen, cook more, stir, go back out
for more green gems, come back, serve one,
one last thing to add, oh god 5 seconds left,
serve and time!
The game doesn’t let you sit still for long
enough to get too bored or annoyed at any
one part of the game.
The satchel limit for picking up items keeps
you from hunting for too long in one stretch.
Some of the pots encourage you to start cooking
early in the round, so you’re bouncing between
cooking and hunting.
If the game stuck you in the hunting section
for much longer than it does, the game would
bog down.
If the game forced you into the puzzle section
for longer than it does, you’d run out of
stuff to do.
Even between cooking rounds - the puzzle,
hunting, and restaurant mini games keep battles
from becoming a slog.
By hopping from station to station the game
comes together, even if each part of it could
work better.
Battle Chef Brigade is a game with an amazing
high concept, an interesting story, and fun
gameplay, even if it doesn’t have the deep
strategic foundation of the games it’s inspired
by.
So many parts of the game don’t stand up
to scrutiny on their own, but the game as
a whole is better than the sum of its parts.
This is the exact kind of game that could
use a sequel.
Given a bigger budget and more time to work
out the kinks in the different gameplay systems,
Battle Chef Brigade has the potential to be
a spectacular series.
[Chill vibes outro music from Battle Chef
Brigade]