It’s one thing to be superpowered in a game,
it’s another thing to become untouchable.
Invincibility is almost always the biggest
reward a game gives its players, but it’s
not something to give out lightly.
A lot of games only work because of the give
and take between risk and reward.
Invincibility removes that risk, and if you’re
not careful, that can remove a lot of the
fun along with it.
Let’s figure out how to make invincibility
fun on a very special, very powerful 100th
episode of Design Doc!
Feel invincible inside steel armor and blast
through the front lines in today’s sponsor
War Thunder!
War Thunder is a free-to-play, large-scale
multiplayer action game with ground, air,
and naval combat, available for PC, PlayStation,
Xbox, and Mac.
Over 2500 tanks, helicopters, planes, and
ships of 10 major nations are ready for you
to command, everything from the biplanes of
the 1920s to the main battle tanks of today.
The vehicles have sophisticated damage modeling.
You can disable engines, wreck the crew, all
kinds of stuff has been modeled to make a
more realistic fight.
I’m a fan of arcade jet fighting, and this
game scratches that itch no problem.
They’ve got modes running the gamut from
an Arcade mode, to Realistic, to Simulator
mode for maximum accuracy.
Check out their new Alpha Strike update, and
the new map North Holland, built for intense
tank and aviation battles.
The update adds new Hungarian planes, other
new equipment, and includes a big improvement
in visual effects.
Over 70 million players have tried it.
The game has some gigantic PvP fights ready
for you to jump in at any time.
Download War Thunder for free.
We’ve got a link in the pinned comment and
the video description.
Sign up with our link and get a massive bonus
pack: rentals for the P40E-1 aircraft and
M4 tank for a week, and free unique skins,
the exclusive ‘Eagle of Valor’ decorator,
100,000 Silver Lions, three premium vehicles
for free, a week of premium account, and more!
It’s available for all new players and those
who haven’t played War Thunder for over
six months.
Hurry, though, the American vehicle bonus
season will end soon, so get in there and
keep fighting the good fight.
Thanks, War Thunder!
Every video game is a house of cards, built
with game mechanics.
They’re oddly shaped.
Some don’t fit together, but others fit
nicely.
Mechanics support and build off of each other,
and if you can get the balance just right,
you can reach amazing heights.
But that doesn’t make the building stable.
Remember Game Genie codes from way back when?
They worked by overriding pieces of the game’s
instructions to do all kinds of crazy effects.
What you could get a Game Genie to do could
be completely different game to game, but
one of the most popular types of codes you’d
read about is the Invincibility code.
It would take whatever part of the game was
responsible for losing your hearts or hit
points, and just made it not do that anymore.
Just like that, you were invincible!
In some ways.
Invincibility codes could be a fun way to
screw around in a game you knew by heart,
but there were drawbacks.
Turning on an invincibility code made it pretty
likely that the game design didn’t work
quite right anymore.
If a game was built on risk, threats, combat,
and skillfully maneuvering around enemies,
those mechanics almost always need you to
be able to lose to be fun.
Without the risk, there’s no tension, and
quickly it starts to feel like you’re just
roaming around a landscape.
If you’re going to let a player be invincible,
you have to design around it.
So if you’re trying to add invincibility
into a game on purpose, what can you aim for?
What does a player being invincible actually
help you do as a game designer?
There are a number of cases where invincibility
is used to provide something specific, or
to create a distinct feeling in a player.
Becoming invincible is a power fantasy.
It just is, it’s part of the deal.
And as one, it can work as part of a grand
set piece meant to be a moment of triumph,
It can turn a sequence into a victory lap.
Metroid Dread’s ending section is a straightforward
example of this.
After enduring a very tough 3 phase boss,
Samus is given the super-powered Metroid Suit
and gears up to fight the true final bo…
oh, nope.
Samus one-shots it with a big hyper beam…you
know what…that’s just fine.
Samus has never felt more overpowered than
this, and you follow it up with the series’
traditional final escape sequence.
You get to zip around with your super suit.
Nothing can touch you, outside of the time
limit.
Your health is unlimited and all obstacles
and enemies get obliterated with that hyper
beam.
If this was any longer than 5 minutes, it
might get boring pretty fast, but as a one-shot
escape sequence to celebrate your win, it’s
fantastic.
Invincibility can also be a great tool for
accessibility, in the right situation.
The standard set of difficulty options can
be augmented with a mode where you just can’t
be defeated.
For games where the draw is the story, an
optional invincible setting lets people who
just don’t want to deal with your mechanics
anymore still get more fun out of your game.
For games that appeal to a younger, or a family
co-op audience, your players who maybe don’t
have the skills yet for your full experience
can still have a good time.
You can leave in some marker that signifies
that the game is being played on an easier
mode if that’s important to note, but including
an invincibility option can let as many people
as possible play the game in the way they
want to, or are capable of playing it.
Invincibility can make it easier to play a
game, but it doesn’t always have to be a
free pass.
Moments of invincibility can be the key turning
points in games whose gameplay focuses on
building up and releasing tension.
Pac-Man is one of the earliest examples of
an invincibility power-up with its power pellets.
Each board in the arcade original has 4 of
these placed in the far corners of the maze,
and they’re your only option to take out
your ghost pursuers.
When you eat one, the ghosts turn blue and
you can eat them by running into them.
You know, it’s Pac-Man.
The safety they provide is fleeting, though.
The effect only lasts a few seconds before
things are right back to normal, but that
moment of catharsis when the pursued becomes
the pursuer is pretty great.
Each round reduces the effect’s duration,
until eventually they barely do anything anymore.
You’re supposed to lose and put more quarters
in, after all.
Even so, the power pellets give the game a
much needed moment of safety to release the
tension a little before building it back up
again.
Pac-Man Championship Edition DX leans into
that feeling as hard as it can.
CEDX changes a few fundamentals.
One, way more ghosts.
Two, some of them start asleep and wake up
when you run by.
Three, instead of the ghosts just chasing
you normally, the ghosts also follow you in
a big ghost train.
As you pass by more ghosts, they join the
train.
Some of them will even have power-ups like
the power pellets on hand.
The maze keeps changing shape until it eventually
leads you to a power pellet.
It’s no longer about a short moment of relief.
Grabbing the pellet becomes a peak as you
turn back to the ghost train and go to town.
As you eat the ghosts and additional pellets,
the power-up timer extends a little, so scoring
high in CEDX is about time management and
chaining together pellets.
Maybe you keep part of that train in reserve
instead of eating the whole thing to maximize
your points or keep things under control.
It’s up to you.
Sometimes invincibility shows up in unusual
ways.
Perks that keep you from losing if you were
going to can fit into almost any game.
Balatro has Mr. Bones, a joker that sacrifices
itself if you were about to lose to a boss,
as long as you sorta kinda made it close in
the end.
Not only do you not lose, you win!
Balatro is full of bosses that can neutralize
your engine of points - making all the cards
of a suit worthless can wreck an engine built
for flushes, or a boss that hides your cards
can make it almost impossible to play the
straights that you leveled-up.
Mr. Bones can get you past that challenge,
as long as you’re willing to give up a joker
slot while you hold onto him.
It’s not the most useful joker, but in the
right circumstances it will save your run.
If you’re going to focus on the mechanics
of invincibility, you can get extremely detailed
with the who’s, what’s, where’s, when’s,
and why’s.
I-frames let you tinker with the idea as a
useful tool.
Invincibility frames, or I-frames can be part
of the game’s reaction to a player taking
damage.
It gives just a little bit of breathing room
for a player to react to the situation before
getting hit again.
Without I-frames, a character might get hit
several times a second.
If there’s no knockback, the character is
probably still touching whatever it is that
hit them the first time.
If you could get damaged immediately, it’d
be very easy to create a scenario where a
full health character gets blasted down to
zero before a player could do anything about
it.
I-frames give that buffer to keep players
from stumbling into a no-win situation.
Most games use SOME I-frames when you take
damage.
Maybe not a ton, or maybe the amount will
vary depending on how you got hurt, but some.
Kid Icarus on the NES gives you a second's
worth when you touch an enemy, but much less
for poison water.
In there, your health ticks away much faster.
It's so rare for a game to completely skip
I-frames on hit, that when it does happen,
it's often thought of as a bug or a design
oversight.
The classic Sonic games normally give you
some on a normal hit from an enemy, a projectile,
or spikes.
When you're invulnerable, you get to stand
on top of the spikes and jump off of them
like normal ground.
The original Sonic 1 on the Genesis, however,
handles spikes weirdly.
Step on one, and you’ll get knocked back
and lose rings like normal.
Get knocked back ONTO OTHER spikes, though,
and you’ll immediately die.
No I-frames will save you.
It’s called the ‘Spike Bug’, but it’s
not known whether or not the behavior is intentional.
Later games remove it, but that might just
be an acknowledgement that it’s not fun
hazard behavior.
You can even give the power of I-frames directly
to players.
It’s helped out most of the Soulslike games
for sure.
Rolling in Dark Souls, Elden Ring, or countless
others makes you invincible in the middle
of the animation.
It’s an all-purpose dodge that frees up
monster attack design to be more dramatic.
The rolling I-frames make it so players don’t
have to worry quite so much about whether
they can get away from a big sweeping sword
attack in time.
Without the I-frames, it’d be almost impossible
to fight against so many of the larger enemies
in particular, whose big sweeping attacks
would keep you from getting anywhere near
melee range with your dinky little spear.
The shield’s not bad.
It’s pretty safe.
I guess.
Kinda slow though.
And real tiring to like… hold it there.
Man.
Know what’d be way better?
Throwing yourself around.
Full out diving.
Rolling is a bit more demanding of your timing,
but if you know what you’re doing, you’ll
be totally safe.
Better yet, you could roll INTO the attack
at the right time, and make this monstrosity
rue the day it went up against Rollson the
Tumblr.
If you want, you could get way, way more detailed
with I-frames, too.
Combat depth in most fighting games depends
on split-second timing windows, including
when a character is immune to damage at specific
points of an attack animation.
Basically every competitive fighting game
uses them, but let’s just look at Smash
Bros, since they have this nice I-frame highlight
setting.
Rolls and spot dodges will make you invincible,
of course, but you can also do it by pulling
yourself up from a ledge or getting up off
the ground.
Different moves have unique patterns of I-frames,
where players have to get pretty familiar
with a character to know the right window
to counterattack.
Sometimes only parts of the body will be immune
to damage.
They aren’t set in stone either, a move
like the roll will start to lose I-frames
if you use it too often.
The system has a level of detail that only
the most dedicated players will dive into,
but that commitment to detail also brings
with it the professional-level skill ceiling,
high enough to make the game a spectator sport.
I-frames and power-ups are cool, but what
about letting a player become invincible as
a normal ability?
That shows up in many RPGs, MOBAs, and shooters,
often through some skill in a character’s
toolkit.
It can be a short burst of zero damage, maybe
a few seconds, to get in there and do your
worst.
The long cooldowns these abilities almost
always come with keep them from becoming game-breaking,
but deployed at the right time, it’ll negate
tons and tons of damage.
It’s also great for tactics, to get a character
positioned to where they can be most effective,
either by closing the gap to melee range,
or by letting you flee from the fight as an
emergency option.
In an MMO like Final Fantasy XIV, it’s usually
the emergency one.
MMO tanks are all about soaking up hits and
keeping enemy aggro away from the squishiest
members of your squad.
FFXIV’s tank skills are full of things that
let you buff your defense, and no skill is
more effective than the invulnerability ones
that give you that perfect cover.
Each of the 4 tank classes put their own spin
on the idea.
The Paladin's Hollowed Ground is just 9 seconds
of straight invulnerability, no strings attached.
Pull dungeon mobs all day, and all you have
to do is wait seven real minutes until the
cooldown ends.
The Warrior's Holmgang is also straightforward,
but needs a little more timing.
You'll still lose health, you just won't be
able to lose that last hit point.
They get powerful self-heal abilities to get
back to good health, but you've still got
to make sure you don't lose your shield before
that.
Gunbreaker's Superbolide makes you fully immune
like Paladin, but it takes away all your HP
right away.
Hope someone can get you back up to speed
before the effect wears off.
It’s also the best way to jumpscare your
healers.
Keep ‘em busy.
The Dark Knight has the most emergency button
option of the 4.
Living Dead needs you to die after using it
in order to work.
You'll stay alive for another 10 seconds,
and your skills gain a strong self-healing
property, but you do need to heal back a chunk
of your health before the timer ends or you'll
die for real.
In older expansions it used to be infamously
worse, too, with no self-heal perks, and basically
forcing a healer to babysit you to even get
you a chance to come back to life.
I can’t get footage for this, good riddance.
Invulnerability is a major tool in any tank’s
kit, but each flavor brings with it its own
tactical changes that makes each class its
own thing in the same role.
It might not always show how much it matters
in casual content, but for high-end fights
like the Savage and Ultimate level raid bosses,
the little details matter.
Invincibility isn’t even stuck as a mechanics-only
thing.
Immortality has been a theme in literature
forever, and game stories can deal with invincibility
as a theme too.
If your character couldn’t die, how would
that affect them?
How would it change how they see the world
and their place in it?
Lost Odyssey is a JRPG whose story is centered
around the immortality of half of its main
cast.
The game weaves around Kaim, one of several
immortals present in this world, as he works
to regain his memories and piece together
what exactly is going on.
He has to wrestle with the mortality of everyone
he knows, befriends, or gets close to, while
he stays ever the same.
The game includes a compendium of very well-written
side stories called the Thousand Years of
Dreams that describe vignettes from Kaim’s
long life, and how he changes as the centuries
go on.
The theme is integrated back into the game’s
battle system as well.
The mortal and immortal characters learn skills
in different ways, and even how they each
deal with getting KO’ed is different, with
immortals coming back to life in a few turns
every time.
No such luck for the rest of ‘em.
Lost Odyssey is criminally underrated, go
check that out.
Invincibility doesn’t have to be temporary.
There are games where you just permanently
can’t die.
What they tend to do instead is redefine what
failure actually means.
If you can’t lose your health, there has
to be some other element of risk to take its
place.
You can have a game where the question isn’t
‘Can you get through with your life?’
but instead ‘How well can you get through?’
Kirby’s Epic Yarn is a very, very chill
platformer.
You don’t have to worry about losing your
life to these yarnbois.
It’s a great way to get a younger player
new to gaming used to the controls of moving
a character in a game world.
But if you’re into more of a challenge,
this game still has something for you to dig
into.
Kirby ranks how well you clear levels.
More beads collected means a better medal.
Taking hits won’t hurt you, but dropping
your beads all over the place won’t charm
the judges.
If you want to get the gold, you have to finish
the stage with as many beads as possible.
Explore everywhere, grab everything, and try
not to get snagged on too many enemies in
the process.
It’s a simple ranking system that rewards
skillful play and exploration.
It’s not super challenging, it’s still
Kirby’s Epic Yarn, but systems like this
are a great way to give players something
to strive for when they no longer fear death.
There are of course games with much deeper
ranking systems.
I like the one in Pizza Tower.
Outside of boss fights, there are no health
mechanics at all.
You can take as many hits from enemies as
you want, and aside from getting knocked around,
it’s not going to stop your progress.
The only way to ‘die’ in Pizza Tower is
to run out of time and get caught by Pizza
Face.
The challenge instead comes from figuring
out how to master a stage to score better
and reach those elusive S- and P-ranks.
Pizza Tower gives you a combo count when you
take out enemies and resets it when a timer
hits zero.
You can lengthen the combo timer by extending
the combo or getting points by collecting
items or destroying objects.
High combos are key to getting enough points
for higher ranks so the real penalty for getting
hit is how it can ruin your combo by cutting
that timer down.
If you’re just looking for an S rank, a
dropped combo here and there isn’t a dealbreaker.
Just get a pretty good chain going at some
point, grab most of the collectibles and secrets,
and you’ll be fine.
Maybe do the optional Lap 2 if you’re low
on points.
You’ve got some wiggle room.
If you want that P-rank though, you’ve got
to go for a near perfect run.
Grab everything you can, every major collectible
and secret, complete the second lap, and do
it all while keeping your combo going for
the entire stage.
Choose to be untouchable, or kiss that P-rank
goodbye.
This is Pizza Tower’s greatest challenge,
completely optional to pursue, but oh so satisfying
to overcome, even if all you can manage is
the S-rank.
Without any health bar or fear of death, the
game still presents a tense and compelling
challenge, from carefully raising the skill
ceiling into the stratosphere.
I’d be hard-pressed to not talk about Wario
Land after Pizza Tower.
That game really drove home the idea that
a failure state in a game can simply be a
loss of progress.
Wario can’t die in Wario Land 2 and 3, he
can only be tossed aside.
The stages in Wario Land are built as sort
of an obstacle course to navigate.
A lot of enemies don’t really hurt you.
They might make you lose your precious coins,
but they’re more into pushing you off course.
Some just do it by literally pushing you,
but many have an extra trick up their sleeves.
Wario Land 2 and 3 are full of transformation
status effects that can be inflicted by enemies.
Bee stings make you float, Zombie Wario lets
you shuffle around and fall through stairs
for some reason, and a lot more.
The levels are often built where getting one
of these statuses means you can’t get past
some parts of the level.
You won’t jump high enough or move fast
enough to get to where you need to be.
To make it to the end, you have to get through
the gauntlet of enemies while mostly staying
as your normal self.
If you fail, you’ll often have to retrace
your steps to return to normal before you
can progress.
Sometimes, though, you DO want to be hit with
a status.
Secret passages are everywhere in Wario Land,
only accessible by turning a disadvantage
into an advantage.
Float into this tiny crack as Flat Wario to
get to secret areas, that kind of thing.
Even without a normal way to be hurt in Wario
Land, that doesn’t keep the level design
from being challenging.
One more little note before we go.
It’s been 8 years, but we finally made it
to episode 100!
If you started way back when this was my college
thesis, or if this is your first time here,
thank you for your eyeballs!
I got ‘em now.
You can help us keep making episodes of Design
Doc by signing up for our Patreon.
We put each new video out there a little earlier,
and you can also get our behind-the-scenes
podcast we do for every episode, and a newsletter
of some of the new stuff we like each month
from around the Internet.
Patrons really help us out, so go over and
sign up!
Thank you for watching!
*chill vibes from Mario Kart Wii*