So you’re saying the pentagram works?
Hmm.
Alright, you’re the doctor.
If a game has combat, it’s probably going
to have some healing system.
Pills, beams, regeneration, food, spells,
hot springs, hotels, BloodRayne.
There’s a thousand ways to flavor healing,
but there’s another question you’re going
to need to grapple with.
If the player can heal, what’s the catch?
There’s not a lot of drama in it if you
just get right back to where you started.
If you can wipe away the consequences of combat
so easily, is combat so much of a risk?
If your reward is a new lease on life, what
are you willing to give up?
Let’s talk about how to spice up a healing
system.
Eh, maybe you’re not fit for medicine.
Maybe computers instead?
Learn to code with today’s sponsor, Boot
dot dev!
According to Stack Overflow, the median salary
for backend developers in the US last year
was over $100,000.
Boot dot dev has taken the tactics from modern
game design and applied it to coding with
an eye towards starting a career in backend
development.
The platform is designed to get you writing
a LOT of code right away to help you avoid
tutorial hell, and they’ve embedded the
lessons into a full-on RPG, all that stuff
keeps you locked into the learning process.
It’s self-paced, and by the end of it you’ll
be able to code in the Python and Go programming
languages like a pro, perfect for tackling
your personal game design projects.
If you get stuck, Boot dot dev subscribers
also get access to an active Discord community
full of people learning alongside you, and
can help you tackle technical interviews and
build a successful programming career.
If you’ve ever been curious about learning
how to program, this is your chance!
Take it!
Click the link in the description box and
use my code DESIGNDOC to get 25% off your
first payment for boot dot dev.
That’s 25% off your first month or year,
whichever you choose.
Thanks to Boot dot dev!
So what’s the problem with healing anyway?
Healing’s great.
It might be necessary, in some form.
But if your plan is to just add some health
to a health bar and call it a day, that’s
a little dull, isn’t it?
There’s a lot more room for creativity.
You can use healing systems to build interesting
choices for a player to make, or not make.
Dilemmas they have to puzzle through, sometimes
at a split second’s pace.
Designing a spicy healing system takes something
that most games have, and keeps it from getting
tactically boring.
The Kingdom Hearts devs found that out the
hard way.
The first Kingdom Hearts has a weird healing
difficulty curve over the course of the game.
The first quarter of it, you’re weak, your
defensive options are limited, and all you
can do to heal is vacuum up tiny health orb
drops and use up your limited item inventory.
Once you finally unlock Cure, though, the
game turns into a different…
game.
Cure is easy to use and quick to activate.
The spell upgrades, too!
As you get more MP and you get the higher
level Cura and Curaga spells, the game gets
exponentially easier.
You can save yourself at a moment’s notice
for a small fraction of your MP bar.
Cure spamming is a viable way to get through
most fights, even to the point of foregoing
other magic options to save all that mana
for healing.
It simplifies the game a bit.
Maybe too much.
To address how overpowered it could be, Square
overhauled both the MP bar and the cure spell
for the sequel.
Instead of segments, spellcasting now makes
you spend mana points just like a lot of other
games.
Don’t spend it all, though.
Dropping down to 0 MP puts you in an ‘MP
Charge’ state, where you have to wait through
a cooldown before getting your spells back.
Cure is still around, and you can use it whenever
you want!
But it’ll cost you.
How much?
Well, how much ya got?
Curing costs the entire remaining bar, so
you’re guaranteed to be locked out of magic
for a time if you use it.
You really have to commit if you’re going
to heal yourself, it can’t be spammed anymore.
This change also made offensive magic more
appealing.
You don’t have to save up for a cure if
you can spend the bar down to 1 MP and cure
anyway.
If you’re going to be locked out after the
cure either way, why not, right?
Cure in Kingdom Hearts 2 became less of a
crutch and a get-out-of-jail-free card, and
instead helped give players the go-ahead to
explore more of their combat options beyond
cavemanning and healing.
You can think of healing like an 'undo' button,
meant to correct any major mistakes in combat.
If that 'undo' is free - if it lacks checks
and balances - that can drain all the tension
out of fighting.
Why learn how to fix a bad habit, if you can
heal away the problem?
You might be able to ignore major elements
of a combat system entirely if basic attacks
and generous healing lets you get through
it anyway.
Cheap healing can dramatically reduce a game's
challenge if it’s the optimal strategy.
Players loooove to optimize, even if they
optimize out the fun in the process.
The two new open world Zelda games have surprisingly
intricate combat systems.
If you’re not allergic to weapons breaking,
many players find the early parts of the games
to be the most satisfying.
You’re barely getting by in fights with
low health, limited resources, and a heavy
dose of improvising.
Combat is scrappy - for a while at least.
As you get more hearts and more options, that
fades away, thanks in no small part to the
game’s cooking system.
As you grab ingredients, you can easily make
full-restore meals by just slamming a few
things together.
As long as you have access to a cooking pot,
you can store dozens of these things, and
even throw in a few combat and defensive bonuses
on top for flavor.
When you’re in a fight, no matter what’s
happening, you can pause the game, eat something,
and be right back to full strength.
As long as you’re not getting one-shotted,
you’ll be fine.
There’s not even a limit to how many meals
you can eat at once.
You can even eat ingredients by themselves.
Eat forty apples, if you want.
That’ll do the trick.
Even if you get one-shotted, the game provides
fairies to bring you back from the dead.
You’re an unstoppable healing machine.
Luckily, the games are fun for other reasons,
but this healing system is way more forgiving
than other Zeldas, The limited inventory slots
and bottles in the earlier games made you
think more carefully about getting into fights
stacked against you.
It’s fine to have a very generous heal system,
but just recognize that it’s going to dramatically
alter how combat feels.
Great, now you’re convinced that a spicy
healing system can be Important.
I’m glad I’ve convinced you so easily,
kudos to me.
So let’s say you’ve got a healing system
already that you want to spice up a little.
What can you mix into it?
Health doesn’t have to just be about how
far your lil guy is from dying.
The health you have can also impact whatever
other stats you’ve got.
Advance Wars has always had a special relationship
with unit health.
The combat power of your units is proportional
to their HP.
The weaker one of these tanks is, the weaker
its punch.
The less health this infantry has, the more
turns it’ll take to capture a building.
Units with 1 HP are good at taking pot shots
and taking up space.
Better to try to heal up if you can.
So how DO you heal your dudes?
Everyone has access to two main ways: You
can either have them wait on top of friendly
properties and gain 2 HP per turn, or you
can merge two of the same unit, and their
health numbers will be added together right
away, up to a max of 10.
Since heavily damaged units can’t contribute
much to the fight, this can be the fastest
way to get one back to fighting shape.
It’s a tradeoff, though.
You aren’t really ‘healing’ a unit as
much as you are ‘consolidating’ them.
None of them can heal above 10 HP, and you
can’t split the merged unit back up.
You’re essentially sacrificing one of them
for immediate health, and that means sacrificing
anything that one extra guy could do for your
plans.
Even an APC with 1 health can take up a square.
When you merge a unit, it can’t even move
again until next turn.
Healing is quick, but it’s not quite an
instant turnaround.
If that unit was getting hammered last turn
and can’t move, you might be right back
to where you started in a hurry, and with
one less unit.
If you merge things to heal, you might have
a harder time boxing your opponent out from
capturing a city, or keeping them from running
around your front line to attack your flanks.
The number of units you can bring to the party
can be as big of a factor in winning a fight
in Advance Wars as how much health each one
has.
They might be cannon fodder, but they’re
YOUR cannon fodder, damn it!
There’s no quick fix for healing in Advance
Wars.
You get your health back, but at what cost?
Time?
Or manpower?
Or even more than that.
Othercide is a roguelike tactical RPG - a
little bit XCOM, a dash of Child of Light,
and some dramatic color choices.
You can heal units, called Daughters, in Othercide
by sacrificing higher leveled characters into
lower ones.
The surviving Daughter gets her health restored,
plus some cool traits.
Better traits come from higher leveled sacrifices.
Othercide is built to get you to build up
characters and fold them into the next generation,
all while under the risk of permadeath, XCOM
style.
The game’s healing and progression mechanics
make getting too attached to any one character
a possible way to sandbag your entire run.
To build up, you must first tear down, or
something like that.
Healing can also be risky by how it excludes
you from taking other actions.
This shows up all the time in games with animation
lock.
Hollow Knight has a spell called 'Focus',
which lets you spend some of your SOUL meter
to repair one unit of health at a time.
However, it's not just the SOUL cost that
you have to worry about.
You've gotta commit to it.
You have to hold down the spell button until
the cast can finish.
Be careful though, you have to be very selective
about when to start the process.
If you get hit while casting, you take damage,
you don't get the extra health, and you waste
the SOUL meter that you were spending.
Picking the wrong moment can put you in an
even worse position than you were in already.
It's not a complicated animation lock, but
the system doesn't have to be complicated
to still make you think hard about when to
heal.
Fromsoft uses animation lock in a similar
way.
The specifics change game to game, but many
of them use a recharging consumable item as
your main healing option, like the Estus flask
in Dark Souls.
Generally, you can only use the flask so many
times before you have to recharge it.
You can upgrade that number, both in charges
and how strong each one can heal you, but
you’re not going to be so full up on Estus
that you get to stop thinking about how to
deploy it effectively.
The healing itself can be gradual in some
games instead of instant, and the punishment
that your opponents can dish out is far more
devastating.
It creates a moment of hesitation, even when
you know the right move is to heal.
Do you have the chance to do it right now?
Or do you have to wait a second?
Or move to a safer spot?
The signature feel of Souls difficulty is
partially built from making no moment truly
safe, not even when you’re recovering health.
Get even more extreme with it and you might
find yourself inside Monster Hunter.
No game series emphasizes animation lock more.
Every action you take is tempered by finding
the right opportunities, and almost EVERYTHING
you do requires you to make at least some
level of commitment.
Healing is no exception.
Using potions in the older games locked you
in place as you chugged it.
They even did a little celebration flex animation
before letting you move again.
Like the other games we brought up, healing
at the wrong time can put you in an even worse
position than before.
The level of commitment forces you to actually
study the attack patterns of the monsters
you fight and to search for those golden opportunities.
They’re in there, but you do have to find
them.
It’s part of what made the series generally
unforgiving for new players, and at the same
time contributed to the depth of each encounter.
The more modern games like World and Rise
let up a little, and you could drink a potion
while moving.
You could even roll out of the healing animation
before it finished if you really needed to.
They also added more ‘area of effect’
heals, which can be more convenient in some
cases.
Still, even with the changes, you had to pick
your spots.
Your AOE heals aren’t always available,
so break out the potions.
In return for the potions being more convenient,
you do lose the item if you get hit or have
to roll out of the animation.
The tweaks make the system maybe not as punishing,
but that doesn’t mean it isn’t risky.
You can absolutely go too far with animation
lock healing, though.
Ever had to lock your physical body into an
animation?
Metroid Other M has a ‘Concentration’
mechanic.
Unlike any other game in the series, enemies
don’t drop health or ammo when defeated.
You only get patched up at save stations.
They’re all over the place, but it’s still
a little odd.
Aside from that, all you have at your disposal
to heal is Concentration.
Normally it’s used for reloading missiles,
but it can give you back a bit of health if
you’re in critical condition.
Find a spot, and Statue of Liberty your Wii
remote.
Better hope the motion controls play nice.
And that there’s no monsters around.
Animation lock healing is meant to be annoying
in some degree, but making you do it physically
is a step too far.
It’s right in that maximum-awkward era of
motion controls, which has mostly been abandoned.
Nothing will ever be as 2010 as bad motion
controls.
You don’t have to get too cute with these
healing mechanics.
Healing feels kinda defensive, y’know?
You could change up that healing feeling by
tying it to offense instead.
Let’s call it Ironic Healing.
Healing systems can be an efficient way to
push players into a playstyle.
The way you reward resources like health is
naturally going to make some styles of play
more successful than others, and players will
generally drift towards those.
In a lot of older shooters, falling to low
health encourages players to hang back and
become cautious, defensive, and slow down.
Hanging behind cover, taking pot shots, maybe
waiting for a regenerative shield to pop back
up.
In many games, that was all you COULD do to
survive, and it cut against the fun of most
action games.
I love Modern DOOM.
It’s whole deal is geared toward making
you become the DOOM Slayer, the single best
possible person you could come up with to
kill all of these demons you’ve got running
around.
Everything about the game’s aesthetic, tone,
and gameplay encourages adrenaline-pumping
aggression and violence.
Including the way you regain health.
The Glory Kill system is built to give out
more stuff if you weaken an enemy into a stunned
state, rush in, and take them out up close.
You get wayyy more health and ammo than you’d
get by just hanging back.
It seems a little risky to do, but that’s
the point of the extra rewards.
It’s active encouragement for you to get
all up in there,
swapping to the right weapon for the job,
and getting as many Glory Kills as possible
to keep yourself alive in the process.
It’s exhilarating, and defines the feel
of the two modern DOOM games.
Now, you don’t HAVE to play like this to
beat the game.
Enemies will still drop some health and other
items if you hang back, but there aren’t
any guarantees unless you rush in where angels
fear to tread.
With one tweak, DOOM’s Glory Kills flipped
player behavior on its head, and let the game
become the kind of aggressive shooter it was
always meant to be.
if you want the same system but even LESS
abstract, try Ultrakill.
All the blood flying out of the demons you
shoot is your health regen, and you can absorb
it in the air, which is easy thanks to the
game’s focus on fast movement.
Just grab it before it hits the ground.
Wouldn’t want any of that floor blood, gross.
If you want to tie healing to aggressive actions,
you aren’t limited to shooters and action
games, either.
F-Zero is one of the few racing games where
health is a constant factor.
In most of the series, your machine’s health
is also tied to the boost mechanic.
You can speed yourself up whenever you want,
but it’ll drain your health bar in the process.
You can recharge at the track’s healing
pads, but there are only so many of those
scattered over a track.
You have to juggle your resources, choosing
whether to boost a ton and increase the risk
of blowing up, or play it safe and… probably
lose.
Some of these games add in a little more reward
to your risk by giving you a bit of energy
for eliminating other machines, to encourage
aggressive play.
F-Zero 99 takes it even a step further.
KO’s in F-Zero 99 are important.
You get rewards that carry over between sets
of races for all the people you…
‘ReTiReD’.
But there are two types of KOs.
One is for these grey CPU drivers, which give
you a bit of health for getting the last hit.
But if you want a full charge, you can take
out a real person driver.
Both of these make the meter itself extend,
giving you more boost to play with for the
rest of the race or the grand prix.
Player KOs are less common, since you need
to have another person make a pretty big mistake
at just the wrong time for you to have the
chance to get it, but if you see a smoking
car on the track, you better believe everyone’s
going to rush in to try to claim the kill.
If you’re low yourself, you might just get
blown up in the fight to blow up the other
machine.
If you time it right though, man, nothing
feels better.
Boost your way to the front, you’ve earned
it.
F-Zero 99’s KO system turns a limited healing
mechanic into something that causes bloodlust,
and I wouldn’t have it any other way.
Healing in a risky healing system almost always
has to come at the cost of foregoing something
else.
It’s about the opportunity cost.
This pattern shows up in many of the games
we’ve mentioned already, but some games
are more blatant about it.
Healing in fighting games is somewhat rare,
but it does happen.
Your life bar is the most important resource
you have, and some games let you recover a
bit of it through Red Health.
It’s more common in Tag Team formats, like
Marvel vs. Capcom, Dragonball FighterZ, and
Skullgirls.
The specifics vary game to game, but it generally
looks something like this: As your characters
take damage, part of that damage shows up
as a red section of the health bar.
You’ve lost that health, but you do have
an outside chance of getting it back.
If you tag out your active character, they
can regenerate that health while they’re
on the bench.
As long as you’re fine without that character
for a while, you can recoup some of that damage.
At any time you can tag them back in, but
any remaining red health will be forfeited.
The question becomes ‘How badly do you need
that character RIGHT NOW?’
Could you hold out a little bit longer and
give them more of a chance to recover, or
do you need them to make a power play?
It’s just one element, but it adds depth
to a match, and can punish a player that miscalculates
one way or the other.
It’s yet another split second decision that
has to be made and re-made in a game type
that thrives off of navigating those decisions.
In Roguelikes, the time or money you spend to
heal can seem cheap, but winds up being very
expensive over the long haul.
Repairing things in FTL always comes with
an opportunity cost.
If you need to patch up your ship, the cost
could be as simple as credits.
You can’t spend them on other things, but
that’s just how money works.
The bigger dilemmas show up when you have
a choice between repairing your ship or gaining
something else.
You can encounter someone who can help you
repair, OR give you a cool weapon.
Repair, OR upgrade your systems.
Some bad encounter where you lose half your
health might bite you again when you can’t
pick up both the secret upgrade and keep your
hull from splitting apart.
Your crew might need repairs, too.
Each of your crew has their own health bar.
Boarding a ship and fighting their crew, getting
hit by a missile, walking into a fire, and
the harsh vacuum of space can all do some
damage, and can get harrowing if you’re
in the middle of a tense fight.
To heal up your crew, they need to physically
walk over to your med bay and stand there
for a bit.
There’s a weird healing gun too, but that’s
not cheap, either - or all that convenient,
really.
While they’re getting back to fighting shape,
they aren’t doing their normal job.
Maybe the shields won’t work quite as well,
or the weapons take longer to load without
a crewmember manning the station.
In a tense fight, that can easily contribute
to a bad encounter spiraling into a deadly
one.
Even worse if one of your crew dies and you
lose all of their hard-won skill bonuses.
You can’t just replace a crew member at
a moment’s notice.
There are only so many ways you can get another
to join you, and they won’t show up in the
middle of a firefight.
Damage in FTL is painful, and the game steers
players towards choosing their encounters
very carefully, lest they be sliced open in
empty space.
Dave the Diver has a slightly inverted take
on risky healing.
Chill out in this ocean dreamscape, where
all you have to do is keep an eye on your
oxygen meter.
Don’t wanna run out of that.
OK great…
and the health bar?
Where’s the health bar?
Uh… ow.
Oh, the AIR is the health bar.
OK.
You’ve got a lot of time and a lot of O2
canisters you can use to top up, so you shouldn’t
feel too much pressure down here before you’ve
maxed out what you can carry back to the surface.
But if you’re going shark hunting, you’re
gonna have to plan this out a little more.
You can suck down a can of air to heal right
away, but you barely have any slots to carry
around a spare, and it takes quite a while
to go pick one up.
Especially if you’ve pulled aggro on one
of these guys.
You have to prepare before you go, but you
can’t course correct much once you commit
to the fight.
How big of a fight do you think you can survive
with what you’ve got on hand?
If you get the mix wrong and run out of air
down here, it isn’t a huge deal.
You’ll just lose all but one of the items
you picked up on this dive.
But there’s a lot of cool stuff down here.
It’d be a shame to leave it behind.
In Dave the Diver, the healing itself isn’t
risky, but that healing comes at the expense
of plenty of other things you could be doing
on this dive.
Healing doesn’t always have to be risky
to the healEE.
It could be risky to the healER instead.
The Medic in Team Fortress 2 shoots a beam
out to quickly heal whoever they can get kind
of close to.
The beam can overheal, too, giving a big chunk
of extra life over the max.
Medics tend to jump around, person to person,
to top everyone up.
If they’re any good.
When an attack starts, though, they sometimes
shift to becoming a pocket medic, tethering
themselves to someone attacking the front
lines and hanging by their side as they go.
For the defenders, it sure would be nice to
take out the medic first, so they can’t
undo the damage you do.
Where is that medic any… oh.
It’s much harder to blend into the background
if you’re doing the healing, which makes
it a touch riskier to be on the front lines.
Anyone paying attention knows exactly where
all the team’s healing is coming from.
The medic might be the juicier target, and
the constant visual indicator of active healing
can remind the opposition to take out the
medic first.
The game didn’t have to do it like this.
It could’ve been invisible, or an auto-healing
pack, or any number of things that didn’t
paint a target on the healer.
But they did.
And the game’s probably better for it.
Your least risky move of the day is to go
look down in the comments.
This channel’s audience is actually pretty
good with the comments, it’s nice.
Go down there and let’s talk about weird
healing systems.
Games with no healing at all.
Auto-healing.
Any kind of weird system you know about, shout
it out down there.
Healing can feel very basic, but there’s
no reason it can’t be the most interesting
part of your game.
Healing happens in high stakes situations,
so you’ve got plenty of material for compelling
gameplay.
Add something unexpected into a healing system,
and you might suddenly find yourself with
your game’s new centerpiece.
*chill vibes from Pokemon Black and White*