Stealing in games is ancient. There have basically 
always been games whose core mechanics involved  
taking things that aren’t yours. But no idea that 
sticks around that long is going to stay exactly  
the same. Developers have taken the basic concept 
of stealing, and morphed it, little by little,  
to reflect what they think would make the most 
fun in their specific context. Now, decades later,  
the act of stealing can mean all kinds of things 
in a game. With dozens of different related,  
but distinct mechanics, new devs have tons of 
options to borrow from, and cross-pollinate with,  
to make a thievery system in their 
game that feels fresh. But to do that,  
you first have to know what’s out there, 
and why those systems do what they do.
Let me take your hand. … … No? 
Fine. Let me take you BY the  
hand while we explore stealing mechanics in games.
Learn how to say 'steal' in 41 different 
languages with today's sponsor, Mondly!
Mondly is a language learning app from Pearson, 
with over 125 million users. Mondly helps you  
learn anything from Spanish to Japanese with its 
chat interface and speech recognition technology,  
helping give you real-time feedback and actually 
improve your pronunciation quickly. Mondly's  
focused on giving you practical lessons recorded 
by native speakers to keep it authentic and very  
useful. If you've never done it before, 
you'd be surprised how satisfying learning  
a new language can be. Mike speaks Spanish 
and French, and you get a thrill every time  
you see a newspaper article that you don't have 
to translate, you can just read it right there.
Mondly has a hands-free mode, too, so 
you can learn a language while cooking,  
working out, or going about your day.
Mondly's winter sale is going on right 
now, and Design Doc viewers get 96% off  
lifetime access. IT'S A STEAL! Go 
to mondly.app/designdoc to get 96%  
off lifetime access to 41 languages and 
start learning today. Thanks, Mondly!
So how are we going to tackle this? 
I don’t think it makes a ton of sense  
to do a strict timeline. I think the best way 
to tackle this will be in style…z. In styles.
Many games borrow similar styles of thievery 
mechanics from other games in their genre,  
so I’m going to name these styles after genres.  
Nothing forces these mechanics to stay 
there, but it happens pretty often,  
and it’s the best shorthand label I can 
think of. There are plenty of exceptions,  
though, and discussing them will be great comment 
section material, so shout them out down there.
Let’s start with a very common 
one - Open World-style stealing.
The Open World style leans into free-flowing 
action, searching for opportunity,  
and dealing with consequences.
Elder Scrolls, Fallout, Starfield, 
and others. Stealing in these games  
is not too complicated. Often it comes 
in two related, but independent forms:  
pickpocketing - stealing from people - and 
burglary - stealing from the environment.
Pickpocketing involves a little stealth, and 
a little luck. Your chance to take what is not  
rightfully yours depends on a few things. The 
general awareness of the victim, the properties  
of the item you’re stealing, and your general 
skill at pickpocketing, as defined by the game.
Burglary can be a little simpler. Burglary 
success often only depends on whether or not  
someone spots you in the act. More complicated 
burglary scenarios often mean figuring out how  
to get physical access to the space with the stuff 
you want. That can range from simply getting past  
guards, to a whole assortment of lockpicking 
and hacking minigames to open sealed areas.
Regardless of whether the goods you want are 
in someone’s pocket, or on a table somewhere,  
thievery goes hand in hand with sneaking around.
Sneaking can be as simple as whether 
an NPC spots you at that exact moment.  
It’s an intuitive restriction, but that 
mechanic often gets finicky. Sometimes  
it’s literally line of sight, like in Skyrim, 
where if you block the vision of a character,  
they can’t see what you’re doing. It’s not the 
easiest thing to tell if you’re visible to NPCs  
in these games. Line of sight is tricky to 
judge to begin with, and being fully aware  
of the game world around you is very tough 
when you only see one screen of it at a time,  
so often these games will straight up 
tell you whether or not you’re detected.
It might be a UI contrivance, 
but at least it keeps you from  
surprise-failing your task quite so often.
All these pickpocketing mechanics are used 
most often to take things, but you can get more  
creative with it, too. There’s no reason why you 
can’t use the same mechanics to plant items ONTO a  
person. Games have used that idea to let you frame 
NPCs with evidence for story purposes. Or, you  
could take advantage of the freedom of the open 
world, and plant a stick of dynamite onto someone.
But Open World stealing can’t be only dynamite 
murder. By itself, these mechanics can tend to get  
a little too zany and cartoonish, and some games 
aren’t going to want that vibe all the time. To  
try to balance it out a little, designers almost 
always add a system of consequences in this style.
The most straightforward one is for NPCs to simply  
become hostile if they spot you 
taking things that aren’t yours.
The Outer Worlds might have you and the victim 
talk it out, before they immediately resort to  
violence. Maybe you can smooth talk your 
way into not getting punched in the face.
Bethesda loves to make their guards judge, jury, 
and executioner, if they spot you breaking the  
law. Getting caught stealing lets you choose how 
to resolve the issue - through paying a fee and  
losing the stuff, teleporting to jail and losing 
the stuff, or trying to fight your way out WITH  
the stuff. It’s in SO many of their games, it’s 
practically a company hallmark at this point.
Even if no one’s around, some games 
quietly keep tabs of your sins in the  
background. Fallout New Vegas docks you 
points in karma when you take things,  
even when no one’s looking. That karma system 
can impact your companions and your ending,  
though New Vegas’ karma system is pretty 
busted morally, if you look into it.
So you can get arrested by guards, or 
you can feel karmically bad about it,  
but a game might still need a more 
concrete limit to these systems.
Being able to steal whatever you want 
could have disastrous effects on a game  
economy. With no limits, you could flip all 
your stolen stuff for cash and immediately  
gain the most expensive gear, making the 
intermediate stuff obsolete immediately,  
and destroying the appeal of earning money 
through quests, or any other way. Speedrunning  
these games often involves grabbing some obscure 
item off of something, for exactly that reason.
To dampen that effect, selling goods might be  
limited by the amount of gold 
any shopkeeper has on hand.
What you can carry also might be limited 
by a weight-based over encumbrance system.
Your character’s skill at thievery 
might be limited by a hard number.  
Open world games with level 
up systems might have you  
put points in pickpocketing before 
you’re able to steal better stuff.
Some games limit the type of gear you can 
take until you get a high enough skill. Skyrim  
blocks off weapons and other equipped items 
until you gather tons of experience in it.
Low skill characters might struggle to 
get away with the goods. Bethesda often  
explicitly puts a hard percent 
chance to succeed on screen,  
and leveling up your skill raises that 
chance. Though, this isn’t a perfect fix.  
Save scumming means that for any percent chance 
to succeed, any player could turn that into a  
guaranteed success if they’re determined 
enough to reload the game until it works.
None of these limits by themselves are that major,  
but the sum total of their effects add up to 
a slightly less ridiculous thievery system.
Open World stealing is great, but it’s 
not for every type of game. If that  
style feels a little too improv-heavy 
for you, maybe you’d prefer something  
that rewards a little more thought 
and preparation. The CRPG style.
This one takes a lot of cues from tabletop 
role playing games, if not straight up using  
their system entirely. It shares some of 
the mechanics of the open-world style,  
but those mechanics end up feeling very different 
when they’re placed in a more regimented,  
turn-based context. This can make some aspects 
of stealing feel less silly, and others way more.
If Open World is more smash-and-grab, CRPG style 
is a little more Ocean’s Eleven. Baldur’s Gate  
3 lets you do most of the thief actions 
that something like Skyrim lets you do,  
but there’s time to stop and 
think through the process.
You get more time to plan and double 
check before you try to pull off your  
heist. You can spend the time to use 
support skills and plan out a complex,  
multi-step process to get in and 
out with exactly what you want.
Having a party of multiple people makes the 
prep work feel completely different. Instead  
of having to do it all yourself, you can piece 
together different specialties to help make the  
thievery more of a team sport. Have your party 
boost your Rogue’s sneaking stat. Send someone  
in to distract the target in a conversation, then 
go in with advantage. Make your thief invisible,  
and get up close without a hassle. If you’ve got 
an idea, you just might be able to pull it off.
  
The teamwork of it all doesn’t change 
that much in the underlying numbers  
versus what you could do in a game like Skyrim, 
but it does feel like a different experience.
Players can create a different kind of 
satisfaction out of making a plan, puzzling  
through contingencies, getting all the elements 
in place, and then making it work flawlessly. Is  
one style better than the other? No, but different 
scenarios can feel more fun in one or the other.
Some CRPGs almost expect you to steal to 
get through the game. Combat in Divinity:  
Original Sin 2 can get expensive. Your 
equipment is only good against enemies  
in a small range of power, so you’re going to 
have to upgrade your gear often. And how are  
you going to pay for it all? Hard work? 
Nah, it’s easier to take what you need.
When thievery is such a powerful tool to get ahead 
economically in the game, a designer has to pay  
even more attention to anti-cheese techniques. 
DOS2 puts lots of restrictions on thievery. Your  
ability to take things in this game depends on 
weight, value, and your pickpocketing skill,  
not unlike the limitations we talked about in 
Open World style. Each player character can only  
pickpocket a given NPC once. Ever. If your master 
thief succeeds, I hope you got something good.
You also can’t take more than the 
hard weight and value limits that  
your pickpocketing level allows you to take. 
Try to push it, and you’ll for sure be caught.  
The Thievery system in DOS2 walks a very 
fine line between under- and overpowered,  
and only through a lot of restrictions and 
limitations is it able to strike that balance.
OK, let’s switch styles and head east. JRPG-style 
stealing. It’s totally different! JRPG-style  
stealing focuses on mystery. The chance of getting 
something amazing, and getting ahead of the curve
In these games, stealing is often a dedicated 
action. Where our last two styles were a little  
more freeform as to when and where, in here 
stealing can come with more of an opportunity  
cost. Instead of attacking, or casting a 
spell, you choose to use your time to steal.  
Use a dedicated command to try to take it, and the 
game will do some RNG to see whether you succeed.
In the most basic version of this, an enemy 
might have one item in their pocket for you  
to take. Stealing might get you something 
as simple as a basic healing potion,  
or a poison remedy, or it might be as useful 
as some gear you can’t find anywhere else.
A more deluxe system shows up in Final Fantasy 
IX. Just like enemies have a table of loot that  
has a percent chance to drop when defeated, they 
also have a table of items that can be stolen,  
and not necessarily just one thing. Each item 
in the table has a percent chance to be grabbed,  
and the more difficult the odds, the better 
the item tends to be. Every enemy has a  
table like this - from cannon fodder to 
every boss and villain. There’s just one  
catch. Unlike the inventories you see in 
Open World-style pickpocketing, in here,  
you have no idea what you’re about to take. Unless 
you spend even more valuable time scanning for it.
Whether you know what you’re getting or not, 
FF9 mostly makes stealing worthwhile. Major  
enemies and bosses often hold exceptional 
gear for that part of the game - high stats,  
or even items with mechanics you may not have 
seen yet. If you don’t try to grab it now,  
you might not have access to it again for hours.
Of course, all the upside of a system 
that reminds me of gacha comes with a  
major downside that also reminds me of gacha 
- the good stuff has very low drop rates. The  
BEST stuff has very VERY low drop rates. 
FFIX stealing is not fun when you have to  
repeat an action dozens of times to get the 
rare drop. I tried to put on cheats to speed  
up getting this footage for the Fairy Flute, 
and I still didn’t get it. You get abilities  
to reduce some of that problem, but even 
so, getting the rarest loot takes forever.
At least if you stick with it, you get 
something good. Unlike Dragon Quest.
Steal rates in Dragon Quest can be 
terrible. I’m most familiar with DQ11,  
but from what I understand, this isn’t 
a new problem. You can easily sit there  
and fail to steal anything for minutes. But 
even when you succeed, more times than not  
the item you get is completely worthless. 
It’s very often a basic crafting material,  
AND it’s the same item you get as a 
common drop from winning the fight.
There are some cases in late game 
crafting where this is worth doing,  
and some abilities that guarantee a steal,  
but for most of the game the lack of upside 
makes this not a mechanic worth messing with.
Some JRPGs let you disarm opponents through 
thievery. Final Fantasy Tactics Advance  
has late game abilities that let you steal 
armor, shields, accessories, helms, money,  
or weapons. Not boots though. You can 
even take one of your opponent’s skills!
This can be a source of a lot of great high-end 
gear, but disarming opponents can be incredibly  
overpowered. Fire Emblem: Thracia 776 has 
basically no restriction on what you can take  
off someone, and enemies can’t really comprehend 
not having any attack power anymore. Thracia also  
has a bulk-stealing mechanic, where if you Capture 
an opponent instead of destroying them, you get to  
take everything they have on hand, and sell off 
anything you don’t need for money. Very powerful.
JRPG pickpocketing can get even quirkier.
A style as abstract as JRPG stealing lets you 
have some leeway in WHAT you take. It doesn’t  
have to be bound by things you can put in an 
inventory. Xenoblade Chronicles’ Riki is a  
Jack-of-all-Trades character who happens to be a 
thief. His special talent art is ‘Yoink!’, which  
at first seems like a standard steal command. Riki 
can steal materials, and equipment, but he can  
also temporarily swipe stats to power himself up. 
HP, strength, defense, it doesn’t matter what, and  
in the right situation it can make a fight much 
easier. Plus it’s just a fun take on the concept.
Let’s leave RPGs entirely and go somewhere 
else. Action game thievery. The action style  
focuses on selling the fantasy of being a 
thief. Aesthetics are important. Putting  
you in that one big flashy moment 
where you finally get away with it.
Grand Theft Auto surprisingly only lets 
you do very much Theft on Autos. Story  
missions INVOLVE thievery all the time, 
but the mechanics of it are pretty sparse.  
A lot of walking to a cutscene trigger 
and watching your characters have fun.
A cutscene or a scripted sequence 
gives you a ton of flexibility to  
deliver the exact right feeling, in the 
exact way you want, with precise timing,  
and actions you could never expect a player 
to perform. It might not be very interactive,  
but it’s still great at getting the 
fantasy across, and that can be plenty.
Action games often include a shop,  
and every other dev seems to put in 
a fun way to take things for free.
Zelda doesn’t give you a ton of opportunities 
to steal, but it does have one famous one. In  
the shop in Link’s Awakening, you can bolt out 
the door while the shopkeeper isn’t looking. The  
fun of it comes out of the rush of getting away 
with something. But once that rush wears off, you  
still have to forever deal with the consequences. 
You can never enter the shop again, else the guy  
busts out his wizard powers, kills you, and 
brands you a thief forever. Was it worth it?
Going all-out with a thief aesthetic can be 
striking enough to elevate an entire game.
If you really look at it, Sly Cooper doesn't 
have any elaborate stealing mechanics at all.  
The game's a platformer at heart, with some 
early parkour magnet jumping in there. You're  
pickpocketing a lot of NPCs, but that's 
not too involved. Stealth is encouraged,  
but getting caught doesn't come with much 
consequence. You might fight your way out,  
but that's pretty simple, too. Instead, 
the series is all about the thematics of  
thievery. The aesthetics, the way Sly moves, 
the sound design - it's all to create the  
feeling of being a master thief as you jump 
through laser grids and grab keys off guards.
Especially after the first game, Sly Cooper 
leaned into it’s ‘thiefly’ Saturday morning  
cartoon aesthetic by tweaking 
its mission structure and story.
Sly games were a collection of chapters, 
each taking place on an open sandbox stage,  
with a variety of missions to complete. Your 
main goal was to steal a treasure from the  
Villain of the Week, doing a lot of prep work 
beforehand so you can pull off one big heist.  
The individual missions put you in the shoes 
of each of the crew members. Sly will do some  
recon and sneaking around, Bentley will hack 
and place C4 on things, and Murray will muscle  
his way through objectives, all building towards 
one final confrontation with the chapter villain.
The heist setup is a great way to make 
each of the small missions feel less like  
filler and more like they’re building 
towards a payoff. A fun throughline,  
and a way to build anticipation for 
one cool set piece at the end. Plus,  
the series historically does a pretty good 
job of mixing up the formula before things  
get too predictable, so you’re never quite 
sure how exactly the chapter will play out.
This series was created in a 
time of similar platformers,  
and the aesthetic and mission design 
let it stand out in a crowded field.  
Every part is built to support 
that ‘master thief’ power fantasy.
No matter the style, stealing 
in a single player game  
is pretty benign. But what happens 
when you add other people into the mix?
In multiplayer settings, stealing is 
way more tangible - more visceral.  
Whether you're the victim or the 
perpetrator, knowing that there's  
another person on the other side of the 
theft will change the dynamic completely.
Stealing in Mario Party is a way of life. Coins 
and stars can change hands in tons of different  
ways throughout the series. Landing on a Boo, 
Calling one with a Boo Bell, Chain Chomps,  
gambling them away, becoming a majority 
shareholder of a hotel, or Chance Time. Sometimes  
losing your stars is a matter of luck, but if 
the RNG doesn’t get you, your friends just might.
Especially on the board Snowflake Lake from 
Mario Party 6. Everyone starts with 5 stars,  
however it has no star spaces, or opportunities 
to buy them. You can’t gain stars in any other  
way besides stealing them, and if YOU don’t 
take any, someone else will take yours.
But of course, you’re all friends here, 
right? There’s room for negotiation.  
Everything’s on the table, now that stealing is 
expected. Diplomacy can take place, deals cut,  
corrupt bargains struck. Anything goes, if all 
parties agree. Though, you still have to think  
this through. Aggression brings retaliation, and 
with real feelings on the line, you’re going to  
have to tread carefully, if you’re worried about 
payback. It’s easy enough to gang up on one  
person, too. There’s nothing stopping a 3-on-1 
demolishing of someone’s chances to win, other  
than your collective conscience. The game is just 
a game, but it can bring in as much baggage, quid  
pro quo, and underhandedness as your particular 
group has on hand. Mario Party can be brutal.
BUT NOT AS BRUTAL AS DOKAPON KINGDOM, 
MY GOD. If you want Mario Party,  
but even less civil, Dokapon 
can turbo-end your friendships.
It’s pretty much Mario Party, but you’re all 
turn-based RPG fighting your way through a  
board. As you travel, you’re gathering 
items and gold from spaces you land on,  
trying to level up and build power over 
time. Everyone else is doing the same,  
trying to defeat monsters and 
capture towns for big cash.
When you land on the same space, there 
is no peace. You fight head to head,  
and the winner screws up all the loser’s 
plans. You can take their money, their items,  
their equipment, or the deed to their town! You 
can legally change their name! If you choose to  
play as the thief class, you can take from 
others without a fight, just by passing by.  
Outside of a fight, you can rob a shop and put 
on the disguise of another player to frame them!
Be aware, if you’re going to jump in, 
play with friends. It’s a lot more fun  
if you can put a face onto the thief and get 
revenge, than a bunch of uncaring CPU players.
The way we’ve talked about some of 
these games might give the impression  
that stealing mechanics are this extra, side 
thing you can choose to do, but if you don’t,  
you won’t miss that much. But these mechanics 
can be as important as you want them to be.  
They can be built robust enough to 
support complex, emergent gameplay  
that becomes the entire experience. It’s 
time to talk about the Hitman collection.
Agent 47 has to work through missions that are 
essentially elaborate ‘murder dioramas’. You’re  
dropped into a location, and you have to track 
down and take out an eccentric set of targets,  
using an even more eccentric set of 
tools and methods at your disposal.  
Anything from a well-placed bullet, 
to a couple of unfortunate accidents,  
to dropping a chandelier on ‘em. 
 
Every level has a variety of scripted  
‘opportunities’ - situations the target will find 
themselves in where they’ll become a sitting duck  
if you’re waiting in the right place. But to get 
that opportunity, you might need a new identity.  
The crown jewel of Hitman’s gameplay is 
its system of disguises to steal. Taking  
people out lets you steal their identity, and 
with it, their abilities. Kinda like Kirby,  
but real. These targets are guarded people. You 
can’t expect to walk up to them as yourself,  
the World’s Baldest Man, and get the job done that 
way. The game expects you to get very creative,  
and infiltrate the normal operations of the 
place to get close enough to get the job done.
When you steal someone’s persona, you’ll need 
to play their role in this diorama. Different  
people on premises belong in different places, and 
should carry themselves in different ways. They  
should be holding the right things, walking in 
the right areas, and talking to the right people.  
Anything else can raise suspicion, and 
suspicion can compromise the mission.
Doing too much spy stuff in one disguise might 
catch the eye of the wrong people, and compromise  
your ability to move around unbothered. But 
opportunities can lead to other opportunities, and  
a new set of people to impersonate. Steal another 
disguise, and you might be able to get closer.
This system of shifting identities opens up new 
paths for you to take. Literal physical paths,  
like rooms you gain access to without raising 
suspicion. Behavioral paths, where characters act  
differently around you when you’re a supermodel vs 
when you’re security. Strategic paths, like what  
environmental constraints you’ll have to consider. 
And those paths themselves branch off into new  
paths. The entire game is this unfolding tree 
of possibilities, dependent on what you choose  
to become and what you do while in their shoes. 
The process of stealing - the planning, the setup  
and the payoff - is the core action of the game - 
more so than the murders. Nobody does it better.
Welp, that’s a big bag of stealing mechanics, 
but I know we’ve left out some. Tell us about  
your favorite ones in the comments. Bonus 
points if it’s a one-of-a-kind system,  
or very deeply integrated into the game. Or 
just talk about your real heinous Mario Party  
bargains. Thanks again to Mondly for sponsoring 
this video. Theft in games can come from any  
angle. As a dose of reality, as a quick way 
to get some extra stuff, as a box of mystery,  
or just as a way to feel cool, thievery 
systems can get you what you need.
*chill vibes from Sly Cooper 2*