We can rebuild it.
Better.
Stronger.
Faster.
Maybe.
Sequels are tough to make.
Sometimes even tougher than the original game.
They come with baggage attached - the what-ifs
and what-could-bes that come with being a
follow-up to something liked enough to deserve
another try.
I’ve played two impressive sequels lately
from two different studios.
The games have two different sets of expectations
and the teams have two very different goals
and capabilities, but both found their unique
path to releasing two brilliant games.
Let’s take a look at Psychonauts 2 and Mini
Motorways, the potholes they could have fallen
into, and how their studios both made worthy
sequels.
If you want to make a game of your own, you
can do it with today’s episode sponsor Core!
Core is a new free game creation platform
that lets you build, publish, and play games.
It’s great if you’re just starting out
in making your own games - it makes it super
quick to create even a 3D multiplayer game
with no coding required.
You can get started with thousands of free,
high-quality music, sound, and art assets
that they provide, and you can go deeper and
customize Core whenever you’re ready.
You can create your own game logic using Lua,
remix and reimagine content shared by other
creators on the platform, and even build completely
from scratch if you want.
When you’re ready to publish, you can push
your game live instantly on Core with the
click of a button.
Core is powered by the Unreal Engine from
Epic Games and handles a lot of the hassle
that usually goes into making a game.
Core is completely free, so if you’re looking
to get started making games easily, click
the link in the description and get your feet
wet with Core.
You ever want to take another crack at something?
A chance for a do-over to make things right,
once and for all.
Maybe it’s to revisit something you did
5, 10, oh I dunno, 16 and a half years ago?
I bet you have, but what would you do with
that opportunity?
Double Fine had to figure that out for Psychonauts
2, the sequel to their cult-classic platformer.
The first game was unusually story-heavy for
a game of that type and era, and had plenty
left to explore in its universe and its characters.
In the first Psychonauts, you play Raz, a
circus acrobat who trains his psychic abilities
in secret.
He learns about a nearby summer camp that
trains psychic children run by an organization
known as the Psychonauts.
Raz runs away to the camp where he’s taught
how to hone his psychic abilities from the
camp counselors and soon uncovers a huge conspiracy
as he travels through dozens of minds with
all kinds of assorted issues.
In the end, Raz becomes a Psychonaut himself,
which is where we pick up in the sequel.
The first game had an incredibly troubled
development cycle.
This was Double Fine’s first game, and Tim
Schafer hired a lot of new talent and had
to make the game completely from scratch,
and in a genre and platform the team was mostly
unfamiliar with.
The amount of rework and concepts thrown away
as they were iterating resulted in a lot of
long nights.
Tim Schafer: "The other thing is we wrote an engine from scratch.
And, you know, writing an engine from scratch,
you just don't have the features you need to build the world.
So we didn't have any level design tools,
we didn't have any of that stuff, so that took a long time."
Development started to find its footing around
2003, but Double Fine was not out of the woods
yet.
Microsoft, who had been set to publish Psychonauts,
got a new Vice President who promptly chose
to drop the game.
Tim Schafer scrambled to find funding while
he paid out of pocket to keep the team together
and keep the project alive.
At the last minute, Majesco swooped in and
saved the day, and the game was released in
2005.
Psychonauts is a hybrid of adventure games
and 3D platformers, combining the strengths
of both genres to create a game with both
a well-written story and solid platforming
action.
The levels are all themed around what’s
going on inside the heads of different characters,
and results in each level feeling incredibly
distinct.
Psychonauts is unique and has aged quite well,
but that doesn’t mean the game is flawless.
For as good as Psychonauts is, it does feel
somewhat like a lot of separate elements glued
together.
The piecemeal, stressful, just-get-it-done
environment where the game was created comes
through a little while playing.
Some abilities are clunky to use, like Telekinesis
and Confusion grenades.
The enemy variety is a bit sparse with a lot
of simple foot soldiers, and getting every
collectible can be a bit of a pain.
While there’s a great amount of level variety
here, it’s clear that most of the focus
was on the individual levels rather than an
overarching throughline.
The levels are more self-contained and disjointed
than you’d expect.
Story sequences would happen between stages,
but they served more to set up the next crazy
level rather than do much for an overarching
narrative.
The lengthy development cycle saw the industry
trend away from character platformers, and
the game was released into the start of the
Xbox 360 hype cycle, both of which took a
toll on sales, but the game reviewed quite
well and quickly found a dedicated fanbase
that would stick around for years.
There was plenty of room for a sequel.
After a decade and about a dozen other games
under their belt, Double Fine finally made
the pitch for Psychonauts 2 with a crowdfunding
campaign on Fig.
The team kept the public updated regularly
by posting behind-the-scenes videos on the
game’s development cycle, as well as footage
covering the development of the original game.
In them, you can really see the difference
that all those years of development experience
can make.
The team seems clearly more organized and
experienced and credited a ton of their
success to using more efficient development
tools rather than having to make them all
from scratch.
After 6 years of development and being acquired
by Microsoft, Psychonauts 2 was finally released.
It’s an incredible sequel, full of creative
platforming, that takes everything that was
great about the original game and adds the
polish that you can only find with experience.
Psychonauts 2 takes place only days after
the first game.
Now at the Psychonauts HQ, Raz is enlisted
as an intern as a greater threat looms on
the horizon.
This time the story dives into the
history of both the Psychonauts organization
and Raz’s family.
The overarching story and the individual stories
within stages are much more carefully intertwined
this time with every major stage providing
a new clue into the foggy history of all the
key characters involved.
The game explores some heavy themes of love,
loss, and mental health while still maintaining
that comically snarky tone throughout.
Psychonauts 2’s gameplay is a refined continuation.
Most of Raz’s old moveset returns with subtle
improvements made across the board to make
moment-to-moment gameplay a bit smoother.
His psy powers are more well-rounded with
5 returning powers and 3 new ones.
Situational abilities from the first game
like the barrier and confusion grenade were
removed and things like telekinesis are greatly
improved with a handy auto-targeting system.
The more versatile ability set is put to work
against a better enemy variety.
We now have flying enemies, fast enemies,
large heavy hitters, tar-like creatures that
slow you down, all with their own unique strategies
for dealing with them, similar to what you
might see from character action games.
The theming for these guys is better too as
they are now all allegories for common psychological
concepts like regret, panic attacks, bad ideas, and doubts.
There are tons of other little improvements
throughout Psychonauts 2, but I think two
specific ones show off the attention to detail
that Double Fine put into sprucing up what
was already a great part of the first game:
Clairvoyance and Figments.
Clairvoyance was a great power in the first
game, not so much for it’s practicality
but more for the fun detail it brought to
the story.
With it, you could see from the perspective
of the target and how they saw the world around
them, including how they saw Raz.
Every NPC would see him in a unique way based
on their own personality and relationships,
and it would manifest as a unique cardboard
cutout illustration pasted into the world.
One of your mentors, Sasha Nein, would see
Raz as a younger version of himself.
Another character who spoke in long-winded
stories saw Raz as a giant ear.
Psychonauts 2 brings back Clairvoyance and
massively upgrades the idea with higher-quality
2D art.
My favorite part, though, is the animation
improvements.
You can control Raz as you’re using Clairvoyance,
and in the first game that appeared as 
this janky-looking sliding motion.
The sequel adds just this very simple walking
animation that changes based on your speed.
It’s such a small touch, but it’s sooo
much better.
The bigger quality-of-life improvement comes
in how they updated Figments.
The figments in the original game were one
of its most divisive elements.
Figments were a collection of neon-colored
2D images placed across stages like common
coins.
Each figment was a unique piece of art and
fit in with the theme of each stage and the
temperament of the character who created it.
The concept was charming, but the original
game’s Figments were a nightmare for completionists.
The art itself had contrast problems all over
the place.
The Figments were actually 2D in a 3D world,
so you could easily miss one if you were looking
at it from the wrong angle.
They were multicolored and semi-transparent
and were incredibly easy to lose as they blended
into stage backgrounds and didn’t look like
something you could pick up.
The Figments in Psychonauts 2 were redesigned
top to bottom to improve usability without
sacrificing the charm of the concept.
The outlines of each Figment are now a much
brighter glowing neon color 
and an underlying
dark stroke acting as a drop shadow.
The color palettes are also chosen more carefully
to not blend in as much with their surroundings.
Each Figment now has a ‘Squigglevision’-like
animation to create some slight movement to
highlight their existence among their mostly
static surroundings and give them all collectively
a more unified style.
The images are still 2D in a 3D world, so
Double Fine added moving transparent paint
splotches that always face the camera to give
the Figments a sort of aura.
The Figments are much less frustrating to
spot in this game.
Psychonauts 2 gets my 'Most Improved' award for taking some
good ideas with mediocre execution from the first game
and polishing them until they sparkle.
So, Happily Ever After.
Lots of sequels play out that way - take the
first game, fix the old problems, and just
make more of it.
But there’s another kind of sequel out there.
It can be harder to make, but oh-so-satisfying
if you can pull it off, and for some games,
there’s really no other option.
Like Mini Motorways.
Mini Motorways is the new...ish follow up
to one of my all-time favorite puzzlers, Mini
Metro.
Mini Metro is a subway map brought to life
- an incredibly strong and memorable aesthetic
over the top of an easy-to-learn but hard-to-master
management puzzle game.
Mini Metro’s gameplay is extremely simple,
but the few rules that exist compound on each
other to create emergent behaviors that you
have to plan around.
All this Square person wants to do is get
to a square and jump on the first train that
will take them there, but so are dozens or
hundreds of other shapes.
The flow of people from place to place isn’t
a game rule, per se, it’s just the result
of a bunch of individual behaviors baked in
and the transportation network you’ve created.
It’s very abstract, but that pairs so nicely
in a puzzle game, not to mention in a game
with as strong an abstract aesthetic as this.
But Mini Metro is the full package.
There’s no story to continue.
It’s like trying to make Tetris 2… oh
they did that.
Well, it’s tough to do.
What sorts of things do you even try to do
to follow up a game like that?
The developers at Dinosaur Polo Club wrestled
with that very problem for months.
In an interview for twinfinite.net, Robert
Curry talked about how there wasn’t really
an easy answer:
To make a follow-up to a self-contained game
like Mini Metro, you really have to first
understand what made the game what it was
in the first place.
Essentially, you have to figure out how to
do a heart transplant.
Mini Motorways has exactly that sort of emergent
behavior and flow at its core, too.
You’re connecting houses to businesses.
Each business will get Pins, and then a car
from one of the houses automatically takes
as short of a trip as it can to go pick up
the pin and bring them back home.
House color and business color have to match.
To connect the houses, you have a limited
amount of road tiles, plus some special traffic
management tools to use to help smooth out
traffic flow.
From there, it’s just a matter of making
sure the routes to the buildings are able
to handle the amount of traffic the pins are
generating.
The core elements of traffic flow and traffic
jam management are in Mini Motorways just
as they were in Mini Metro, but re-flavored
just enough to play distinctly.
But even though the games have overlapping
hearts, there’s enough difference between
the two to make them both feel unique, and
to make Mini Motorways not feel like just
a rehash of the first game.
The strategies of the two games aren’t as
similar as you might think.
Mini Metro had a lot of micromanagement and
being able to change things on the fly.
Mini Motorways is all about the long-term,
macro strategy.
Once a traffic jam shows up it might be too
late to do anything about it.
You can’t reason with the individual cars
driving along.
Plan ahead, or suffer the consequences.
It could easily have been a temptation to
just add a bunch of new mechanics to the second
game, but the devs smartly restrained themselves
from it.
Too many mechanics would start to cut against
the ‘minimalist strategic puzzler’ core
of the game, and could have easily muddied
it up.
Adding more isn’t always better in a sequel.
Even if it took longer than the original,
the developers knew what made Mini Metro a
hit, and stuck to that blueprint in the follow-up,
which makes Mini Motorways feel like part
of the set, yet also feel like its own great
standalone experience.
Ahh, that’s two great recent sequels.
But I bet right now you’re thinking of a
few that I didn’t mention.
Harness that energy and put it in the comments,
we’ll talk about sequels and what elements
your favorite sequels have improved over their
original games.
You can take a pretty broad brush with it
- direct sequels, reboots, spiritual successors,
I think they all count for discussion purposes.
Don’t forget to check out Core over at coregames.com
or click the link in the description.
Psychonauts 2 and Mini Motorways took very
different paths to release day, but both are
more than worthy successors to their original
games.
*chill vibes outro from Psychonauts 2*