[Intro music from Star Fox]
People love a good rivalry. Whether that rival
is a childhood friend, your brother, a professional
adversary, or just an evil clone, two similar
forces from opposite sides are exciting to
see when they’re done well. In games, some
of the best rivals not only serve as a foil
for the main character but also as a catalyst
for self improvement and character development.
But there's more to a rivalry than just pitting
two characters against each other. What’s
the difference between designing an ordinary
boss and designing a great rival? How do games
make this type of character memorable and
motivate us to beat them?
I believe that there are 3 key factors that
make for a good rival character. The rival’s
premise, the conflict, and their persistence.
First , The rival’s premise. Who is your
rival? How does their design contrast against
your character? What drives your rival's story,
and how does it tie into your own?
Second, we have the conflict. Does the battle
make sense? How does the game adapt to two
similar ability sets? Does the fight stand
out from other battles? Is the fight challenging?
Is victory satisfying?
Last, and most importantly, is the sense of
persistence in the rival. The rival should
serve as the player’s motivation, to challenge
and surpass them. Do they actively stand in
your way throughout the game? How do they
progress on their quest while you work at
your own?
You can make a good boss fight with only one
or two of these factors, but great rivalries
tend to use all three. So, let's talk about
how a couple of game series use these three
factors to create some great rivalries. First
up is a series famous for its rivals - Pokemon.
Pokemon… oh yeah, I should probably put
up one of these first.
[Intermission-style music from Final Fantasy
7]
Pokemon’s premise alone naturally allows
for a rival character. A journey to ‘become
the very best like no one ever was’ is tailor
made for rivalries. Now, rival battles in
pokemon don’t stand out mechanically from
other fights. Gym leaders, trainers, and even
random encounters use the same mechanics,
the rival fight is just a little harder and
their party composition is a bit more thought
through. The best quality of the rivals in
Pokemon is their persistence, especially the
series' first rival, Blue. Blue is one of
the best rivals in the series not just because
of nostalgia, but because he feels the most
like a genuine rival.
Blue made such a strong impression because...
well...he's kind of a jerk. He's not really
a villain, but he is the antagonist, a cocky
kid who says “smell you later.” He taunts
you whenever you see him and most importantly,
he is very persistent - fighting you up to
8 times throughout the course of the game.
Like here - in a hostage situation… or in
a mausoleum. Mmm. From the start of the game,
the player’s arc is clear - beat these gyms
and become champion. But Blue is on that same
arc as you, and he seems to always be just
one step ahead, developing his team as you
develop yours. You can beat him but you need
to keep up until a final battle for the title.
A simple and perfect climax to the rivalry.
The game's progression is the story of the
rival's drive to match and surpass you, and
for you to surpass them.
Generation 1 nailed the rival battle, but
even though the series is known for its great
rivalries, the quality isn't always consistent
through the generations. Look at the rivals
of Gen 6. Technically, there are 4, but they
just are not very memorable. They are 1-dimensional
as characters, like...even by Pokemon standards.
This one is shy, this one likes to dance,
this one is *robotic voice* IMPLICIT LOVE
INTEREST, and this one is a genderswap of
your character whose defining personality
trait is existing.
Their weak premise and presence makes Gen
6’s rivalries fall apart. They're not so
much rivals to help drive the player forward.
They're more casual friendly rivals, but that
makes them about as memorable as the comfy
shorts kid. Not much build up, and no climactic
fight. You can do friendly rivals well. Just
look at Wally in Gen 3, but you do need some
character development for that to work. Earlier
generations of Pokemon are better at making
you want to take your rival down, where in
something like Gen 6, you do it because...
the game just tells you to.
Aside from Pokemon, character action games
are famous for making fierce rivals that motivate
you to challenge them. Jet Stream Sam, Jeanne,
Henry Cooldown, but these characters all bow
down before the granddaddy of them all, Devil
May Cry 3’s Vergil. Rivals don’t get much
more...r-rivaly… than him. Vergil is…
oh right. Hang on.
[Intermission music returns]
Vergil is Dante's mirror image, similar yet
contrasting. He is his twin after all. His
hair, his color scheme, his body language,
even his speech. For a character as lax and
cocky as Dante, having someone as cold and
precise as Vergil to challenge and keep him
in check makes him the perfect foil.
Vergil’s presence in DMC3 is so big that
the game is focused around that rivalry. Sure
there’s also something about Arkham Asylum
over here getting sorta-satan powers but WHO
CARES ABOUT THAT BECAUSE THAT GUY IS LIKE
YOU AND YOU WANNA BE BETTER THAN HIM! At the
start of the game a gigantic tower emerges
with Vergil at the top. Dante’s and the
player’s initial goals are the same: GO.
FIGHT. VERGIL. He is the catalyst to learn
the game, and to get better. He is your reward
and your final test. You may not fight Vergil
as often as you fight someone like Blue, but
he stands as a bookend to the game's 3 'acts',
and the game's most pivotal moments. These
fights play out in a progression, Dante loses
the first, reaches a stalemate in the second,
and finally struggles to victory in the third
and final match, driving home the sense of
accomplishment over the course of the game.
Mechanically the fights with Vergil are interesting
too. As a boss, Vergil makes you feel like
you are fighting the protagonist of a parallel
game. Vergil’s moveset is not a simple copy
of Dante’s but it’s very comparable. He
gets combos, phantom sword projectiles, his
own version of Devil Trigger, he even gets
a weapon from a boss you couldn’t take down
in the story. His versatile moveset requires
you to be flexible with your own, making you
pay close attention to the rhythm of the battle
and adapt your fight strategy accordingly.
Before this, your flexibility in combat was
an incentive to ‘style’ on enemies. Against
Vergil though, you have to be flexible to
survive. Adapt or die. If you just start the
fight blasting away at him with your guns,
he will quickly reflect your shots and teleport
in close. The fight is a dance, don’t just
rely on 1 move, stay on your toes, adjust,
and then once you find your rhythm, take your
opponent out in style. This idea rings true
throughout Devil May Cry’s combat as a whole
but it’s really brought home with each of
the Vergil encounters that escalate as his
moveset evolves with each battle. He’s just
about perfect as a rival, which cannot be
said about his 2013 incarnation.
In DmC: Devil May Cry the rivalry between
Dante and Vergil still exists but it feels
very forced. It’s a rivalry that shouldn’t
exist. Over DmC’s Campaign, Vergil isn’t
set up as a rival at all. Instead he‘s a
supporting ally to Dante during most of the
story. He is the leader of a rebellion movement
that seeks to take down the Demon King Mundas.
Because Vergil is too weak to take on Mundas
and his demons, he seeks out Dante to do it
for him. Vergil is the brains while Dante
is the brawn. He’s the intellectual with
Hollywood hacking skills. His personality
still contrasts against Dante’s, but it
seems to be more in service of being part
of a weird buddy duo between these two and
not really as a rivalry. You even have to
save Vergil multiple times throughout the
campaign. Now, It wouldn't be a problem to
reimagine Vergil for a reboot but the game's
pivotal final battle is between the two of
them.
Vergil is not really a fighter and the game
does everything it can to say it. The only
time he fights at all is at the very end against
Mundas where he just starts using his move
set from DMC3 at the last minute out of nowhere.
Something that would’ve come in handy earlier.
Vergil doesn’t even become an antagonist
until the very end of the game. In this cutscene,
in 5 seconds. Watch his eyes.
Dante: ‘It’s the beginning of the end
for the demons. Mankind will be free.’
D: And now.
Vergil: ‘Yes. Free from the demons. The
path is clear for us to rule.’
Dante: ‘What did you just say?’
The conflict and persistence factors are the
issue here. While some of Vergil’s actions
were certainly hinting at a betrayal, they
were few and far between and ultimately felt
separated from what actually sparks off this
conflict. It’s like a plot point that a
sequel should have focused on. The game skips
most of the necessary build up to support
this heel turn and skips right to the big
final fight.
No explanation, no gradual development, he
wasn’t even trying to actively conceal his
powers since his betrayal wasn’t planned.
Vergil becomes powerful because... he just
has to be. He’s now the final boss and this
is a video game. The developer wants him to
seem like a threat to the player, to make
the player afraid and cautious of him, but
the game doesn't do the work to make that
believable. It’s a rival battle that shouldn’t
have even happened, yet there it is. DmC's
Vergil seems to be shackled by the expectations
of the character from the earlier games. Since
the rivalry defined their characters before,
they must become rivals now by any means necessary.
The rivalry is unearned making this Vergil
awkward as a character and unsatisfying as
a rival.
Great rivals are highlights of any game series.
They’re more than a mirror image for the
player character. The design needs to feel
like a reward and a challenge, a battle between
two sides of a coin, but most importantly
the best rivalries are built up slowly over
time. Blue and Vergil do this well but also
rivals like Riku, Protoman, Ocelot, Eric Sparrow,
and dozens more.
There are so many great rivals in games that
they may seem easy to create but there’s
no shortcut to a memorable rivalry.
[Chill vibes outro music from No More Heroes]