People have a real mixed reaction 
to time limits in games. Some people  
love the pressure they add to a sequence. 
Some don’t want to deal with them at all.
I don’t think the difference is so much about 
timers themselves, but more in how they’re used.
Some designers use timers in a fine balance, 
thinking through how they interact with every  
other mechanic. And some designers 
slap a big dumb countdown on screen,  
auto-fail you when it hits zero, and then go 
home to their passionless, empty marriage.
But just because it’s easy to make a 
bad timer, that doesn’t mean they’re  
all bad. The difference between a great and 
a terrible timer is about subtle details.
If you want to add a great time limit to a 
game, you better get ready to get creative.  
Maybe it would help if I dredged up, oh,  
let’s say about a dozen examples of good 
timers? That sounds like an episode to me!
Let’s talk about how to spice up a time limit.
Tick tock, the countdown is on for this year’s 
Rising Tide Challenge, run by today’s sponsor,  
BlueOceanGames.com. Blue Ocean Games is 
a new group, who got together to make  
a fund for innovative, early-stage indie 
games, and they’re hosting a new game jam.
You and your team can build over the month of May, 
and you’ll be put up for a vote to find the best  
of the best new indie game pitches. 20 winners are 
selected from a public vote and a panel of judges,  
including guest judge Mix and Jam. The 
winners get a gift card worth up to $500,  
as well as the big prize: an invite to pitch 
their game for up to $300,000 in funding.
If you’re not building a game, you 
can still head over there at the  
end of May to vote on participants, 
and help the best rise to the top.
The challenge runs the entire month of May,  
so go to BlueOceanGames.com and sign up now. 
I’m rooting for ya! Thanks to Blue Ocean Games.
Alright, why are games messing with time limits, 
anyway? Time limits can be a very useful tool.
And they always have been, ever 
since the earliest arcade days.
If you were making an arcade game in the 80s, 
your machine’s value to arcade owners was  
determined by how fast it could grab money 
from player’s pockets. To earn more money,  
you have to get people to start new games. 
And that can be a problem if your game  
is entirely skill-based. If someone’s 
good enough at something like Pac-Man,  
they could be camped out on 
the machine for… quite a while.
People aren’t going to stop playing until 
they lose, so… you’ve gotta MAKE them lose.  
Guarantee that they lose. Design it so 
they lose. No matter how good they are.
But you don’t want to eliminate ALL the skill. 
Why would someone bother sticking another quarter  
in a game that you can’t get better at? So 
ideally, you’d want to make a game with the  
skill curve to bring in repeat customers, but also 
guarantee a new game gets played every so often.
You see where this is headed. That’s 
right… light guns. I mean… A timer.
One of the earliest books written on video 
game design talks about that need to make an  
explicit end-state. But a timer can do more than 
just end the game. If you’re a little creative,  
you can design a timer that 
keeps the quarters flowing,  
rewards skillful play, but ALSO helps a 
player get into the spirit of the game.
Take my favorite arcade timer: Crazy Taxi.
The loop in Crazy Taxi is dead simple. 
Pick up a passenger. Drive to a 90’s brand,  
and get paid. Repeat until you run out of time.
Each passenger needs to travel a different 
distance to get to their destination. The  
more green the floating icon is, the further away 
they want to go, and when you pick someone up,  
the game adds some time to let you drive there. 
Now, it’s not very MUCH time. If you want to get  
to the stadium before time runs out, you can’t 
be driving all normal. You’re not playing Regular  
Taxi. You’ve gotta GO. And you’ve gotta go THROUGH 
people. But that’s what the game’s built for.
All the time goes into the same pool, 
so if you can get to the KFC really,  
really fast, you can bank the seconds 
you didn’t use, and keep the game going  
for longer. You even get a bit of a direct 
time bonus if you get there speedy enough.
The timer rewards skillful play,  
but also puts a cap on how long the game can 
possibly last, without making it a hard cap.
You could imagine a version of Crazy Taxi with 
no timer. The blatant Crazy Taxi knockoff,  
The Simpsons Road Rage, had 
a mode called Sunday Drive,  
which does that. It’s not without 
its charm, but with no time pressure,  
there’s way less pushing you towards the 
exciting gameplay the format works best with.
Crazy Taxi’s timer is the game’s centerpiece. 
The faster you go, the more reckless you are,  
the harder you push it, the more fun 
you’ll have. Both in the abstract sense,  
where it’s just more fun to drive like that, but 
also you’ll literally have the fun for more time.
The timer creates a game that forces 
you to have the most fun you can.
That basic, extendable, short countdown 
type of timer comes out of arcades,  
but it doesn’t have to STAY there of 
course. Or even stay in that same genre.
Mullet Mad Jack is an indie 
high-octane boomer shooter,  
with an 80s cyberpunk anime VHS aesthetic, 
and some of that movie Crank mixed in there  
too. They’re going for a lot of things 
at once. You’re climbing a building,  
10 roguelike floors at a time, taking out 
as many evil robot billionaires as you can,  
to try to save an 80’s anime damsel and win 
yourself some new sneakers along the way.
Your runs are being live-streamed in-universe, 
with your viewer’s entertainment juice literally  
working as your lifeblood. You have 10 seconds 
to live, and have to keep adding to that timer  
by killing robots and getting dopamine from 
your viewers. Basic kills get you a couple  
more seconds, but environmental kills are where 
the real money’s made. Throw someone into a fan,  
or electrical currents, and you 
get some stylish bonus time. Oh,  
and you can’t bank more than 10 
seconds total, so… yeah keep it up.
Each floor is a gauntlet of hallways, 
and you have to rush forward and find  
new enemies to get more dopamine. At 
the end of each floor is a shop full  
of upgrades to help boost a weapon, 
or gain perks to make things easier,  
like bonuses for crotch attacks, or slowing 
down time when you have 3 seconds left.
You’ll need the perks, because with only 10 
seconds, a run can be lost before you even  
realize it. Each floor is only maybe 30 to 90 
seconds long, but you can’t waste any of it. As  
you go up higher in the building, more complex 
game mechanics get added in, like wall running,  
or locked doors that you need to shoot open, 
so the game doesn’t get too monotonous.
The very strict time limit, the 
drive to constantly sprint forward,  
and how a run can end in the blink of 
an eye make for a uniquely intense game,  
and it can be straight up exhausting 
to play, but if you want to play at  
the extremes of what a timer can be 
in a game, this is worth studying.
The shorter the time limit, the more pressure 
you add. But not every game is Wario Ware.  
It can start to feel a little absurd to 
have every timer be super short. But how  
else could you add pressure to a timer? 
Well, what if you just add MORE timers?
That’s the secret sauce of the 
run-your-own-restaurant genre.
Galaxy Burger can ease you into it. Your job is 
to juggle a bunch of burger recipes as you cook  
for aliens in galactic fast food restaurants. 
A lot of the game is about attention to detail  
as you build burgers by hand, stacking one 
ingredient at a time. But for a lot of the  
steps in the cooking process, you’re on the clock. 
Watching one burger cook is relatively chill,  
but if you’re trying to do a couple orders at 
once, it gets exponentially more chaotic the more  
timers you have going - to make sure you don’t 
burn anything, forget a step, or worst of all,  
send the perfect burger to the wrong customer. 
Where one timer isn’t that big of a deal,  
a few of the same timers, all running 
at once, and all running on slightly  
different schedules makes you have to quickly 
juggle priorities, lest you get overwhelmed.
At least, that’s how it works in most 
restaurant service games. But in Galaxy  
Burger specifically, the game isn’t really the 
one pressuring you. The timers are all there,  
but your customers grade you more on 
accuracy than speed. In this game,  
the pressure to do as much as you 
can at once is all self-imposed.
I find it interesting that the game lets you 
decide how much stress you want to have. If you  
want chaos, trying to fire four huge burgers at 
once, the game will let you do that, but that’s on  
you. No matter how hard you 
try to ruin this griddle, no one will yell at you.
You can treat it instead like a zen cooking 
sim, making cozy burgers for alien cats, and that makes it a very chill game.
Galaxy Burger is cute. It’s super tactile, and 
the burgers look pretty good by the time you  
send them out. But if you want your restaurant 
game to be a little more of a pressure cooker…
Try Cook, Serve, Delicious! 2!!
You’re a chef for hire, running the line at 
one of a few dozen kitchens. You prep food,  
customize every order, and deliver service with a smile,  
all by yourself. And make sure to take 
out the trash while you’re at it.
  
This is the fastest paced cooking game I 
know of - you’ll serve a hundred people  
over the course of 10 minutes, and nobody 
coming in the door has much patience.
Each station’s timer adds a little 
pressure, and you can easily have  
a dozen timers running at once. Timers for 
customers waiting in line, cooking timers,  
holding stations where food will go bad 
after a while, chores timers - you have  
to address everything yourself before any 
of it expires and ruins your perfect day.
The overlapping timers force you to 
act as quickly and precisely as you  
can to not burn food, make people 
sick, serve uncooked sandwiches,  
or have customers leave.
It sounds impossible, but the game has an 
incredibly satisfying keyboard control scheme.  
Type out single letters for each ingredient, 
shift menus for cooked vs. raw components,  
hit numbers to pick an order to focus on - 
every command is one keystroke away. It can  
be very overwhelming at first, but the keys are 
coded to ingredient names, and after a few runs  
you’ll rapidly pick up speed. You’ll soon be able 
to fill an order without thinking about it. The  
game’s very demanding, but it’s doable. When 
you get the prep just right, and you’re serving  
4 or 5 customers in a lunch rush rapid fire with 
Delicious orders, it’s unbelievably satisfying.
The flood of timers in these games can crank 
up the stress to unbelievable levels, but the  
rush of rapid decision-making, prioritization, and 
perfect execution help create a totally new genre.
But not every game idea can handle a zillion 
timers. And that’s fine. You can still have  
fun with just a single countdown. But you’re 
gonna have to make it feel VERY important.
Timers are supposed to be pressure. 
They’re supposed to be frantic, or  
at least a little threatening. Like a tiny knife.
But how important does YOUR 
game’s timer actually feel?
De Blob’s time limit is not like a knife at all.
You start with 10 or so minutes to jump around a 
level, and you can find all the time extensions  
you could ever want. It doesn’t take nearly 
that long to finish a level, even if you’re  
a kid, so there’s absolutely no pressure to 
change how you act on account of the timer.
It’s benign, but then why is it here at all?
When a time limit is easy to ignore, it loses 
the punch it’s supposed to have. The timer in  
most 2D Mario platformers barely factors in 
while you’re playing. Only at 100 seconds,  
when the music changes, does it make its presence  
felt. But then, if that earlier part is 
so ignorable, does it need to be around?
New Super Luigi U doesn’t think so. 
All of its stages are designed around  
a 100-second time limit. Stages are 
shorter, but significantly tougher.
Because of the shorter timer, the 
platforming challenges tend to be  
more condensed around a central gimmick. 
If a stage is based around Bullet Bills,  
it has a LOT of bullet bills. Or a stage has A 
LOT of geysers. More action, and less dawdling.  
The short timer forces you to commit a 
little more, which gives the game a stronger  
identity among the rest of the otherwise 
kinda-samey New Super Mario Bros series.
But 2D Mario platformers have 
a pretty rigid formula. New  
Super Luigi U is making a very small tweak to it.
But if you’re OK making huge structural changes, 
you can use a timer to change a series completely.
Take Wario Land 4. If you’ve only 
played Wario Lands 1 through 3,  
you are… not prepared. Wario Land 4 is a not that 
unusual platformer built around an out-and-back  
level design. Once you enter a level, you’re 
exploring all corners of the stage for treasure,  
while you search for a special key and this 
Frog hourglass at the far end. You can take  
all the time you want, but once you hit 
the hourglass, get ready to run. Wario  
yells at you to ‘Hurry Up!’ and a big countdown 
appears. Like, really big. Not gonna miss that.
The screen shakes, the background distorts, 
the music shifts, and you’ve gotta book  
it - backtracking as fast as you can until 
you get back to the portal at the start.
If the timer hits zero, Wario gets 
audited. You lose some coins. It’s fine.
That escape sequence is the game’s best draw. 
The unique structure where you get to puzzle  
through the level in one direction, then get 
challenged on the return trip is super fun,  
and unique for the time. And for the escape, 
the timer does what a timer does best: adding an  
element that creates the pressure to perform, and 
a natural rising action and climax to every level.
Wario Land 4 had this design structure 
all to itself for a pretty long time.
There was Wario Land: Shake It, but that’s about 
it. But leave it to the Indie scene to leap into  
action. Two indie studios built two different 
spiritual successors, emphasizing two unique  
elements of the escape sequence, in the last two… 
and a little years. Pizza Tower, and AntonBlast.
Pizza Tower has the same out-and-back 
stage setup as Wario Land 4,  
but Pizza Tower’s escape sequence 
focuses on mastery of the controls.
Once you find Pillar John and take him out, 
you’ll enter ‘Pizza Time’. Like Wario Land,  
you’ve gotta book it back to the start before 
the timer runs out. The path back might be  
very different, though. Some new routes and 
shortcuts might open up to you along the way.  
Peppino is much faster than Wario, and the 
escape feels much more frantic and exciting.
The game plays up the mad-dash, chaotic race 
back to the finish, way more than Wario Land,  
and its slippery, yet responsive, yet slippery, 
movement controls back up the challenge.
If the timer runs out, you’re not quite 
dead yet. The game’s villain, Pizza Face,  
will awaken and chase after you. If he CATCHES 
you, it’s game over, but if you can dodge him,  
or just out run him, you can still make 
it out. You should have time to spare.  
Maybe even enough time to take on the games 
biggest challenge: Lap 2. Instead of leaving,  
you can enter the Pizza Portal, get taken BACK 
to where Pillar John was, and have to race your  
way to the finish all over again. There’s no 
timer extension, but if you’re fluent enough  
in the game’s controls, you can make it out of 
there alive, and maybe with an enormous combo.
Pizza Tower’s Lap 2 is an amazing risk/reward 
call the player has to make, all while the timer’s  
ticking away. The game is built to recognize not 
only the efficient movement to get to the end  
TWICE in the time limit, but to have the perfect 
execution to get there without getting hit much.
Even if you’re not going for top scores, there’s 
a thrill in knowing that you COULD play it safe,  
but you’re choosing to put it all on the line 
again to prove your skill. It’s not at all a  
required part of the game, but it’s a 
great way to raise the skill ceiling.
But what about AntonBlast?
AntonBlast has an escape sequence 
that plays up the spectacle of it all.
The game sticks a little closer to the 
Wario Land style than Pizza Tower does,  
but it’s definitely more bombastic.
Tons of explosions, and like twice the 
amount of screen shake as recommended,  
but you can turn that off if it’s too much.
The escape is called ‘Happy Hour,’ and it’s 
more focused on the set pieces of each level.  
Every corner of the stage is exploding and 
falling apart, but each Happy Hour has its  
own unique gimmick that comes into play too. 
The first level has a bunch of minor villains  
crashing through the stage on a blimp, chasing 
you down, and causing a ton of chaos. Another  
level might have walls trying to crush you in 
each room. Another stage based on liminal space  
will throw you into a maze of endless doors, 
and try to fake you out with a false exit.
Where Pizza Tower’s escape sequence 
lets players show off their mastery,  
AntonBlast shows off its unique settings 
that complement the frantic gameplay,  
while making each stage feel like its own thing.
These six platformers demo how the feeling of a 
game can change as you make the timer more and  
more prominent in the design. From ignorable, 
to tangible, but not that big of a deal,  
to a driving force, to a crazy set piece 
that contains its own unique gameplay.
If you’re building a game with a timer,  
it’s up to you to decide how 
much of a centerpiece it will be.
Timers create limits. Limits create puzzles. Does 
that mean that timers can create puzzles? …Yes.
Lots of games sprinkle in interesting 
puzzle elements with a timer.
Minit is a quirky top-down, Zelda-like 
indie game with one little time twist.  
After finding a cursed sword on a beach, you’re 
now stuck living through a one-minute timer,  
where if it hits zero, you die and respawn at 
the last house you visited. You get to keep  
items between lives, and your quest progress is 
saved, but you’ll need to work quickly to advance.
The game is a constant puzzle. 
You can’t extend the time limit,  
so you have to figure out what short-term 
goals you can accomplish in 60 seconds.  
Over time, you’ll gain a sense of how long 
something might take, and whether you’ll  
be able to do it, or if you’ll have to find a 
way to divide your big goal into smaller ones.
Small goals can unlock things that 
let you complete larger goals. You  
can open up shortcuts to travel further 
on the next run. You might be able to  
upgrade your tools to better traverse the 
world. The devs have built tons of puzzles  
that play with your expectations 
about what you can do in a minute.
Like if you need to wade in quicksand 
to sink down into an underground area,  
or walk down a long, winding path. Some tasks 
reward spending a little time over lots of cycles,  
like taking the time to water this plant outside 
your yard, for an eventual health upgrade.
The game plays with these limits for 
comedy, too. Like when you have to  
spend a whole cycle speaking with an old guy 
that takes way too long to get to the point.
The game asks you to figure out for 
yourself what to dedicate a cycle to,  
and what you can do to turn an impossible 
goal into something you can tackle.
The way the game keeps to its one-minute format 
is a hint by itself. It helps encourage you that  
it CAN be done, no matter how impossible it 
may seem at the start. Once you solve a few,  
the quick iteration time, and the satisfaction 
of coming up with a solution that works,  
makes the game pretty addicting. It’s very 
much a ‘just one more turn’ kind of thing.
The game’s unique experience is only possible 
thanks to the limits imposed by the timer.
So we’ve seen timers as game enders, 
as pressure cookers, as centerpieces,  
and as puzzles. But there’s one series I love 
whose time limits do all of that at once,  
and game by game keeps tweaking 
exactly how its timers operate,  
and in the process completely changes 
how players approach each entry.
It’s time to talk about Pikmin.
Pikmin isn’t just about weird bugs on 
a weird planet. It’s about planning  
your day. Planning it efficiently with 
the limited time you have. Figuring out  
how to best spend your time so you 
can do everything you want to do.
There’s a Japanese word for it: Dandori. The art 
of preparation and strategic execution. The joy  
of playing Pikmin is the joy of Dandori. The 
details, the sequence of tasks you decide on,  
the ability to bring the right tools to the right 
job to complete it efficiently - those are the  
bits of gameplay that Pikmin excels at, and it’s 
been the core of the series since the beginning.
In Pikmin 1, Captain Olimar’s ship done 
blowed the *Pikmin noise* up. But it’s OK,  
because you can gather all the pieces back 
together and be on your way again. Your suit’s  
life support system only has 30 days of juice 
left, though, so that’s the hard time limit.
You have 30 days to get 25 parts, including the 
worst chair you’ve ever seen, back together.
So, with 30 days and 25 parts, you don’t have 
a ton of time to spare. Gather up at least 1  
part per day, with a little bit of wiggle 
room allowed while you get your bearings,  
or if the unfortunate should 
happen. That’s time limit 1.
Beyond that, each day runs on a timer as 
well. There’s only so much daylight and  
the surface of the planet isn’t safe 
at night. That’s time limit 2. If your  
Pikmin are not with you or near the ships 
by sundown, you’ll lose them to the horrors.
With two strict time limits running, your 
day-to-day decisions really do feel like  
they matter. The routes you take to equipment. 
The way you divide up your Pikmin workforce.  
The order in which you take on tasks. It 
all adds up, and careful planning will let  
you get way more done in a given day, and 
keep you ahead of that 30-day deadline.
The work you have to do to safeguard your 
ability to do future work is part of the  
fun. Even little things like rounding up all 
your Pikmin as the day is about to end can  
be thrilling. Don’t leave anyone behind. They 
might save you tomorrow. Not having to rebuild  
your supply of Pikmin can have ripple effects 
on what you’ll be able to do in future days.  
This planning that lets you plan for 
future planning is THE core loop of Pikmin.
Pikmin 2’s premise isn’t nearly as dire as 1. 
Instead of being stranded with a broken ship,  
Olimar is looking for treasure with his 
co-worker Louie, so they can earn cash and  
pay off a debt. This planet has some treasure 
on the surface, but there’s a lot more in the  
underground caves. Find 10,000 dollary doos 
worth of stuff, and y’all can get out of here.
This game doesn’t have nearly the 
time pressure as the first one.  
There’s actually no deadline. Sure, if 
you take forever you’ll start to get  
some emails from your boss about how 
he’s getting hounded by loan sharks,  
but that’s his problem. You can take 
as many days as you want to pay it off.
If you think that’s still too much pressure, 
don’t worry - time doesn’t pass at all while  
you’re exploring a cave, and that’s 
like 80% of where the game happens.  
You can jump in and out of multiple caves 
on the same day and clear them all in one  
go. The daily timer really only comes into 
play when you’re clearing the path TO a cave,  
or when you’re collecting the small 
handful of treasures on the surface.
Series producer Takashi Tezuka said 
in an interview that the removal of  
the time limit was mainly done to increase 
the game’s length and to give the player  
a much greater level of freedom to focus on 
whatever they wanted to do, and play at their  
own pace. Those are totally valid goals, and 
removing that time pressure does just that.
You have full control of how fast or slow you want to tackle the game.
With that change, you don’t feel the NEED 
to be as efficient as in Pikmin 1. Quickly  
getting through Pikmin 2 feels way more 
like you’re doing it for your own sake,  
instead of the game pushing 
you to play a specific way.
But as the time pressure goes down, so does 
the game’s challenge. In Pikmin 1, the cost of  
losing your Pikmin was mostly in the amount of 
time lost, from not only the failed encounter,  
but also the amount of time spent rebuilding to 
try again. Pikmin 2 drops that element entirely.
That makes for a much easier base game,  
and the devs compensate by pushing 
the encounter toughness way up.
Plenty of enemies now have instant-kill 
hazards, like electricity, rolling stones,  
or explosives, which can wipe 
out your whole squad, too.
The dangers can appear right next 
to each other. Dodging two threats  
at once is something you’ll have to 
deal with. Tiny mistakes can snowball,  
kill off dozens of Pikmin, 
and force you to regroup.
Though without the pressing time limit, 
the tougher encounters and unforgiving  
enemies can only raise the stakes 
so much. There’s no time pressure,  
so losing time is not a problem. You’ll always 
have time to rebuild and try again if you can’t  
stand to roll with the losses, and you can always 
restart the game and reset the floor all the way.
Pikmin 2 may be tougher to 100% complete, 
but the timer really did add pressure to the  
first game’s critical path, and removing 
it creates an overall much easier game.
OK, Pikmin 3. What are we doing for this one?  
The first game’s timer is too rigid. 
The second game’s timer is gone,  
but some of the game’s drive and challenge goes 
with it. Let’s see if we can dial it in here.
In Pikmin 3, you’re a trio of explorers on a 
mission to… let’s see here, ‘feed your entire  
starving planet… with alien fruit’. This Pikmin 
lore’s going places. Now, your food supplies  
are the timer. If a day ends with no supplies 
left, it’s a game over, and you have to rewind  
to a previous day to try again. With each fruit 
you collect, you get to keep a cut for yourself.
On paper, this is a cool way to reintroduce the 
time deadline. It’s not a hard day limit, it’s  
an adjustable one. Tezuka’s original objection 
to the 30-day limit is still addressed. You’re  
still able to play at your own pace, just once in 
a while go pick up some fruit while you’re out to  
keep adding time. You COULD paint yourself into a 
corner I guess, if you spent 99 days and exhausted  
every fruit in the game. If that happens, I 
don’t know what to tell you. Dandori issue.
But that structure is part of the problem. Getting 
ahead of your juice use is barely a challenge.  
You’ll have more than you’ll realistically 
ever need pretty quick. The critical path  
is paved with fruit. Like we said before, this 
is what happens when the timer is too lenient.  
The tension of the ticking clock dissolves, 
and then all you have left is some more numbers  
on screen to ignore. There’s even a bit about 
halfway through where your supplies get stolen,  
and it BRIEFLY gets a hint of tension back, 
but don’t worry, it’ll be gone again soon.
It’s really too bad. Your trio of captains 
can command three different squads at once,  
and switch between them at will, allowing you to 
work while another group walks to their next task.  
You can get a ton more done at once, and the skill 
ceiling of speed and efficiency skyrockets. But to  
complete the game, you’ll never need to scratch 
the surface of half of the stuff that’s possible.
But it’s completely reasonable for a game designed 
for players of all ages to have a simple critical  
path. If you want more, that’s what Mission 
Mode is for. New to the third game are all these  
challenge stages, where the goal is to collect 
everything on the map, or clear out enemies,  
within a time limit. This is my favorite part 
of Pikmin. Rack up a score, and put it on the  
leaderboard. Doing tasks one at a time won’t get 
you anywhere. The hard timer forces you to dandori  
your pants off - dividing up work and planning out 
routes to complete objectives. Once you play it a  
few times, the push to improve can make the timer 
go from seeming oppressive, to actually pretty  
generous, once you know what you’re doing. 
This right here, this is some great Pikmin.
But it’s not the last Pikmin.
Now, Pikmin 4.
The set up this time is that you’re part of a 
rescue team responding to a distress signal,  
sent by Captain Olimar, who has become stranded on  
Planet PNF-404 for the 4th time in 5 
games. The other one was Hey! Pikmin.
You search for Olimar, while gathering 
treasures and rescuing any other castaways  
you stumble across. This planet’s 
become a Bermuda Triangle for tourists.
Pikmin 4’s really just car-crashing the 
other three games into each other at this  
point. The cave exploration is back from 2, but 
the treasure you collect now fuels your escape,  
instead of paying your boss’ debt. Along the way 
you’ll encounter special challenge caves they now  
literally call ‘Dandori’ challenges, which are 
modeled after the mission mode stages from 3.  
You team up with your rescue dog Oatchi, 
who is both your second captain to command,  
like you would’ve in 2 and 3, and a 
large adult Pikmin in his own right.
There’s still no hard deadline for how many 
days you can spend planetside. At first. Once  
you save Olimar, you can listen to his side of 
the story, ‘Olimar’s Shipwreck Tale,’ as an extra  
campaign that’s more or less a mini Pikmin 
1 campaign. 15 days to find 30 ship parts.
Really, no matter what mode or restriction 
you loved from the earlier games,  
you got it in here. Pressure, 
or no pressure. Harsh limits,  
or soft ones. Challenging strategic action, or a 
chill cozy game. It’s all here, for all players.
In a world where you can’t really predict what 
your players want to be, maybe it makes sense  
to try to be all things to all people. If you can 
manage that, you’re golden. That is, IF you can.
So that’s all of ‘em. All 
the time limits in games.
No, we did not mention Majora’s Mask, Steam World 
Heist 2, Outer Wilds, Unsighted, Dead Rising,  
Tony Hawk, Amogus, King’s Quest 4, Every Metroid, 
Half Minute Hero, or Katamari. That’s where you  
come in. That’s what comments are for. Have 
you seen how long this episode is already? No  
I couldn’t have cut down the Pikmin segment, 
what are you talking about? You’re crazy.
Great time limits are more than a countdown to 
zero. They’re a tool for pressure. Figure out  
where, when, and how hard to push your players, 
and you can make everyone have a good time.
*chill vibes from Pizza Tower*