If your game has room for only 1 status effect,
it’s probably going to be poison.
Poison’s everywhere - not just in RPGs,
though it’s hard to find one without it,
but also in tons of shooters, survival horror,
platformers, strategy games, puzzle games,
and even a party game or two.
That’s not an accident.
Poison is super adaptable.
It can fit all kinds of game mechanics inside,
and it’s flexible enough to cover tons of
unique aesthetics and settings.
Get out your star pendants and your antidotes.
Esuna rather than later.
It’s time to talk about poison!
Purify your mind in a sea of knowledge, vast
and… smart.
Be a real smart boy.
With today’s sponsor Skillshare!
Skillshare is an online learning community,
with high quality classes on a huge variety
of topics.
Music, art, and design.
Business, marketing, and freelancing.
Whether you want to dive into a new hobby,
a new side hustle, or you’re just looking
for an edge in your work life, Skillshare
can help you out with its classes led by industry
pros and an active community to help cheer
you on.
I like this Learning Path on UI/UX design:
Explore Basic Principles and Tools.
If you want to start improving your eye for
UI design, check this one out.
This series of classes helps you learn the
lingo and the principles of what goes into
improving the look and feel of your projects.
They can help you take something of yours
from looking…
kinda bad to actually looking pretty well
put together.
It’s super quick, very informative, and
is the perfect thing for getting started.
If you’re in the mood for something else,
like creative writing, building a shop on
Etsy, social media management, or even help
in avoiding procrastination, click the link
in the description to browse around and find
the right classes for you.
Join thousands of people learning on Skillshare
by clicking the link below.
The first 500 people to use my link will get
a 1 month free trial of Skillshare.
Thanks, Skillshare.
Let’s start things off with the mechanics
of poison.
The standard case for using poison is this:
Attack something early with poison, and have
their health whittle down over time.
Poison is an investment.
Pay a little now for a big payoff in the future.
And that’s a totally valid way of making
poison work in a game!
Slay the Spire is a roguelike deck builder
with turn-based RPG style combat, where you
play cards to do moves.
There are a zillion different styles of characters
you could build, but one major archetype involves
dealing as much poison as you can.
In this game, poison stacks up, and how many
stacks of poison you inflict determines how
much HP a character loses at the start of
their turn.
It decays by one tick every turn, so building
a little poison isn’t a big deal.
One or two stacks of poison on a character
will hardly be noticed.
If you stack 20, though… that’s a lot
of poison.
20 damage now, 19 next turn, 18 the next,
and so on will melt even the toughest enemies.
Building up that level of damage can take
a while, though, and of course you have to
survive in the meantime, but it’s a completely
viable type of character build that can work
especially great for high HP enemies like
most bosses.
Seeing your poison build up and then getting
to reap the dividends at the start of every
turn automatically can be a fun type of engine
to construct.
It’s nothing but a good time.
But every rose has its thorn.
The most common complaint about poison shows
up when this style of Poison-as-investment
goes wrong.
The payoff has to be worth the effort.
Damage over time tools take a while to kick
in, and if combat is over before it does,
or if the damage is tiny, you’d be better
off skipping the status effect and just punch
them in the face instead.
A bunch of Final Fantasy games run into this,
where poison is a flat, small percentage of
overall HP damage.
If there’s no way to build up a ton of damage
when the poison actually hits, the small amount
of damage it DOES do can be pretty ignorable.
For poison to feel worth pursuing, it has
to either pay off big, or be so effortless
to implement that doing an extra 2% of damage
just feels like a little bonus tacked onto
stuff you were already doing.
If you’re not going to have poison compound
and build in a game’s battle mechanics,
consider tacking it onto other attacks as
an add-on rather than treating it as something
to be done as its own dedicated action.
So that type of poison can be pretty basic.
Let’s get spicier.
The effect doesn’t have to just be a binary,
on-or-off thing.
You could make it have a buildup, a progression,
or multiple tiers.
Monster Hunter is built around a boss-centric
gameplay loop, where you get to go on long,
drawn-out hunts against giant monsters.
This seems like the ideal place to use poison,
right?
It almost seems like it could be overpowered.
Weapons embedded with poison ARE very strong,
but the game’s poison system isn’t as
simple as that.
Here, it’s based around buildup.
Status damage from weapons, tools, or traps
builds an invisible bar, and when it’s full,
that’s when the status effect strikes.
It’ll wear off over time, and you can do
it all over again.
But wait, next time, it’ll take just a little
bit longer.
The monsters will slowly gain a resistance
to the poison, and more and more damage will
be needed to trigger the effect every time
it wears off.
Each monster has a unique threshold to get
to, and a unique duration and effectiveness
when it gets poisoned.
The effect isn’t nearly as uniform as it
is in most games, where it’s either there
or it’s not.
It’s a minor thing, but it contributes to
the core of the game making sure each monster
feels like a crafted creature, fleshed out
in detail from its attacks, behavior, movement,
and yes, poison resistance.
Poison may not always be your best option
in Monster Hunter, but it might be.
You’ll have to figure that out yourself.
Direct damage can be one aspect of poison,
but you can also use the effect for other
things.
Bug Fables is one of the few games that lets
you turn the core concept of poison on its
head.
Bug Fables characters can add several perks
that work by strengthening a poisoned party
member.
Poison Attacker and Poison Defender boosts
those stats by one if you’re afflicted.
There’s ‘Reverse Toxin’ which lets you
heal while poisoned at the cost of 1 defense.
Does that sound too situational, though?
How am I gonna get poisoned often enough for
that to work?
Oh don’t worry, there are more medals for
that.
‘Weak Stomach’ poisons you EVERY time
you heal.
‘Eternal Venom’ makes sure your poison
never expires.
You get to be a lil sicko glass cannon forever!
This game has loads of crazy synergy strats
that you can roll out with these types of
builds which can even take out some super
bosses with the right approach.
I can’t think of an RPG that gives you more
of an incentive to poison yourself.
OK, let’s get out of direct damage combat
mechanics.
It’s pretty common to have a poison effect
resolve itself when a fight is over, but you
don’t have to.
A handful of games use the effect to do something
outside of battle.
Maybe it ticks your health down while walking
around.
Pokemon springs to mind, where a sound effect
plays and the screen gets wonky every few
steps to let you know that there’s still
a problem with your HP.
Running out of health here is just as bad
as if it happened during a fight, so it’s
still a crisis for players to deal with.
Chrono Cross did it without letting you know
what was going on.
A little icon in the corner lets you know
something’s up, but you have to be paying
attention to your character details screen
to see that every step you take is dropping
your HP down to 1.
If you didn’t notice, you might start up
the next fight in really bad shape.
If your game doesn’t do combat like an RPG,
you still have options to look into.
Think of it in more general terms.
Poison as a crisis.
Frequently, people think of video game poison
as a chip damage problem.
Something players will have to deal with…
eventually.
But poison doesn’t have to take a backseat
to anything.
Spelunky 1 doesn’t have poison, but oh man
Spelunky 2 does.
As if there wasn’t enough around to worry
about.
These things spring out of pots and such.
Get scorpion’d and every 30 seconds you’ll
lose a heart.
I don’t know about you, but I don’t have
a lot of hearts to spare, so this is a big
problem.
There are two major ways to fix it: die and
come back to life somehow, so that one’s
kinda hard.
OR!
Bring a pet to the end of a level, and they’ll
take one for the team.
A curing elixir is very hard to get, and you
can’t just wait it out.
This game’s poison makes you act, quick
and decisive, or else.
It’s a sudden timer thrown into the design
mix, without literally being a timer.
Poison can let you dial in the urgency of
the problem to whatever level you want.
You could make poison impact other stats besides
health.
Poison can be a cap on your ability.
Castlevania uses it differently in the different
games in the series, but in Symphony of the
Night, poison doesn’t do damage at all!
Instead, poison makes you worse at everything.
In combat, a poisoned Alucard will hit for
half as much damage and take twice as much.
It’ll go away on its own, and you can speed
up the process if your constitution is higher,
but in the meantime you might want to avoid
combat as much as you can.
The poison in Symphony of the Night won’t
kill you, but it might open you up so something
else can.
OK, that’s enough about combat.
What can we do with poison as an element of
the environment?
Trek through this poisonous pool.
C’mon.
Do it.
No?
Yeah I don’t blame you.
Poison can work as area denial, making a challenge
out of taking routes around the gunk, finding
a resistance against it, or maybe both.
Hazy Maze Cave in Super Mario 64 uses poison
as a tool for area denial.
The Haze in the hazy maze is a cloudy mess
that’ll pretty quickly kill you on contact.
There are a few things in the maze that you’ll
need to grab, but you don’t really have
much time to get them before the poison overtakes
you.
Your inability to deal with the poison maze
is one of the things that points you towards
unlocking the Metal Mario cap.
You can apparently fight poison with heavy
metals.
Grab that, and you can walk through this thing
no problem.
This stuff isn’t very tough to work around
unless you’re a kid, but the concept is
there.
Streets of Rage 4 has a few stages that feature
toxic barrels and glass vials that will leave
a pool of acid that damages friend and foe
alike.
Blaze?
Blaze!
Blaze, please get off of there!
You have to watch your step, but you can kite
enemies onto it.
These types of surprise environmental hazards
are often not much of a problem in isolation.
You could tank the hits and run straight through.
Once you’re focused on some other combat
action, though, their impact can sneak up
on you.
Enemies that leave pools of acid like the
Spitter in Left for Dead can create some dangerous
situations.
If you’re caught in a pool at the wrong
time, like if you’re held up by a horde,
or pinned by another special infected, the
pool can easily take you down to zero without
a little help from your friends.
None of these mechanics have to act alone.
Poison can be an area denial tool AND a cap
on ability.
A combo synergy tool AND an investment.
A game can do it all at once!
Hades did!
Hades has a couple kinds of poison.
The first is Hangover, which is tied to many
of Dionysus’s boons, and so is really only
done BY you TO mobs.
Hangover applies damage every half second
to anything afflicted by it, and it can stack.
Every stack boosts the damage, and lasts for
4 seconds - an eternity in Hades combat time.
You can apply Hangover onto whatever attacks
you have, and it can be great when used as
a ‘set it and forget it’ option.
Tag enemies with it and go do something else,
and the Hangover can finish the job for you.
On sturdier enemies, the Hangover stacks will
help melt down their HP.
As with the other effects in Hades, this one
only gets more potent with more boons.
Hangover builds can get crazy.
You can get a damage boost when multiple enemies
are hungover at once, it can make everyone
with it slow down, and you can even have enemies
spread hangover to their friends by themselves.
Synergize with some other moves like Dionysus’s
Festive Fog to increase the poison damage,
and your DPS will skyrocket.
Your enemies might not be able to use Hangover,
but they’ve got their own tricks.
Poison is a hazard in the fourth and final
region of any run, the Temple of Styx.
The rooms in here are tiny and cramped, which
lets the satyrs and rats leave pools of poison
and shoot poison darts that are very tough
to avoid.
The Styx poison will absolutely MELT you,
turning your screen bright green and wrecking
your health bar until you cure it at the convenient
Mandragora Curing Pools located in each room.
Styx poison acts fast, though, so race for
that pool before it’s too late.
The threat of poison down here makes the entire
Temple of Styx super fast, even by Hades’s
standards.
You’re going to have to design some fast-acting
and powerful builds to be able to get through
before the poison gets to you.
The level design and nature of the poison
work together to change the feel of combat
entirely, creating one final bar to clear
before the finale.
These mechanics are cool, but that’s STILL
not all you can do.
Forget all the mechanics.
You can build poison into your game’s aesthetic.
Locations, for one.
Whole locations are easily built around some
aspect of poison.
Mario Odyssey has a fun one.
Check into a primeval jungle… forest, officially
I guess.
I guess it’s a rainforest.
A deep wilderness filled with bright creatures.
Oh, they’re going for a bright-means-poison-animal
thing aren’t they.
Yep.
And if that didn’t tip you off, the ocean
full of one-hit-KO poison should do it.
The poison gives the area a specific flavor,
distinct from even the earlier natural areas
like the Cascade Kingdom and the Wooded Kingdom.
The series has had other poison water themes
before, like in New Super Mario Bros., but
I like the look of this one a little more.
The deep purple works as a striking backdrop,
and takes this from a jungle, to a fun-gal.
Eugh.
The poison helps make it look good, there.
Sonic games don’t really linger on Poison
directly, but there are plenty of zones that
deal with a sort of 90’s-environmentalism-style
pollution threat instead.
Chemical Plant Zone and Planet Wisp are all
about Eggman just trashing the natural beauty
of an environment with an industrial plant.
Sonic Mania approaches the theme a bit more
directly with its reimagining of Oil Ocean
Zone.
Located on a massive oil refinery, the gimmick
of Act 2 has you trek through the most polluted
parts of the zone, running through a buildup
of suffocating smog.
The stage pressures you to find and use release
valves to vent the smog out before it builds
up too much and drains your ring count.
Let’s get out of locations.
What about character design?
There’s plenty you can do with poison here
too.
Pokemon is the family friendly king of exploring
Poison as an aesthetic.
The entire Poison type is filled with an assortment
of associations.
Lots of poisonous animals - dart frogs, snakes
and cobras, bugs, bugs, more bugs, bugs, bugs
of all kinds.
The worst thing you could step on underwater.
The worst thing to touch underwater.
Skunks, if you get a little abstract with
the idea of poison.
They’ve got poisonous flora - a stank plant,
some ivy, thorny roses, pitcher plants.
There’s a couple of weird mushrooms.
We’ve got industry - from toxic sludge to
a larger glob of toxic sludge, to a glob with
an oil spill on it.
We’ve got a literal garbage pokemon.
Two of them!
We’ve got societal toxins like… uh, rock
and roll music I guess?
But not KISS, that’s just dark.
And THIS happy little fella is some kinda
toxic sea mine with a skull and crossbones,
who evolves into… oof, might wanna get that
looked at.
The Galarian version evokes the Spirit of
Victorian England!
How quaint!
Don’t breathe that in.
If there was a studio that could be called
the ‘Masters of Poison’, though, it’s
FromSoft.
No one has embraced poison as a mechanic and
an aesthetic more fully than they have.
Their games often feature multiple tiers under
different names - Toxic, slow and fast poison,
plague
The original Demon’s Souls version sneaks
up on you, building on a hidden meter.
You might not know you’re in danger until
it’s too late.
But they’ve also mastered Poison as an Aesthetic.
Beyond just the foreboding deterioration that
comes out of every corner of their game worlds,
the bulk of their RPGs have at least one major
area themed on decay, disease, and rot, if
not straight up poison itself.
You want a gross shanty town?
Here you go.
It’s not a Fromsoft game without a poison
swamp.
Whether it’s, let me check the name here,
the Valley of Defilement, Blighttown, The
Gutter, or Faron Keep, these areas get filled with
poison pools, toxic abominations, and crumbling
footholds on cliffs.
But Elden Ring puts the rest to shame with
their most aggressive toxic locations yet
- the Lake of Rot and Caelid.
Everyone loves Caelid.
Except the people in Caelid.
Fromsoft invented a totally new kind of horrible
mess with Scarlet Rot.
It’s visually distinct, horribly lethal
if you catch it at the wrong time since it
does damage as a percentage, and it’s deeply
tied into the lore.
A curse that is slowly spreading across the
landscape.
Look at what it’s already done to Caelid!
Now imagine that but inside you.
Aaah!
Yeah, some players might complain about how
oppressive these places feel, and maybe the
theme is a little overdone coming from that
studio, but they’re really good at it!
There’s a reason this is such a famous part
of Fromsoft games.
There’s plenty to explore in the rotten,
horrific, and evil nature of poison as an
element, and Fromsoft is great at creating
memorable moments within those bounds.
These places don’t have to be positive to
be well-designed.
There’s more to talk about, but let’s
leave it there.
Head to the comments and give me your greatest
poison systems in games.
I didn’t talk about Divinity: Original Sin
or Dead Cells in here, those two can kick
off a pretty good discussion.
Poison is versatile.
It can be way more than just a chip damage
status effect, if you let it.
From mechanics to aesthetics, it can burn
in some character to a bland location, and
it’s wide-ranging enough to give you plenty
of options to work with.
Fold it in as deep as you can, and your game
might gain a deadly charm.
*chill vibes from Xenoblade Chronicles*