When was the last time you really thought 
about saves? Like, REALLY thought about them?  
Save systems aren't as flashy as skill trees, as 
notorious as microtransactions, or as widespread  
as experience points, but a game's save system is 
just as important. Saves are part of the bedrock  
of a game’s design. They touch on risk tolerance, 
experimentation, safety, social factors, quit  
rates, metagaming, and more, and there are dozens 
of different flavors that each shape how a game  
feels differently. The right save system in the 
right game can create an entirely new subgenre,  
but a wrong combo can collapse the house of cards 
just as much as janky combat. Let's talk about  
different styles of save systems, tradeoffs for 
each, and how you determine what's worth saving.
Save your ears with today’s episode sponsor 
Raycon! I've been using Raycon's Everyday  
Earbuds for a few years now, and I love them. 
I listen to podcasts while I take walks,  
and these are really comfortable for 
long-term use while you're outdoors.  
Raycon’s engineers have designed the Everyday 
Earbuds and the included custom gel tips  
to fit great in every ear type, big and 
small, for a comfortable, no-budge fit.
They look great, sound great, they 
have over 49,000 5-star reviews,  
and are priced at half the cost of other high-end 
earbud options, with all the high-end features.  
Siri and Alexa support. Wireless charging. 
Noise isolation mode. Water-resistance.  
Customizable audio profiles that sound great 
no matter what you’re listening to. And they’ll  
run for 8 hours of playtime plus 32-hours of 
battery life stored in the capsule charger.
Click the link in the description box or 
go to buyraycon.com/designdoc to get 15%  
off your Raycon purchase. I love my Raycons, 
and I think you will too. Thanks, Raycon!
So what's the point of saving? Well, yeah, it's 
pretty obvious. Saving your game lets you continue  
it later. It carries over data from session to 
session, so you can leave it and pick up where you  
left off. But that also implies some things that 
are a little more subtle. A world without saving  
has a pretty severe impact on what a game can even 
be. Without saves, a game's length can only last  
as long as the average person keeps it powered 
on. Anything you want the game to be would have  
to fit in that short amount of time. Story-heavy 
games would be incredibly limited. It's hard to  
tell a lengthy saga if you'd have to keep your 
NES running for 40 hours to tell it. Long-term  
progression of all kinds - mechanical, character 
stats, rewards, and unlocks - they're all very  
tough to incorporate into a game if you can't 
carry over your progress to the next session.
Of course, that doesn't mean that there 
weren't games without saves. They were  
just designed differently. Arcade games 
were designed with short play sessions  
to get you to pump in quarters and usually 
didn't have a way to save your progress.  
The first home console games carried 
over that arcade game design philosophy  
and were made to be both short in length and 
brutal to complete to stretch out their playtime.  
Games were designed to start you over from the 
beginning. Checkpoints were temporary, and lives  
were limited. Once you got a game over or just had 
to end the play session, your progress was gone.
If you wanted to finish a single-player game like 
Ninja Gaiden, Contra, or Rygar, you had to be  
patient, start from the beginning, slowly become 
an expert at the game's systems, and work your  
way up to having that perfect run. For those who 
get to the end, it can be incredibly satisfying.  
The road to get there will infuriate people, 
though, and has a good chance of alienating  
anyone who doesn't - or can't - get to the end. 
It can be fun, but it won't be for everyone.
Some games without saves were designed a little 
differently. Sonic 2 can be cleared in about an  
hour, and the stages are short, sweet, 
and filled with multiple paths to keep  
things fresh during repeat playthroughs. 
Super Mario Bros had warp pipes that let  
you skip to the later stages relatively 
quickly if you knew where to find them.
But if you tried to just power through a game’s 
design without adapting it for a save-less  
environment, you might run into problems. Micro 
Machines for the NES tried to. It’s a super fun  
8-bit racing game. I had the Game Boy Color port, 
Micro Machines 1 and 2: Twin Turbo, and it was one  
of my go-to road trip games. There were loads of 
inventive tracks, each creatively themed and using  
totally unique vehicles to race on each one of 
them. Go head to head vs several AIs of different  
skill levels in a progressive structure with a 
couple dozen different matchups. Can you get to  
the end? No, probably not. The game has absolutely 
no way to save your progress. No cart save, no  
level skip, nothing. The game even “””””saves””””” 
your fastest lap times - at least until you  
powered it off. Every time you boot it up, you’re 
starting at the bottom of the ladder and seeing  
how far you get before your batteries run out. 
The game uses concepts that really only work if  
your progression can be resumed and your records 
kept, but provides no functionality to do so.
But this isn’t a video about not-saving. 
So if we’re gonna try to save data,  
what’s the quickest, fastest, cheapest, 
and easiest way to do it? You won’t need a  
battery in a cart, or a hard drive, or cloud 
storage. Just a pen and paper. Passwords.
Passwords were very popular ways to save your 
progress around the 8-bit era without having to  
include persistent memory inside a cartridge. 
A game save password can do one of two things:  
it can either be a secret code to unlock a 
set of features, or you can use a password  
to code in specific data, then decode it later 
to interpret back out what all that data means.  
That type lets you store a whole lot more 
information, like saving exactly how much money  
you have, which bad guys you’ve taken care of in 
which levels, what exact coins you’ve picked up,  
and so on. If you see a password like THIS, 
you’re probably dealing with that basic  
level select type of password. 
If you see THIS, that usually  
means there’s a bunch more fine-grained 
data being stored inside that password.
Passwords are surprisingly convenient for 
some things. They’re way more shareable  
than a cartridge save. A magazine could just print  
this out and get a final boss warp 
out to thousands of people. Hell,  
the thousands of YOU watching right now can take 
this and start up my terrible Kid Icarus save.
But passwords can be pretty annoying, 
too. You have to manually write it down,  
and if your handwriting is bad, you’re out of 
luck. If you flip letters and numbers around,  
you’re also out of luck. Wouldn’t it be 
easier if you just said when you wanted  
to save and the machine kept track of it all 
for you? Passwords fell out of favor and gave  
way to hardware saves as the cost of RAM chips 
became cheaper. It was a lot more convenient,  
and hardware saves let some new behaviors appear. 
There are many different ways to flavor a hardware  
save system, but they fall under a couple of broad 
categories: freeform and designated save points.
Freeform save points let you save just 
about anywhere you want. Take a step,  
save. Take another, save. Use an item, save. 
Maybe you can’t save all the time like during  
combat or against a boss, but everything’s kept on 
disk for you to pick back up when you load next.  
Players get the maximum sense of security that 
they won’t lose any progress they’ve made,  
but there are downsides, too.
Freeform saving greatly reduces the tension of 
losing progress from dying to something. There  
are plenty of games where that’s OK. Story-driven 
games, for example, don’t usually get their fun  
from the risk of losing your progress and having 
to replay parts of it. But plenty of other games,  
often more action-focused, use that tension 
as part of the internal drama of the game.  
Freeform saving removes that drama almost 
completely, which might play into what the game  
wants to highlight, but might not. On the flip 
side, freeform saving encourages more risk-taking  
and experimentation. If the downside for 
failing is low, why not take more chances?  
It’s a tradeoff. It also can be an invitation for 
players to undermine some of a game’s intentions.
Limitless saving can invite a thing called Save 
Scumming. Save scumming is a strategy where a  
player frequently reloads a save to manipulate 
what will happen next. If you’re about to go  
into a fight centered around random chance, and 
the devs aren’t careful, save scumming takes  
the randomness out of an encounter at the cost 
of a bunch of repetitive reloading. Take XCOM.  
XCOM is built around attacks that have a 
percent chance to hit. The game has some  
built-in anti-save scumming features to keep 
track of the dice rolls from load to load. If  
they hadn’t done that, save scumming would let you 
keep reloading the same fight until that rare 5%  
chance to hit actually succeeded. If you’re just 
gonna reload a game until it goes your way, that’s  
not really a random roll of the dice now, is it? 
A player might reload a fight repeatedly to get  
a rare loot drop or get an enemy attack pattern 
that’s easier to beat. It’s a strange side effect  
of the convenience and security of unlimited saves 
that creates a tedious optimal strategy for some  
encounters. This can also apply to emulated 
games with save states and rewind features.
Developers can work around it by saving a big list 
of random dice rolls early on and just reading  
from the table instead of re-rolling it live on 
each reload. Still, it's something they do have  
to keep in mind, so they don't accidentally 
create an experience they didn't want.
Or you could go in the total opposite direction 
and embrace save scumming. Fire Emblem is a  
series that uses random rolls for attacks a lot 
like XCOM, and permadeath for its characters,  
which creates a pretty significant incentive 
to start over the second something goes wrong.  
Fire Emblem: Three Houses is the newest game in 
the series and has a feature called Divine Pulse,  
which canonizes the save scumming process by 
letting you rewind a battle a limited number  
of times to course correct if you made a fatal 
mistake, instead of reloading the whole fight  
from the start. The feature takes some of 
the tedium out of the process of reloading,  
which makes it a nice quality of life benefit 
if the devs are going to tolerate save-scumming  
as a part of the game. You can’t just do the 
same actions and expect different results,  
though. The random rolls are saved in a 
way where repeating the exact same actions  
will wind up with the same outcome. It’s there 
to let you adjust to a new, winning strategy.
Other games only let you save at 
designated places during play.  
In Kingdom Hearts, you can only save at 
one of these things and nowhere else.  
Often these save points pull double-duty as safe 
havens to heal, restock, strategize and prepare.  
The placement of save points isn’t usually 
random. Especially in games that use them as  
places to refresh your characters, they tend to 
be spaced out evenly, or before major events.  
In many games, save points were implicit 
signals that a boss fight was about to start.
Some games gave you a portable designated save 
point and let you set it wherever you wanted.  
Final Fantasy 7 gave you one in the final 
dungeon, but only one. Place it too early,  
and you might have a long gauntlet 
to get to the end, wherever that was.  
It would be a clever way to get around the major 
event telegraphing problem that hard save points  
created, though in this game specifically, it 
was pretty obvious where the final boss was.
If you want something a little less permanent, the 
idea works with checkpoints, too. Demon Turf is a  
3D platformer a la Mario 64 where you’re stringing 
together your different movement options to bounce  
and dive all over the place. You’d be surprised 
where you can get to, but learning requires a  
good amount of experimentation and risk-taking. 
The game gives you 3 checkpoint flags that you  
can plant anywhere you want to encourage you 
to take chances with where you jump to next.  
You can’t be completely careless with them, 
but you get to choose exactly where you feel  
like you really need them so you don’t have 
to repeat an easy chunk of the level. You can  
even teleport between the flags, which 
can be handy for finding collectibles.
If there are only going to be save 
points in certain places of the game,  
the placement of those save points 
matters more than you might think.  
The longer the game goes between 
save points, the greater the stakes.  
Whether you can reuse a save point matters, 
too. Unlimited save points, especially ones  
where you can heal and restock, can act as 
a base of operations, letting players brute  
force grind for experience in an area without 
risking much, using the save point as an anchor.
The classic Resident Evil games tried to avoid 
this problem by making saves a consumable item.  
There are safe rooms scattered throughout where 
you can take a breather, manage resources with the  
storage box, and save your game. But only if you 
have an ink ribbon. Saves themselves are a limited  
resource, just like healing herbs and ammo. You 
can’t just pop in and out of the safe room and  
save whenever you want. You need to pace yourself 
and press your luck a little, either now when you  
know what you’re facing, or later if you run 
out of ink ribbons and have to keep going until  
you find another one. Resident Evil 4 dropped 
the save system as a quality of life feature,  
but the recent Resident Evil 2 remake brought it 
back as part of the hardcore difficulty option  
and would even take into account how many saves 
you used to rank you at the end of the game.
Man, all these hardware save types seem like a 
pain to sort through. What if we could just get  
the computer to do it for you? Like automatically. 
Auto…. saves. Oh right, yeah, that exists.  
Autosaving takes all of the work out 
of saving, with one horrible cost.
If you’re relying on an algorithm to save for you,  
you need to make sure it can’t soft lock the game. 
Soft locking involves creating any situation where  
the game cannot let you continue. It might be 
that the game locks you out of a room, or away  
from an item you need to progress. It can also be 
autosaving you into an unwinnable position, where  
reloading a save puts you back into a place where 
the enemies are too high-leveled and you can’t  
catch up, or without enough ammo to take on the 
next hoard without a way to get more, or in the  
middle of getting ambushed in a way that you can’t 
get away from. Soft locking in an auto-save-only  
game can be devastating, in the worst case 
making the entire save file completely useless.
Layering autosaving on top of other 
saving techniques and having recent backup  
save files is practically a necessity to keep 
from causing horrific soft lock scenarios.
Cool, so those are the basic save 
styles, but we can go deeper.  
Some of the most creative uses of saves have 
been when they get treated not just as a utility,  
but as another game element. What if 
saving is just another part of gameplay?
Donkey Kong Country 2 would let you save, 
but if you wanted to save in the same world  
a second time, it’d cost you 2 banana coins. The 
Japanese version of the game only cost 1 coin for  
some reason. It’s not hard to collect two coins, 
but it does create a fiddly little extra step  
before saving. It’s, I guess, an attempt to make 
collectibles feel more meaningful and less like an  
anonymous checklist to complete for no rewards, 
but this is still a half-baked idea. Luckily,  
it’s pretty ignorable. The GBA port of the 
game cut this out and let you save wherever.
Steel Batallion used a save file as a long-term 
pause rather than a checkpoint. Even with a saved  
game, you were under constant threat of losing 
it. If you died or ran out of money in-game,  
your save would blow up alongside your mech. 
The setup definitely made you value your life  
in game more and made you more cautious, but it 
did increase stress. It’s an interesting approach  
for a game that wants to crank up the stakes, 
and games with Ironman modes use the same idea,  
and most Roguelikes are also built around the save 
game as more of a pause than a life preserver.
Shovel Knight found a way to use the 
convenience of frequent checkpoints but  
with a fun challenge baked in. Shovel Knight uses 
these glass orbs as checkpoints, but you don’t  
have to use them. If you don’t want to save, 
you can break most of them for extra cash.  
If you’re feeling confident, you can spice up 
the game’s difficulty to your tolerance level  
and progress even faster if you make it through. 
But if you’re shaky, the same system lets you have  
the convenience of modern save-happy design. 
The game becomes more adaptable to different  
players and play styles, helping make the 
experience more fun for a wider group of people.
Save your spot down in the comments where 
we’ll talk about some save horror stories,  
and any game you can think of that treats 
saves in a unique way. Save systems are part  
of the bedrock of game design, and thinking 
through the decisions you make here can….  
saaaaaaaaaaaaave a game. That was terrible, quick 
load. Saves are important, do them good. Flawless.
*chill vibes outro from Ico*