Nobody move.
We’re gonna take turns punching each other.
Me first.
I get a mace.
Ready go.
I love turn-based combat.
I love the planning and the strategic complexity,
thinking through all your options to come
up with the right plan of attack.
At its best, it’s gameplay where every choice
is meaningful - every fight, important.
Not all turn-based combat is at its best,
though, and it can have a hard time winning
over new fans.
At its worst, it can be a slow, meaningless
slog towards a conclusion that you saw coming
a mile away.
So how do you make turn-based combat that
accentuates the positives and eliminates as
many negatives as possible?
Today, let’s talk about the pain points
that lots of these games keep running into
and how you can polish turn-based combat to
be the best it can be.
If you’re looking to make the next great
turn-based combat system, you’re gonna have
a lot of moving parts to keep track of.
You’re gonna need to stay organized with
today’s episode sponsor Milanote!
Milanote helps you organize and share your
ideas.
Mood boards, storyboards, proposals and notes
- Milanote lets you keep it all in one place
and share and collaborate on them all with
your entire team.
We even use it to organize thoughts for our
episodes.
It’s got a clean and beautiful interface
with intuitive drag-and-drop tools on a freeform
canvas that keeps everyone informed and involved
- designers, developers, artists, managers,
and everyone else that needs to know what’s
going on and has something to contribute.
Milanote has built-in templates specifically
for game design, too, and guess what, it’s
free to sign up!
Click the link in the description to sign
up for free.
Design Doc viewers will be entered in a giveaway
to get a free Milanote PRO subscription.
Milanote helps you take your thoughts from
a dream to a plan.
Link in the description, sign up now.
Thanks Milanote!
Turn-based combat is an ancient cornerstone
of gaming - born from the tabletop scene and
made famous with games like Final Fantasy,
Dragon Quest, and Phantasy Star, among lots
of others.
It’s worked for decades, adaptable to all
kinds of settings, systems, and aesthetics
through the modern-day with games like Yakuza:
Like A Dragon, XCOM, and Octopath Traveler.
Turn-based combat isn’t everyone’s cup
of tea, though.
Outside of the die-hard fans, you hear the
same complaints over and over.
It’s slow.
It’s grindy.
It’s slow.
It’s not realistic.
It’s… it’s mostly people complaining
about it being slow.
And they’re right.
Or at least they can be right.
Turn-based combat can be slow.
It can be abstract and grindy.
But, it doesn’t HAVE to be.
Lots of these complaints are about fixable
things.
Things that aren’t an unchangeable core
to the turn-based combat experience.
The slow pace and grindy battles usually aren’t
THE REASON that fans fall in love with the
format.
Some are default design choices, or are easiest
to implement, but with some careful planning
a game designer can sand down the rough edges
and still keep the parts of the turn-based
combat that old fans love and make it easier
to create new fans as well.
So what can we do to fix some of those issues?
The biggest and most common turn-based turn-off
is just the amount of time spent waiting for
something to happen.
Waiting for a battle intro to play out.
Waiting for the enemy to make a move.
Waiting for YOUR turn to move.
Waiting for attack animations.
Waiting for text.
If you do it wrong, there are just a lot of
moments of ‘dead air’ that add up to make
combat encounters last way longer than they
need to.
It’s one of the bigger complaints about
Pokemon.
Pokemon battles across generations have felt
very slow and stilted.
Every action has little pauses between animations
and multiple text boxes with redundant information.
The 4th generation is especially bad.
Every step of every battle has noticeable
delays.
You notice them on the transition into the
fight, intro text, using the menus, watching
attack animations, status effects, text confirmations
of everything that just happened - every little
thing happens one piece at a time and pauses
at every step in between.
Even HP drains at a snail’s pace if you
have enough of it.
In Pokemon Sword and Shield, you can turn
off battle animations and speed up text, but
battle without animations deals a pretty severe
blow to the game’s charm.
It doesn’t really even solve the problem
all the way, either.
A battle where you KO your opponent in a single
attack still takes nearly half a minute to
play out.
This isn’t the same as saying that long
battles are inherently bad.
They can be great!
But there’s a difference between something
taking a long time and something feeling like
it’s taking a long time.
The core of the problem involves there being
lots of stretches of time where the player
is waiting around for something to do.
To help speed it up, think about which elements
can happen together.
Actions don’t have to play out one at a
time.
ATB systems in Final Fantasy were a step forward
partially because of how they spread out the
waiting.
Instead of entering all commands at once,
then watching them play out all in a row,
you could be entering commands while another
command was happening.
This sped up battles a bit without changing
much of the underlying mechanics.
Reducing the time each action takes is helpful,
but you can also try to make the actions more
interactive.
Action commands help solve this problem by
mixing in a mini game or a QTE that a player
can perform to get a bonus.
Super Mario RPG did this back in 1996, among
others.
You would get attack and defense boosts if
you could time a button press in sync with
the action on the screen.
It made attack animations more active, and
worth paying attention to even after you had
seen them dozens of times.
But action commands are like salt.
A little is nice, a lot… maybe not.
Mario and Luigi: Paper Jam, has special attacks
that are executed through lengthy action commands.
They’re like a Final Fantasy 7 summon fused
with a Mario Party minigame.
Each attack is tied to one minigame, so you’ll
be doing that minigame over and over and over
again.
The attack commands aren’t designed poorly
or anything.
If they were used sparingly they’d be nice
punctuation points, but they end up being
used a little too frequently to be anything
but grating after a while.
The game’s defensive action commands take
a much lighter touch.
Every enemy has a unique method of attacking
you, with unique tells for who they’re targeting.
You have to learn and react to the tell to
get through unscathed, and you even get to
dish out a little extra damage if you time
it just right.
The defensive action commands are quick, interactive,
and require a touch of thought, all of which
help keep players on their toes.
It’s not a lot, but a lot of little improvements
can add up to a much cleaner and more engaging
battle system.
Better Menus
What else can we do to speed things up?
What if we think about this even more basically?
What do you do the most when playing a turn-based
game?
Navigating menus.
The core of turn-based combat centers around
selecting options from a list over and over.
When you’re doing an action thousands of
times, even tiny time savings will pay off
big.
Persona 5’s menus are snappy to navigate.
Each face button is a different command, removing
a lot of the raw number of button presses
per action.
The time between thinking of your move and
entering it in is kept to a minimum, and so
are each menu move’s visual cues.
The UI is full of flourishes in animation
and character movement as you navigate.
They don’t take up a lot of time, they’re
just there to accentuate your actions as you’re
performing them, and they go a long way towards
making a uniquely satisfying menu system.
OK, now your combat is zippy and responsive,
good job.
What’s the next big complaint?
Turn-based combat at its best relies on strategy
and planning, so very simple fights usually
aren’t that fun.
A default your turn/my turn structure might
be too rigid and predictable.
Time to start messing around with the Turn
Economy.
Lots of games let you change who gets to move,
when they get to move, how moves can affect
future moves, and how to limit your opponent’s
moves.
More moves mean more damage dealt and less
taken, or more time to prep or heal.
It gives players another layer to think strategically
about how they can turn the tide of battle.
Sometimes it’s really simple, like using
buffs and debuffs to slow down, stop, or speed
up character turns.
Some games let you force opponents to skip
their turn entirely.
Shin Megami Tensei takes turn skipping to
the extreme, where if you continuously attack
with the right elements on the right opponent,
you can double the number of turns you get
and potentially sweep your enemies before
they even get a chance to do anything.
Careful, though.
Play your cards wrong and they could do the
same to you.
Maybe casting spells to affect the turn economy
is too subtle for you.
What if you just grabbed the turn economy
by the horns and lived with the consequences?
Bravely Default lets you use the turns themselves
like a resource.
The game’s main battle gimmick is the creatively
titled Brave and Default system.
You can ‘Default’ to defend yourself and
save up turns to use them all at once, or
be ‘Brave’ and borrow up to four rounds
of your future turns to try to get out of
a battle faster.
Make sure you’re right, though.
If you can’t get the job done and have gone
into turn-debt to do so, your opponent gets
a bunch of moves in a row without you having
a chance to respond.
You can split who uses future turns, like
saving them for your healer to try to hedge
your bets, but the system is all about the
risks you choose to take and knowing what
your team is capable of before committing
all your resources.
Grandia does a great job at making a unique
way to play around with how turns work.
However, I haven’t played Grandia.
I have it.
It’s in my steam library.
Luckily, I HAVE played Child of Light, and
I hear it’s basically Grandia.
I think.
Go play Child of Light.
Also probably Grandia.
Child of Light’s battles revolve around
this timeline.
Each character and enemy travels along it
to determine when they get to go.
There’s a ‘wait’ phase, a ‘command’
phase where time freezes and you can pick
your move, and a ‘cast’ phase where the
character prepares the move you picked, then
they do their thing when they get to the end
of the line.
Different moves will take different amounts
of time to go through each of those phases.
Slow, powerful moves might take longer to
complete.
Faster moves, or even guarding will get you
to the next turn sooner.
However, a character getting hit also affects
their position.
Getting hit in the ‘Cast’ phase will send
you back to the ‘Wait’ phase, wasting
time.
But again, you can do the same to your opponent.
You’re constantly looking at the timeline,
adjusting your targets based on where everyone
is on it, and what everyone is about to do
next.
You can also use your little cursor companion
in real time to slow down specific targets,
giving you a large amount of control over
how the battle plays out.
The timeline system is an awesome iteration
of ATB, adding a lot of depth to turn-based
combat and keeps the player thinking throughout
every fight.
You might think to do puzzle mechanics, but
you do have to be careful not to just make
the same puzzle over and over again.
Paper Mario: Origami King did this.
You’re still making it boring, just boring
later.
So we’ve gone over some of the nuts and
bolts of how turn-based combat can feel better
or worse depending on how a fight progresses
and how you submit your actions.
But turn-based combat might depend even more
on how a game rewards you fight-to-fight.
That could be experience, items, and equipment,
sure, but that’s not all the rewards can
be.
It could be novel fight types or tactics that
make for compelling strategic encounters,
or story progress, or unlocking new moves.
All of that plays a complex role with what
people usually call ‘The Grind’.
Most every game with turn-based combat has
dozens or hundreds of encounters to go through,
but not every game feels ‘grindy’.
When people complain about ‘The Grind,’
they’re often actually complaining about
an imbalance in the reward you get for completing
the fights the game puts you in.
Things like filler battles that don’t advance
the story.
Fights that keep playing out in the same way
and just take up time.
Long stretches between unlocking anything
new.
Action games tend to be a little more immune
to the problem than turn-based games, because
their fights are more about the action in
the moment rather than deriving their fun
more heavily from strategic planning.
Different players will have different tolerance
levels for this kind of thing, but eventually,
too many fights that feel meaningless wind
up being poisonous to the design of turn-based
combat.
A quick way out of the problem is to make
sure players get a small but meaningful reward
as often as possible.
Final Fantasy V does it through its job system.
Each fight completed gives out experience
points that go towards leveling up your character,
but it also gives out Ability Points to level
up your character’s Job.
Each character can swap between more than
a dozen different jobs and develop them independently
with those ability points to get new abilities
that are only earned through that job.
The game makes job-hopping easy and fun, which
lets you get a variety of skills over multiple
jobs to play with.
The abilities can be mixed and matched with
those of other party members to create crazy
combinations that are super fun to experiment
with.
Each job levels up at different rates, which
makes it so new abilities unlock at small,
random intervals all the time.
You won’t go through too many fights before
a new move or skill opens up for someone.
The game lets you set short-term goals for
each character and longer-term ones for the
party composition that you’re constantly
progressing towards.
You also see this in Tactics games, where
many characters leveling up on independent
schedules lets you strategize around the composition
of each character in short bursts after each
fight.
Small, frequent upgrades are a great way to
get a sense of concrete progress that keeps
the feeling of ‘The Grind’ at bay.
Leveling up is cool, but that’s not the
only tool in the toolbox if you’re trying
to hide the grind.
Treating encounters like a sort of scavenger
hunt is another option.
Pokemon’s Pokedex is the most straightforward
example of a scavenger hunt built into the
game’s encounter system, but other games
use it differently.
Shin Megami Tensei lets you add to your team
of demons only by finding them in the world
and starting negotiations.
They’re not risk-free either.
They might demand items, or ask questions
about your opinions to see if they’d gel
with you.
If negotiations go poorly, you might lose
a turn, which can be super dangerous in a
combat system as swingy as this one.
The strategy behind finding new demons and
adding them to your team throws an interesting
wrinkle into each encounter, instead of the
one and only goal being a race to 0 HP.
That’s a pretty specialized fix, though.
Even if recruiting your enemies doesn’t
make sense for a game, just seeing new types
of enemies can be its own reward.
Dragon Quest XI has a super charming set of
them where every baddie stands out with delightful
character designs and goofy pun names.
Of course you have the classic slimes.
They’re good but a little played out.
Check out Sham Hatwich.
Or the Cruelcumber, a spear-wielding cucumber
man.
When you kill him he turns into hors d'oeuvres.
The game keeps the new designs coming consistently
and makes getting to a new area with new enemies
to fight its own little reward.
Another option is to weave the battle system
into the game’s narrative.
The Support system in modern Fire Emblem games
creates a great secondary goal during the
game’s normal encounters.
As pairs of characters fight side by side,
or support each other, each pair’s support
level rises.
They gain extra bonuses as they unlock new
support levels to help them be more effective.
More importantly, there are huge chunks of
the story locked behind conversations that
only happen at certain support levels.
Much of the characterization relies on getting
these support conversations, and even special
side missions might only become available
through them.
In Fire Emblem Awakening, an entire set of
new party members depends on who you decide
to pair up with whom.
The support system adds another layer of meaning
to the standard battles, impacts your tactical
positioning, and gives plenty of reason to
look at your characters as more than just
their stat lines.
You could attack the grind more directly,
though.
There are paths you can go down that cancel
the need for grinding altogether.
In Final Fantasy VIII, as you level up your
characters, the game levels up enemies alongside
you.
There’s no way to ‘outlevel’ your opponent.
If you’re having trouble, you probably just
need to get more acquainted with the junction
system rather than trying to brute force your
way through.
Chrono Cross puts a cap on your stat increases
after each boss fight, ensuring you can’t
stray too far from where the game expects
you to be on the power curve at any given
time.
But there are people who do like grinding,
treating it almost like a meditative exercise
or something to do in the background.
If you’re careful, you can totally thread
the needle and give both pro- and anti-grind
players what they want.
Just make the grind optional!
Disgaea uses a system called the Item World.
Each weapon in Disgaea has a full-on dungeon
inside it, with rarer items having more floors
in its dungeon.
The rewards for playing in the Item World
are worth it, too.
Clearing dungeon floors boosts the weapon’s
stats and makes them significantly more powerful.
If you’re the type of player who loves the
grind, there’s an incredible amount of it
to do.
If you’re not, you can still easily beat
the game without interacting with the system
much at all.
Disgaea separates the grind from the story,
and it works well enough to get both types
of turn-based combat fans what they want without
ruining the fun of the other side.
Head down to the comments and join the discussion
about turn-based RPG combat.
We’ll be talking about some unique battle
systems that streamline the gameplay, speed
up menus, and use all kinds of unique rewards
to make the whole thing more fun.
Turn-based RPG combat isn’t for everyone,
but it’s not a relic of the past.
Give the battle system the care and attention
it deserves, and all your moves will pay off.
*chill vibes outro from Trails in the Sky*