Maybe the important part of these RPGs aren’t
the critical hits, or the status effects,
or the bosses.
Maybe the real value was the friends we made
along the way.
RPGs are one of the best ways for a video
game to tell a long-form story.
In RPGs, a great set of party members can
give an otherwise bland and predictable story
the right punch to become something that will
stick with you for a long time.
But what makes for a good party?
It’s not just about the character archetypes
you use, or the ships you want.
A good party out can be made with any set
of characters you can dream up, if you do
it right.
Party chemistry is about more than any one
person, and it’s a marathon.
It’s the factors that play characters off
of each other, it’s good motivations and
characterizations, and putting all the pieces
together like a jigsaw puzzle to create something
more dynamic than the sum of its parts.
Let’s talk about some factors that go into
party design, the characters in them, and
the sorts of character dynamics you’ll want
to make a memorable party.
Wait, who’s this?
Moneybags, the wealthy
financier?
Hell yeah, get in this party.
Moneybags!
Your true motivation this whole time was…
to sell Skillshare!
It all makes sense now!
Skillshare just got a new class by Thomas
Frank called Productivity for Creatives: Build
a System that Brings Out Your Best.
It’s about building the right sort of systems
and environment to help speed up your creativity,
and help take your mindset to one that works
better for creative professionals.
It’s helped me get more done during the
day, and got this episode finished earlier,
actually.
It’s been super worth it.
Skillshare has thousands of inspiring classes
for creators.
Improve your professional life, learn a new
hobby, or just explore your creativity.
You could dip your toes into photography now
that things are opening up again, or dabble
in illustration, just for something new.
Skillshare is ad-free and they’re launching
new classes all the time, so you can follow
wherever your creativity takes you.
The first 1000 people to click the link in
the description will get a free trial of Skillshare
Premium.
Go do it!
It’s fun!
I will never forget you, or your amazing value,
Moneybags.
Goodbyyyyyyyeeeee…
A great party is built on a great foundation,
and you can start building that foundation
by paying attention to three big things: intra-party
dynamics, pacing, and story structure.
There’s plenty more to do on top of that,
but you could spend your entire life studying
story structure alone.
For a 15-minute intro video, we’re gonna
start with the basics of the basics.
Oh, and some light to medium spoilers are
incoming.
Have a spoiler card.
First up, intra-party dynamics.
Great parties don’t usually start as a group
of strangers.
More often, a party is made of a bunch of
people who already relate to each other somehow.
It's not that everyone knows everyone ELSE
necessarily, but each member of the group
should have connections to someone within,
and if you drew out the links, the party would
look like a single net of relationships.
What those connections are can be anything.
Characters might be long-time friends, co-workers,
lovers, rivals, secret enemies, family - a
great party starts with some connections between
characters and develops and changes those
connections over time.
One of my favorite RPG parties is the main
group in Final Fantasy X.
The core of the game's story is about a band
of people going on a pilgrimage from one religious
shrine to another.
The party is made up of one person who needs
to make the pilgrimage to save the world,
a set of bodyguards she's known since she
was a kid, her estranged cousin, her dad's
best friend who really knows what's going
on, and a rando hot boyfriend material dude
that washed up on the beach one day.
His name’s Tidus.
Or Tee-dus.
I don’t care…
Everyone in the party relates to each other
in a variety of ways.
Even Tidus, the odd-man-out, has connections
through Auron, quickly establishes himself
as Yuna’s love interest, and has plenty
of other plot threads tying him to the events
and themes to come.
Although, starting a story with a group of
well-connected people can run into one specific
problem early.
It's tough to find natural reasons for your
characters to spout lore if they already know
each other and are comfortable in the story's
setting.
If they aren't mentioning things to each other,
that's one less tool a writer can use to get
the player up to speed.
Stories set in a world with fantastical elements,
like any Final Fantasy game, need to dump
a lot of exposition and lore to set the stage
properly.
Even stories that just take the player through
unusual territory in the real world can run
into this problem.
Like, say, if you made a game about a secretive
ancient society of ...legitimate businessmen
working in shipping, or at a nursing home,
or something.
The less familiar the player already is with
your material, the more likely this will come
up.
Final Fantasy X gets around this with a classic fantasy setting trope:
the fish-out-of-water character.
They aren't accustomed to the world but are
learning about it as they build connections
to familiar characters.
It gives writers a natural avenue to explain
the basics in-universe and inform the player
in the process.
The characters telling Tidus about their relationships,
history, motivations, and fears fill in the
player at the same time.
It adds another exposition technique in addition
to others like context clues, data logs, and
flashbacks.
As Tidus learns more about the culture of
Spira and the nature of the greater threat,
the intra-party dynamic develops.
Yevon's prejudice against the Al Bhed sets
the stage for both Wakka and Rikku's character
arcs and how those characters clash and play
off of each other.
The hardships in Kilika and Operation Mi'hen
flesh out Yuna's character, in particular,
reminding us what's at stake and just how
far she's willing to go, and just what Lulu,
Wakka, Kimahri, and Auron have signed up for.
Each of their individual story arcs are impacted
by the arcs of others, and the collective
development helps make the party feel like
a cohesive entity.
As the crew gets closer and closer to their
end goal, it helps give the later stages of
the game a stronger emotional payoff.
A less successful version of the same thing
shows up in Octopath Traveler.
The game's good, but Octopath's intra-party
dynamics are not its strong suit.
Each party member is optional to pick up,
and there really aren’t all that many threads
connecting their individual
story arcs.
Everyone has a perfectly decent progression
in their own personal arc.
Alfyn's search for meaning, Primrose's revenge
plot, Ophilia's quest to impersonate Yuna
- they're all solid stories to tell, but there's
very little overlap between them.
Well, until a very, very late optional side
quest, and I'm not super enthusiastic about
counting that.
The only interaction they have during the
story are in scenes where they dim the lights,
have the characters stand around like a stage
play and lightly comment on what just happened.
The arcs weren't really able to overlap because
they advance in stages.
You could take the stages on in any order,
so any character change over time might not
come through sensibly if they had to react
to or appear in the events of another character's
arc.
Regardless of the reason, though, the characters
wound up feeling like their own little islands,
and the party itself had almost no dynamic
to speak of.
The party dynamic is an independent thing.
A well-crafted party doesn’t depend on having
a great main plot.
Final Fantasy XV’s main plot was literally
unfinished for a long time.
On release, the setup and backstory for main
characters was partially told in an anime
and an animated movie you probably didn’t
watch.
Even now it’s sorta unfinished, and yet
the intra-party dynamic of the four main party
members is fantastic.
The game is about brotherhood and the lengths
each of the main cast will go to protect each
other.
You get a sense of that in the main plot even
when the story events are not told especially
well, but the flood of side content really
highlights the friendship between the four.
The long drives, stopping by diners for food,
going camping, taking photo ops, none of that
depends on the game’s backdrop of fighting
giant monsters and saving the world.
It’s all developed one mundane moment at
a time through the small talk, the inside
jokes, the body language, even the silent
animations that run as they rest in a hotel
help convey a sense of friendship.
It’s a rare thing in RPGs to find this sort
of easygoing friendship that’s primarily
delivered through small moments throughout,
rather than a cutscene loudly proclaiming
that everyone is friends now.
The game nails the feeling of a grounded,
believable relationship between four long-time
friends on a road trip, and makes the bond
they have incredibly relatable.
OK, sounds like your cast is on the right
track.
Everyone’s got their own things going on,
and they’re all synergizing with each other.
The next thing to think about is how to keep
up the pace.
Each party member needs their time in the
spotlight, but each also needs to stay relevant
as long as they’re going to be around.
This can trip up even the best RPGs.
The size of your party can play a big role
in how you plan your character development.
It’s not as if a cast has to be small to
feel cohesive throughout a game, but it is
easier to make a smaller party work.
The less characters there are, the more time
each member will have in the spotlight.
Though with fewer cast members, the stakes
are higher.
Party members are support pillars.
The more there are, the more easily the cast
as a whole will stand up even if a few pillars
are weak.
A smaller cast needs each party member to
be strong for the party dynamic to hold up
over time.
Bug Fables does a great job in characterizing
its small cast.
Team Snakemouth is made up of just three characters
- a self-centered bee named Vi, a stalwart
beetle named Kabbu, and Leif, a mysterious
and blunt moth.
The small team size gives plenty of time for
the plot to flesh out each character, and
room for the trio dynamic to develop and become
tighter-knit over time.
Each character joins in fairly early on, and
the game makes sure to keep each relevant
throughout the entire story.
Their personalities balance each other out,
and their individual backstories and character
arcs progress at an even pace.
You couldn’t really say there’s a single
“main'' character in Bug Fables.
No one in the party really outshines anyone
else and they all rely on each other for support
as they develop their own arcs.
They share the spotlight equally as a team.
With fewer characters, the writers could spend
more time polishing each one.
There’s a unique conversation the party
can have in every room in the world, and there’s
even custom dialogue for each member when
scanning enemies for information in battles.
Their dialogue stays true to their own thoughts
and reactions to make the characters feel
more consistent, and that attention to detail
shows up throughout the game.
The contrast between Bug Fables and its most
direct inspiration, Paper Mario, is striking.
You get plenty of partners in Paper Mario,
but they’re each given very little, if any,
character development time after their introductory
chapter is over.
After that point, each party member essentially
becomes a ‘living Zelda dungeon item’.
Especially in the original game, each party
member becomes completely interchangeable
outside of their specific battle skills.
The second game does a little better, but
it’s pretty close to the same problem.
Vivian abandons her abusive sister to help
you out, and then she’s just there for the
rest of the game.
Bobbery overcomes his grief to sail the seas
again, and then he’s just… there.
Sure, it’s easier to write.
It might not make sense in every case for
everyone to have something poignant to say
about every plot situation, but it’s a missed
opportunity to nurture the budding party chemistry.
According to the developer Moonsprout, Bug
Fables was designed to have a small, focused
main cast in direct response to this problem
with Paper Mario.
OK, small, intimate casts are nice to get
to know well, but let’s go to the other
extreme: Huge, expendable casts.
Some party members aren’t supposed to last
forever.
Games with optional party members or ones
you can permanently lose can force you to
dramatically change your approach to characterizing
your party.
Having a key, plot-driving party members get
permanently removed from the game could be
a fun angle if you plan for it, but it’s
more likely to just freeze your story in its
tracks.
Expendable characters are more often forced
into background roles, only taking front stage
in their own dedicated side arcs, if they
have any at all.
It’s a very tricky type of party to write
narratives for.
The Mass Effect trilogy just takes the challenge
head-on.
Most of your squadmates are both optional
and expendable.
They can either be ignored entirely or die
at key points based on choices you make, with
the story continuing without them.
Without careful planning, this story structure
could’ve led to wildly different branching
paths, but in Mass Effect, it usually leads
to one of two things.
Either future moments with a character you’ve
lost are completely skipped, or a scene will
feature a different, less interesting character
acting as a direct replacement.
Once in a while, a scene will play out with
some extra drama, but it's usually just missing,
or it has someone else going through the motions.
If you wanted to make expendable characters
matter more in the plot, you might think to
just make dialogue more interchangeable.
If you do that, you might end up with a situation
like in Chrono Cross.
Chrono Cross doesn’t have expendable characters,
but it does have very interchangeable dialogue
in its cutscenes, and it highlights how it
can cause problems with characterization.
Chrono Cross is known for its very large cast
of party members, but it’s really a paper-thin
set.
There are maybe a dozen characters that have
any real motivation or say in what’s going
on, and the rest of the group has maybe one
character motivation each if that.
This guy’s entire purpose is being a pun.
The plot specifies generic dialogue that whoever
is in your active party will say, and the
game does have a pretty cool text ‘accent’
system where characters will give that generic
dialogue with their specific affectation,
but generic dialogue is no replacement for
a central character motivation.
Another option is to just sidestep the problem.
Strategy RPGs like Fire Emblem or Valkyria
Chronicles have dozens of expendable characters,
with names and distinct personalities.
Almost none of them will directly affect the
main story, but they’ll often have a lot
of side content to interact with.
Optional missions and support conversations
help flesh out their personalities and let
them shine even when they aren’t directly
plot-relevant.
You’ll start to get attached, which will
help raise the emotional stakes of every fight
now that you’ve gotten to know everyone
in your squad.
And if you lose someone, oh well, the plot
chugs along with some optional branches blocked
off.
It’s devastating to YOU, but not the plot.
So that’s some of the very basics of how
to make better parties, but there’s plenty
more to talk about.
Head down to the comments, where we’ll be
talking about some of your favorite party
dynamics, and why they work for both the story
and gameplay.
Add your own, and talk to others about what
you think they did to get it right.
If you can fill your story with deep connections
and dynamic characters, you can turn a rag-tag
group of wannabe sky pirates into a real party.
*chill vibes outro from Tales of Symphonia*