I love unexpected games.
Especially ones that mash up two genres into
one complete package.
The two combine into a beautiful idea that
we couldn’t have played otherwise.
Over the past decade, one of my favorite mash
ups has been the ‘item shop’ genre - a
dungeon crawler crossed with a light store
management sim.
Two major games from two different studios
have come out about just that - 2010’s English
translation of Recettear, and 2018’s Moonlighter.
Recettear came out of absolutely nowhere to
break new ground.
Moonlighter is a dramatic refinement of the
idea, and put its own spin on it.
But the two games still have their flaws,
both subtle and glaring.
Let’s take a look at them both, and dissect
how their mechanics mix together.
Recettear came out of the hobbyist side of
the Japanese indie game development scene.
It’s closer to a passion project than a
full retail release with full retail expectations.
It was definitely made on a budget, but Recettear
makes up for that lack of polish with the
novelty of its premise, and wraps it in just
enough charm to draw you in.
Recettear is about a little girl who is stuck
with the massive loans taken out by her deadbeat
father.
Deadbeat or dead, one of the two.
Either way, she opens up a little RPG-world
item shop with the help of her father’s
loan shark fairy.
Together, they run their new shop, ‘Recettear’
to pay off the loans.
Your job is to keep up with the bills, or
else the item shop will be repossessed and
Recette will have to find a nice cardboard
box to live in.
You’ll run the store day to day, haggle
with the locals, and restock your supplies,
either by buying from the marketplace or hiring
the town’s adventurers, following them into
randomly generated dungeons, and ruthlessly
selling that sweet sweet loot.
But not to little girls with chump change
that don’t buy anything and waste my time!
Get out of my store!
Recettear’s premise works wonderfully as
a game loop.
It’s really tough to run the shop without
running to the dungeons to restock your shelves,
and you can’t dive into the dungeons too
often or you won’t make enough money in
your shop to meet your weekly payment and
keep the debt fairy away.
The game is constantly flipping between the
two distinct game styles, and it keeps the
game fresher for longer than either part could
do on its own.
The dungeon crawler injects some action and
is fine for what it is, but the store management
side is the game’s biggest attraction.
Store regulars show up to haggle with you,
or sell you new items, and you can figure
out each customer’s tendencies and needs.
Your adventurer friends can even equip what
they end up getting at your store, so you
can cut them a sweet deal on the stuff they
buy in order to make dungeons easier.
You can customize your shop to attract different
clientele, which makes it feel like you’re
really putting your own spin on the store
you’re managing.
The two styles are a smart, natural combo,
and the game gets a bunch of points for being
a novel mash up without feeling contrived.
But it’s not all cheery anime kids, labor
law violations, and wacky hijinks.
The game has a ton of heart, but its ultra-indie
roots show up a little more often than you’d
like.
The story is presented in a visual novel style,
with static backgrounds and slide in conversations.
The localization work by Carpe Fulgur is actually
very good, so the story doesn’t weigh down
the rest of the experience.
The soundtrack is fine, though it’ll get
a little repetitive before the end.
[music from Recettear]
Maybe a lot repetitive.
Haggling with your customers in the shop is
fun at first, but the process of haggling
can become predictable after a while, and
that takes away some of the charm.
The dungeon crawling half is simplistic.
The dungeon layouts aren’t that complex,
and it definitely feels like you’re running
through the same set of tunnels after a while.
The visual style isn’t very cohesive with
the 3D enemy models clashing hard with the
backgrounds and the 2D sprites.
There’s a bit of inventory management to
think about, but nothing complicated.
The combat is real basic.
Attack animations have almost no weight and
feel stiff.
Your super moves aren’t that interesting,
or tactically complex.
It’s really a bare minimum combat system,
and it hasn’t aged all that well, as there
are tons of quality top-down dungeon crawlers
that do this style of combat much better.
None of these problems are deal breakers,
but they’ll pile up as you play.
Recettear is a game with a novel hook surrounded
by juuuust enough window dressing to make
it playable.
Good, even.
It’s fun, it’s definitely interesting
and it’s totally still worth playing, even
today, but clearly there was an opportunity
for another studio to take a second shot at
the idea.
The item shop genre sat in hibernation for
years, with one or two attempts briefly flashing
to life, but without a real high effort release
to duplicate or improve on what Recettear
had done.
Until this year.
Until Moonlighter.
In Moonlighter, you play as a shopkeeper’s
son who dreams of getting out from behind
the counter and diving into the mysterious
dungeons nearby to find treasure and glory.
You tend the shop by day and, MOONLIGHT
Eh?
Eh?
as an adventurer by night.
Or by day if you want, whatever.
I’m not your boss.
Go down and beat the monsters within to unlock
the next dungeons to explore, and their true
nature will slowly be revealed.
It’s super clear that Recettear is a major
influence on the direction and structure of
Moonlighter, but developer Digital Sun has
clearly taken the concept and poured a lot
of hard work into it.
Moonlighter is a beautiful game.
Excellent sprite work, silky animation, a
pretty UI.
It’s got one of the best soundtracks of
the year.
The action controls well, hands down better
than Recettear, with more interesting attack
and movement options, and meaningfully different
weapon types to help you deal with a set of
more complex enemies.
The inventory management is fun.
Some of the items have little curses on them
that do things to themselves or other inventory
items nearby.
Some curses are bad, like the one that breaks
the item if you take too much damage.
Some are good, like sending a different item
to your chest at home, which frees up space.
The item curses and the way they play off
of the other items in your inventory feels
fresh and makes you think more tactically
about what items you’re bringing back from
the depths.
It reminds me a little of Resident Evil 4’s
Attache Case.
From top to bottom, Moonlighter is polished
in all the ways the very best indie games
are polished.
But under all of the beauty and pomp is a
strange problem.
The game runs out of depth, way faster than
usual.
This is probably going to sound pretty harsh,
maybe more than Moonlighter deserves, because
it IS fun, but the game’s progression is
so bizarre.
Every time it introduces a mechanic that could
act as a platform to add gameplay depth, it
seems to get plastered over.
It’s not quite paper thin, but Moonlighter
definitely feels like a beautiful facade was
built around a set of underdeveloped mechanics.
Moonlighter feels unfinished, but in exactly
the opposite way to how many other games feel
unfinished.
Usually unfinished indie games are missing
the polish.
That’s definitely not the problem here.
After about hour 4, there is basically nothing
more the game teaches you, introduces, or
lets you discover.
Unlike Recettear which keeps introducing new
mechanics as you progress.
The game’s progression ramp just evaporates.
The dungeons all feel the same, just rooms
with different themed wallpaper and a few
new enemies.
The story never, ever evolves.
It’s led by your mentor character who has
nothing to say to you other than ‘Be careful
in the dungeon!
Think about your responsibilities!’ for
literally the entire game.
The rest of the characters don’t pick up
the slack either, the writing makes them more
onenote than a hearing test.
That is, until the very end where the game
throws a ridiculous plot twist out of nowhere.
Nothing happens, nothing happens, nothing
happens, then something happens so hard that
the story is sliced in half.
But maybe the biggest disappointments are
outside the dungeons, in the town and in the
item shop mechanics.
It’s not THAT far off from Recettear on
its surface, and Moonlighter does add a few
interesting ideas to the mix, but the mechanics
end up getting undercut and kill the budding
strategic complexity that the game could,
and should have.
In Moonlighter, you put items out on your
shop tables and set their prices.
Your customers will wander over to an item
and give you a little speech bubble to let
you know whether you priced the item well,
are giving away money, or are ripping them
off.
It’s fun to test different item prices at
first, but once you figure out that the items
you can sell are sorted in your item book
by price, you’ve basically solved the entire
item shop mode.
Item values are set in stone, and once discovered,
every item can be sold without thinking about
it.
Bulk sales are a new idea, but there is no
need to put in a discount, so there’s no
strategy to be found there.
There are little chotchkies that you can put
in your store to decorate, but they just give
you really basic bonuses.
The sale box is a new twist, but I’m really
not sure what the point of it is.
You could’ve just sold the items normally
and earned more money.
Moonlighter also added robbers that visit
your store to steal stuff, but they’re always
the same people, they literally announce that
they’re going to rob the place, and they’re
all dealt with in the same way, every time,
every day.
Outside of the shop, the town upgrade options
don’t deliver much strategic depth either.
There’s a forge where you can craft new
weapons and armor.
You might think the forge would be a good
opportunity to turn basic materials into more
expensive items - but it’s expensive to
forge stuff.
By the time you pay the blacksmith, you’d
be better off just selling the raw materials.
There’s the town banker who literally just
takes your money and invests it offscreen.
He’ll give you a graph showing how much
money you’ve made.
That’s it.
Oh, and if you leave your money with him for
more than a week he just steals it for some reason!
Thanks!
There’s the rival shop owner who can sell
you any item you could want, but it’ll cost
you.
Unlike in Recettear, the rival owner isn’t
developed as an actual character beyond a
few sentences when you unlock him.
His store’s markups make it so he’s only
useful for crafting new equipment and since
you’ll only upgrade your weapons and armor
a few times over the course of the game, you’ll
barely ever need him.
You can’t use him to profitably make expensive
items to sell, so he becomes an afterthought
as soon as your upgrades are complete.
There are a million places where Moonlighter
could have made systems that played off of
other systems, which would have made the game
feel more like running an actual business.
But even if the game had that depth, there
isn’t much of an incentive to optimize your
business anyway.
Recettear’s payment deadlines could be stressful,
but they were a good way to pressure the player
into being the best item shop owner and dungeoneer
they could be.
There’s nothing like that to push players
in Moonlighter.
There’s barely any punishment for dying
in the dungeons or for being a bad salesperson,
besides your own wasted time.
You’re absolutely drowning in money by the
middle of the game, and with barely anything
worthwhile to spend it on, the game railroads
you to the conclusion - not because it’s
that compelling, but because there’s nothing
else to do.
It’s a really strange roll out.
The first part of the game is relatively difficult,
keeps introducing new ideas, and bounces you
between the item shop and dungeon sides of
the game well.
Then, you get familiar with the game and realize
that nothing they introduced matters at all,
and there’s nothing left afterwards.
No surprises, no choice, no strategy, no pressure,
and not a ton of challenge.
When you break it down, Moonlighter is just
an okay “rogue-lite” with a progression
system that hints at something elaborate,
but is ultimately pretty basic.
The two styles of gameplay just don’t inform
each other as much as they need to.
As rough as Recettear’s dungeon gameplay
is, it was better balanced with its item shop
management.
Moonlighter doesn’t quite feel like the
full refinement of Recettear that it was trying
to be.
Recettear and Moonlighter are two sides of
a coin.
Each game succeeds at parts where the other
fails.
Recettear has solid shop mechanics that evolve
over the course of the game, but it’s weighed
down by an unpolished and basic dungeon crawler.
Moonlighter is a solid roguelike dungeon crawler
with great production values, but it’s shop
simulator is ultimately too basic.
Again, that’s not to say they’re bad games,
I’m happy I bought and played them both,
but I see so much more potential here.
Recettear and Moonlighter have blazed a trail
for something amazing.
[Chill vibes outro music from Moonlighter]