The Nintendo Switch is finally here.
It’s a hybrid of console and portable systems,
forged by the lessons learned over thirty
years of hardware development, and steeped
in the DNA of a company that loves to do things
their own way.
For Nintendo, each new piece of hardware is
a chance to make a fresh start.
But nothing is completely new.
If you look closely, you can see patterns
- ideas echoing through time.
Some ideas changed the industry, some completely
flopped, and some ideas just weren’t quite
ready yet, but they all reveal bits and pieces
of the identity of the company that created
them.
To understand what’s in store for the Switch’s
future, maybe we can search for answers in
Nintendo’s past.
Every Nintendo system comes with a piece of
iconic hardware - its controller.
The Switch and its Joy Con controllers are
no different.
Out of the box, you’ll be able to choose
from several different control schemes, depending
on the game you’re playing.
Having so many different controller options
has been common for Nintendo, going back to
the very beginning.
The NES first came bundled with its original
rectangular controllers.
Soon after, Nintendo released the NES Advantage
- which had an arcade stick, turbo controls,
and could plug into both player 1 and player
2 ports at the same time.
Then came the NES Max - which had this awful, terrible
circle pad-looking thing instead of just a regular D-pad.
Even in the mid 90’s, very late in the console’s
lifecycle, Nintendo released the ‘NES Controller
2’, a dog bone shaped redesign of the original
rectangle.
The SNES controller was more comfortable to
hold and added more buttons to allow for more
complex games, but the design stayed the same
throughout the SNES era.
On the N64, Nintendo started supporting more
than one control scheme on a single controller
- you could grip the three pronged controller
in two different ways.
It was … unique.
And sometimes painful.
But even though game designers were given
more options, just about every game was designed
for the controller to be held with one hand
on the analog stick.
Starting in the early 2000’s on the Game
Boy Color Game Boy Advance, Nintendo started
experimenting with motion controls.
Kirby’s Tilt n Tumble, Yoshi Topsy-Turvy
and WarioWare Twisted came with custom hardware
embedded in the game cartridges to detect
tilting and shaking.
The DS didn’t support motion controls, but
it still had plenty of new features.
It added more buttons for more complex handheld
games, a built in microphone, and its biggest
innovation was its touch-capable second screen.
Smart phones weren’t nearly as widespread
at the time the DS was released, so the DS
was one of the few places where games with
touch controls were being developed.
Having two close screens was used to great
effect on the DS and later the 3DS, but the
idea did not translate as well when Nintendo
tried to adapt dual screen gaming to the Wii
U.
The love affair with motion controls kicked
into high gear with the Wii, but results were
mixed.
Wii Sports, arguably still the best game ever
built for motion controls, was available at
the launch of the Wii, but more games of that
quality were few and far between.
The Wii Motion Plus was able to improve the
responsiveness of the hardware, but it wasn’t
cheap, and it only made a difference in a
few games.
For every game that used motion controls well,
like Wii Sports and Wario Ware: Smooth Moves,
you can find dozens of others that shoved
it in as an afterthought.
Twilight Princess had a ton of waggle, Wii
Music was a disaster through and through,
and look at all this SHOVELWARE!
Aah!
Aah!
Aah!
Oh my God!
The basic Wii remote was designed primarily
around motion controls, but Nintendo knew
that there would still be games released for
the Wii that would work best with a standard
controller.
Classic games available on the Virtual Console,
for instance, weren’t designed to use motion
controls at all.
So, Nintendo made more controllers, like in
the NES days.
The Wii Classic controller had a design that
echoed the SNES controller, which worked great
for those older games, but also had a more modern
layout with analog sticks and four shoulder
buttons, which made it perfect for more complex
games.
Nintendo also released the Wii Classic Controller
Pro, which felt even nicer to hold.
After the Wii, Nintendo was again wrestling
with how to support traditional games while
still trying to make their next console innovative.
The novelty of motion control games was wearing
off, so Nintendo needed a new hook.
Reggie: 'This is a new controller for Wii U."
With the Wii U gamepad, Nintendo added a big
screen in the middle of a traditional controller,
to allow new game styles without hindering
traditional designs too much.
But, because of hardware limitations and the
expense of each gamepad, Nintendo allowed
only allowed one to be connected to a single console
at a time.
Nintendo seemed unsure of the Wii U’s main
hook, and to try to fix this problem, they
threw the kitchen sink at it.
In one way or another, the Wii U works with
half of all controllers Nintendo has ever
released - the Wii U gamepad, a new Wii U
pro controller, everything ever released on
the Wii, a straight up 3DS, and you can even
hook up an adapter for Gamecube controllers.
Granted, only for one game, but eh.
The flood of controllers led to practical
problems - Super Smash Bros for the Wii U
let you choose between ALL of those options,
which led to an explosion of control schemes.
With so many options, it makes it tough for
a game designer to focus on making each control
option feel good.
But the biggest problem with the Wii U gamepad
was with its main gimmick, the center screen.
It was rarely used effectively.
Star Fox Zero used it, but it felt clunky,
overwhelming, and a bit forced.
Some games that could have used the screen
to do amazing things that wouldn’t be possible
on a traditional controller were never even
developed.
I'm looking at you, Pokémon Snap 2.
Sigh, it’s never gonna happen.
What we’ve talked about so far is a history
of standard controllers.
But, for every generation, Nintendo also put
out weird hardware tailor-made for specific
games.
The NES had the Zapper and the Power Pad.
The SNES had the Super Scope for a small handful
of shooters and the Mouse, which worked for
Mario Paint and a few strategy games.
Then came the bongos, the hey you pikachu
microphone thing, the Mario Party microphone
thing, the Wii microphone thing, the balance
board, all the plastic crap you could stick
a Wii remote into, and even the cancelled
vitality sensor show that Nintendo always
tries to work unusual control schemes into
their systems, even if those were abandoned
almost immediately.
The repeating pattern you see through Nintendo’s
history is a broadening of possibilities with
control schemes.
The Switch does this by just including EVERYTHING.
Every control scheme that Nintendo has released
before is showing up on the Switch - motion
controls, a touch screen, a complete set of
buttons, and Bluetooth support for connecting
whatever random controller idea they’ll
have in the future.
This hopefully is a refined version of what
the Wii U was trying to accomplish, but all
the pitfalls of having too many control options
apply here too.
There could also be a problem with how the
Switch supports touch gaming.
When the Switch is docked, players won’t
have a touchscreen handy, so game designers
have to consider that limitation.
There are even a few games that won’t be
playable on your TV at all.
But even if it’s tough to work around, it’s
not an impossible problem to solve.
We’ve already seen games adapt touch controls
to standard controllers successfully.
Console and PC ports of mobile games do this
all the time.
The Switch gives developers
the opportunity to build or port games with
just about any modern game design.
What remains to be seen is whether developers
take the time and effort to make something
that feels right for their game.
So, the Switch’s controller looks solid,
but Nintendo changes more than just the controller
between generations.
For instance, Nintendo loves rumble - they
created the Rumble Pak, which put force feedback
in a home console for the first time.
It was such a big hit, Nintendo shoved it
into the Game Boy Color as fast as they could,
even though the system wasn’t at all designed
to let you plug in peripherals.
Instead, Nintendo stuck a motor inside the
Game Boy cartridge itself.
Put a AAA battery into Pokemon Pinball, Top
Gear Pocket, or… uh…
Disney’s The Little Mermaid 2: Pinball Frenzy…
and you get rumble on the go.
All of Nintendo’s consoles going forward
- the Gamecube, the Wii, and the Wii U - were
designed with rumble built in from the beginning.
The Switch is shipping with “HD Rumble”,
which promises much better fidelity.
1 2 Switch uses HD Rumble to mimic the feeling
of marbles rolling around in a box, and first
reports are that the tech is really impressive,
but cool tech doesn’t guarantee there will
be games that put it to good use.
We might have to wait for a new Wario Ware
game to explore what HD rumble can really
do.
Each Joy Con comes with HD rumble, but the
right Joy Con has one special feature - an
IR sensor.
IR tech has been used in older Nintendo products
to do a bunch of different things.
The Game Boy Color tried to replace the physical
link cable, and let two systems communicate
with an IR sensor at the top, but it was unreliable
and finicky to use - hardly any game supported
it.
The sensor would only work if your systems
were THIS CLOSE to each other, and you neeeever
touched the game boy while it was trying to
transmit data.
You couldn’t even trade Pokemon with this
thing - which is probably for the best.
I mean, losing a Shiny Charizard in a trade because
someone bumped your game boy would have broken
a lot of hearts.
Nintendo abandoned IR tech for wireless communication,
but brought it back on the Wii and the Wii
U. IR works great for sensing depth, and some
of the minigames in 1 2 Switch use it for
that.
Unfortunately, since only one of the two Joy
Cons has the IR sensor inside, it will be
less likely for someone to have all of the
hardware needed to play a multiplayer game
that uses IR, so it most likely will only be used
for single player experiences, or its limitations
could make it too difficult to use effectively,
and it could be forgotten completely.
The Switch is the first Nintendo home console
in more than 15 years to use cartridges.
Cartridges on the NES, SNES, N64, and the
Game Boy were completely custom designed hardware.
Nintendo had the freedom to put special chips
inside the cartridges themselves to do things
that weren’t possible on the basic hardware.
On the SNES, Star Fox, Stunt Race FX, and
a few more games had a Super FX chip inside
the cartridge itself.
Super Mario RPG shipped with a Super Accelerator
1 chip.
Super Mario Kart and Pilotwings had a DSP-1
processor inside each cart.
Without the extra chips, the hardware inside
the SNES couldn’t render the 3D graphics
used in each of those games.
This is really a crazy approach to take - it’s
really expensive to do, and really inefficient
since the chip is only usable for that one
game.
If you look in old game ads, you’ll see
Nintendo cartridges selling new for $70 or
more, which would be over $120 today after
inflation.
This extra hardware was the reason why each
game cost so much.
The technology inside modern game cartridges
is completely different from what it was in
the 90’s.
Instead of using old ROM cartridges, the DS,
3DS and Switch use flash memory cards, which
are much cheaper.
Instead of including processors inside each
cartridge, modern systems like the Switch
are built with a powerful GPU inside the system
itself.
Good thing too, it would be tough to fit another
processor inside that teeny tiny cartridge.
Nintendo usually supports backwards and cross-generational
compatibility with each new console.
They released the Super Game Boy for the SNES,
which was more or less a cartridge with the
guts of a Game Boy, minus the screen.
Pop in a Game Boy game and you could play
it right on your TV.
Later, you could do the same thing with GBA
games on the Gamecube with the Game Boy Player.
Just about every game was compatible, even
games with unusual hardware, like Kirby’s
Tilt and Tumble.
The DS could play any Game Boy Advance game
out of the box.
The 3DS let you plug in DS carts.
The Wii could read Gamecube discs and included
4 ports for Gamecube controllers, and the
Wii U played Wii games.
But, this streak is going to break with the
Switch.
It doesn’t take disks, and DS or 3DS cartridges
won’t fit into it, so the Virtual Console
will be the only way to play old games on
the system.
This has big drawbacks - you will almost certainly
have to re-buy games you already own.
Hopefully the game list on the Virtual Console
will be extensive, and hopefully Nintendo
won’t charge too much.
But still, the loss of backwards compatibility
is a break in tradition and will be a black
mark on the system.
There’s one more surprise in the Switch
- Nintendo’s new online service is going
to be super weird.
You’ll need to pair your Switch to a smart
phone app to play online multiplayer.
This isn’t the first time Nintendo has come
up with a really weird way to connect to the
Internet.
There was even a modem released in Japan back
in 1988 called the Famicom Net System.
There wasn’t even a world wide web back
then, your console made a direct connection
to a Nintendo server that gave weather forecasts,
stock information, and if you were feeling
lucky you could bet on horse racing right
from your own home.
The Super Famicom had something even weirder.
In the mid 90’s, Nintendo released the Satellaview.
It was a satellite modem attachment that read
data beamed down from space.
To save a game to your Satellaview you needed
to turn on the system and start downloading
at a specific time of day.
Even weirder, some games used SoundLink, which
let SNES games have full voice acting beamed
down from the satellite.
On the SNES.
There’s even a Zelda game: BS Zelda no Densetsu,
which had voice acted cutscenes.
The voice acting data was too big to save
to your system, so you could only play SoundLink
games during the time of day that game was
being broadcast.
Even later when Nintendo systems connected
to the internet in a normal way, there were
still quirks.
Friend codes on the Wii and Wii U are clunky, and downloadable
games on the 3DS are licensed to the hardware,
not your account.
It’s a major hassle to get your downloadable
3DS games back if you lose your system.
The Switch’s reliance on a mobile app is
going to be a problem for people who don’t
own a smart phone, but designing the service
like this neatly solves a few problems.
The Switch will let you play online anywhere
with a cell connection, which is great for
bus and train commuters, and you won’t even
have to pay for an extra line on your phone
bill.
The app will also give Nintendo the option
to use the smart phone to do things without
having to build more hardware into the Switch.
The camera, GPS, cloud storage, just about
anything your phone can use could also be
used by the Switch, if Nintendo wanted to.
There’s one more catch with the Switch’s
new online service - it won’t be free.
The service is roughly half the cost of similar
services from Sony and Microsoft, but we don’t
know yet what features we’ll get for the
price.
Nintendo will be offering free games with
the cost of the subscription, but they will
only be available for a limited time.
The upshot is that fees should pay for improvements
to the service - faster speeds, better reliability,
and more developers who can fix problems and
design new features.
The Switch iterates on what Nintendo has learned
about gaming hardware over the last 30 years.
The controller, the games, the hardware, and
its portability combine to make a console
that feels new, but above all, feels like
a Nintendo.
That goes both ways, just like how past Nintendo
hardware hasn’t always met expectations,
there are plenty of ways for the Switch to
disappoint if Nintendo isn’t careful, but
the foundation of the system is solid.
In the Switch, you’ll find Nintendo’s
past, updated to the present, and you’ll
see their vision for the future of gaming.
*chill vibes outro from Mario Kart*