Paper Mario: Color Splash is…..oooooooookaaaaaaaayyyy
I mean its pretty to look at and the exploration
is pretty good...BUT MAN THAT COMBAT IS REAL
BAD!
It’s a step down from what Paper Mario’s
Developer, Intelligent Systems, has created
before.
Regardless of where you stand on Color Splash,
the most common criticism has been the very
flawed battle system.
This comes from how Nintendo and Intelligent
systems have tried to step away from the series’
RPG roots while still holding on to core systems
that fall apart without those roots in place.
In a nutshell, Color Splash and its predecessor
Sticker Star use a light turned based combat
system where attacks are done with disposable
items.
It's a departure from the more traditional
turned based combat of the original Paper
Mario and its GameCube sequel, The Thousand
Year Door but the two styles have some similarities.
Let's call the two styles Classic Paper Mario
for the two older games, and Modern Paper
Mario, for the two new ones.
The fundamentals of Modern Paper Mario are
not that different from Classic Paper Mario
but the quality suffers from the simplifications.
The combat of Color Splash and Sticker Star
lack in 4 key areas, engagement, depth, customization,
and incentive.
Let’s start with engagement.
A good combat system gets players engaged,
something that Color Splash fails to do for
two reasons, action commands & health.
Action commands are a defining aspect of Mario
RPGs.
For every attack that the player uses or defends
against, a little button prompt or minigame
appears.
Succeed and attacks become more powerful or
your defense improves.
Classic Paper Mario used action commands perfectly
- they were varied and just short enough to
keep battles active without being too tedious.
In Classic Paper Mario, Action commands had
variety: you might pull the stick back, hold
buttons, draw, shoot targets and more.
But in Modern Paper Mario, it’s just timed
presses, timed presses, timed presses, mash,
and more timed presses.
It’s a big reason why combat is so damn
tedious in Color Splash.
Even the UI in Color Splash is a downgrade
- it takes 5 to 6 inputs for an action that
should only take 2.
When all attacks are performed the same way
it makes battles blend together, and your
engagement in any one battle will drop.
It's not just action commands that make battles
more tedious, changes in how the health system
is handled make for a worse experience as well.
One thing I love about Classic Paper Mario
was the use of low damage numbers in combat.
Unlike more traditional rpgs like Final Fantasy
or Persona which use huge, arbitrary numbers for damage,
every individual point of damage matters,
and you get a better sense of how powerful
you and your opponent really are.
Seeing an 8 show up for a big attack when
smaller ones show a 2 or 3 gives some real weight
to those big attacks.
The way Classic Paper Mario used low damage
numbers made fights more engaging as it let
the player do the mental math to figure out
the most efficient way to win.
Combine the small numbers with an armor system
that subtracts damage from each hit, and all
of a sudden attacks feel very different from
each other.
For example, multi-hit moves like Bow’s
Smack might have a higher damage output, but
they are weak against enemies with high defenses, where moves with big single strikes are more effective.
A simpler battle system lets the player think
more deeply about what is actually happening
in combat.
None of these systems apply to Color Splash
- enemies don’t have health bars and your
attacks don’t display damage numbers.
Enemy damage is only indicated by their color
draining.
It's a fun idea, and a cool visual motif,
but it doesn’t actually give the player
a good sense of how strong their attacks really
are.
It's all for nothing anyway, because most
enemies will go down in a single attack.
I mean for goodness sake a normal shy guy
goes down on the first strike of your weakest
jump which then will stomp him five extra
times just to rub it in.
I honestly can’t tell if there is a difference
in damage between the Normal Jump and the
Hopslipper.
I mean the enemy is still super dead, I just had to press the button a bit more.
Color Splash took out information and made
its action commands tedious, which makes the
game's combat feel mindless, and because of that one of the strong suits in Classic Paper Mario becomes
a chore, something to just get out of the
way instead of something fun.
Color Splash and Sticker Star’s combat don’t
fail because they are too easy, they fail
because there is so little to consider.
Classic Paper Mario games aren’t very challenging
but they aren’t pushovers, and they definitely
aren’t mindless.
They gave you a ton of different options in
combat from normal attacks, special moves,
items, star powers, and partners.
Your options were complemented with plenty
of enemy types plus your limited pool of FP
made you mix up your tactics.
Part of the fun in combat was finding the
most efficient strategies.
Your options in Sticker Star & Color Splash
mostly come down to either jump, hammer, heal
or thing (YEAH...THING).
Just like Classic Paper Mario you do have
to pay some attention to how enemies are set
up but it doesn’t mean much.
There’s practically no strategy to combat
because 4 out of 5 times you can win the fight
in your first turn, there just isn't enough
time spent for a complex strategy to play
out, and the simple strategy works just as
well anyway.
If the fight just happens to be too hard, try using one of your zillion Thing cards that will literally
win the fight for you.
Most of your overpowered attacks don’t have
any real limitations... unless you count the
Paint system.
Similar to Mana or Magic Points, classic Paper
Mario limited the player’s power with FP, or flower points,
which is there to prevent you from spamming
your most powerful abilities.
Intelligent Systems made an effort to strip
out RPG elements in Sticker Star by getting
rid of FP entirely and instead made attacks
inventory-based.
This was often cited as one of the more frustrating
aspects of the game.
Color Splash would try to make the system
less frustrating by making items more plentiful
and tried to balance it with a pseudo FP system
in the form of the paint meter.
In order for your cards to do any significant
damage, they have to be painted, which depletes
the paint meter.
The problem is that the amount of paint you
use is so tiny and you are constantly tripping over paint
refills, which makes the system borderline
pointless.
Granted there are the Fire and Ice Flower
cards that do take up a significant amount of
paint but you have plenty of more powerful
options than those 2, and you can get the
Fire and Ice Flower cards pre painted anyway.
If instead, the game raised the cost of paint
across the board and made pre-painted cards
more rare, that would make your attacks more
significant, add strategy to combat and it
would make the upgrades to your paint capacity
actually mean something.
Speaking of upgrades, a huge sticking point
in Sticker Star was how there wasn’t much
incentive for the player to fight random enemies.
In Color Splash the rewards for battles are cards, coins to buy even more cards, paint to refill your
meter, and scrap hammers which upgrade your
already huge paint capacity.
Coins could have been a worthwhile reward
if the game’s economy wasn’t absolutely
busted.
Coins are found everywhere and you can easily
reach the coin cap in just a few hours.
Despite having a pseudo exp system with the
hammer scraps and paint meter, there is still
no strong incentive to fight.
After about one or two upgrades the additional paint doesn't really feel needed.
Nor does it open up any new possibilities in combat.
The only reason I fought random enemies was
that it was faster to just fight them than it was
to try running away.
In the end, every battle incentive boils down
to just getting more cards, but with Color Splash’s
battle system as basic as it is, that really
isn’t much of an incentive at all.
We still haven’t talked about the most frustrating
aspect of Modern Paper Mario’s combat, the
lack of customization.
Sticker Star and Color splash are games that
want you to play in a very specific way, and
don't really give a lot of opportunities to
make choices, or see much character progression.
HP upgrades are predetermined, you can’t
really customize your deck of cards since
they’re expendable, and boss fights are
paint-by-numbers, forcing you to use very specific
Thing cards in order to win the fight.
You don’t have to guess what item you need
to beat the boss, so it’s a bit better than
Sticker Star, but it still isn’t fun - you
are stuck fighting the boss in one specific
way.
Classic Paper Mario let you customize your
character by using the badge system which
in addition to giving you special moves and
abilities, it allowed players to play however
they saw fit.
Want to go on a low HP or FP run?
Just invest in upgrading your badge points.
Want to be ridiculously overpowered or underpowered?
Equip the proper badges and you can.
Want to try a No-Jump or Partners only run?
With a couple exceptions, that’s totally
possible.
Classic Paper Mario gave the player many options
in how they wanted to build their character.
Color Splash and Sticker Star don’t.
Now we’ve made many direct comparisons to
the first two Paper Mario games but the truth
is Color Splash doesn’t have to be like
its predecessors.
The series can, and should, change over time.
But, if you're going to change the system
you need to end up with something compelling
and rewarding.
There is a version of the Card and Paint system
that would be an improvement, it's just not
the version in Color Splash.
The lack of any progression and frustrating
inventory based combat could be resolved by
replacing it with some kind of Deck Building
system like in Kingdom Hearts Chain of Memories,
Baten Kaitos, or the Megaman Battle Network
series.
A card system with a sense of permanent progression
makes card collecting worthwhile and fun.
I’ve seen some people make the suggestion
of having specific combinations of cards to
perform special moves kind of like the slight
system in chain of memories or the combination
powers in Kirby 64.
Adding more customization to combat allows
players to experiment and adds a little depth.
They could have also gone further with the
color theme and made the different color types
add elemental effects to attacks, such as
adding red to a hammer to give it a fire effect
or yellow to a jump to add electricity or
purple to create an ice effect.
These aren't groundbreaking ideas, but they
also would've added a little depth to the
combat system.
Ultimately the reason why color splash’s
combat doesn’t work is that it just isn’t
very fun or engaging and unfortunately this
brings down the rest of the game.
Combat is half of what this game is and gorgeous
visuals and decent exploration can only bring
a game so far sometimes.
A lot of these design issues come down to
how Intelligent Systems abandoned some of
the RPG roots of the series while still clinging
on to systems that need those roots to actually
work.
Ripping out core genre mechanics can work,
but in Color Splash's case, it made the game kinda hollow.
*chill vibes outro from Paper Mario*