How can you fix a boss that players think 
is too slow? ‘Just make the boss faster,’  
you say? YOU FOOL. Actually, sometimes yes. But 
bosses don’t all have to be zippy, hyper twitch,  
caffeine bombs to be good. Shadow of the Colossus 
designed almost all of its bosses to be very slow,  
and it’s a classic. Some bosses are meant to be 
slow, but they do have to fight the FEELING of  
slowness. It’s not as easy as it sounds, though. 
That feeling can be caused by lots of things,  
and subtle variations on what the problem is, 
can lead to completely different ways to fix it.
For a change of pace, let’s talk 
about how to fix a slow boss.
Fast track your finances with 
today’s sponsor, Rocket Money!
This is that app that lets you save on sneaky 
subscriptions. I found out I was still paying $5  
a month for a fitness app subscription I switched 
off of last year. That could’ve paid for like 20  
games on the Steam sale right there! Or like 
an hour of rent! I think that math checks out.
Rocket Money also helps you set a 
customized budget in seconds. The  
app can help you see exactly where your 
money is going, identifying top spending  
categories, and can help you be better 
informed about your personal finances.
Rocket Money has helped customers save up 
to $740 a year when you use all of the app’s  
premium features, and has saved customers $500 
Million and counting in cancelled subscriptions.
It’s the New Year, and a lot of 
people set financial resolutions  
around now. Rocket Money can help. Take 
control of your finances today. Go to  
RocketMoney.com/DESIGNDOC or click the link 
in the description to get started for free.
Each slow boss is slow in its own way. But, 
even if the specifics are a little different  
from boss to boss, if you look at enough 
of them, you might be able to spot a few  
themes as to WHY they feel slow. Let’s start 
with one of my favorites, Kingdom Hearts 1.
Now this is gonna sound too dumb 
to ask, but does your boss feel  
too slow because it literally isn’t doing 
anything? Like this guy, the Rock Titan?
The Rock Titan is the grand finale of the Hades 
Cup, a 50-match gauntlet arena that you unlock as  
part of the end game content. To get here, you’ve 
got to fight through 49 other arena challenges,  
full of optional bosses and difficult enemy 
mobs. And it all leads to this big… anti-climax.
You might expect him to be slow, but not THIS 
slow. Look at ‘em. He takes a literal minute and  
a half to walk across the arena. YOU do not. It’s 
not like he’s got attack range to cover for that,  
either. He has a stomp and a slightly 
larger hand-stomp. I’m not kidding,  
that’s it. He doesn’t even throw rocks!
The attack plan is to go all in on his legs until 
he topples over, then climb up and beat down his  
two heads. The heads flail around a little, but 
that’s nothing to worry about. If you DO get hit,  
it’s a chunk of damage, but there’s a LOT of time 
between attacks to cast Cure, and get back to it.
Conceptually, the Rock Titan should be a 
totally reasonable, challenging fight. A big,  
powerful looking boss, with area of effect 
moves and plenty of HP. Massive characters  
are supposed to convey tons of strength and 
health, and the common balancing nerf those  
characters get is to reduce attack and movement 
speed. But you can turn that knob too far down,  
and make it almost impossible for the 
boss to get a good hit in. Making the  
final arena challenge in this game a boss 
with this severe of a weakness is a bizarre  
choice. One of the biggest let-downs of 
an optional boss you’ll find anywhere.
So one game from 20-some years ago has one weird,  
too-slow boss that can’t move fast enough to 
attack you. Surely no modern game would do that,  
right? Well… you can make the same 
problem with a different recipe.
The Hinox from Breath of the Wild and Tears of the 
Kingdom is not AS helpless, but not much better.
They’re almost always found sleeping, so they’re 
easy to sneak up to and get in position. 
It’ll go through a VERY slow standing 
animation. AND you can whale on it the whole time.
Once they’re up and active, they’re much tougher  
to deal with. These guys become a real 
challenge for new players who hesitate.
And that’s really who this boss is perfect for: 
new players, who will be awestruck when they spot  
one, and give the Hinox a fighting chance. Once 
a Hinox gets moving, it has a bunch of fun little  
attacks and behaviors that make it memorable. 
It’s just maybe a little too easy to figure out  
how to blitz it down before it gets to any of 
the fun parts. The encounter is ‘solved’, The  
extreme slowness creates too big of an Achilles 
heel. One that I can blast with this hammer.
So, if you’re making a boss, keep an eye 
out for ones that seem easy to blitz down  
while taking no damage. And if you 
spot that happening in playtesting,  
look for ways to cut down how often the 
boss poses no threat. The boss should  
not already be dead before it’s active. 
Speed up animations, movement, or attacks,  
and that might be all you need to take these 
guys from ‘exploitable’ to ‘just right’.
Cool. Don’t make your bosses literally too slow 
to be a threat, got it. What other ways can a  
boss feel too slow? Let’s see here… ah, here we 
go! Have you ever been trapped in a cutscene?
Final Fantasy VII was the biggest, most 
expensive, most cinematic game that had  
ever been made… in 1997. The game’s final fight 
against Sephiroth is a legendary grand finale,  
for plenty of reasons, but among them are its 
amazing fight animations - and the king of kings  
is Super Nova. Once Sephiroth casts it, get cozy, 
and watch him bring the heavens down on your head.
Quantum physics and orbital mechanics equations 
flash on screen as you see a comet come in from  
outside the galaxy. Watch, as it blows 
up planets into polygons one by one,  
and explodes the sun, engulfing you 
and your party. For like… a couple  
thou in damage. The animation’s pretty sweet 
even now, honestly. We’re grading on a curve,  
but for 1997 this was unbelievable. The attack 
is two minutes long, and it’s good as hell… ONCE.
It’s not a unique attack. Sephiroth’s happy to 
blow up ANOTHER identical solar system if you  
take too long to kill ‘em, and you’ll get to 
watch the whole thing happen all over again.  
There’s nothing for you to do during the cutscene. 
No blocking, nothing to prepare, and it’s not  
skippable. If you lose the fight, it’s back to the 
start, and he’ll FOR SURE cast it again next time.
The North American release of the game is the 
only one with this full animation - the Japanese  
one’s much shorter, more of a static image 
than a tiny movie. Not nearly as bombastic.
I did not have a great time finishing this game  
back in the day, just for the amount of 
time spent on repeating this cutscene.
Jason Greenberg had it worse, though. As 
development was wrapping on the PC port of FF7,  
he was drafted into helping the team 
test the game as much as possible. In  
a PC Gamer retrospective, he talked about 
a bug that hard crashed the game during  
that cutscene. His team had to spend a 
ton of time testing fixes on it. Quote,  
“I’ve probably spent at least a full 
24 hours playing that one battle.”
It’s still a pretty cool attack, though.
Super Nova is an extreme case. Literally. It 
got a Guinness World Record for how extreme it  
is. But the game’s summon animation 
lengths were a common complaint,  
even back then. For the next few games, 
Square tried a few different fixes.
FF8 had the Boost ability, where you could hammer 
Square during the cutscene to raise the summon’s  
attack power. You get all the spectacle of a long 
animation, and you SORT of get something to keep  
you busy while you watch. Like Subway Surfer 
TikToks, but in the 90s. Not much of a fix.
FF9 had shortened cutscenes for its 
summons. After the first time you watch it,  
the sequence is much shorter next time. 
There’s also a Boost support ability  
that plays the longer animation every 
time, while increasing the attack’s damage,  
but it’s maybe not ideal to force players to watch 
the long animation if you want max attack power.
FFX had a toggle. You can choose: long or short 
animations. This is, in my opinion, the nicest  
of the four cutscene systems, but there’s still 
some core issues that aren’t being addressed.
If you’re thinking about how to put cinematics 
into a boss fight, maybe stay away from using them  
for fight events that repeat. You can wow a player 
with high spectacle cutscenes without playing  
them during attacks. Shift it around. Maybe use 
one for a coup de grace at the end of a fight.
Save the long animations as a capper, a 
phase shift, or an intro. All the hype,  
with none of the gameplay-affecting downside.
OK, next up: maybe a boss feels slow because of 
the way it telegraphs its moves. Instead of a  
helpless boss like in the first section, they 
could be giving players too long to prepare.
Action bosses basically HAVE to telegraph 
moves somehow. No telegraphing would mean  
instant attacks, and players would have to 
RANDOMLY GUESS to defend against them. Now,  
that could be a style of combat you’re OK with, 
but if not, you have to give players SOME chance  
to react to an attack. Even if it’s as subtle 
as which eye blinks a split second before an  
attack gets thrown. But there’s a very thin line 
between ‘enough’ telegraphing and ‘too much’.
Pikmin 3’s can be a little too much.
Boss fights in Pikmin can make you think 
of combat in an unusual way. The game’s  
crowd mechanics aren’t super common. But 
action combat can fall apart if a player  
has reacted to something, and then has to wait 
around forever for the next decision point.
Take Scornet Maestro.
You've got this bird... bee hybrid thing that uses  
a harp to control drones and swoop them 
in on prey. It's sort of a rival fight,  
if you think about it. You've got ants, 
Scornet's got bees. That sounds fun!
Scornet is shielded by the drones until 
they’re sent out to attack in 3 forms:  
a spiral that shoots bees at you, a big rectangle  
blockade where rows of bees will 
attack, and a surrounding circle.
You're supposed to send out your winged Pikmin 
to attack the drones and create openings for  
your main squad to escape. Any of your Pikmin 
that get caught will be 'captured' and you have  
to use more winged Pikmin to get them back 
before the drones eat them. Not super tough,  
but it's a unique fight, and pretty fun to play 
through. But only in the original Wii U version.
Pikmin 3 Deluxe, the Switch version of the game,  
tweaked a couple fundamentals that completely, 
literally, side-stepped this boss' design.
Pikmin in the original have different 
walking speeds. Leaf, Bud, and Flower  
Pikmin all get around differently, so 
corralling everyone takes some work.
Pikmin 3 Deluxe unified everyone's following 
speed. No matter what type of Pikmin you have,  
they're all going to ball up right behind you. 
Essentially, your squad's 'hitbox' is way smaller,  
but the game's enemies weren't also tweaked with 
that in mind. They're now less capable of picking  
off stragglers, now that there aren't as many 
stragglers. The Scornet Maestro fight makes  
the problem a lot more obvious. Now all you 
have to do is walk to the side, and you win!
Your ball of ants is effectively way faster, so 
a player deciding to move away from an attack  
means that the whole group is out of danger 
very quickly. The timing on the attacks was  
tuned for the original game, meaning that 
the telegraphing window, where you know an  
attack is coming and have to act to dodge, is 
too wide now. You'll be clear of this machine  
gun formation and don't have to worry about the 
stragglers getting in place in time. No stragglers  
means no having to save the stragglers, 
and even fewer decisions you have to make.
Not just that, but they made the whistle radius 
bigger in the re-release, too. It’s easier to get  
everyone back in the group if you lose a couple, 
which makes even FEWER decisions you have to make.
Once the boss is open, sending your squad on the 
attack means everyone jumps in there immediately,  
and obliterates the boss' HP much 
faster than in the original. The  
fight can easily be over even before 
the boss gets to all three attack forms.
An amount of attack telegraphing that 
was appropriate under the old conditions,  
feels like far too long now. Even though the  
fight is technically faster to 
play, it feels so much slower.
When you’re designing a boss, don’t think only 
about how fast or slow a character appears.
Think more in terms of the 
pacing of the player’s decisions.
Fromsoft LOVES to apply different 
telegraphing behaviors to their bosses,  
in ways that make their slowest bosses feel 
as dramatic as any other action boss fight.
Melee boss combat in Elden Ring relies on 
telegraphing moves. Huge sweeping attacks  
that you have to defend against and roll 
through. It’s hard to get very far at all  
in this series if you aren’t willing to get up 
close and personal with the bosses you find,  
and you have to learn how to do that safely. 
The detailed timing you have to do when you  
react to boss attacks, is one of the ways Fromsoft 
creates the signature feel of Soulslike combat.  
There’s nuance in every fight, and you have to 
learn how to appreciate and apply that nuance.
In Elden Ring, one early boss is the gatekeeper 
for that concept: Margit, the Fell Omen.
On this bridge, you will fight this very old, 
very deadly man. Margit has huge range with  
his staff and ghost blades, but he’s not the 
fastest. Between attacks, he’s quite slow, and  
when gearing up to strike, his wind up animations 
are insanely long. But don’t mistake that for the  
fight being easy. This is a skill check boss, and 
it’s no guarantee you know how to pass the test.
You can’t blindly tumble your way 
through and expect to win. Margit  
is here to get you into the counterattacking mood.
If you treat him like a boss in other action 
games, and start spamming dodge too early,  
you’re going to burn through stamina and still 
be vulnerable once the attack actually starts.
Your roll I-frames won’t keep you safe for very 
long. You have to learn what the actual moves are,  
and WHEN to dodge, and WHERE to roll to be safe 
from follow-up attacks. You have to slow down,  
and study what moves Margit has 
before deciding how to respond.
If you’re watching from the outside, this boss 
might seem slow, but the moments between attacks  
are filled with so much decision making 
and tension that it never feels slow to  
the player. You’re never waiting to make your 
next decision - the waiting IS a decision,  
and if you choose wrong, you’re 
dead. Start over, and study up.
The slowness has a purpose, to get players 
in the right mindset to continue in the  
game. Elden Ring’s bosses are made to 
create player action inside the inaction.
OK, next up is a different type of inaction.
A boss can seem slow if it feels like the 
fight is on rails. Boring, slow, boring,  
boring rails. You see this many times in 
bosses that flip between an invincible  
and a vulnerable state. And if there’s 
a lot of downtime in between, watch out.
Shadow the Hedgehog is chock full of ones that  
fall into this pit. There are like half 
a dozen bosses, including 3 final bosses,  
that play out as a 5 to 10 minute ride 
waiting for their state to change.
The fight against Black Doom is by 
far the worst of them. He’s completely  
invincible most of the time. He’ll drop 
shields only AFTER he’s done attacking,  
where he’ll be open for a couple of 
homing attacks, before teleporting away,  
and then the cycle repeats. His attacks 
aren’t tough to avoid, it’s just tons and  
tons of waiting around for them to end before 
getting a chance to do anything productive.
This game has a Super meter that you fill 
up as you get hits in. For fights like Sonic  
and Diablon, or the one against Eggman’s Egg 
Dealer, you do your homing attack chip damage,  
and wait around, until you fill up your 
meter, and unleash the ultimate power…
Eggman: ‘NO, not Shadow Fever!’
What? No, a gun.
Now you can do a boatload of damage in 
one go. It speeds up the whole process.
You can’t do that with Black Doom. 
He’s only vulnerable for so long,  
and you can’t really take advantage of 
your infinite ammo like before. You’re  
gonna be stuck here for a while. With Vector.
And that wouldn’t be so bad if the 
fight itself had more interesting  
actions for you to do. There’s no secret 
technique, or hard pattern to dodge,  
or enough choice to be made. Just a few basic 
patterns, repeated over and over, until you win.  
5 minutes can feel like forever, 
if they’re boring enough.
I could’ve picked a bunch of other fights in 
the game with the same problem. A tedious 3-5  
minute slog of chipping the boss down, or one 
where you can blast them down to nothing once  
you get access to a weapon with infinite 
ammo. But this approach to a fight isn’t  
hopeless. An improvement might look more like 
the Ratchet and Clank series bosses. It’s also  
a weapons-focused furry mascot platformer, and 
those fights are handled with much better pacing.
You don’t rely on limited weapons, or a 
super meter that can remove the limits  
during the fight. These bosses aren’t 
flipping in and out of an invincible  
state. It’s actually a little more vanilla 
of a boss fight, really. You and the boss,  
and you can fire with whatever you’ve got. 
Dodge and weave around a variety of attacks  
and hit back whenever you can. Maybe break up the 
fighting with some driving, but otherwise keep it  
open to attack. The difference is that this game 
doesn’t bake in all the little bits of downtime  
into the structure of the boss fights in the same 
way. These bosses aren’t breaking new ground,  
and eventually they became a little too 
similar across the series as it went on,  
but there aren’t the same low-lows in the boss 
fights in Ratchet and Clank compared to Shadow.
If you can make the boss structure less 
restrictive, that can fix the problem.
OK, one more topic. We’re going to 
Final Fantasy XIV for this one. Oh,  
and we’ll dust off the ol’ Spoiler Card.
Uneven difficulty over time 
can wreck how a boss feels,  
and MMO raid bosses tolerate it especially poorly.
This style of boss is built to be tackled as 
a team. Lots of coordination between lots of  
people in a party, and the style’s 
mechanics are built to challenge the  
teamwork of the group. But a unique 
style comes with unique problems.
The 7th fight in Endwalker’s Pandemonium Savage 
raid series: Agdistis. Fight this tree. Just like  
most MMO raid bosses, Agdistis throws out tons 
of attacks that have different mechanical ways  
to counter them. You and 7 of your closest, 
dearest friends have to decipher the fight,  
like you’ve probably done in lots of other 
raids on the way here. Your group has to attack,  
move, and use utility skills at specific 
times to handle different boss mechanics,  
and keep incoming damage and casualties to a 
minimum. The high-end raid combat experience  
in FFXIV is a synchronized dance, a spinning of 
plates on poles, whose punishment for failure  
is death. One small slip-up - one accidental death 
here, one missed move there - can cascade quickly,  
where a loss of damage, defense, or 
utility will end in a full party wipe.
Assuming you’re fighting ‘on content’ and 
aren’t crazy overpowered, you have to take  
this boss out within a set time limit, else it 
does an ‘enrage’ attack and wipes the party. So,  
you all have to learn the dance. The ‘prog’. 
Hours of practice before the real thing. And  
this is where a slow, poorly paced 
MMO raid boss can eat away at you.
The Savage version of this fight is extremely 
backloaded. The first 4 or 5 minutes are easy  
to learn, and kinda boring, really, by 
raid standards. If your group has made  
it to this raid boss, you’ve seen these 
early tricks before and shouldn’t have  
a problem. The back end of the fight 
changes it up. The mechanics get way  
more interesting. Tougher to execute, 
more annoying to counter. Back to back,  
unrelenting attacks. More fun, but you’ll 
be dying a lot while you all learn.
Learning an MMO raid boss isn’t like 
learning to play a piano piece. You  
can’t jump to the middle to practice, at 
least in FFXIV. Every time your party wipes,  
you have to start over from the beginning, and 
do 5 minutes of boring build-up all over again.
And since it’s an MMO, there’s another 
wrinkle here. Let’s say you got your  
role down. YOU got everything right… 
but did your FRIENDS? ALL SEVEN of  
them? It’s bad enough when you have to 
restart because of something YOU did,  
but it feels so much worse if you have no 
control over what’s keeping you from progressing.
MMO raids demand patience above all, 
and a raid boss that adds any kind of  
time-wasting friction to that process can 
feel especially bad. 4 to 5 minutes spent  
going through the motions at the start, 
without your party learning anything new,  
just to have to do it again the second 
anyone in your group slips up. It’s brutal.
So what could you do to fix a slow 
raid boss? You’ve got lots of options,  
some way easier to implement than others. If 
you front-load the difficulty, like flipping  
the two phases to make the harder one first, that 
would solve a chunk of it. Might make the boss  
less fun, though. If ALL parts were EVENLY 
difficult, the problem would also go away.
You could also checkpoint the fight. Break 
it up into stages and groups can tackle  
each one individually without repeating 
so much. Lots of games do that already,  
like Destiny 2 for its raid bosses. 
FFXIV does that too for other bosses,  
as that game uses checkpoints when a boss 
makes a dramatic phase change mid-fight,  
like in most final bosses of a raid 
tier. Agdistis doesn’t change. At all.
You could try an instant respawn mode, 
where you don’t get the prestige or the  
gear associated with beating the 
fight without dying, but you still  
get to practice the rest of the raid boss. 
That would help people get better, faster.
Or, to really go all out, the devs could create 
a Raid Practice mode. Create bots that can handle  
each raid role well enough to get through the 
fight. When a player wants to practice against  
a boss, have them sub for one of the bots, and 
let the player learn the fight through doing.
Watching someone beat a raid boss on a YouTube 
video or from a wiki helps, but there’s no better  
way to learn than hands-on practice. A new player 
could learn the basics and practice up whenever  
they wanted - not just when they’ve strong-armed 
friends and guild members into being a guide.
Third party tools that help you practice 
raids, like FFXIV Raid Simulator, do exist,  
but maybe it’s a good idea for games to 
implement better practice modes directly.
More robust ways to practice a game leads to 
higher skill ceilings. This happened in rhythm  
games. Friendly practice modes in games like 
Guitar Hero and Stepmania led to more practice,  
and more skill. Now players can knock out charts 
in these games that used to be superhuman.
If you remove some friction from 
the learning process - through  
redesigning the boss, or by 
making it easier to practice,  
players will be less likely to feel 
that one of these bosses is ‘too slow.’
Or you know, if you need a good slow boss,  
just steal any of the ones from Shadow 
of the Colossus. They’re perfect.
Head to the comments, and let’s talk about 
how perfect Shadow of the Colossus is. Or,  
if you’ve got your own favorite terrible 
slow boss, let us know down there.
A too-slow boss can mean a lot of things. 
Whether you need to cut the waiting time,  
make telegraphing more interesting, 
fix your cinematics, or pace it better,  
you can put a slow boss on 
the fast track to success.
*chill vibes from Shadow of the Colossus*