It’s been a hell of a decade for roguelikes. Like, 
for the concept of a Roguelike. It’s gone from a  
niche of a niche, to one of the most popular 
tags for indie games on Steam. But roguelikes  
aren’t the same as they were a decade plus ago. 
Time morphs every genre, but especially this one.
The concept of a roguelike has been diced 
up, mixed with other ingredients, and become  
a part of an explosion of flavor fusions. You can 
still see the original roguelike recipe in there,  
but a lot of these new games are using 
classic roguelike mechanics as a base  
to whip up something no one’s seen before. 
There’s been arguments about genre labels,  
but no matter what you call them, this new era of 
roguelike-inspired mechanics has resulted in some  
of the most creative games around. Not all of 
them work, but they’re all worth talking about.  
So let’s take a tour! Let’s talk about a bunch 
of the freaky roguelikes of the last few years.
You ever want to play an RPG that 
taught you how to program? Today’s  
your lucky day! It’s today’s sponsor, Boot.dev!
If you’ve ever wanted to learn coding, 
Boot.dev is the best tool to start  
out. Boot.dev teaches you back-end web 
development in Python, Golang, and SQL.  
They’ve turned the process of learning to code 
into a game, full of quests, XP, tons of tasks,  
and more, all with the goal of getting you coding 
quickly and getting comfortable with the process.
Learning this way is much cheaper 
than taking a class at a university,  
and this isn’t some shortcut either. 
You’re learning real-deal coding,  
starting with the fundamentals and building 
until you can write useful code you can  
be proud of. Head over there and try their 
totally free demo - you’ll see what I mean.
Even if you’re not looking to 
become a professional programmer,  
being able to write, understand, and debug 
code is an incredibly useful skill in any  
profession. You’d be amazed at what one 
good Python script can do for you at work.
Go to Boot.dev and try out the courses for free,  
then use my code DESIGNDOC to get 25% off your 
entire first year, if you choose the annual plan.
Get to love computer programming, with Boot.dev!
Alright, I think it’d be a good idea to 
make sure everyone’s building off the  
same foundation before we get too deep here. 
Let’s start with the basics of the basics.  
What’s a roguelike, anyway? The question is 
kinda thorny if you don't know the story.
We did a video a while ago about exactly what 
the deal is, but a roguelike is basically a game  
that plays AT LEAST A LITTLE like Rogue, 
a very popular turn-based hack-and-slash  
game made for UNIX mainframes in the early 
80s. Its combination of run-based gameplay,  
procedural dungeon generation, and difficulty made 
it one of the most influential games of the time.
  
Much like how the popularity of Doom created 
a bunch of ‘Doom clones’ that would eventually  
become the First Person Shooter genre, Rogue 
inspired so many games like it that they spawned  
a genre as well: the ‘Roguelike’. For a lot of 
the 80s, 90s, and 2000s, a ‘Roguelike’ was a  
game that looked more or less like a Rogue reskin 
- this is the era of Dungeon Crawler Stone Soup,  
Nethack, and Mystery Dungeon. Devs that loved 
the high-stakes structure and replayability of  
the original made their own tweaks, but largely 
kept them very recognizably still like Rogue.
It went on like this for long enough 
that a group of Roguelike developers got  
together in 2008 to codify this style 
into a more rigid set of guidelines:  
the Berlin Interpretation of 
Roguelikes. So… that’s it.  
This list of high and low value factors 
is the final definition of Roguelikes.
Lol no. Time morphs EVERY genre.
Over the past decade or so, tons of 
game devs got away from adhering to  
that strict definition of what a Roguelike 
can be. They decided to be more liberal in  
what elements of Rogue to keep and what bits of 
creativity they could add to their personal game.
And guess what? That kind of 
thinking started… a holy war.
The more purist fans of the genre want the 
label ‘Roguelike’ to still mean what it’s  
always meant: a game that provides 
that classic Rogue hack-and-slash,  
restart-every-life-from-scratch gameplay.
But some people don’t have the same history with 
the genre, or the same expectations around what it  
should or shouldn’t be. To them, a ‘roguelike’ 
is basically ANY game that has something that  
looks like run-based gameplay, no matter 
what other design elements come with it.
Maybe they began to know the genre 
by playing Spelunky. Spelunky  
used traditional Roguelike elements like 
permadeath, random dungeons to go through,  
and lots of clockwork gameplay systems to 
tinker with, but it’s an action platformer,  
has actual graphics, and the items do the 
same thing run to run. Is it a roguelike?
Or maybe they picked up FTL. 
FTL has run-based gameplay,  
it’s laid out on a grid, and it has random 
events, but it plays more like Oregon Trail,  
has multiple characters to command, and is a weird 
action and tactical hybrid. Is IT a roguelike?
Or Rogue Legacy. Rogue Legacy made a 
big show about you making permanent  
upgrades to your character, so you 
can build up your stats over time,  
and improve your chances of making 
it deeper. Is THIS a roguelike?
And if you liked those games, 
how do you find others like them?  
The term ‘Roguelike’ became a sort of catch-all.
The purists would like these types of 
games to be their own distinct genre:  
the ‘Roguelite’. A lighter, less 
punishing version of the style.
Me? I’m OK with playing fast and loose with 
the label, but only because I don’t know that  
there’s a better one. We’ll get into that 
later. But there’s a bigger point here.
The emergence of more and more ‘Roguelite’ games 
is revealing a new, and I think more interesting  
truth: Run-based gameplay is an incredibly 
powerful platform for all kinds of games,  
not just ones that look like Rogue. I 
said in that previous video that there  
had been a wave of unique roguelikes in 
the 2010s, but I made that video in 2018.  
That era’s got nothing on what’s happened 
since. Now ANYTHING can be a roguelike.
You ever hear about BAZR?
BAZR is a wild ROM hack of Mario 64 that turns 
it into a Roguelike. Take Mario 64 Mario and  
strip him of almost his entire move set. All he 
can do is run around and use a few environmental  
actions like ledge grabbing. All other moves 
have been converted into cards that you hold  
in a deck. Kinda like Kingdom Hearts Chain 
of Memories, if you’ve played that. Jumps,  
backflips, triple jumps, punches, kicks, long 
jumps, even things as simple as crouching are  
now cards. And since it’s a ROM hack, they throw 
in some crazy extra moves from other Mario games  
like the Spin Attack from Mario Galaxy, or 
the Cloud Flower power up from Galaxy 2.
All of the game’s action buttons - B, A, Z, and 
R - are assigned a card from your limited deck,  
and each card can only be used so many times 
before they’re replaced with some other action  
from the top of your deck. If you run out of 
moves before you complete a stage, that’s death.
With these limits, you have to play a… 
MOSTLY normal Mario 64 stage and collect  
the normal stars with your BAZR moves. 
These rules can make even the simplest  
stars in the game a struggle to complete. Bob-Omb 
Battlefield becomes an entirely different beast,  
especially with stars on the floating 
island. The cannons are all closed off.  
The game forces you to get creative to get 
around. I ended up having to backwards long  
jump from the mountaintop to the island, 
and that got the job done. Eventually.
The stage you play is assigned randomly, 
and you have to pay coins to re-roll  
for a different stage if you’re stuck. The 
ultimate goal of BAZR is to collect 16 stars,  
then do a gauntlet of the 3 
Bowser stages back to back,  
all with one deck. Every move you make is going 
to have to be planned carefully…if RNG allows it
Your base deck of moves probably 
won’t be enough to clear the gauntlet,  
so you’ll need to build up for it. Find extra 
cards in stages, or head to the shop to spend  
coins to buy new cards or improve your 
existing ones. Making mechanics a scarce,  
random resource immediately converts the game into 
hitting the same notes as the best Roguelikes do.
This all still feels absolutely like Mario 
64, but also absolutely like its own thing.  
It immediately breathes 
new life into the familiar.
Mario 64 wasn’t meant to be a roguelike, but 
that doesn’t really matter. A roguelike can  
be as simple as an extra set of rules 
on top of an existing structure. If  
those rules can make you think 
laterally, that can be enough.
BAZR’s a testament to how flexible the 
roguelike structure can be. If it can  
bolt onto a game like Mario 
64, what can’t it work with?
Creative roguelike additions 
aren’t limited to mods. More  
and more big studio games have been adapting 
themselves to fit into the Roguelike mold,  
often through DLC. Like Splatoon 3: Side Order.
Side Order converts Splatoon into a floor-based, 
randomized, objective-centric roguelike,  
reshuffling elements from the 
rest of the game in new ways.
The setup is straightforward. Pick a loadout 
at the start, and climb a 30-floor tower.  
Instead of dungeon crawling and brawling 
your way through, each floor gives you an  
objective-based challenge to do, in an array 
of premade arenas. Complete the objective  
while you fight off waves of reskinned 
single-player and Salmon Run mode enemies.
They’ve built 5 different mission types in total, 
from shooting specific targets, to holding Splat  
Zone style control points, to pushing billiard 
balls into goals. You get to choose between 3  
challenges, whose rewards ramp up by difficulty. 
Harder challenges get you more chips and money  
for upgrading your build. Some challenges have 
extra Danger modifiers, making your job tougher,  
but you don’t want to avoid them forever. Skipping 
them will cause more Danger modifiers to appear  
later, and more frequently. Getting the wrong one 
on a late-game challenge can be very dangerous.
It’s not a bad foundation for turning Splatoon 
into a Roguelike. The objectives are nice enough,  
and selecting challenges based on 
difficulty and rewards adds a touch  
of strategic thinking that I think 
is the most fun part of the mode.
Now there’s not a ton of new content, but that 
might still be ok. Many action Roguelikes get  
their pizazz from the variety of builds you 
can go for. Different perks and abilities  
can mesh together to change how you play 
the game completely. The strategies you  
use to make these choices wind up being 
a little meta-game. Builds in Side Order  
don’t have as much of that. The weapon you 
choose to start with is the biggest factor,  
and the abilities you gain mid-run are 
mostly just stat buffs. There’s not as  
much to think about. That winds up making 
a lot of runs in this game blend together.
4 or 5 attempts in and a few hours 
of work got me my first clear,  
which is maybe a little low. I didn’t even 
need that many permanent upgrades to make  
the runs easier. The arenas repeat 
themselves a little too often, too,  
and there aren’t many different bosses. Just a 
pool of 3 that you see 2 of, plus the final boss.
Side Order is a fun Roguelike, and for an 
add-on to an already solid game it’s fine.  
It’s a great foundation that could 
use some more meat on its bones.
Now, you can add a roguelike mode to a 
multi-million selling game franchise,  
but let’s say you DON’T have one of those 
lying around. You might have to make yours  
from scratch. But how can you make one 
stand out in this crowded marketplace?
Well, you could get more creative with 
where it’s set. A Roguelike doesn’t have  
to be a medieval hack-and-slash, you 
can hack-and-slash wherever you want!
In Going Under, you’re Jackie, a newly 
hired unpaid intern. This was supposed  
to be a marketing internship, 
but instead, her manager has  
told her to dive into the procedurally 
generated dungeons beneath the office.  
There’s cool stuff to find, in the ruins of 3 
failed tech startups that used to work down there.
Each startup is a parody of an existing tech 
company, with a fantasy twist. There’s an  
overcaffeinated gig economy firm for goblins, 
called Joblin. There’s a demonic dating app  
developer - Winkydink. And there’s the 
undead crypto firm, making ‘Styxcoin’.
The big draw here is the heavy dose of satire. 
This game is drowning in corporate disdain.
Even the game’s art style draws from Corporate 
Memphis, that bloodless, quirky-but-not-too-quirky  
aesthetic that has been the signature art style 
of tons of tech companies for the last decade.
The game’s a straightforward dungeon 
crawling action roguelike. Combat  
is very scrappy. Everything’s a weapon. 
Staplers, mops, keyboards, anything handy.  
You’ll quickly burn through the durability 
on a lot of things, so you have to improvise,  
but when you lose a weapon, you can quickly 
pick up and use whatever you find on the ground.
The workplace and tech startup satire is all 
over the gameplay too. The passive “skills” you  
find in a run are written like qualities you’d 
find on a workplace evaluation. You have ones  
like ‘open-minded,’ which increases your crit 
chance when you aren’t locking on to enemies.  
My personal favorite is ‘Unapproachable,’ 
which makes a giant buzzsaw circle you.
The game goes all in with goofy perks and 
abilities, including the special consumable  
phone apps that help you during runs. You got 
“WheresApp” to reveal the entire floor’s map,  
“WinkedIn” which assaults enemies 
with emoji texts too hot for work,  
and ‘TubeYou,’ which spawns an inflatable flailing 
tube man of yourself to draw in enemy aggro.  
The satire lays it on maybe a little 
thick sometimes, but better too much  
than too little if you want to stand out. 
 
Going Under unfortunately came out the same  
week as Hades 1 did their full release, so I 
won’t blame you if it flew under your radar,  
but it’s still there! I’m sure Aggrocrab 
will take your money. Check it out!
You can make your game any setting you want,  
but you can also make your 
Roguelike any GAME you want!
Peglin is what you get if you made a 
Roguelike out of Peggle. On the topside,  
some guys are trying to fight 
you. But to interface with that,  
you’ve gotta play the board below. Your little 
goblin guy’s got a whole RPG to run through,  
where damage and effects are determined by the 
bouncing ball. Punch your way to the end, and rack  
up special balls and pegs to make your actions 
more action-y. Bonus damage, resetting pegs, multi  
ball - a s many little quirks as you can imagine 
happening with the interactions of balls on pegs.
Peglin gets a lot of mileage 
out of being DEVOTED, ENTIRELY,  
to making Peggle mechanics the only interaction 
that matters. EVERYTHING is done on this field.  
Fighting? Of course. But so is navigation. To get 
to the next encounter, you have to go through the  
right hole on the bottom of the board, and 
a lot of the pegs from the end of your round  
are going to stick around while you’re trying to 
get there. It might be easy to go where you want,  
but you also might clip an edge, bounce the 
wrong way a couple times, and wind up going  
exactly where you didn’t want to go. Or into the 
fire pit of indecisiveness, and light damage.
The random bounce mechanics work pretty well with 
the inherent randomness of a Roguelike. After a  
few bounces, there’s absolutely no way to predict 
where the ball is exactly going to go, so you’re  
going to have to take your chances. Strategizing 
around the deck of balls you have at your  
disposal, and how to upgrade them, makes this feel 
like more than just another pachinko-type game.
Peglin’s super polished, and since there’s only 
so much strategic planning you can do on this  
kind of game, it’s super accessible, too. The 
game gets a lot of mileage with its events,  
ball perks, and some surprisingly inventive 
bosses. This one’s worth your time.
Every type of game can be a roguelike. No matter  
how complicated. If Peggle is 
too basic for you, don’t worry.
Tape to Tape takes a Roguelike structure and makes 
the core gameplay loop just straight up NHL ‘94.
It seems fun, but you should probably 
come into it with at least a little  
arcade hockey muscle memory. It’s 
not super easy to pick up and play,  
and it’s been in early access for 
2 years without much of a tutorial.
I was gearing up to get into more 
specifics about how this game works,  
but it turns out I’m not good enough to do that.
I played a chunk of the EA Sports NHL games 
in college with some roommates, so I have a  
little background in it, and I’m still finding it 
very hard to win enough matches to get too deep.  
You lose one game and your run is over. But the 
presentation is nice, and the sheer inventiveness  
of the concept is a lot of fun. If you’re better 
at this kind of thing than I am, this is for you.
If you don’t want a hockey roguelike, how 
about an old phone game: the roguelike?
Haste is built with a roguelike branching 
structure, but it doesn’t have cards,  
or turn-based gameplay, or even 
combat hardly. It’s Tiny Wings,  
if you remember that mobile game, but in 3D.
Haste puts you in the shoes of 
an interdimensional courier,  
who has to keep reality from falling apart. 
To do this, you have to travel between Shards,  
which are gauntlets that you complete as you 
travel from point to point on a road map,  
full of branching paths and nodes with 
special challenges, events, shops, and bosses.
The core gameplay involves running at high speeds 
in a hilly environment. As you run up hills,  
you take off of them like a ramp to get some 
big air. While gliding, you’re free to steer  
and dive back down whenever you want, 
but to keep your speed and momentum high,  
you need to land on the downslope of a hill. The 
smoother you hit it, the more speed you retain,  
and the faster you’ll go. You have to stay quick, 
because reality IS falling apart behind you,  
and if you get caught in the expanding void, 
you’ll lose a life and have to start over.  
Nailing your landing can also get you meter 
for special abilities like a grappling hook,  
a hoverboard, or a double jump, and can 
help save your run if you use it correctly.
The roguelike elements are honestly pretty 
light here. They act as a thin coating of  
progression and a ready-made reason to keep 
going on top of a fun core gameplay loop,  
but when you combine the two, the package 
crosses some unlabeled threshold for making  
a fun sandbox into an actual game that 
the core loop wouldn’t get to on its own.
It’s not the hardest Roguelike out there, 
and the more difficult moments can get a  
little annoying but the hill mechanics are 
SO satisfying that I don’t really care.  
It’s another case of light roguelike 
elements breathing life into an idea.
You know, if a roguelike can be any game you want,  
why not make it EVERY game you want? 
Just do everything, all at once!
Drop Duchy. It's a Roguelike. It's a Tetris. It’s 
a Carcassone. It's a Risk. And it's a Deckbuilder.
Your deck is made of resource tiles shaped like 
Tetris-y blocks. Drop them in a Tetris well,  
and watch as they combo off of each 
other. Fill in lines for resources,  
and drop in special building tiles 
to collect even more resources.
As you go, you’re also building up an army 
that will fight enemies when all the tiles  
are laid down. There’s a weapon triangle to 
think about, but you primarily have to get  
enough soldiers to defeat the enemy soldiers that 
get shuffled into your deck. Pick your fights,  
pick when to reinforce, and maybe leave one 
of the enemy structures in the holding cell  
to throw it away without fighting. The 
more soldiers you save at battle’s end,  
the more resources you get to build up your 
tile deck and buy upgrades during your run.
There’s plenty going on at once here, 
but once you play it for a round or two,  
the rhythm of gameplay clicks into 
place pretty quick. It’s quite  
charming, and a great little puzzle 
roguelike in a totally new format.
By this point, you can see how far the basic 
building blocks of a roguelike can shoot out  
and blend with other completely random game types. 
That’s one of the main difficulties with figuring  
out what to call all these run-based games. 
They’re all branching off of the roguelike core,  
but in random directions. What do BAZR 
and Haste have in common? What do Drop  
Duchy and Going Under have in common? Maybe 
you could just call them ‘run-based games’,  
but maybe it’s just easier to label this 
giant hunk of game ideas as ‘roguelikes’.  
I’m OK with that. Though I’m not one to get 
too precious about what to label genres,  
anyway. I’m more interested in seeing 
the ideas people come up with when they  
aren’t limited by the genre conventions 
of the past. That’s why I love this new  
era of roguelikes. People keep finding crazy 
combinations that break new game design ground.
There’s a poker Roguelike, obviously. I don’t 
have to tell you any more about Balatro.
Though someone did just mod in a set 
of Pokemon cards as replacement jokers,  
so who knows how much further this game can go.
There’s a Boggle roguelike.
Mark Brown just released a demo for Word 
Play, his take on Balatro and Boggle.
Punch in words, and grab tile upgrades 
and bonus multiplier modifiers. Turns out  
that sticking some Roguelike rules 
on top of Boggle works just fine.
There’s a slot machine roguelike.
Luck be a Landlord has you upgrading icons on slot 
machine reels to get big combos and big points,
and it's pretty smooth sailing to get an infinite run going.
There’s even a Calculator Roguelike. Like,  
punch in numbers and do some 
math calculator, but a roguelike.
It’s called ‘Calculate It,’ and all 
you have to do is get the target  
number on the calculator screen. 
By any means necessary. Thing is,  
each key on the calculator can only 
be pressed so many times during a run.
You have to buy, like, an extra 
copy of the number 3 in the store,  
so you don’t run out. Or buy the function 
that turns all 5’s into 6’s. Or trims off  
the first digit. Or snaps the readout 
to the right number if you’re within 10.
It sounds like a joke. And it is, 
kinda. But you know what? It’s not bad…  
The roguelike is just some structure 
over intuitive, emergent mechanics,  
and that’s really all this is, just the 
set of emergent mechanics is literally  
real math. It’s worth checking out for four 
bucks. The music track is kinda catchy, too.
There clearly seems to be no limit to how basic 
you can make a roguelike. But that goes the other  
way too. My favorite game of the past month takes 
a bizarre premise to its most complicated extreme.
It’s Blue Prince, the world’s 
first interior design,  
point and click adventure, resource 
builder, mystery strategy roguelike.
Welcome to Mount Holly Manor, the grand estate 
of your late great uncle Herbert. He was known  
as quite the puzzle master, and thanks to his 
infinite wealth and a team of researchers,  
he managed to build some kind of magic house, 
filled with rooms that you build and re-build  
in an ever-changing layout every morning. 
In his will, he left the place to you,  
but only if you can solve his final puzzle: 
unlock the 46th room of this 45-room house.
You start each new day from the entrance hall, 
choosing what new rooms appear in front of you  
every time you open a new door, from a pool 
of three options. Every day you have a limited  
number of steps in the house you can take before 
you get exhausted, and you’ll need to gather  
keys and gems - resources you use to unlock 
doors and spend building more exotic rooms.
It’s hard to compare this game to anything 
else. It’s not far off in tone and gameplay  
to a game like Myst, but it mixes in a ton of 
rogue-ish elements in ways that I haven’t really  
seen before in a point-and-click adventure 
game. This isn’t an action-combat roguelike,  
obviously. It’s a resource manager, and the 
way that the rooms are drawn semi-randomly  
from a pool behaves a little like the typical 
dungeon generation elements of a roguelike.
But the real draw here are the game’s onion-like 
mysteries. If you liked the mystery-solving aspect  
of Outer Wilds, where your own knowledge is 
the only thing holding you back from the end,  
there’s a lot of that in here too. I can’t 
think of another game with a premise that  
seems so straightforward on the surface, 
but is so unbelievably deep below it.  
I’m 40 hours into this thing, I saw credits roll, 
and I’m nowhere close to the end. Every room has  
a new clue. Every room carries more context 
and more loose ends to tug at, as you slowly  
piece together what has led you to exploring 
this house, and what exactly is going on here.
The roguelike randomness in the room generation 
does present a challenge, though. Blue Prince has  
a skill curve. You can, and probably will, 
paint yourself into a corner if you go into  
the house one morning and try to single-mindedly 
focus on one mystery thread. A lot of the time,  
you can’t get exactly the right room at 
the right time to progress that thread,  
and that’s understandably frustrating. 
This game is a ride that you aren’t in  
full control of. But if you’re blocked from 
solving one mystery, there will be 5 more you  
can make progress on in that run, if you keep 
your eyes open. What’s up with this thing?  
What does this note mean? Does this mean anything? 
Who wrote this? Boy you sure like chess. What  
happens when I do this? Let the game come to you, 
and you’ll find the whole ride to be more fun.
Most of the time the only thing holding you 
back is your sense of perception and logic.  
The game wants you to use what you’ve learned in 
the clues from other rooms to develop new room  
drafting strategies, new ways to earn resources, 
and to slowly bump the RNG odds in your favor.  
Keep a notebook handy, take screenshots, and 
you’ll figure it out. If you think you’re stuck,  
just keep drafting rooms you haven’t seen before,  
and you might just find that note that 
makes everything else click into place.
Over time, like many modern roguelites, each 
run will get you ever closer to drafting just  
the right rooms in the right places and in the 
right combinations to make serious progress. The  
game will provide, even if what it provides 
is not exactly what you started looking for.
It’s not without flaws, but Blue Prince is 
a stunner - a breath of fresh air for both  
adventure games and roguelikes that only works 
because it combines complementary elements of  
each to make something new. I think you could 
easily take this as a template and apply it to  
other settings. An office, a mall, a palace - 
tons of unique stories could be told like this,  
and I’d be in line day 1 to try them 
out. Blue Prince is the kind of game  
that when we look back in 10 years, will 
be a point of inspiration for dozens more.
I know that YOU know about a bunch 
of other weird new roguelikes that  
we didn’t mention. You’ve gotta let 
the world know. In the comments.
Roguelike design principles have broken 
loose from their Rogue origins, and with it,  
hundreds of amazing new games have been 
born. Who knows where it’ll all go next?
*chill vibes from Going Under*