Everyone’s counting on you.
You’re the only one that can save the world.
It’s going to take complete dedication,
nerves of steel, absolute focus… no now
is not the time to play Triple Triad…
NO you don’t need to catch the butterflies…
NO get away from legally distinct Michael
Jackson.
Aww. Dang side quests.
They come in a zillion forms, but side quests
do have some common threads.
Let’s take a look at side quest design,
how to make a side quest that really hooks
you in, and what they do to make them distinct
from mainline quests.
If you want a great tool to design sidequests,
or any other project, check out today’s
episode sponsor: Milanote!
Getting a handle on the early stages of game
design can be messy.
Milanote helps you organize your ideas and
share them with your team.
It’s a super slick tool for creating storyboards
and mood boards, keeping visual notes, and
throwing ideas around, and keeping it all
organized in one place.
We made a board while we were making this
very episode!
It looks great, and it’s been a breeze to
use.
Milanote uses a drag-and-drop, freeform canvas
built to let your entire team - designers,
programmers, artists, and managers - create
boards that help visualize your projects.
They even have some great plug in templates
made specifically for the workflow of game
designers.
Milanote has the flexibility and power you
need to help you bring your game ideas to
life.
Milanote is hosting a giveaway just for viewers
of Design Doc.
If you’re ready to start working on a new
game design project in 2021, sign up to Milanote
for free using the link in the description
below, and three lucky winners will be randomly
selected to receive Milanote PRO subscriptions
for free.
Thanks, Milanote!
You can slice almost any side quest into three
parts: how it starts, how it goes, and how
it ends.
There’s an action that branches a side quest
off from the main questline, there’s something
you do within the side quest, and there’s
usually some way that the side quest connects
back to the main story.
There are unique opportunities to help create
something memorable in each of those phases,
so let’s break them down.
First up is an easy one to overlook: how a
side quest starts.
Side quests have to branch off from the main
line in some way.
Coming up with a reason and a mechanism for
players to go out of their way is an essential
part of making them interested in following
through with the side quest.
As a general rule, you’ll want them to be
convenient to start and find, or otherwise
feel like a natural part of the game’s design.
You’ll find plenty of convenient side quests
in the criminally overlooked CrossCode.
CrossCode is a 16-bit action RPG set in a
‘fake MMO,’ and its quest design borrows
heavily from what you’d find in a standard
one of those - lots of basic fetch quests
and kill 10 whatevers type stuff.
The side quest content itself isn’t really
anything special, but the game makes it ultra-convenient
to take them on.
You can take a quick jog around any town and
pick up a bunch of new side quests by talking
to the NPCs you find.
As you go adventuring in the field, you’ll
stumble on to plenty of quest goals without
even thinking about it.
The side quest rewards are mostly XP and gear,
and the purpose of the side quests are to
help mitigate the need to grind for levels.
Or rather, to make the grind feel just slightly
more fun and purposeful by attaching side
quest goals to it.
You’re not locked into completing one at
a time, and your menus keep tabs on any special
information you need in case you forgot anything.
The lack of obstacles and the speed at which
you can take on and knock out side quests
create a very low barrier to entry.
It’s kind of soothing, really.
It’s not revolutionary, but good design
doesn’t always have to be innovative design.
Convenience is a good start, but convenience
through low barriers to entry alone can be
a little bland.
You could instead make the side quests feel
like a more natural part of the gameplay.
Hollow Knight is all about exploration, and
its side quests are given out by the occasional
scattered NPC.
It’s a challenging game, and there’s a
strong incentive to look everywhere to find
any reward that could give you an advantage
or just give you some lore.
Finding a side quest NPC itself acts like
a little reward for the exploring that the
game wants you to do.
The side quests don’t appear as a checklist.
There aren’t signposts telling you ‘THIS
IS A SIDE QUEST’.
You might not even know if the task even is
a side quest at all.
The presentation helps make it feel like you’ve
actually stumbled upon something interesting,
which encourages you to do the task and sink
deeper into Hollow Knight’s immersive world.
CrossCode’s side quests are convenient,
and Hollow Knight’s weave seamlessly into
the main storyline.
But wouldn’t it be cool if you did the exact
opposite of both of those?
No?
Too bad, that’s Paper Mario: The Thousand
Year Door.
The game’s terrific, but that’s in spite
of its side quest design.
As soon as you decide to pick up a side quest,
the game slows down to a crawl.
Almost all of them have to be picked up at
the Trouble Center in the central hub town,
Rogueport.
You could be standing next to the character
who put up the request, but you still have
to head back to the Trouble Center board.
Pick up the note and then trek all the way
back to where they’re waiting.
Do the backtracking fetch quest in a game
without a good fast travel system, then go
back to the quest giver to complete it.
No, you can’t pick up more than one at once.
The redundant travel stops the game’s flow
dead in its tracks and destroys the motivation
to do any of the side quests, at least the
ones without some REALLY outstanding rewards.
Great, so you’ve picked up a side quest.
But now that it’s on your list, what are
you supposed to DO anyway?
What makes a good side quest quest?
Obviously, there’s a massive range of things
you COULD have your players do - anything
from pick up 5 colored frogs to take out this
big ol’ mountain turtle.
But most side quest types break down into
just a handful of categories: story-driven,
variety-driven, elaboration-driven, and challenge-driven.
Each one focuses on a different facet of a
game.
Each type has its strong suits and unique
potential problems and has its own reason
for being a side quest rather than part of
the main game.
A great side story is a perfect core for a
side quest in any game with a strong narrative
focus.
If your players are already invested in the
game’s story, they’ll want every detail
they can get.
Maybe it fleshes out some side characters
or shines a light on subtle elements of the
world that didn’t quite fit into the main
plotline.
It could even contribute to the main story
later on, through added context or if a character
does something different because you took
the time to do their side quest.
Mass Effect 2 has loads of great optional
side content through its loyalty missions.
Each one is unique, and they all give the
game’s side characters a chance to truly
shine.
While there's some mandatory missions that
push the main plot along and introduce key
characters, a large chunk of Mass Effect 2's
most interesting missions are these isolated
storylines that you can pick and choose as
you like.
Each can be viewed as a good episode of Star
Trek that focuses on fleshing out both the
secondary characters and the universe.
But when a developer goes all-out on top-tier
storytelling, it makes you wonder why they
made it optional?
In Mass Effect’s case, it serves two purposes.
First, it lets players pick and choose what
content they want to see.
Instead of focusing for a couple of hours
on a character the player might not care about,
the players can tailor their experience.
Are Jacob and Zaeed too bland for you?
Just skip their loyalty missions.
You’re not going to be able to account for
everyone’s personal preferences, so letting
people choose what they want to see helps
satisfy more players in the end.
Second, the missions are also deeply tied
to outcomes in the main storyline, but we’ll
get into that a little later.
If you’re not in the mood for a big story
revelation, you could make your side quest
more variety-driven.
Throw a curveball in the normal game and give
the players something weird.
The Yakuza series has a vast range of activities.
From game to game, the core gameplay doesn't
change all that much - until recently - and
the environments are often recycled,
with some new editions here and there.
But that lets them put a ton of work into the side quests.
The side content is WILDLY different, even
within a single entry in the series,
and the streets of Kamurocho are dense with things to do around every corner.
Mini-games, elaborate fetch quests, ridiculous
event battles, and the shockingly deep management
sims all give a breather from the usual gameplay
routine.
You'll often get a little mandatory sample,
especially for the more involved side quest
types, but the game lets you pick how deep
you want to get into each of them afterward.
If the high-stakes plot becomes too much,
you can take a break with some mahjong, head
over to the Sega arcade for some Virtua Fighter
or Outrun, or you can take a crack at running
a hostess club or candy company.
If that's not enough, you can compete in a
literal full-blown Kart Racing League against
a bunch of costumed weirdos.
Take a job as a town's orange-headed mascot
and win the local kids' hearts and minds.
Try to corner the local real estate market
until you catch the wrathful eye of THE LEISURE
KING.
The side content in Yakuza is so different
from what the game makes you do that you go
seek it out for the spectacle and as a palate
cleanser.
The time and loving attention each side quest
gets makes the trip out of your way completely
worth it.
Side quests don’t have to contain completely
new mechanics, though.
Some side quests elaborate on pre-existing
mechanics.
They might highlight a different train of
thought or an exciting combination of systems
that the normal game might not explore.
Especially tricky system combos tend to fit
great in side quests.
Thinking through all of the existing systems’
possibilities might turn out to be the high
point of the game for players who sought out
those side quests while not punishing other
players who might not totally wrap their head
around it.
Majora’s Mask is a fairly short game by
Zelda standards.
There are only 4 main dungeons to complete
in the main story, and they don’t work with
the game’s 72-hour long Groundhog Day structure
all that deeply.
The side quests are the bulk of the game’s
content, and they play off the game’s structure
much more thoroughly.
In each cycle, there are a ton of scripted
routines and events that happen across Termina.
Many of the side quests involve observing
these patterns and planning out what to do
in a sort of elaborate time-based puzzle.
You have to be at the right place at the right
time with the right plan to complete the tasks,
and you’re given a surprising amount of
freedom to pick and choose which ones you
pursue.
The time-sensitive structure even makes repeat
playthroughs more interesting.
You could try to plan things out to finish
as many side quests as you can within a single
3-day cycle.
The game gives you management tools like the
Bomber's notebook to help keep track of everyone's
schedule and the Song of Time to help you
manipulate the clock by either resetting the
cycle, slowing down the flow of time, or skipping
ahead to specific points.
The system is a little fiddly, and some of
the side quests are a chore even with these
tools, but the side quest mechanics expand
on the game's premise in a way that you can
interact with as much as you choose to.
But what if your game's mechanics don't lend
themselves to deep variations?
There's one more trick you can use, and it
might be the easiest of all.
Just take your base game and crank up the
challenge.
For players that take on challenge-driven
side quests, overcoming the mountain is the
draw.
Keeping it in a side quest lets you block
off massive difficulty spikes behind a velvet
rope that won't keep players from getting
to the end of the game.
This shows up all over JRPGs.
Optional super bosses and the occasional secret
dungeon fit this section to a T, and Kingdom
Hearts 2 Final Mix does them both.
The Cavern of Remembrance and the Garden of
Assemblage give a polished challenge that
demands great execution of the game's mechanics.
The Cavern is a mix of challenging platforming
and mob fights that force you to use the extra
movement abilities like the high jump and
glide that aren't as necessary in the main
game and hint at the difficult bosses ahead.
The rematches against every member of Organization
XIII will wipe the floor with you unless you
come fully prepared.
They probably will still get you the first
couple of times anyway.
These end game challenges go well above and
beyond what you're asked to do in the main
game.
Any individual fight would be far too frustrating
if it were an average encounter, or even if
it was the final boss.
To block off the story's resolution because
you just can't execute quite well enough or
don't feel like charting out exactly how to
maximize damage is a recipe for a lot of people
to quit the game in frustration.
But a side quest super boss is a fantastic
reward for really, fully understanding what
the game lets you do.
The fights are a great test and a badge of
accomplishment.
Without that test, the depth of the system
might go to waste as unneeded and unappreciated.
So now you’ve started a side quest, and
done something in it.
All that’s left is to stick the landing.
How do you make the end of a side quest satisfying?
What goes into making a good enough reward
to make the time feel well-spent, and to give
even more incentive to do other side quests?
Just like in the last section, it depends
on what you’re going for.
The best rewards are tailored to the strengths
of your main game.
The most straightforward approach is to give
out loot and other upgrades.
The side quest rewards can supplement your
existing progression system, and help jump
people ahead of the curve, or keep them from
falling behind.
FTL’s whole structure is built on gaining
loot from optional quests and events.
What ones you take on and the quality of the
rewards you get can make or break a run.
As you trek through each star system, the
riskier moves and more elaborate challenges
you take on might get you better weapons,
more fuel, or new crew members, all of which
will help you stay alive for longer.
But don’t save the very best stuff for last.
Especially in challenge-driven side quests,
hiding the best loot behind the hardest challenges
can counterintuitively be a mistake.
If there isn’t anything left to use your
new stuff on, it’ll undercut the reward’s
impact, which might have been more enticing
if it was placed somewhere else.
For story-driven games, if the story you told
in the side quest ties back into the main
game, that’s a pretty compelling reason
to keep finding more side quests to do.
Some of the best story bits that inform the
main storyline in Mass Effect 2 are locked
in the loyalty missions.
Confronting Mordin about the ethics of the
Krogan genophage.
Helping Thane stop his son from becoming an
assassin.
Posing as a hipster to lure out and deal with
Samara’s dangerous daughter.
Their stories alone make these optional missions
worth doing, but the way that they have a
big, big impact on how the ending can play
out, among lots of other rewards, is just
icing on the cake.
Now aside from gear and stories, you could just give out cool stuff.
There’s not much rhyme or reason to this,
just make something cool happen.
Cosmetic items are nice options.
Or maybe something cool happens in the game
world itself.
Breath of the Wild is technically 99% side
quests, but what the game actually labels
as “side quests” are pretty basic in their
construction.
Tarrey Town, though, has a lot going on.
You help build a town slowly from the ground
up by providing resources and gathering different
people together.
It’s meant to be something you do slowly
over the course of your playthrough.
Watching the town grow as it gains citizens
and special shops is very satisfying.
Even the town’s music evolves over time
with new instruments as you get new people.
It’s a bunch of little rewards that work
both narratively and mechanically to make
you feel like you’ve had a direct impact
on how the town has flourished.
Of course, even though we’ve talked about
side quests as being made up of stages, no
side quest is an island.
To have a truly great set of them, you’ll
need to nail all aspects of them at once,
and I think Bug Fables does a wonderful job
of it.
Bug Fables has over 50 side quests, and nearly
every one of them is well worth the effort.
They deliver in every element that a good
side quest needs to be worth the detour.
The devs made initiating them super convenient.
You can pick up as many as you want from a
quest board as soon as they’re available.
Backtracking issues are kept to a minimum
thanks to well placed shortcuts and fast travel
options.
You aren’t flooded with a bunch of contextless
generic ones either, they’re doled out gradually
as you go from chapter to chapter.
The side quests have fun stories that make
the world and characters more lively.
There’s a good variety of mini games, like
an elaborate card game quest line.
There are plenty of challenging optional bosses
and over a half dozen super bosses that demand
you bring your A-game and experiment with
your character builds for a winning strategy.
There are even a couple of full blown optional
dungeons, one of which is complete with a
major plot reveal that… you can just skip
entirely.
It’s a side of the game’s narrative that
you might not have seen otherwise, and that
makes the side quest just that much more special.
The quantity and quality of these side quests
is so high that it’s easy to spend hours
between story chapters to complete these things.
It’s very easy to fall into a chain of them,
finishing one and finding the next one just
around the corner, where you might not make
any progress in the main story for hours,
and be happy for it.
The rewards are plenty and give powerful bonuses
and ability boosts that will help you tackle
the main story.
The game is difficult enough that you’ll
feel thankful for the time you spent getting
geared up.
The side quests support every aspect of Bug
Fables, and are worth emulating for any game
that wants to make their own great ones.
So that’s a quick run down of the basics
on how to elevate your side quests.
Yes, I didn’t talk about the great ones
in The Witcher 3 or Fallout.
You can fix my oversight by talking about
your favorite side quests down in the comments.
By tailoring each phase of a side quest to
your game’s focus, you can turn a detour
into the scenic route.
*chill vibes outro from Bug Fables*