Video games can serve as an escape from the
ordinary, the monotonous, the common everyday
events that make life dull.
New and different experiences let us escape,
explore, and have fun.
But while putting variety into your game is
important, game designers need to be careful.
Creating a range of experiences shouldn’t turn the game as a whole into an underdeveloped, forgettable
mess.
There's a fine line between variety and aimlessness.
Having each distinct experience reflect a
cohesive whole is the goal.
Do it right, and you get Wario Ware, Grand
Theft Auto, or The Witcher 3.
Do it wrong, and you get Carnival Games for
the Wii.
But no series underscores just how tricky it is
to add gameplay variety quite as much as Sonic
the Hedgehog.
For over two and a half decades Developer Sonic
Team has tried over and over to add gameplay variety
through different gameplay styles.
With, well, mixed results.
What is generally considered the core of a
Sonic Game?
Going Fast and Momentum Based Platforming.
To let the player go fast, level designers
need to make very large levels, which are
also challenging and interesting for the player
to blaze their way through.
For developers, this can be a design nightmare
as it requires a huge amount of development
resources for a relatively short amount of
gameplay in a single stage.
Because of how expensive it can be to make
this kind of level, a full Sonic focused game
is by design, pretty short.
This is partly why many Sonic games feature
multiple playable characters that go through
the same (or at least similar) stages with
different styles of gameplay as a means to lengthen the
game and add variety.
The earliest and perhaps smartest use of multiple
characters in the Sonic series can be found
in Sonic 3 and it’s companion game, Sonic
& Knuckles.
Sonic 3 & Knuckles presents the player with
3 different characters; Sonic, who provides
the standard fast platforming that fans expect,
Tails, who adds the ability to fly and swim
to bypass some of the platforming challenges,
and Knuckles who trades some speed and jumping
for the ability to glide and climb walls.
What’s great about the characters in Sonic
3 is that they let the player approach the
same levels in new ways while still staying
true to the core of a Sonic game.
Tails and Knuckles don’t play drastically
different from Sonic, they work under the
same general rules and have the same goals;
the end of a stage.
They just have a few advantages that provide
for a slightly different experiences, adding in replay
value and variety while still keeping the
speed and momentum that makes a Sonic game
feel like a Sonic game.
The Sonic Advanced and Sonic Rush series both
use the same idea with different characters
and for the most part it works.
While multiple characters were a solid way
to create variety and replayability for 2D
Sonic Games, how does this work in Sonic’s
jump to 3D?
The original Sonic Adventure, released in
1999 for the Sega Dreamcast, featured 6 different
playable characters each with their own story
and unique style of gameplay.
These characters included Sonic, Tails, Knuckles, Amy, E-102 Gamma, and... Big the Cat.
Sonic’s gameplay consists of the fast platforming that players expect,
Tails' is similar except that he has to race   either Sonic
or Eggman and retains his ability to fly, Knuckles
changes the game up entirely with a treasure
hunt for emerald shards in large open sandbox stages,
Amy’s story focuses on slower platforming
while running from a giant robot, E-102 Gamma 
is based around shooting, and Big
the Cat's gameplay is all about putting a fish hook through his best friend's face.
As the years went on, the most divisive aspect of Sonic Adventure was these different characters
and play styles.
Developer Yuji Naka was wrestling with creating
such huge worlds for Sonic.
In a 1998 interview, he said,
“...Because Sonic’s very fast, you have
to create a huge scale simulation.
I’ve put huge efforts into creating a big
map.
Of course, I have to focus on the details
of the 3D world, but I have to create a vast
scale map as well.
This is the most difficult aspect of Sonic
Adventure.
If it were Mario or a slower character, I
wouldn’t have to create the huge world first
for Sonic, but then thought “why not utilise
these maps for other characters?”
Maybe I could add some variety to the game
- not just running quickly through this huge
world.
That’s one of the key concepts in the game.”
Now using multiple characters in the same levels
allows the developers to reuse art and design
assets, which extends the game’s length
and adds in variety.
But if it's not done carefully it can dilute the focus of the core game.
You can't expect the same level design to
feel good for fast paced platforming, extremely
slow platforming, a treasure hunt, and a shooting
gallery.
Adding in a completely irrelevant fishing
minigame with a bootleg Totoro doesn’t solve
the problem.
Forcing the player to slog through every one
of these play styles to finish the game doesn't
help either.
This was a problem that Sonic 3 & Knuckles
avoided because the characters were more like
variations rather than completely different
kinds of games.
The stage design still felt intended for
them.
At times, the levels in Sonic Adventure can
feel at odds with certain characters that
the stages weren’t originally intended for.
Taking a level that works well for Sonic and
forcing it to also accommodate for the shooting
or treasure hunting stages can limit the design
space for both gameplay styles.
For example, the downtown section of Speed
Highway is an area that feels designed for
Knuckles with a lot of verticality on top
of having an open world sandbox design similar
to that of Mario 64 with a ton of little nooks
and crannies to explore while hunting for
emerald pieces.
Now Sonic goes through the exact same area at
the end of his version of the speed highway
but because of the verticality and open nature
of the stage, it feels like a strange and abrupt
place to end a level as Sonic who's at his best
when running through long stretches of terrain.
The same problem applies to E-102 Gamma,
where 80% of his stages are shared with Sonic.
Because Gamma’s moveset doesn’t really
work with the roller coaster level design
of Sonic the developers gave him the smaller flatter
sections those stages instead of building
his own from scratch
which doesn't really work.
Gamma's gameplay is based around shooting enemies to keep a timer from hitting zero.
But the thing is his stages are too small for this to even work.
They're based around a timer but really you don't need to shoot any enemies
to make it in time, which makes his gameplay feel kinda pointless.
Only Gamma's final stage takes any real advantage of his gameplay style
and it's the only one that wasn't originally built for Sonic.
This issue was partially fixed in Sonic
Adventure 2 where the 6 play styles are reduced
to only 3 in the main game, running, shooting
and treasure hunting.
Stages are no longer shared between characters
beyond some similar themes and art assets
so levels are designed with their respective
play styles in mind.
However Sonic Adventure 2 still suffers from
some serious pacing issues
amongst other problems.
*cough* Emerald Radar *cough*
Sega continued to experiment with the series
by using other characters & play styles in
Sonic Heroes, Sonic Unleashed
and the hilariously awful Sonic 06, all of
which suffer similar problems.
The additional characters and styles would
become one of the focal points of criticism
for Sonic from both fans and critics alike.
So much so that the actual lack of them became a
focal point for the marketing of Sonic 4.
There was a general consensus that many people wanted more focus & polish put into
Sonic’s core gameplay and aside from some
of the handheld titles, it wouldn’t be until
2010’s Sonic Colors where Sega finally struck
a balance between Sonic’s high speed gameplay,
varied platforming and exploration.
Sonic Colors understands the core appeal of
Sonic.
It’s not THIS, or THIS, or whatever the
hell THIS is?
Sonic Colors keeps itself focused on THIS.
Taking what was learned from the daytime half
of Sonic Unleashed, Sonic Colors is all about
racing your way through the stage as Sonic
and only Sonic.
The game seamlessly shifts perspectives between 2D and 3D and every level keeps the player on their
toes by making them use Sonic’s array of
mobility based moves with boosting, quick-stepping,
drifting, homing attacking and sliding.
In addition to Sonic’s large move set, Additional
variety is created with the Wisps.
Wisps are colorful creatures that serve as
power-ups, granting Sonic special context
sensitive abilities that are built around the
level design.
There are a total of 8 Wisp powers and they all share a common trait, movement.
White fills up the player’s boost gauge.
Cyan turns Sonic into a laser that bounces
off of walls
Yellow lets him drill underground and underwater.
Green allows him fly and dash through trails
of rings to gain speed.
Pink grants the ability to scale walls.
Orange launches him up to great heights.
Purple turns Sonic into a monster that chomps
its way through enemies and obstacles.
and lastly, blue lets him change special blue
rings into platforms and vice-versa
Every Wisp allows Sonic to move in ways he simply
couldn’t before.
They’re rarely ever required to complete
the game and most importantly they are easy
to control and quick to use on the fly with
just a press of a button or flick of the Wii remote.
These powers add in a slight Metroidvania
style of exploration to the game as they open
the way to alternative routes in levels.
For example, in the first stage there are
large sections of dirt designed for the Yellow
Wisp, which is unavailable during the first
playthrough.
When the power is unlocked later on, the player
can go back and explore these areas to see
what they missed.
These alternate routes often lead to one of
the many hidden red rings which unlocks bonus
stages and eventually the ability to become
Super Sonic.
This gating and backtracking is nothing groundbreaking
but it’s nice and adds some healthy replayability,
variety and depth to many of the stages.
Sonic Colors sets up a solid foundation and
its follow-up Sonic Generations builds upon
it with it’s healthy split of 2D classic
Sonic and 3D modern Sonic.
As a franchise, Sonic seemed like it was finally
headed in the right direction...at least until
it took another misstep because
Sonic Lost World takes the foundation that
Sonic Colors and Sonic Generations had lovingly
laid out and completely trips over itself.
Sonic Lost World goes too far with its variety.
It loses coherency by rapidly switching between
gameplay styles throughout every stage.
Every level feels like it operates under its
own rules.
The 2D and 3D levels feel like they use different
physics and they never transition smoothly
into each other.
Here, it’s a cylinder that kind of plays
like Sonic Colors and Sonic Generations, now
it’s a 2D stage based around verticality,
now it’s an auto runner, now it’s a rail
based level straight out of Donkey Kong Country,
now it’s a super monkey ball stage where
the player rolls a snowball, now it’s based
around stealth, now it’s ice skating, now
it’s rolling around giant pieces of fruit,
now it’s pinball!
And on top of all of this, the Wisps
are also shoved in.
Every power makes use of the Wii U’s game
pad features but they're unintuitive to use
and end up completely breaking the game’s
flow.
Even the powers that do return from Sonic Colors
seem to function completely differently.
Since only one type of power appears in each
stage the Metroidvania aspect from Sonic Colors
no longer applies.
The Wisps are treated more like level gimmicks
that distract the player from the game’s core.
Even the game's final level - a stage that should test the player's skill at the game's core mechanics -
instead introduces the green wisp powerup out of absolutely nowhere.
This powerup allows the player to bypass what should be the game's final test
because the game never spent enough time letting the player build up their skills with the core gameplay
Now, we’ve spent 
a lot of time talking about core gameplay
in other games in the series but, it’s honestly
unclear as to what the core of Sonic Lost
World’s gameplay really is.
When the game begins, it seems like it’s
the cylindrical level design but less than
half of the main levels even use it and even
the levels that do quickly shift into the
other styles.
Simply it's an unfocused mess.
Sonic Lost World and Sonic Colors are opposites
of each other.
Sonic Colors is a game that adds variety that
meshes with its core to create a cohesive
whole whereas Sonic Lost World uses variety
to do pretty much the opposite, where
the alternative play styles are like separate
satellites floating around the core.
In moderation unrelated gameplay styles can
be fun, but when it’s taken to its extreme,
it can fall apart, making the game unfocused
and underdeveloped.
Of course, Sonic games are not the only ones
that have struggled trying to juggle different
gameplay styles.
I would recommend taking a look at some other series
and think about how they incorporate variety.
Take a look at games like Sly Cooper, Grand
Theft Auto, Wario Ware, Metal Gear Solid 5,
Nier, and Jak & Daxter.
Look at these games and ask yourself this:
Do the different gameplay styles blend together to make the experience stronger,
or do they simply dilute the experience?
*chill vibes outro from Sonic Lost World*