[Arwing booster sound]
[Menu theme from Star Fox 64]
Star Fox
[communicator sound]
is stuck
[communicator sound]
in a time loop.
For the past 25 years, Nintendo has made and
remade the same basic Star Fox over and over
again, with the occasional detour.
Like THIS one and THIS one and…
THIS… one.
But they always return to that same first
story.
Star Fox 64 was a great reimagining of the
original game, but remakes account for half
of the series now, and as time goes on they're
getting worse at capturing what makes Star
Fox special in the first place.
You'd think it would be easy, the game is
right there, we have 25 years of better technology
and better design to help, there's no reason
it can't be topped.
Star Fox 64 is a great game, but there’s
plenty of room to improve on that formula.
Whatever that hypothetical Super Star Fox
game is, it's not Star Fox Zero.
Now I DON’T HATE Star Fox Zero.
I’ve earned every gold medal and I’ve
done a number of runs in the arcade mode.
I’ve enjoyed it and it’s probably as close
as I’m gonna get to the Star Fox 64 sequel
that I want to see.
But it's still very disappointing.
The motion controls and dual screen gameplay
are a big barrier to entry, and they hurt
the game overall, but that's not the only
issue.
To me, Star Fox Zero is hamstrung by its structure
and mission design.
The hallmark of Star Fox 64 was its unusual
branching path structure.
It took an approach to alternate paths that
very few games have tried.
For most missions in Star Fox 64, there are
hidden objectives that determine your next
mission.
Complete that objective and you'll see 'Mission
Accomplished' at the end of the run and you'll
branch off to a more difficult path.
For example, in the game's first mission in
Corneria, you can save Falco and fly through
these stone arches to unlock a unique section
of the map hidden behind this waterfall.
Beat the unique boss here and you'll play
the next stage in Sector Y instead of Meteo.
Most of the game's stages have at least 1
secret objective but some have more.
In Sector X if you take too long to defeat
the boss, Slippy will crash into the planet
Titania.
Or, beat the boss early enough and you'll
head to Macbeth.
OR, find the EXTRA secret path and get warped
to Sector Z.
Over in Sector Y if you fail to take out at
least 100 ships you will go to Katina instead
of Aquas.
Even the final mission on Venom is divided
into 2 very different stages depending if
you went to Bolse or Area 6 beforehand.
Some stages will even play out differently
based on how you got there.
Star Wolf will show up on Bolse if you didn’t
take them out on Fichina.
Temporary wingmates like Bill and Kat will
help you out in later stages if you met with
them earlier.
All of these paths were a great reward for
playing well and finding secrets.
They aren’t just spelled out for you, you
have to piece together how to get them through
context clues or just by being thorough.
Your reward is an entirely new chunk of the
game that you've never seen before.
Reaching Sector Z from Zoness is an actual
challenge that the average player will likely
fail their first time, so when you nail it
and take out every searchlight, it’s really
satisfying.
The branching structure makes each run feel
different from the last and does so much for
Star Fox 64’s replayability.
Over time, as new Star Fox games came and
went, it’s always bugged me that they never
went further with that structure.
Star Fox Adventures was a Zelda game.
Star Fox Assault was a linear campaign.
Star Fox Command on the DS sorta brought it
back but it was presented like a ‘choose
your own adventure’ and the strategy based
gameplay and its repetitive mission design
undercut it.
And Star Fox 64 3D was a 1 to 1 remake with
no new single player content.
I think that a game with the structure and
core gameplay of Star Fox 64 but with more
elaborate scenarios and more complex and detailed
branching paths would be a no-brainer in a
sequel.
It was something I wanted to see in Star Fox
Zero and it KINDA happened but the structure
of Star Fox Zero just isn’t that good.
There is an arcade mode with several alternate
paths and stages, but it's half baked.
On your first run, you’re mostly locked
into one path.
You start in Corneria as you would in Star
Fox 64.
You then fight through the armada in Sector
Alpha, head for the Area 3 Space Colony, enter
a warp gate that brings you to a stealth mission
on Zoness,
(sidenote: we’re gonna talk about this warp gate later)
which leads into the
battle in Sector Beta where the only branching
path on this first run comes into play.
Depending on whether you were able to defeat
Wolf in time, the game splits into either
a single mission on Fortuna or 3 missions
on Titania, Sector Gamma, and Fichina.
From the end of these branches the game finishes
with Sector Omega, a revisit to Corneria,
and a final confrontation with Andross.
There is no secret ending here.
Once you finish your first playthrough, the
game begins to open up.
Portals start appearing and members of Star
Wolf will show up on other stages.
Your Arwing also gets to transform into a
walker or hack computer terminals from the
start, which you’ll need for the alternate
route on Corneria, which is a lot like the
route in 64 except it sucks.
On the new route, you open the gate, save
this battleship over here and then the stage
ends suddenly.
You enter a warp gate and get into a fight
with a remix of the first boss.
Finishing this mission lets you choose between
two completely different paths than the original:
an alternate version of Zoness where you use
the Arwing instead of the Gyrowing and an
alternate version of the Area 3 Colony that
plays as a traditional on-rails mission.
This is the problem I have with how Star Fox
Zero handles its pathways.
With the sole exception of the Star Wolf Battle
in Sector Beta, triggering each branching
path is as simple as just flying into a portal
or locking on to a member of Star Wolf.
There’s a lot less that goes into choosing
a path here than in Star Fox 64, and that
really shouldn’t be the case.
Some missions have multiple ways of completing
them like taking out the first boss either
from the outside with your Arwing or from
the inside with your walker.
You’d think that that would determine your
path but no.
They both lead you to the same mission.
You'll get a medal for taking the inside path,
but that's it.
Lots of these medals feel like replacements
for what would've been the branching path
requirements in Star Fox 64, but in Zero they're
reduced to glorified Xbox achievements.
The worst example of this happens in the Area
3 space colony.
After some fighting on the outside of the
colony, this mission normally has you go into
an underground section to get access to the
Gyrowing.
You fly it and hack into a terminal on this
tower to then open up another terminal on
the back of this robot gorilla.
You hack that terminal and then you just...
wait for the mission to end.
The gorilla sometimes punches some stuff and
it's over.
Hooray.
The mission ends with Fox going into the portal
to Zoness with the Gyrowing.
In later playthroughs, the Arwing can transform
into the walker and hack terminals, so you
can skip that underground section entirely.
After you do that, you'd think you just head
to the Arwing version of Zoness, but NO.
Fox goes into the portal with the Walker and
comes out with the Gyrowing with only a medal
as a reward for your curiosity.
The attention to detail is missing.
The game has a big gap between the quality
of its Main Story Missions and the missions
found on alternate paths.
The story missions mostly feel fleshed out
and complete.
The alternate paths are recycled content with
minor tweaks.
The alternate mission on Zoness is the same
as the original, just with the Arwing and
without Kat.
Area 3 turns into a wonky on-rail mission
through the same city area with a weird encounter
with Andrew that doesn’t really go anywhere.
They even pluck out your wingmates from most
of these alternate path missions.
The in-game dialogue is generic if it's even
there at all.
The alternate missions feel like they're missing
pieces, which makes a run through them feel
disjointed.
The main missions are well produced, then
you start what feels like a placeholder mission.
Good, placeholder, placeholder, placeholder,
good, good, placeholder but kinda good, good,
placeholder, good, placeholder, bad but not
a placeholder, and you're done.
These extra missions that are supposed to
be a reward to players who are the most invested
in the game feel rushed and empty and looking
at the circumstances surrounding the game’s
development it’s easy to see why it feels
so rushed.
It was one of the last games pushed out for
a Wii U desperate for new releases.
Miyamoto had a vision where the game was a
showpiece for the gamepad but that control
system never gelled together quite right.
The storyline and setting was yet another
retelling.
It’s not surprising that Zero feels like
a shell of what could have been.
Star Fox Zero might be known for its control
scheme problems but that's not its only major
issue.
rather it’s the game’s attempt to remake
and recapture the magic of Star Fox 64 without
staying true to what made it so special.
It's an imitation.
It's derivative to a fault, too simplified
in its content, self-defeating in its replayability,
and it loses its identity.
It’s neither an inspired remake or its own
game outright.
You can't call it BAD, but it’s one more
in a long line of disappointments.
Over time the Star Fox releases are like papers
in a copier - slowly fading away as we get
further and further from the source.
It's up to Nintendo to bring back the color.
[Chill vibes outro from Star Fox Zero]