The star, the flower, and the mushroom. And from 
them, a video game franchise. THE franchise.
40 years of Mario, and 40 years of the star, 
the flower, and the mushroom. Those power-ups  
have been the backbone for a lot of great games. 
A lot of DIFFERENT games. But nothing can stay  
the same for 4 decades. No generation is an exact 
copy of the one before. Every so often, there’s a  
change. Some tweak to the formula. And for Mario, 
that often meant new powers, and new power-ups.
The supporting cast of Mario power-ups have gone 
through massive turnover. A new addition here, a  
change in behavior there, each leaving an imprint 
on its debut game, and each subtly guiding the  
direction of the games to come. Mario power-ups 
shape their games, and the story of them is the  
story of the franchise, so let’s tell it. Let’s 
talk about the evolution of Super Mario power-ups.
Start your OWN classic 40-year game 
franchise with help from today’s sponsor,  
GameMaker! Toby Fox is doing 
it! What’s stopping you?
I know at least half of you watching right 
now have a game kicking around in your mind,  
but one of the key decisions any 
indie dev will make is what engine  
to use. GameMaker is a powerful, but 
approachable engine for making games.
You can really push it and get 
commercial quality stuff out there.  
GameMaker can help you make high-end, 
commercially successful indie games.  
Deltarune's done in GameMaker. So is The King Is 
Watching and BeastieBall. Those have sold great!
Since GameMaker has been around for a bit, there 
are plenty of YouTube tutorials that can help  
you get your game started on the platform, plus 
GameMaker also has an active Discord community,  
ready to help you make, talk about, and 
celebrate the games you want and love.  
Click the link in the description to start 
making great games fast with GameMaker.
Alright, let’s go back to 1985. 
Super Mario Brothers. Jumpman,  
in his starring debut. Forget 
those other ones for now.
Super Mario Bros. early designs had a large 
player-character who would run and jump around  
large courses. In these early builds, a big 
Mario was taking up too much of the screen,  
and one of the developers thought it might 
be fun if you pulled back and could see more  
of the course at a time. That sparked the idea of 
changing from big to small when you hit an enemy,  
and a new mechanic was born. But what 
would cause that game mechanic to happen?
Taking a cue from the same magical associations 
that inspired Alice in Wonderland, the Magic  
Mushroom was added to change Mario from small 
to big. The devs experimented and found that it  
was most fun if it ran AWAY slowly from you 
once it appeared, enticing you to chase it.
Besides the extra hit point, you 
also get to smash through bricks,  
and blaze a little trail of 
your own through a level.
That’s it. That’s all the mushroom does.
But there can be subtle details 
in even the most basic mechanics.
With the Super form responsible for both 
an extra hit point and some abilities,  
losing health in Mario means you also lose 
powers. Miyamoto knew that players would have  
a very different experience when the game takes 
away POWERS versus when it only takes away health.
The dev team decided that starting small 
would be better than starting as ‘Super’  
and only getting weaker as you go. Starting 
with the power and then losing it is much  
less satisfying than starting without 
the power, gaining it, then losing it.
But what if you find a block with a mushroom 
in it when you’re already Super Mario?  
That’s where you get the second powerup - the 
stationary Fire Flower. Sometimes the power-up  
being stationary makes it even 
tougher to get to. *effort noise*
Touching it makes you turn into ‘Fiery 
Mario’. It doesn’t give you a third hit point,  
but you can shoot off a bouncing fireball that 
makes short work of most enemies. Two fireballs,  
even! The difficult segments of 
the game get way more manageable,  
but that makes the punishment of 
turning back into Small Mario that  
much worse. You’re powerful, but still 
fragile. The tension is always there.
Unless you find the third power-up. Secret, 
hidden, and much rarer blocks can hide a Starman,  
which keeps you from dying from enemies or 
obstacles at all. Just don’t fall. And a song  
for being a special lil guy plays. *starman 
theme* Yeah! The Starman is separate from  
the other two powerup’s upgrade chain, and 
also gives you a death touch, which lets you  
completely overpower anything you find. For 
a few seconds, you’re completely invincible.
There should be no tension. But, 
since the star is so short-lived,  
the tension now comes from within. There’s a 
pressure to get the most done you can, with the  
time you’re given. You might want to rush forward, 
full speed, though that can create its own risks.
But that’s all. There’s just the three power-ups.  
This game is comically restrained 
compared to where we’re going.
The Mario 1 power-ups are all great boosters. 
Even if there aren’t that many of them,  
and the mechanics of the power-ups aren’t 
very complicated, each powerup is a major  
step up in Mario’s survivability. They’re 
all still effective at BEING power-ups,  
giving some benefit you can feel as you play.
None of the three powerups are 
required to beat any level,  
or to beat the game - they’re all there 
to boost the player’s margin for error,  
and in the process make the game a 
little less stressful, step by step.
But remember, nothing stays 
exactly the same forever.
Super Mario Bros. wasn’t going to 
be a one-off game. There was going  
to be a sequel. But… What should its sequel be?
In Japan, Super Mario Bros. 2 was a quick 
flip. A more difficult set of courses,  
released less than a full year later.
This version was the game packed into Super 
Mario All-Stars as ‘The Lost Levels’. The  
Poison Mushroom shows up for the first 
time, but that’s less a powerup and more  
just another kind of obstacle. Power-ups 
were maybe a little more hidden than usual,  
and tougher to keep, with all 
the new stuff trying to get you.
Were there any other changes? No… not really. 
The game’s basically ‘Baby’s First Kaizo Mario’,  
which is an important point of inspiration, 
but there’s not much more to say about its  
power-ups. This Super Mario Bros 
2 is just overall a lot harder.
But could the world handle such a game? 
Nintendo of America Did Not Think So.
Even though they had a full on sequel to one 
of their best selling products of all time  
just sitting around ready to go, they would not 
release it anywhere else. It’s Just Too Difficult.
But if that wasn’t going to be the 
world’s Super Mario Bros 2, what WOULD be?
Kicking around Nintendo was a prototype 
platformer, inspired BY Mario, that they  
reskinned to make a promotional tie-in game 
for Fuji TV, the big Japanese TV network,  
and their media expo Yume Kojo ‘87. This was 
released in Japan as Yume Kojo: Doki Doki Panic.
And if you were a company desperate to 
release a new Mario 2, why not re-skin  
this thing back to Mario? Just 
make it quick. Quick and easy.
The final, easier Super Mario Bros. 
2 was at last released in October of  
1988 in America. And boy does it do its own thing.
It’s obviously not really working off of 
the same foundation of the first game,  
but a few elements do make the jump. The 
Starman made it, and the Mushroom is back,  
though no longer magic. Mario and friends 
have explicit hit points in this one,  
turning small only when 
they’re on their last legs.
You collect hearts to heal, and 
the Mushroom is a full heal,  
plus it adds an extra tick to your health bar.
Finding a mushroom is like 100 times harder. 
You have to first find a magic potion,  
throw in the right spot to spawn a door, 
go to a parallel world called “sub-space”,  
and if done successfully, you’ll 
have a few seconds to get the shroom.
Even though it gives you the extra hit 
point, you can still jump and move the  
same, small or big, and breaking 
through blocks isn’t a thing here,  
so having a mushroom is not quite 
as important as in the first game.  
Maybe the mushroom’s a little underwhelming 
for the big to-do involved in finding it.
The star does roughly the same thing 
still. Instead of finding them in blocks,  
you collect enough cherries in a level to 
get the star to appear. You might want to  
be choosy as to when you spawn the 
star. It’s got its own places to be.
Mario 2 focuses more on throwable items that 
you can pull up from the ground instead of  
traditional power-ups. Vegetables, bombs, shells, 
and POW blocks do the work when you toss them at  
enemies. Sometimes you’ll pull up a stopwatch and 
freeze the world for a bit. It’s a little more  
of an improvisational style of play compared to 
the first game, where you’re aiming and throwing  
whatever you can get your hands on, instead of 
jumping and running. It feels more deliberate. *effort noise*
Super Mario Bros 2 wasn’t exactly 
a template for the future,  
but it’s still the origin of some ideas 
the series would keep in its back pocket.  
But with this detour out of the way, 
it’s high time for a proper sequel.
Where Lost Levels was an expansion pack and 
Mario 2 USA was a Plan B reskin stopgap,  
there’s no question where Mario 3 fits 
into the series - this is a true sequel.
But Miyamoto and crew did take one lesson to 
heart. After the Mario 2 difficulty kerfuffle,  
they set out to make a sequel where all types of 
players could have fun. And among other things,  
that led to a flood of new 
helpful systems and power-ups.
The original power-ups all return, and 
they all work the same as before. The  
international version is even a little more 
forgiving, Getting hit as Fire Mario in that  
one will only downgrade you to Super, 
rather than all the way back to small.
There’s a brand new inventory system. By 
going into Toad Houses, playing minigames,  
and completing certain challenges, you’ll be 
given an inventory item. These can be held  
onto across levels and across lives, to save 
for a rainy day. If you’re strategic about it,  
you now won’t always have to restart 
a level in your Small form. Nice.
Instead of power-ups being short-term 
only, the game is letting them become  
a basket of tools for you to gather, 
and choose from at the right moment.
But what would a sequel be without fun new powers? 
Before, power-ups had mostly just been boosters  
to your survivability. In Mario 3, the new ones 
help give you a greater variety of ways to play.
If you find a power-up while you’re in 
Super form, you might get the Fire Flower,  
but you also might be surprised. 
The Super Leaf could pop out,  
letting you turn into Raccoon Mario. You can 
now do melee combat. And glide. Like a raccoon.  
Hit B to whip enemies and blocks with your tail. 
Hammer A while in the air and you’ll glide around.
The game also adds a ‘P’ meter at the bottom 
of the screen, which fills up while running,  
and as Raccoon Mario, you can straight 
up fly if you’ve filled the meter. Now,  
you might think that being able to fly 
over all the obstacles in an obstacle  
course game would break the design a little. 
And you’d be right. But it is pretty fun to do,  
and having to take a running start to make 
it happen makes it a touch less broken,  
but how to balance Raccoon Mario was the source of 
a real design argument among the devs at the time.
Two more new power-ups play off of the new 
Raccoon Mario mechanics: the P-wing and the  
Tanooki suit. The P-wing gives you a full 
meter no matter how fast you’re running,  
effectively giving you infinite flight for one 
stage. …Yeah, they were right to limit this.
The Tanooki suit is mostly a rare aesthetic 
upgrade, but you can turn into a statue as well,  
hiding you from enemies, which can help 
you get out of specific no-win scenarios.
There are more rare power-ups, too. The 
Frog Suit lets Mario improve his swimming  
technique, letting him move much more freely 
underwater. It’s very situational. On land,  
Frog Mario can only hop around. Obviously, not 
the best. The Frog Suit is very rare though,  
and it’s still good to have in the right type 
of stage. The Hammer Bros suit is even rarer,  
and lets you throw insta-kill hammers that can 
take out ANY enemy in the game. It’s very useful,  
but so rare that it’s even more 
important to bust it out carefully.
Mario 3 does adopt a bit of the item pick-up 
idea from Mario 2, letting you hold and throw out  
shells and special blocks. Some of these picked-up 
items can function basically like a power-up, like  
the Kuribo Shoe. It only shows up in World 5-3, 
and lets you hop onto spikes and pointy enemies,  
no problem. If you get hit, you only lose the 
shoe and can continue with whatever other powers  
you had collected at the time. You can’t stash it 
in your inventory, either, so use it or lose it.
So, that’s a lot of new power-ups, but how they 
get used is most important. Between the P-meter,  
the gliding, the new combat options, and the new 
inventory, the designers had much more latitude  
to make interesting places to explore. Mario 3 
is filled with secret nooks and crannies only  
accessible when you have the right powerup at 
the right time, and the game loves to give you  
tons of bonuses for making the effort to find the 
secrets. For the first time, the world feels like  
a place you can meticulously explore, instead 
of only treating it like an obstacle course.
Mario 3 cements and defines the series 
foundation, confirming which elements of  
Mario 1 and 2 were going to continue forward, 
and setting up the series for the future…
But first, we have to answer 
another burning question. What  
if Mario was really small? Like Game Boy sized?
The year is 1989. Nintendo is building the 
most advanced video game brick ever made.  
Mario 3 has sold like gangbusters in 
Japan (though it’s not out yet in the  
States). New game systems could always use a 
signature game from the company mascot, right?
But adaptations always come with 
compromises. The Game Boy is KIND OF an NES,  
but it isn’t one. What would have to be 
done to adapt the series to the Game Boy?
Scope, mainly. Super Mario Land is a 
bite-sized Mario adventure. As such,  
it takes more cues from Mario 1 than 3.
Development was headed by Game 
Boy project head Gunpei Yokoi,  
and the team behind the arcade 
Donkey Kong and Mario Bros.
There are quirky differences, 
like the exploding Koopa shells,  
and the Starman music being replaced with 
the Can-Can. *SML Can-Can plays* The Fire Flower is now the  
Superball Flower. Mario will look exactly the 
same, but now he can chuck balls at things.
The Superball projectiles don’t bounce along the 
ground, but instead reflect at a 45 degree angle  
off of any surface they hit and keep going. You 
can pull off some neat trick shots! Don’t miss,  
though. You can only fire off one superball at a 
time, and it’ll be a while if it’s bouncing off  
to nowhere. And sometimes it’ll just 
come right back at ya. Not sure why.
There’s no Toad House or inventory but hitting the 
top of this tower at the end of every stage will  
let you play a minigame with a chance to either 
get another Superball Flower or some extra lives.
We also have a couple vehicle-based levels. Mario 
gets in a submarine and a plane. These were simple  
side scrolling shmup segments that worked under 
the basic mushroom damage rules but this is just  
straight-ahead shooting. Though this is the first 
non-platforming gameplay in a mainline Mario game.
Besides that, this game is essentially if you 
take Mario 1 and make it tiny. Tiny coins,  
tiny Mario, tiny blocks, and tiny 
changes to the power-up system.
Is it the most original Mario game? No. 
But does it have iconic power-up elements  
used in the future? …. …. No. But is it the 
BEST Mario game? …No. Alright, moving on.
We’re coming up to the 90’s. Nintendo’s 
got a hardware upgrade in the pipeline,  
and Mario’s first 16-bit adventure is 
close at hand. 
Super Mario World. A whole new 
World of Super Mario. And a new  
system! Super Mario World is a launch 
title for the Super Nintendo, in 1990.
We’ve got new ways to find power-ups.
Your normal blocks, sure, but they can 
now sometimes pop up out of bushes.  
Some pop out of specific enemies when 
you defeat them. Or take a spin on  
one of these new Roulette blocks. Crossing a 
checkpoint might turn you super automatically.
New to Super Mario World are 
the Switch Palaces,which add  
in specific blocks to all the other levels 
of the world once you activate the switch,  
and the specific power-up inside might be just 
what you need to go down a secret side-path. Or  
just standing on the block itself might open 
the way. Re-playing a level with and without  
a Switch Palace toggled can be a whole different 
experience. It’s another layer of gameplay that  
helps give re-exploring even basic courses 
a chance to be a little more interesting.
In the game, most powered-up states interact with 
the new Spin Jump. Some blocks and enemies can now  
be stomped on where they couldn’t before, which 
opens up lots of new level design possibilities.  
Spin Jumping as Fire Mario will even chuck some 
fireballs out while he’s doing it, just for fun.
The Mario 3 inventory system and Toad Houses have 
been left behind. But we still like keeping space  
for an item in reserve. Whenever you grab a 
power-up, you get to keep whatever you were  
previously using in the box at the top. It’ll 
drop out of the box downwards if you get dinged,  
so you can easily pick up some extra 
health and maybe get some interesting  
power back right away. You can even drop 
it yourself if you hit Select, if you want.  
The falling power-up does phase through terrain, 
which sometimes makes it a little tough to grab,  
but I like the idea of keeping a little 
bit of that quick forgiveness for mistakes,  
without quite as much system 
overhead as the inventory of Mario 3.
Pick up items got some tweaks. We 
can kick items straight upward now,  
which is very helpful for stealing Lakitu’s ride. *effort noise*
This is not far off from the magic carpet from 2,  
where you can choose exactly where 
to fly to. If you can find one.
You’re not here for only tweaks though. we’ve 
got new power-ups to go over, too! First,  
get rid of all the newcomers from Mario 3. We’re 
replacing all of them. In are the P-Balloon,  
the Feather, and the Yoshi. The P-Balloon is rare, 
and temporarily inflates Mario into a balloon,  
floating around slowly and around obstacles. 
You have no defense, so it’s very situational.  
It’s mostly used for specific levels 
designed entirely with the P-Balloon in mind.
In place of the Leaf and the Tanooki Suit, the 
feather gives Mario a cape. It’s very similar to  
Raccoon Mario, but it’s a little better. The melee 
attack is much snappier than the tail whip was.  
You can slowly descend by just holding the jump 
button in midair. Way less mashing of A needed.  
Just like before, you can jump and soar through 
the air by building up speed. Unlike the Leaf,  
the Feather lets you glide a little more like a 
hang glider, pointing your attack angle up and  
down lets you build speed and glide further, but 
getting the hang of it can definitely be tricky.  
Precision is tough, but the skill ceiling is crazy 
high, and gives you a lot more satisfaction when  
you use it to find a new secret path with. And 
let's be real, kamikaze Mario is pretty fun.
The Yoshi is made up of Yoshi. You ride 
Yoshi. He was the game’s big new draw,  
enough of one to get front billing on the box 
art. Yoshi was supposed to debut as early as  
the original Mario Bros, but technical 
limitations stood in the way until now.  
The pure 16-bit power of the SNES opened the 
door for Yoshi to be the Swiss Army Knife of  
the series. A versatile and complex power-up - 
maybe the biggest leap in complexity ever seen.
Hatching out of an egg when approached, 
Mario can hop on his back and ride around.  
Yoshi partly fills the role of the Kuribo Shoe, 
a full on mount that’s separate from the power-up  
chain. He’ll take a hit for you too, but you’ll 
get knocked off, and he’ll run off in a panic.  
But if you can catch up with Yoshi again, you 
can jump back on and continue like normal.
Yoshi can jump higher than Mario, and can bounce 
off, or even walk on top of spiky enemies.
You can also jump off of Yoshi, which can 
work like a double-jump if you do it mid-air.
Yoshi's most iconic move is his ability to 
eat almost anything in his way. If Yoshi eats  
a bunch of berries, he’ll lay an egg with an 
item inside. Most enemies just get swallowed,  
but Koopa shells will stay in 
Yoshi’s mouth for a little bit  
and can be spit out as a projectile 
or can grant Yoshi extra abilities,  
depending on the color. Green shells are... well 
they're nothing. Red shells spit out 3 fireballs  
in a spread pattern. Yellow makes a damaging 
shockwave of clouds every time Yoshi lands.  
Blue lets Yoshi fly free, taking the hammering-A 
thing from Mario 3 and making it nicer. Once in  
a while you might find a multi-color shell, 
too, and you'll get all the powers at once!
If you can find your way into the Star Road, 
there's also a secret trio of colored Yoshis  
that get their matching power all the 
time, no matter what shells they eat.
There's the mini-Yoshis that can eat 
5 things and turn into a normal Yoshi.
There's even an elusively rare 'Dragon 
Wing' that only Yoshi can grab,  
which turns him blue and takes 
you to another secret bonus area.
Yoshi is by far the most elaborate addition to 
the series. As a power-up and a set of mechanics,  
it's extremely versatile, it's chock full 
of secrets, and it rewards exploration like  
never before. The other additions that 
come along in World also go a long way,  
but the series is going all-in on non-linear 
exploration being the ideal state of Mario,  
and Super Mario World is the crown jewel of 
putting that concept into classic-era Mario.
But it's not the final word. A big change is 
right around the corner, but there’s still a  
little time, so why not take another crack at the 
Game Boy formula before calling it a generation?
Super Mario Land 2: 6 Golden Coins showed 
up 2 years later, in 1992. Mario Land was  
an attempt to adapt the Mario 1 to the Game Boy, 
and Mario Land 2 is trying to do the same with  
both Mario 3 and World. But it’s not only a 
slimming-down of those games’ ideas - Mario  
Land 2 builds its own unique identity and 
charm into the mix. Also Wario. V1 Wario.
The damage rules have gone back to what they were 
in Mario 3, and each of the classic trio are the  
same as always. Koopa shells that you can pick 
up and toss are back. They figured out how to  
do the proper fireball behavior, so the Superball 
can go in the garbage. see you in a few decades.
There’s a new Carrot, that can turn you into 
Rabbit Mario. It’s a pretty basic flight power-up,  
letting you descend slowly by holding down 
the button. The Carrot is very exploitable,  
though. If you hammer A, Mario will 
barely descend at all, and you’ll  
just stay up there. You can skip HUGE chunks 
of levels, and if you choose to go that way,  
it’s enough to make this one of 
the easier Mario games, by itself.
So it’s not a huge roster of changes, 
but there’s one more introduction. The  
power-ups can now do more than just help YOU. 
Wario gets phases in his final boss fight,  
and he’s using the Carrot and the Fire Flower 
against you, in a really cool finale at the time.
In hindsight, this was a sendoff for the 
era. There won’t be another new ‘Classic’  
2D Mario game for nearly 14 years. But it 
was a good one at least. Goodbye Mario,  
into the freezer you go. We’re about 
to shift paradigms and synergize the  
proactive status quo. It’s 
1996, and it’s time for 3D.
But that’s a story for another video.
*chill vibes from Super Mario Wonder*