I’ve got a… uh… job for you. 
You ain’t gonna like it.
Not every game mission has to knock your 
socks off, but a terrible mission can put  
a whole game at risk. Sucky jobs in real life 
come with side benefits and big payoffs. Like  
your kid gets to eat, or something. No 
game forces you to play it. They have  
much weaker levers to get a player to 
do stuff they don’t want to do. There’s  
not much stopping a player from walking away 
the second a game bogs down, for ANY reason,  
so a clunky mission can completely break the 
relationship between the player and the game.
I bet right now you’ve got a bunch of bad 
mission examples in mind from older games,  
but these are timeless problems. Many 
bad missions follow common patterns,  
and they’re just as much of an issue 
today as they’ve ever been. Any modern  
game is one poor decision away from 
running into these same problems.
Let’s learn from game design history,  
so we’re not doomed to repeat it. Today we’re 
talking about terrible missions in games!
Alright, your first mission is 
to enjoy the rest of summer,  
before it’s gone! With some new clothes 
from today’s sponsor, Fabletics!
Fabletics is about lightweight, comfortable 
fabrics. They sent us a bunch of stuff from their  
summer lineup, check this out. Mike’s been wearing 
their stuff on walks for the last couple weeks.
They’ve got great gym and workout gear, as well 
as some nice breathable but classy casual stuff to  
keep cool at the office. Fabletics is available in 
lots of sizes, from extra small to 4X, and they’re  
very affordable with their VIP program. New tees, 
3 for $19, shorts for 10 bucks, pants for $19,  
everything is 80% off for new VIP members. Head 
over there, you’ll find something you like.
Check the link in the description to get 
up to 80% off anything on the whole site  
in your first order when you sign 
up to be VIP. Thanks, Fabletics!
OK, so let’s divide this up. You can make 
a bad mission a million different ways,  
but a lot of them fall into 
a handful of categories.
First up, let’s wreck a mission by demanding 
just a liiiiiittle too much from players.
Mario Sunshine is a classic example of 
a game that's fun to casually finish,  
but is a real slog to get to 100% completion. 
The Pachinko Machine trips up a lot of people,  
with its super wonky physics. If that doesn’t 
stop you, the Watermelon Festival might.  
There’s all the blue coins to collect 
that you can't easily track. It’s not  
much fun. The game’s later challenges really 
start to show the cracks in the physics and  
general design, but few missions get as 
frustrating as the infamous Poison River.
Just getting to the stage as intended is dreadful. 
The entrance is locked behind this pipe located on this  
tiny island, but that pipe is blocked off with 
this yellow goo that you'll need Yoshi for. Simple  
enough... Yoshi can't swim. So you have to take a 
3-5 minute trek, riding Yoshi and hopping between  
a bunch of boats. The boats are very slow, and 
the game's twitchy controls make it extremely  
easy to either fall off the boat, or miss a jump 
and fall in the water. Either way, you'll have  
to start over. Dig deep, and you’ll claim your 
reward: possibly the worst stage in the series.
The Poison River seems like a simple red coin 
mission. You have to ride along this lily  
pad to collect ‘em all. It's a lot tougher 
than it looks. The water current is strong,  
so the lily pad moves very fast, and 
steering with the water pack makes it  
tough to collect every coin in one go. 
But don’t fall off, because you- Yep,  
that. The poison river is poison. Missing a coin 
is almost guaranteed, but there IS a pipe at the  
end. So I guess we'll just go back to the start 
and... wait. Wait. Delfino Plaza? I have to do  
the Yoshi trip again? If I died, I’d respawn at 
the head of the river. This is WORSE than dying!
Doing both the setup and the stage proper 
in the intended way is awful. If you don’t  
care about 100%ing the game for the sake of it, 
this is a great one to skip over. But there are  
better… unintended… ways of completing both parts 
of this. For the first half, just take Yoshi to  
the bazaar area, run along the wall, clip through, 
and do a bunch of short hops towards the island  
until you can walk on the ocean floor. From there 
it’s a straight shot to the pipe. For the Poison  
River itself, you can actually walk underneath 
the water surface by jumping into the water fall  
at the end. Walk underwater, do some short hops 
to grab the coins you missed, then backflip onto  
the start. This is WAY easier than the intentional 
way, and it’s the only way I’d do it from now on.
The Poison River is a classic bad 
mission. Imprecise physics and harsh  
punishments for small mistakes are never a good 
combination, no matter the series pedigree.
Thank God for small glitches.
Any game that goes from a relaxed, 
low-precision-controls experience can throw  
players for a loop if the game starts to demand 
more, like in the late-game, or optional stuff.
Loose controls can be tolerable for a big 
chunk of the game, then intolerable later.
We Love Katamari is probably the best Katamari 
game. It’s my favorite, at least. You know how  
Katamari works by now. Most basic missions just 
have you roll up as much as you can into the ball  
within a time limit, but many side missions add a 
new angle. Instead of rolling up just… WHATEVER,  
you’re going to have to roll up specific things, 
or roll underwater with different physics, or race  
your katamari while it’s stuck moving forward, or 
keep a fire alive by rolling up as much fuel for  
it as you can before it burns out. It’s all fun 
and games, until you get to the Cowbear mission.
The original Katamari had 2 
missions, Ursa Major and Taurus,  
which had you roll up the largest bear or 
cow you could find, respectively. We Love  
Katamari just crashes those two together. 
A farmer wants you to roll up one bear or  
one cow within 10 minutes - the biggest one you 
can find. One problem though - when I say one,  
I mean ONE. The stage ends immediately once you 
grab your cow, bear, or cowbear. The larger,  
better scoring cows and bears are too big 
at the start to roll up, so you’ll need to  
dodge a lot of toys and calves and cubs and 
whatnot if you want to get the best result.
Sounds like Katamari to me! Though, there’s 
one MORE catch. I’m afraid the game has a very  
loose definition of what counts as a cow 
or bear. Teddy bears, people in costumes,  
statues, road cones 
with cow spot patterns, your cousin - the  
level is a minefield of troll prizes scattered 
everywhere. They even have little run-ending  
landmines right in front of you at the starting 
point. It’s really frustrating. And really funny.
It’s not THAT bad as long as you aren’t taking 
it too seriously, but going for a high score  
is one of the most frustrating challenges 
in the whole series. You could easily be  
cruising for 7 minutes, just for something to 
knock you into a troll object and wreck the  
run. Katamari was never meant to be a precise 
game. The physics aren’t all that predictable,  
and the camera can have a mind of its own, but 
in the normal game this isn’t a big deal.  
This mission is a perfect example of an entire 
category of annoying mission design - where  
what the game asks you to do and what the game 
is good at letting you do come into conflict.
A good idea for a mission is only as good 
as its execution, and if you CAN’T make the  
mission feel right to play, that’ll wreck it 
right there. Unpolished controls will do it.
Yooka-Laylee had a big legacy to live up to. With 
so many employees from the golden age of Rare,  
Playtonic couldn’t exactly get away from the 
comparisons to Rare’s previous games. It’s  
not like they were shying away - Yooka-Laylee 
was pitched as a successor to Banjo-Kazooie.  
It’s dripping with homages to Rare classics, 
but that’s still a high bar to have to clear.
Yooka-Laylee has its moments. It's a 
nice little 3D collect-a-thon platformer,  
but it's not the most polished game in the 
world. It’s visually fine, but I'm talking  
more about how it plays. Yooka-Laylee is probably 
at its best when it's riffing off Banjo-Kazooie,  
but not all of the Rare tribute gameplay elements 
work quite as well as their inspirations.
The MOST frustrating of them all is this looker 
here, Kartos the Minecart. You wanted a Donkey  
Kong Country minecart stage tribute, right? 
You got ‘em. Kartos is somewhere in each of the  
game’s five stages, and you have to complete 
his challenge to get a Pagie in each one.
Kartos stages are 2.5D track 
sections where you jump, boost,  
shoot, and brake around obstacles while 
collecting as many gems as you can.  
Don’t get hit, and meet the gem 
quota, and the Pagie is yours.
First off, the camera is a real pain. 
It’s rigidly attached to the character,  
so any kind of turn makes the camera jerk around. 
It snaps around EVERY single time you land from a  
jump. The 2.5D element even works against it, 
where if the track turns toward the camera,  
there’s no peek-forward - you just can’t 
see ahead to what you’re about to roll into.
Your jump has a fixed height, no matter how 
you press A. The cart’s boost ability is super  
overcharged, and winds up playing terribly with 
the bad camera. The brake isn’t bad, but it can  
only be used briefly, and the acceleration back to 
normal speed feels off. Your cannon fires straight  
ahead. Always. Even if the track goes in or out. 
Every ability also has an obnoxious 5-second  
cooldown to deal with. This all combines to make 
the cart feel clunky and imprecise on every level.
The stage design demands a level of skill the 
controls don’t want to give you. The first  
couple aren’t a problem, but the rest have 
gems placed haphazardly around obstacles,  
and maybe like they were placed with a different 
control behavior in mind. Hitboxes on obstacles  
are deceptive, so it’s harder than it should be 
to bounce off enemies to reach higher routes.  
The movement cycles aren’t even synced up 
properly, so some runs will have objects and  
enemies in the wrong place, making some gems and 
routes impossible to get to without getting hit.
There’s nothing wrong with the basic idea of 
the DKC cart level, but you can’t just take  
the concept and expect it to work. It doesn’t 
matter how clever or how faithful they’ve been.  
Without overhauling the camera and controls, 
this minigame is just not that fun to complete.
See ya Kartos, thanks for nothing.
Some types of terrible missions 
are timeless. They rarely work,  
but for some reason they also never seem 
to go out of style. Like tailing missions.
Breath of the Wild has a snoozefest of 
a tailing mission: the Shrine Quest ‘The  
Lost Pilgrimage’. Oaki, this lil guy, 
goes through a trial and has to walk  
to a shrine in the forest. You’re just 
there to keep an eye out for danger.
The trial is an invisible path to 
a shrine that the Korok will walk,  
and you’ll follow behind at a distance. If you 
stray from the path, you’ll get taken back to  
the start in the typical ‘Lost Woods’ fashion. 
There’s almost literally nothing on the path,  
though. There’s a wolf or two, but no big deal. 
Oaki’s the only real obstacle. If he spots you,  
the pilgrimage doesn’t count, and he’ll go back 
to the start to try again. You’ll have to use  
some stealth here, which generally just means 
hanging way back. Oaki’s range of hearing and  
vision isn’t clear. There’s no indication 
on screen as to what the limits could be,  
or if you’re going to run into them. Sometimes 
Oaki can spot or hear you from a ways away,  
sometimes there’s a scripted event for 
him to react to, and sometimes you can  
run right behind him and he won’t react. 
Since it’s so difficult to get a read,  
the safe thing to do is to hang way back and 
stay crouched. And that’s what makes it dull.
The only challenge might be to keep him 
from blending with the background. Hang  
back too much and you might lose him 
in the grass. You can use your rune  
abilities to help with the contrast, 
but that’s not too complicated either.
So you’ve got something like 7 minutes of 
slowly trailing Oaki, with no room to try  
or do much of anything else, lest we start 
over. It’s an especially jarring mission type  
in Breath of the Wild, a game whose very core is 
so often about solving problems in your own way.
It’s not at all difficult to complete, 
just tedious. The lack of feedback and  
the lack of action make a classic bad 
combo for a tailing mission. At best,  
inoffensive, at worst, 7 minutes I could’ve 
spent on shield surfing or something.
Tailing missions aren’t the only 
classic terrible mission style.
The other half of the gruesome twosome are 
escort missions. They’re AT BEST tolerable,  
and more often feel like they're fundamentally 
designed to irritate you. Can you name even  
one that's thought of as a high point of 
its game? I couldn't come up with one.
There are so many bad escort missions 
because they’re susceptible to so many  
different unique reasons for their… assitude.
They can fall apart with terrible pathfinding.
Spyro 2's 'Protect the Alchemist' mission 
makes you defend a man with no sense of  
self-preservation, as he meanders his way 
around the level. Like, he COULD walk on  
the path to the left here, but instead he'll go 
around in circles and wander... just... DIRECTLY  
into enemies. Really, just… wait a second man. 
Lemme get up there. It's designed as a challenge,  
but the way it's presented is so farcical 
that it's way more annoying than fun.
But why stop there, when you can make the 
character you’re protecting actively repelling?  
Zelda: Skyward Sword pairs you up with Scrapper, 
a sassyrobot, and he needs to bring a large urn  
of water to the top of Eldin Volcano. As you 
approach the region, instead of being able to  
land at the volcano’s summit like normal, Scrapper 
gets a case of the *zelda noise*yous, gets impatient,  
and lands at the BASE of the volcano. Yes 
he’s more than capable of flying to the top,  
but we have to pad this game out, y’know? 
You’re gonna walk up there with Scrapper in tow,  
and he’ll whine the whole way. It’s clearly 
supposed to be comedic, but either something got  
lost in translation, or someone’s sense of humor 
is wrong, as no jokes land during the whole climb. 
You’ve also already climbed this volcano, so 
this mission boils down to a forced retread  
on a chunk of content with an annoying 
modifier slapped on top. Great job, team.
Escorting 1 NPC can be bad enough, but what 
about 3? Jak 2 is an already difficult game  
with a handful of annoying escort missions, but 
let’s double down. Babysit 3 knuckleheads as you  
make a 5 minute trek through a sewer to blow up 
a statue. Enemies ambush you from every angle,  
and there are zero checkpoints. The trio 
might actually help you a bit on some fights,  
but it’s mostly up to you. You’ve gotta be on high 
alert all the time, spinning the camera around all  
over the place so enemies don’t land a cheap 
shot from off screen. The escorts aren’t even  
that much of a pain to listen to! Their dialogue 
isn’t bad, though since there are no checkpoints,  
even that will quickly wear out its welcome 
by the 4th time you hear the same line.
*quiet, here comes pretty boy*
This one might be the most fixable of the bunch.
Sometimes  
your escort decides to take 
matters into their own hands.
Half of Dead Rising is about escorting survivors 
to a safe house, but the AI is infamous.  
The survivors show next to no self-preservation, 
and will run right into zombie hoards. They’ll  
even try fighting them, emphasis on ‘try’. You’ll 
need to take them by the hand or carry them,  
just to have one less variable to deal 
with, and to help out the game’s awful  
pathfinding. As you amass larger groups 
of survivors, these issues compound.  
Plus there’s always that ticking clock in the 
background, making you get more frustrated as  
you lose time fixing survivor mistakes. People 
love Dead Rising DESPITE its escort missions.
No matter the angle a game takes, 
there are so many ways for this  
mission type to go wrong. Bad pathfinding, 
bad self-preservation, bad checkpointing,  
and bad comedy can easily wreck the fun, no 
matter what else happens. Tread very lightly.
Alright, let’s do a weird one next. What 
can we find in the narrative box here… aha!  
You can wreck a mission by making its characters 
REALLY unlikeable. Like, REALLY unlikeable.
Ace Attorney is a game that lives or dies by the 
quality of its characters. The mystery itself is  
important, sure, but if a case features a lot 
of annoying or actively unpleasant characters,  
it'll likely sink in the eyes of fans. But there 
have been tons of games and a number of mediocre  
cases in the series - that's all normal for a 
run-of-the-mill forgettable Ace Attorney case.  
What really cranks up the juice is when that 
'annoying' factor bleeds into the actual gameplay.
Turnabout Big Top, 3rd case of Justice For All, 
is really bad. It's got other problems, but its  
cast of characters is one of the most annoying 
ones in the entire series. Most of these circus  
performers range from unpleasant to arrestable, 
and I’m not talking about the murder. But there's  
one character who's annoying enough to actually 
get in the way of gameplay. Lawrence 'Moe' Curls.
Moe is a very, very unfunny clown. He himself 
admits he's bad at his job, having been unable  
to make an audience laugh in at least a decade. 
But he's not one to give up, even when he really,  
really should. When brought up to the witness 
stand, Moe can't get to the point and rolls  
right into his bad stand up routine. This goes 
on for a while, and it's bad enough that the  
Judge literally cannot handle his nonsense 
anymore, and demands that you be as efficient  
as possible in your cross-examination. So far, 
I know what you’re thinking, this sounds great.
Usually in Ace Attorney's Cross Exams, you're 
heavily encouraged to press every statement. You  
can get more info out of your witness, which will 
help you poke holes in their testimony. If not,  
pressing can get some goofy character moments 
that can be their own reward. But with Moe,  
you can't do that. If the statement you press 
leads to Moe wasting time with bad jokes and puns,  
you're the one to get penalized for some reason. 
I know Ace Attorney's legal system is nuts,  
but this is pushing it. I'm literally just 
doing my job. This is the PROSECUTION’S witness!
So, you have to press him on only the correct 
statements. Somehow, you have to know what the  
witness will or won't turn into a tangent. This 
naturally can lead to a lot of trial and error,  
even when you press a seemingly relevant 
statement, and still get hit with a penalty.
A gimmicky cross-examination like this isn't 
an inherently bad idea. It'd probably work  
well with a more rounded cast of characters, but 
every action you take feels like a punishment.  
Either terrible jokes, boring tangents, or 
both AND a punishment that makes you start  
over from the top. Grinding through Moe is a 
very annoying sequence in a very annoying case.
Of course, you could make a terrible mission by 
designing one that makes no sense. Real simple.
Shadow the Hedgehog has a terrible 
‘Hero’ mission in Central City.
The big bad planted a bunch of time bombs that you  
have to go around and disarm. Find 
20 of them in 8 minutes, or else.
What you need to do is pick up the 
Suck Cannon off a nearby enemy and  
use that to suck up the bombs. Comb 
the area and suck as much as you can.  
But a handful are scripted to explode as you 
approach them. There’s nothing you can do,  
and it’s not clear that you DIDN’T screw up 
somehow. I thought I was doing something wrong  
when I first did this, like I was being too slow 
maybe, but nope, they’re just not disarmable.
Imagine playing a collect-a-thon but half of the 
collectibles just cease to exist as you approach  
them. No explanation, no reason, just things 
happening. That’s this mission in a nutshell. You  
don’t have a ton of time to dawdle, either. It can 
be easy to get lost or miss a bomb, and there’s  
even part of the stage blocked behind a wall that 
you can easily overlook and miss a few back there.
The game’s structure makes it possible to 
avoid playing this stage if you take some  
other routes, so I tended to avoid 
playing this mission altogether,  
but if you’re going for 100%, this 
will make you tear your hair out.
Of all the terrible missions in 
this video, this is one of them.
Your mission is to write. In the 
comments. About terrible missions!  
Since this episode was pretty heavy on 
the classics, if you’ve got a newer game  
with bad mission design to mention 
down there, that would be perfect.
Bad missions aren’t just relics of the past. Any 
mission that takes control out of your hands,  
wastes your time, gives over the top punishments,  
or is just impossible to do the 
right way can bring a game to a halt.
Keep an eye out for no-win scenarios, 
and … uh… mission accomplished.
*chill vibes from Shadow the Hedgehog*