2025 has had some real classic new games. 
So many, that I know a bunch of great ones  
have passed you by. Until Now! It’s time for 
Design Doc’s ‘A Lot of Games of the Year 2025’!
We did a list like this last year,  
and you can only start a tradition by doing 
something more than once, so here we are.
And once again, they’re all 
exactly, equally Game of the Year.
Keep in mind that it’s basically impossible 
to play everything. I’m just one guy,  
and Mike’s just one guy, so we have 2 guys 
worth of time to cover as much as we can.  
If your favorite isn’t in here, it’s probably 
because we didn’t get to it in time. Or it’s  
Monster Hunter Wilds. Not a fan. It DID send me 
to Generations Ultimate, though. Now THAT'S a video game.
Oh, that also means that you should think of this 
list more as games that we think you’ll like,  
rather than as a definitive and exclusive 
list of the best games that came out this  
year. There are a few high profile games mixed 
in, but I try to make this indie-heavy. I hope  
that I get to tell you about a bunch of 
games that you skipped over, forgot about,  
or never even heard of. Maybe one or two make 
it to your personal best-of-the-year list.
So let’s get started!
New Skill of the Year 2026 
is learning how to program,  
with our sponsor, Boot.dev! Boot.dev 
has turned the process of learning  
to code into an RPG that takes you 
step by step through how to program,  
using real backend development programming 
languages like Python, SQL, Go, and Typescript.
They use elements of modern game design 
to break up the process of learning,  
making it digestible, and actually a fun time.
Boot.dev was developed by software engineers and 
teaches you the real nuts and bolts basics of  
computer science while letting you get your hands 
into the actual coding process right away. It’s  
a perfect way for someone to find a new hobby, 
for students to get more hands-on programming  
tasks to work on the craft, or for professionals 
looking to add another tool to their repertoire.
Boot.dev has a 30-day no-questions-asked refund 
policy, free demos for each one of their lessons,  
and an active Discord community ready 
to help you with any problem you have,  
and get you back to the learnin’.
Click the link and use my code DESIGNDOC to get  
25% off your first year on their 
annual plan. Thanks to Boot.dev!
OK, let’s start with a showstopper.
If you know me, you know I’m a big fan of Final 
Fantasy in the 7 through 10 era. There are other  
good JRPGs, but those four games have a certain 
style that other series and other studios have had  
a hard time matching. I got the impression that 
Square lost interest in making that sort of JRPG,  
so the last one that scratched that itch for 
me was Lost Odyssey back in 2008. Until now.  
Clair Obscur: Expedition 33 is my 
‘Final Fantasy 17’ of the Year.
Clair Obscur tells a great story - a 
mystery centered on themes of grief,  
and comes out of the gate swinging with 
one of the strongest opening hours I’ve  
ever seen in any game, let alone for a 
JRPG. The art direction is outstanding,  
somehow balancing photorealism with a ton 
of surreal setpieces in a painterly world.  
The cast is endearing from the get-go, and the 
voice acting is top notch, in both English and  
French. Story pacing is speedy too, I never 
felt like the story was spinning its wheels.
Combat can make or break a JRPG, though, and 
here it feels like a Greatest Hits of the combat  
systems of other games. It’s snappy, with a big 
focus on status effects to set up your characters  
and overwhelm your opponents. Everyone has their 
unique ‘thing’, from Gustave’s Overcharge that  
you build up to a devastating super, to Maelle’s 
passive stances that build stat bonuses and other  
benefits. Synergizing everyone’s unique things 
together deepens the game’s combat a bunch.
But the most important combat element is the Dodge 
and Parry system. It’s a bit of a double-edged  
sword. If you can master the timing, parrying 
every enemy attack will not only avoid all damage,  
but also flood you with AP to spend for skills, 
AND set you up for a strong counterattack. No  
matter how underleveled you are, if you can 
just parry EVERYTHING, you can survive any boss,  
even the game’s MANY optional bosses. That’s 
great for min-maxers, though once you get good  
at the system, the normal bosses can feel a 
little trivialized. If you have a harder time  
with the parry mechanics, the difficulty curve 
may be much steeper. The right Pictos and stat  
allocations can compensate to make your team 
tankier, so you’ll get through eventually.
Clair Obscur is my favorite JRPG in 
years and is a real statement to make  
as this studio’s first game. I 
can’t wait for their next one.
Ahh. Ever think about retiring? 
To a little seaside town,  
get a part time job in a cute local 
shop, and just watch the waves roll in?
My Retirement Plan of the Year: Tiny Bookshop
Tiny Bookshop is a business sim with no 
pressure. Mike’s a business sim-p. So  
he had to check this out. You run your little 
pop-up bookstore, traveling to different spots  
across your new village, and meet the locals 
as they grab secondhand books off your shelves.
The game is built with hundreds of real world 
books, with accurate synopses and tagging to  
match subject matter, genre, tone and so on. 
A couple times a day, you’ll get a customer  
looking for something specific. The game  
does feel like it responds appropriately when 
your suggestions match what the book is actually  
about. If you’re well-read, this scratches an 
itch that very few games get to - the feeling  
of giving a good recommendation to a friend in 
real life. I really can’t think of another game  
that does anything like that. If you aren’t 
familiar with a lot of the titles in-game,  
the synopsis each book comes with might 
spark your curiosity to go to your library  
and check something out. It’s a game 
that can feed into other real hobbies.
Now, the business sim aspect is pretty 
bare bones, so don’t expect too much there,  
and it’s not all that challenging, but 
it’s not nothing. Expanding your store  
and reshuffling your inventory is that sort of 
cozy satisfying that you might be looking for.
Tiny Bookshop is a very unusual 
sort of game, one that doesn’t  
come by often. If any part of this looks 
like it might be your jam, check it out.
OK, what else we got in the literacy 
bucket? Oh. This one’s personal.
The year’s been a non-stop flood of Balatro-likes, 
but very few have been made by a guy doing my  
exact job. Wordplay is a good game made by my 
Primary Antagonist Mark Brown. And as such,  
it’s my duty to shill for his product. It’s 
my ‘Youtuber Balatro-Like’ of the Year.
Do you like Boggle? Do you like coming up with 
synergies? This game kinda explains itself. Come  
up with words from a Boggle-type board, build 
up a side board with modifiers and multipliers,  
add letters with special properties 
to your bag, and get as high a score  
as you can. You see what’s going on here, 
you know if you’re into it. I’m into it.
Yes, indie devs are falling over themselves 
to make this type of game. But you know what?  
The formula works, dammit. Maybe it won’t work 
forever, but for now, make every board game into  
a Balatro-like and see what happens. Word Play is 
a really good Balatro-like. Good job Mark Brown.
Not gonna lie, I’m surprised Namco came back to 
Katamari to make something other than a remake.  
Once Upon a Katamari is every bit as good as the 
first couple of games, and genuinely feels like  
it’s… uh… pushing things forward a little bit, 
for the first time since maybe We Love Katamari.
It’s as good of an introduction 
as any of the games in the series.  
A bunch of small additions have been made, 
like dashing can now be done by pressing a  
button instead of mashing the sticks back 
and forth, which I appreciate. There’s a  
heavier emphasis on finding collectibles, and 
getting 100% on the game is pretty doable,  
now that they give you a list and 
they show rank requirements. Finally.
The two big stand-out additions are the time 
travel premise and the inclusion of power-ups.  
Rolling up stuff in different time periods 
is great. The level themes integrate well  
into the actual missions, and really help 
them stand out as individual set pieces,  
much more than they did in the past. You got stuff 
like navigating a Roman colosseum while keeping a  
fire alive, collecting a bunch of Yokais in 
historic Japan, or the pirate ship bit that  
transitions to an underwater stage. It’s nice.
The handful of new power-ups like the magnet,  
the maneuvering rockets, or the stopwatch 
add a little extra depth to stages as well.  
The style’s still all there, the 
soundtrack is as good as ever,  
it’s the complete Katamari package. I’ll 
be chipping away at this one for a while.
It’s my ‘Still Got It’ of the Year
Did we need a Yooka-Laylee 
remake? Apparently maybe.
The first game took a lot  
of the wrong lessons from that Rareware 
golden era of platformers. It had levels  
that were big just for the sake of it. Many of 
the minigames and set pieces weren’t polished  
enough. Some obstacles and objectives were 
weirdly unintuitive. Sometimes a callback to  
the older games would miss the mark entirely, 
like the quiz show segments. It had a decent  
amount of good ideas in there too, but it 
was just an uneven experience all around.
Even so, I did always have a soft spot for it. 
Playtonic made good with The Impossible Lair,  
which is one of the best 2D platformers 
I’ve ever played. I was 100% jazzed for  
their next follow up, only for them 
to instead overhaul the first game.
Yooka Replaylee has a smoother gameplay loop, 
taking quite a few cues from Mario Odyssey in  
particular. The level design has been retooled 
for easier and faster navigation. Mini-games  
like the Kartos Mine-Kart Challenges aren’t 
nearly as much of a slog. The Rextro arcade  
games are straight up gone, and replaced 
with this cute puzzle-platformer deal.  
There are checkpoints to fast travel to, 
and you can buy hints for any remaining  
collectibles you haven’t gathered, so 
you aren’t left searching for needles  
in haystacks at the end. Every stage now has 
50 Pagies to collect and it always feels like  
there’s something around the corner. I’ve found 
it very easy to lose track of time while playing.
The mandatory backtracking from before is 
gone, now that you have your full moveset from  
the start, and parts of it have been reworked, 
too. I’m a little less enthused about that one,  
since I kind of liked the evolving moveset and 
that “Metroidvania-like” sense of progress you  
had before. It’s now smoother, but maybe 
a little less interesting. They try to  
recreate that sense of progression with some 
stat upgrades for your health and stamina,  
but it only goes so far. The retooling of 
the moves are very welcome changes, though.  
The stamina bar has been rebalanced, and it 
no longer restricts useful moves like your  
roll. Once-broken abilities like flying have 
been nerfed, and are now temporary power-ups.
The sum total of changes really add up 
and help elevate the base game. While  
there aren’t any fully new stages, there are 
plenty of new challenges in the old stages,  
so there’s still something to check out even if 
you got your fill of the first game. I’m still  
looking forward to a proper sequel, but if this 
remake is a testbed for what that could become,  
I think we have some good things to look forward 
to. Yooka-Replaylee is an easy recommend,  
and definitely the place to start 
if you skipped over the original.
It’s my ‘Do Over of the year’
YOU know that there's about one new 
Metroidvania for every man, woman,  
and child in North America, but most are 
more Vania than Metroid. Still great,  
but not quite the same. I like Metroid 
enough to own multiple graphic tees,  
so I've really been keeping an eye out 
for something to scratch that Metroid  
itch while I wait for Prime 4. Environmental 
Station Alpha did it, Axiom Verge did it,  
and now Zexion has done it. My ‘Why the hell is 
no one else talking about this?’ Game of the Year.
I was tipped off by a random comment on another 
video, and I can't believe how good this game  
ended up being. This thing's on par with Hollow 
Knight, Blasphemous, and Ori. After 15 years  
of work by a single dev, Zexion takes the core 
Metroid atmospheric exploration formula and adds  
in an intense twin stick shooter, with some clear 
Contra and Mega Man inspirations for good measure.
The exploration is top notch - tons to explore 
in a semi-open interconnected world with no  
strict order for completing many of the main 
objectives. Your ability upgrades cast a wide net,  
from missile and health expansions to 
elaborate movement options, to 5 different  
guns and multiple upgrades for each one. There’s 
always something new you can mess around with.
The map is large and dense, full of power-ups and 
different biomes. One moment you’re at the bottom  
of the ocean, the next you’re infiltrating an 
enemy base with swarms of soldiers chasing you.  
Sometimes you’ll stumble into a battle 
between two factions, and have to trek  
through the chaos. The in-game storytelling is 
strong, with great environmental details and  
elaborate setpieces. It’s very clear that Metroid 
Fusion is a major influence, with some incredibly  
unsettling boss fights that do things I don’t 
think a normal Metroid game would, honestly.
It can be hard as nails, too. Boss fights can 
get brutal, verging on bullet hell territory  
towards the back half of the game. Though 
you can restart right outside of arenas,  
or mid-fight checkpoints, which can 
make a stiff challenge much more doable.
But if it's too much, Zexion includes an 
incredible amount of great accessibility options.
Up to full-on save states, which I can't 
remember the last time I saw within a  
base game. You can fine tune anything. Tweak 
damage output to what you like. 3/4ths? 1/2?  
1/10th? Full invincibility? Up to you. Refill 
your missiles and bombs, slowly over time,  
or just give yourself an infinite supply. 
You can even adjust the game speed or make  
yourself immune to status effects. However you 
want to tackle it, the game will accommodate.
You’ll get a note on the end game status report, 
and the expanded ending and some achievements are  
only available on beating the game by default, but 
that's a fair trade off. There's a ton of replay  
value too, with a built-in randomizer and loads of 
achievements for speedrunning and low percentage  
completion. The dev has even said they're looking 
into updating the game with Archipelago randomizer  
support in the future. If you love Silksong or 
2D Metroid, Zexion can be your next obsession.
You’ve gotta admire Bennett Foddy’s rugged 
determination to make games with the worst  
control schemes you’ve ever seen. First QWOP, 
then GIRP, then Getting Over It, and now Baby  
Steps. You pilot a man with some kind of ataxia 
problem, and who just needs to find himself,  
as he tries to get to the top of whatever the 
hell this island thing is. One step at a time.
Baby Steps has very fine-grained movement 
controls for each of his legs. Exact bends,  
foot placements, and extensions will 
play with a wide range of terrain types  
to keep you on your toes as you try to make 
progress, and not slide back down the hill.
This game’s clearly a metaphor, maybe 
a bunch of metaphors wrapped together,  
but your mileage may vary on which one it 
is. Even though moving him around will be  
intentionally frustrating, there’s 
a certain elegance to it, and a real  
satisfaction when you think of new ankle tech 
that lets you get up and over an obstacle.
The writing is fantastic, in that Tim 
and Eric way, though cutscenes can be  
few and far between. It’s gotten to the 
point where I’m less eager to play it,  
than I am happy to watch some 
cutscene clips on YouTube.
I’m probably not going to sit down 
to play too much more of this,  
but I DO want Bennett Foddy to have 
my twenty dollar bill. He’s earned  
it. Baby Steps is my ‘.. just …just use 
…use your arms buddy’ game of the year.
Peak is awesome. I talked about Peak’s great UX,  
and its health and stamina bar in 
our last Good Design, Bad Design,  
but the whole game is very solid. It’s a hybrid of 
roguelike, co-op survival, and climbing mechanics,  
as you die your way up the mountain. The 
distinct biomes on the map all have their  
own unique challenges to conquer. Finding a path 
forward with the few tools and resources you have,  
and doing it with friends has been a great time, 
every time. Even playing solo it’s still fun.
The climbing mechanics are key to the whole thing, 
and the little details about how to place your  
hands and how much you can see while climbing 
help keep this main component easy AND breezy.
With friends, the game is naturally hilarious. 
The proximity chat is amazing, Slowly figuring  
out the rules of survival is incredibly fun, even 
when each mechanic alone is pretty simple. Like  
learning what foods are safe to eat, or how to 
use these random tools you’ve found effectively.
Parts of the game ARE clunky, 
like inventory management,  
but they’re clunky with a purpose - 
when you HAVE to put your pack down,  
on a cliffside, to trade with friends, 
those constraints help let the chaos happen.
It’s great to see that Peak has been a big 
hit for both devs Aggro Crab and Landfall,  
especially with how short the development 
cycle was before release. Now it’s getting  
big updates with new biomes, and there has 
been so much traction that there are already  
some copycats popping up, some of which 
actually look good in their own right.
Peak is my ‘Big Chillin’ of the Year’
Absolum is a near perfect blend of a Hades-style 
roguelite and a Streets of Rage-style beat 'em  
up. No shock, as it's from Guard Crush 
Games, who worked on Streets of Rage 4.
In a high fantasy world, you pick 1 of 4 
unique characters and set out on a run.  
Go as far as you can while collecting resources, 
die, and return to a hub to spend the resources  
on permanent upgrades and talk to NPCs for 
story bits. Along the way, there’s a good  
amount of world building and overarching story 
going on, with new events throughout each run.
Alright, how is this going to not just be 
Hades? Well, Absolum has major branching  
paths. In every run, there are multiple forks 
that take you through different biomes with  
their own unique enemies, NPCs, secrets, bits 
of worldbuilding, and quests to complete.
Combat’s fantastic, even without any upgrades. 
Hits feel great, and it feels like everything  
in your character’s base moveset has a purpose. 
Perfectly timing your heavy strikes and defensive  
dashes to reflect enemies and overwhelm them with 
fast combos is very satisfying. All these tools  
can be augmented with rituals, which are like 
Hades boons. The rituals aren’t quite as tightly  
synergizing as the Hades boons are, but they 
still do help you feel like you’re making serious  
progress, transforming your kit with new options 
and keeping each run varied and interesting.
It’s nice to see a combination of two genres that 
blend together into something tight and refined.
Absolum isn’t wildly original if you think 
about it as a Hades-style action game,  
but it’s much more interesting as 
an evolution of the beat-em-up.
Absolum wins Reese’s Peanut 
Butter Cup of the Year.
Alright, let’s speed things up 
and do some quick hitters. 1-2-3!
Are you a factory freak? Did you like Opus 
Magnum? Those devs made another one of  
those this year! Travel to 1980’s Japan as an 
American ex-pat hired at a Japanese company,  
building factories that make consumer 
electronics. And those plastic display  
meals. And, like, weld a shirt together. 
Compete on leaderboards to make the most  
efficient factory you’ve ever seen! And 
the whole thing’s voice acted quite nicely!
Kaizen wins Business Graphs of the Year.
Jackbox Party Pack 11 is a real return 
to form after 10 was kind of a dud,  
and the Naughty Pack took some of the fun out 
of coming up with your own obscene in-jokes.  
But this one’s much better! All the main 
Jackbox food groups are there. Doominate  
is a good twist on Quiplash where you 
ruin and unruin prompts, Cookie Haus is  
a solid drawing game with a charming dessert 
theme, Legends of Trivia is decent enough,  
and quite high concept for one of these, mixing 
a streamlined RPG with co-op trivia. Hear Say  
is a pretty hilarious audio game with a 
Felix Colgrave-esque visual flair, and  
Suspectives is a fun if kinda unbalanced social 
deduction game based around survey questions.
How much mileage you’ll get will depend on how 
many friends you have and how funny they are,  
but if you got a kick out of Jackbox in 
the past, this one’s worth coming back to.
Old Reliable of the Year
The people who did Tetris Effect 
did that again, but for Lumines,  
and it turns out Lumines ALSO meshes 
with that vibe perfectly. Endless  
vibes. A perfect audio visual 
sensory chamber to zone out to.
What can they do next… Puzzle 
Bobble? Suika? Panel De Pon?  
Is it Panel de Pon? It could be Panel de Pon.
Lumines Arise wins ‘Do Panel 
de Pon Next’ of the Year
Great, I feel faster already. I think 
we’re warmed up now. Let’s fight a monkey.
For a while there, you could see why someone 
could think of Donkey Kong as a forgotten child  
of Nintendo's. A minor franchise - around, but 
not fully embraced, especially after Rare stopped  
working on it. But that just means the series 
was a great place for more experimental ideas.
Donkey Kong Bananza is my ‘Bananarama 
- King K. Rool Summer’ of the year.
Developed by the team behind Mario Odyssey,  
Bananza is the best kind of modern Nintendo 
game. Take one central gameplay idea,  
in this case: destructible terrain, 
and keep pushing it as far as you can.
It’s a mechanic that’s not necessarily 
well-suited to an experience outside of a sandbox.  
I would’ve expected DK’s abilities to either 
be too weak to fully live up to the promise,  
or so powerful that navigation stops being an 
obstacle at all, but neither of those happen.  
Smashing through terrain, finding new paths and 
caves, and getting little rewards like gold,  
fossils, or Banana Gems are often enough and 
varied enough that the core never gets too stale.
DK DOES get around with his skill set, 
but the challenge stages are designed so  
that they can’t be short-circuited 
easily. Lots of clever puzzles and  
platforming sequences ask you to 
play with different terrain types,  
fluid mechanics and obstacles to steer 
around to clear your path forward.
One of my favorite challenges 
involves the special ‘Shade’ ore,  
a material only breakable in sunlight. You’ve 
got to push a special enemy made out of this  
stuff into the light to make it vulnerable, grab 
a chunk while you can, then surf on top of it as  
it re-solidifies to safely cross a bramble 
path, full of patches of light and shadow.  
It’s very clever, and there are more clever 
ideas like that throughout the whole game.
DK Bananza has great music, great controls, fun 
ideas, and even a charming little story that  
pays respect to the history of Donkey 
Kong in a way anyone can appreciate.
Alright, here’s what you’ve been waiting for.
Silksong is.... really.... good. I really.... 
LIKE.... how.... DIFFICULT.... it is.
I've never played a game I'm more personally 
conflicted on. Nearly everything about Silksong  
is masterfully crafted. The animation 
and art design is gorgeous. The music  
is beautiful and memorable. The story and lore 
are interesting. The atmosphere is top notch.  
The exploration is fantastic, with tons to 
find. I would absolutely love this game. If  
it weren't so GODDAMN HARD. Silksong is my 
“stop kicking me in the dick” of the year.
I love the original Hollow 
Knight. It was difficult,  
but really only ever got frustrating 
towards the very end, or in the DLC.  
Silksong has an extremely short 
difficulty ramp up from the start,  
then hits that end game level challenge and only 
goes up from there. Right before release, I had  
JUST beaten Hollow Knight to warm up, and I still 
found Silksong to be overwhelming in comparison.
The bosses are generally well designed, but they 
need so much patience and precision to overcome,  
and will absolutely wall off some players from 
getting the most out of the game. There are ways  
to make things a little easier, with upgrades and 
some secrets to find, but most only help up to a  
point. You really do just have to grind and learn 
each fight, one by one, until you finally succeed.
I’d spend a couple dozen attempts on some 
of these guys, plus the long runbacks to the  
arenas after each death, and all that would add 
up over time and get on my nerves as I played.
Yeah, ‘skill issue’ and all that, but these 
built up to a degree where even when I eventually  
DID finish a fight, I’d feel less SATISFIED at 
overcoming the challenge, and more just RELIEVED  
that I didn’t have to do the damn run back yet 
again. Then, half an hour later, I’d be back at  
the start because some OTHER bug decided to get 
all up in my face. It became frustrating in a way  
I hadn’t felt with Hollow Knight, or even in other 
challenging games like what Fromsoft puts out.
Making it to Act 2 did help, though. Currency 
is more abundant, and shards get much easier  
to stock up on, plus just having more tools 
at my disposal helps. Eventually things do  
start clicking, but that Act 1 difficulty 
curve is exhausting. I’ve improved a lot,  
but I know there are still some relentless 
challenge arenas ahead, so we’ll see.
The game’s obviously not BAD, even with 
how unrelenting it is. There are so many  
things that I love about Silksong, that even 
though I think the difficulty is excessive,  
it’s still clearly one of the best games of 
the year. But it won’t be that for everyone.  
You have to know what you’re getting into, 
if you want to get a whole lot out of it.
So Hades 1 is one of my favorite games of all 
time. Hades 2 is obviously something I had to  
check out, and it’s as good of a follow up 
as I could hope for. It’s the core gameplay  
loop of the original, plus fun new stuff. 
Your base toolkit has some great additions,  
like the sprint, mana spending Omega attacks, a 
new version of your Cast focused on crowd control,  
and upgradeable Hex super moves that expand on 
the idea of the Calls from the original game.  
Each addition adds a new avenue to diversify your 
builds for each run, while still feeling like the  
Hades you already know and probably love. The 
new weapons are interesting. I love the Torches,  
the Umbral Flames, and flooding the screen with 
fire. The new and returning God Boons are as fun  
and synergistic as ever. Hera’s boons in 
particular are busted, and a lot of fun.
I mean, it IS still Hades. The dungeon 
crawling through each new area is still great,  
but there are two completely different types of 
runs you can tackle now. You can fight your way  
back to the House of Hades in the underworld, or 
go up the summit of Mount Olympus on the surface.  
Each new region has some kind of interesting 
gimmick that plays around with the formula. The  
Mourning Fields are large open areas with multiple 
rewards in each room. The Rift of Thessaly has you  
jump between ghost ships and islands. Tartarus 
has a lot of risk/reward elements, where you can  
beeline to a final fight against Cronos, or take a 
longer and more dangerous path to gather resources  
and put the finishing touches on your build. 
Hades 2 has loads of unpredictable events too,  
waiting to shake things up. Different rivals 
who are doing their own runs at the same time,  
and sometimes take your rewards, or shop items, or 
block you from some chambers if you wait too long.
Hades 2’s storytelling is as good as the 
first, with charming character writing for  
both the new and returning cast. Every 
failed run still lets you touch base  
with tons of NPCs back at the hub. There’s 
always something worthwhile to work towards.  
Maybe it’s not BETTER than the first 
game, but that thing won Game of the  
Year in countless places. Matching it 
is plenty good for me. It IS MORE Hades.
Hades 2 is my Sequel of the Year. And maybe 
my game of the year? I haven’t decided yet.
But this next one… THIS is something new.
Blue Prince is a beautiful game. It’s not much 
graphically, though it has plenty of style and  
charm of its own, but I’m head over heels in 
love with its game design. It’s a puzzle game,  
it’s a roguelike, it’s a walking sim, but 
more than those, it’s a mystery at its core.
You’re a 14-year-old boy who inherited a 
magic house from your super wealthy great  
uncle. But to get it, you have to figure out 
how to get to the house’s secret 46th room.
Each time you open a door, you get to 
fill out the interior of this mansion  
from a pool of different rooms. Gather 
resources to build more esoteric rooms,  
and you’ll get closer and closer to that mystery 
room. But, there’s more to these rooms than the  
gems and gold inside. Slowly, you’ll discover 
that the 46th room is not the only mystery.
The design philosophy of Blue Prince is a remedy 
to a nagging feeling I’ve had in the back of my  
mind, but couldn’t put into words. It cuts 
through the samey-ness of most puzzle games.
If we’re fair, the average puzzle 
game isn’t all THAT different from  
a book of brain teasers you could get at a 
newsstand. Oh, they’ll dress it up. They’ll  
scatter the pages of the book throughout 
a mansion, or over the hills, or wherever,  
but there’s a whole lot of walking to a 
space, then solving one thing, over and  
over. The games are full of keys and locks, and 
it’s obvious what’s a lock, and what’s a key.
Blue Prince is a different kind of puzzle game.
It’s a puzzle about logical conclusions. About 
the systems working underneath the surface,  
whether you KNOW they’re there or not. It’s about 
finding truths, and using those truths to uncover  
more of the story. More places. More mysteries. 
It’s a puzzle in the sense that you’re putting  
clues together to solve mysteries, but just 
WHAT those consist of is what’s so refreshing.
When you enter a room, there might be 
some gems on a table, a note to read,  
or a box to open. The first time you’re in there, 
that might be all you catch. But the tenth time,  
you might notice the secret under the floor. 
The things on the wall. An element out of place,  
or a reference to another room. The more 
pieces you have, the more pieces you find,  
and the game reveals another, deeper layer. 
Seeing credits might take you 20 or 30 hours,  
and that will wrap a bow around ONE of the game’s 
mysteries, but you should by then still have a  
whole lot of loose ends. If you make the effort 
to dig a little deeper, there’s, I’m not kidding,  
10 times more game to uncover, and each mystery 
adds a new layer of context on top of elements  
you thought you had already settled. Twist 
after twist, revelation after revelation.
Now, like many of life’s rewards, there will be 
bumps along the way. The biggest payoffs aren’t  
just given to you without a little work. I’ve 
talked to friends who’ve loved the game like I do,  
and friends who can’t stand it and bounce off, and 
what I’ve seen separate those groups often is how  
caught up each type of player gets in picking 
a single mystery to work toward. There’s a  
very good chance that you won’t be able to get 
to the ‘next step’ of one particular mystery,  
if you’re dead-set on solving just that one. Maybe 
you don’t get the right room to draft, or you  
don’t have enough gems, or some item doesn’t spawn 
on this run. Sometimes, being single-minded about  
one mystery makes you miss clues to a half dozen 
others, or makes you sacrifice so many resources  
that you can’t make progress on anything else, 
and a run feels like a dead end. Do enough of  
those dead-end runs, and I can totally see 
why someone would bounce off of the game.
But if you let the game come to YOU - drafting 
rooms you haven’t seen to gather new information,  
farming resources to build up for later, 
and strategically play to see as much as  
you can see on each run, you’ll always 
have something juicy to solve. A totally  
new mystery to unravel. A new combination 
of tools that do something you never even  
considered possible. Only when you let the game 
come to you will Blue Prince show its true form.
It’s such an unusual format for a game. So many 
games are built by people worried about maximum  
player satisfaction metrics, or making sure 
everyone can get through every challenge every  
time, that it can trend to the extremely 
hand-holdy side. But that’s not the only  
way that a game can be made. Making satisfying 
puzzles, letting people’s natural inclination to  
solve mysteries, find lore, and tap around 
to see if there are easter eggs anywhere,  
then DELIVERING something to the people 
making the effort, time and time again,  
for a hundred hours of puzzle-solving - 
that’s a totally valid type of game as well.
It might not be for everyone, but it’s for me. 
Blue Prince is Mike’s personal Game of the Year.
And now’s your time to shine. What games did we 
miss? Head to the comments and tell everyone,  
including us, about your favorites of the year. 
There’s still a month left in the year, and a  
few sales to come, so do everyone a solid and let 
us know. Especially great little indie games that  
may have not gotten their due yet. Like Blippo+. 
Is that even a game? You have to find that out  
for yourself. Someone in the comments told me 
about Zexion, and look how that turned out.
Thanks for another year of Design Doc, and if you 
want to support the videos that Mike and I make,  
I’d really appreciate it if you signed up 
for our Patreon. You’ll get 25 pounds of warm  
fuzzies for helping us keep the channel going, 
but you’ll ALSO get early access to new videos,  
our monthly newsletter full of new games we’ve 
been playing and random links we found funny,  
and we have a behind-the-scenes podcast, too!
Now, go play some games.
*chill vibes from DK Bananza*