Today’s episode is sponsored by Squarespace,
the all-in-one platform to build a beautiful
online presence.
Get 10% off your first purchase with the offer
code DESIGNDOC.
Cheating in video games is eternal.
For as long as games have existed, people
have looked to get ahead of the system.
Sure, you can go for basic glitches and cheat
codes, but there’s an interesting side story
simmering below the surface.
An industry rose to make cheating easier and
more accessible to everyone.
Console manufacturers made counter-moves,
trying to fend them off and re-establish fair
play.
From that fight, a window opened that revealed
for some games what was always hiding just below
the surface.
Let’s look at the history of console cheat
devices, the Game Genie, GameShark, and others,
and see how they started, how they built up
their popularity, and how they fell by the
wayside.
There are lots of ways to cheat in games.
In the beginning, there were glitches.
Every game that’s even remotely complex
is guaranteed to have glitches in its code.
It’s far too complicated to find and fix
every glitch in testing, so every shipping
game is full of them.
Lots of glitches are benign: audio problems,
models clipping through things.
But others have gameplay implications: bunnyhopping,
wall clipping, lap skipping.
Glitches get around the intended design of
a game using just the tools that the game
itself provides.
There’s another category of things that
twist the design of a game for fun, but in
a developer-approved way.
Cheat codes.
Developers intentionally code in a button
combination to change a game, sometimes dramatically.
Maybe you’ll unlock all the levels in the
game instantly, or get 30 extra lives, or
make everyone’s heads bigger than normal.
Often, cheat codes weren’t put in just for
fun.
They were useful as an easy way to test and
debug a game.
Let’s say you’re working as a game tester,
testing a new platformer.
The programmers just created a new build that
fixed a major glitch in the final world and
you have to verify that the fix works.
It’d be a huge waste of time to play through
the whole game again to get to the part that
they fixed at the end.
Instead, the programmers coded in a secret
button combination to immediately unlock the
last world, where you needed to test.
That cheat code just saved you hours of work.
By the end of development, lots of codes might
be stuck in the game.
They could take them out, but then the testers
would have to verify that nothing else broke
in the process….
And probably no one will find them by accident,
sooo… let’s just leave them in!
They’re pretty fun anyway.
But glitches and cheat codes rely on behavior
that the developers put there, intentionally
or not.
What if we didn’t want Johnny Game Designer
telling us what WE could do with OUR game
that WE paid for.
You’re going to have to code it up yourself.
You’re going to need a cheat device.
The earliest versions of this are trainers.
They’re not so much a device, but they were
programs built specifically to change the
code in another game loaded into memory.
Obviously, this was meant for games running
on PCs or other computers, where you were
loading multiple programs at the same time.
In 1983, if you had $15 you could buy one
of the earliest trainers: ‘The Great Escape
Utility’.
It dramatically changed the original Castle
Wolfenstein, acting a lot like what we’d
today call a ‘patch’, but it was fan-made.
Faster loading times.
Fewer crashes.
But also things that the developers definitely
didn’t intend.
Aim hacks.
Get any item.
Start anywhere in the game.
You would load The Great Escape Utility at
the same time as you loaded the game, and
the utility would be able to change the game’s
code on the fly.
It was easy to use, and was a popular way
to squeeze some more fun out of a game you
had already played.
But console players were left out in the cold.
Consoles of that era didn’t run multiple
programs at once, so the technique used by
trainers wouldn’t work.
If you wanted to play with memory editing
in console games, you’d need some new hardware.
Back in 1990, Codemasters developed the Game
Genie, the ‘Video Game Enhancer’, and
licensed it to Galoob.
Over time, they released a Game Genie for
the NES, SNES, Game Boy, and Sega Genesis.
Every Game Genie acted as a middleman between
the console and the game cart.
You plugged a Game Genie into the console’s
cartridge slot, then plugged in a game on
the other side.
Normally, when a console requests data from
the game cart, it sends a command to the cartridge
directly, where the ROM inside the cartridge
would receive the request and respond appropriately.
It could be a request for data for level assets,
game logic, music, save data, anything and
everything that made up a particular game.
But when you put a Game Genie between the
two, the Game Genie can listen in on the commands
traveling between the cartridge and the system.
Usually, it would just pass the request through
as normal and then pass the cartridge’s
response back.
But you could tell the Game Genie to do something…
else.
All you needed were the magic words.
Or… codes.
When you turned on the console with a Game
Genie plugged in, you’d first get this cool
little menu.
In it, you could enter in codes you could
find in the code book that came with your
Game Genie.
Game Genie codes are, in reality, just tweaked
programming instructions.
Each code contained a memory location to look
for and a value to respond with instead of
what the cartridge would normally respond
with.
If the console asks the cartridge, ‘Give
me the number stored in the place where you
keep the player’s life count.’, the game
cartridge might normally respond ‘1.’
But you could’ve entered a code that hijacked
that request and replaced the value with something
else.
Maybe ‘99’ lives.
Or ‘0’, which might break other game logic
in interesting ways.
The instructions you gave the Game Genie were
very small, very specific, but you could still
make huge and unexpected changes in almost
any game released.
Infinite ammo and lives?
Sure.
Gain 1 health instead of losing it when you
hit an enemy?
Maybe, if you knew the right code!
If the console asks, ‘What abilities do
we have unlocked for Super Metroid’, the
Game Genie could respond with a value that
means ‘All of them’.
This was memory editing on a CONSOLE!
In the early 90s that was mind-boggling.
The code system and the included code book
made it easy enough for ANYONE to use, not
just computer savvy types.
A kid could get a huge variety of cheats to
work just by punching in codes from the code
books that came with the Game Genie.
But you didn’t have to stick with the code
book.
You could experiment.
Sure, it wasn’t the easiest thing in the
world to use.
Some games used memory techniques that weren’t
compatible with how the Game Genie worked.
Typing in codes randomly probably wouldn’t
do anything.
Some codes would make their game unplayable.
But once in a while you’d hit on something.
Tweak the infinite lives code and maybe you
discover a color palette swap.
It was kid-friendly enough and the success
rate was high enough that the Game Genie really
did breathe new life into old games.
But, Nintendo didn’t particularly like the
idea of people altering the code of their
games.
So Nintendo sued Galoob in May 1990, alleging
that Game Genie codes made a derivative work
of the games it was plugged into, violating
Nintendo’s copyright.
The Game Genie was pulled from store shelves
while the lawsuit was ongoing.
But after a year of litigation, the judge
ruled in Galoob’s favor in late 1991, saying
that the operation of a Game Genie was analogous
to skipping pages in a book or fast forwarding
through a movie.
Nintendo was forced to compensate Galoob $15
million for the lost Game Genie sales while
the device was barred from sale.
Sega on the other hand just embraced the Game
Genie, and licensed the Genesis version outright.
Simple enough.
The Game Genie was selling very well, and
their success lead to competition.
Datel was also developing a cheat cartridge,
called the Action Replay, which was around
as early as the Commodore 64.
After the success of the Game Genie, InterAct
licensed the Action Replay for sale in North
America and rebranded it as the GameShark.
The technology was advancing too.
The Playstation, Saturn and N64 GameSharks
had persistent memory, which let you save
codes without re-entering them every time.
Codes also came preloaded, making it even
easier to switch on for new players.
The device worked in the same sort of way
as the Game Genie, but for the CD-based consoles
like the Playstation and GameCube it obviously
couldn’t plug directly into cartridges.
It listened in on the system RAM after the
game loaded itself.
The GameShark Pro let you find custom codes
way more efficiently.
Originally for the Game Genie, people used
specialized ROM reading hardware to find the
codes they would publish in a code book.
The GameShark Pro let you do that work yourself
from home, so you could search for the right
memory locations to create your own custom
codes in minutes.
With this sort of live debugging tool available
for home use, GameShark codes could get way
more complicated and varied.
With more powerful tools, and a little obscure
thing called the Internet, GameShark codes
could be found quickly, and spread worldwide.
Cheat devices aren’t only for people who
want to cheat.
At heart, they’re just a tool for inspecting
and altering code.
That makes them great for cheats, but that’s
not the only thing they can do.
Developers often leave test levels, characters,
models, and other leftover ideas inside the
final game.
They just remove all the normal ways to access
the content.
The content remains, locked away, and largely
forgotten.
But if you’re lucky, you might stumble onto
the key with just a couple of custom codes.
In Goldeneye, someone playing around with
the GameShark found multiplayer versions of
Statue and Cradle - two levels that weren’t
in the multiplayer mode of the final game.
They aren’t polished like a final level.
Collision, framerate, and loading problems
are everywhere.
But the dev team did a lot of work to both
before they were cut.
In Zelda: Ocarina of Time there’s a model
of an Arwing, viewable only through GameShark
codes.
It was leftover from testing the flight model
of the boss Volvagia.
During an interview with the game’s original
staff in 2011, Satoru Takizawa, the boss and
enemy designer said that the code for Volvagia’s
movement was ported from Starfox 64, and the
Arwing model was brought over in that process.
The code for modeling the way objects in flight
behaved helped make Volvagia's movements look
right.
Super Mario Sunshine has a test level only
accessible through Action Replay codes.
In it, developers could test jump distances,
curved surface behavior, overhead ropes, water
physics, and loads of other tricky and specific
behaviors and mechanics that would’ve been
a pain to set up and test otherwise.
These leftover bits of code are artifacts
of the game development process that players
rarely get to see.
They’re living proof of the iterative nature
of game design, where ideas are used, tested,
improved, thrown out, and refined all the
time.
And you can see them for yourself thanks to
cheat devices.
But, let’s be real, they’re mostly used
for cheating.
And because of that, cheat devices were about
to run into a problem.
As the generations rolled on, the internet
became more integrated in the way players
play and talk about games.
Discussions with your friends at school, or
on game message boards slowly started migrating
within the walls of the console ecosystem
on services like Xbox Live and Playstation
Network.
The online services could keep track of the
games you played and what you could do in
them.
And that’s really where the new tension
with cheat devices appeared.
Achievements became extremely popular.
They let your friends see how well you did
in your games, earn points, and see where
they stacked up in comparison.
But if an achievement score is going to be
worth paying attention to, it wouldn't make
sense to let players get points for cheating.
If getting a game's final achievement were
as easy as entering a GameShark code, that
wouldn’t be fair to other players.
Anyone who spent dozens of hours to beat the
game as intended would feel ripped off.
Companies now had an incentive to detect the
methods of cheaters and bar them from the
‘legitimate’ achievement ecosystem.
Thanks to online connectivity, exploits could
be patched out in mandatory game updates.
Detection techniques could evolve as new workarounds were found.
Developers locked down the game code harder,
which neutered the methods used by cheat devices
in generations past.
Cheaters could have their online accounts
banned, which gave an incentive for players
to stay away from tinkering with cheat devices.
The work done to prevent ‘illegitimate’
achievements made it harder and riskier to
play around with cheat devices.
Their popularity declined.
But the story didn’t end, it just changed.
The PC had an entire parallel cheat ecosystem
that continues to this day.
Cheat Engine, trainers, and mods.
Steam and VAC.
But that’s a story for another day.
Oh, and by the way, someone bought the rights
to the Game Genie trademark, and rebranded
it.
Now it looks like this!
Eww.
The story of cheating doesn’t end, it just
adapts.
They may not be as popular as they once were,
but cheat devices like the Game Genie and
GameShark were some people’s first foray
into programming, and were a super cool and
important part of video game history.
If you’re looking to make a website, check
out today’s sponsor Squarespace.
We’ve built a few websites over the years,
and in our experience Squarespace is by far
the easiest way to get a killer looking website
up and running extremely quickly.
They’re a one-stop shop, with domain registration,
easy drag and drop tools, no plugins necessary,
and great traffic monitoring tools so you
can watch all those sweet page views roll
in.
Go to squarespace.com for a free trial, and
when you’re ready to launch, head to squarespace.com/designdoc
and use offer code DESIGNDOC to save 10% off
of your first purchase of a website or domain.
*chill vibes outro from Grand Theft Auto III*