Mario Kart.
Everyone’s favorite non-violent 30-year-old
franchise.
Not many game series have that sort of longevity,
let alone have been able to change, adapt
and refine their core gameplay over those
decades to make their current iteration more
popular than ever.
It’s hot!
Mario Kart pioneered a whole branch of kart
racing games, and its success comes down to
its dedication to two things: quality tracks,
and fun items.
We did a video on Mario Kart’s track evolution
over the years, so now it’s time to give
the same treatment to its items.
Every game in the series has tweaked the item
roster a little, and 30 years of little tweaks
get you a lot of big changes from the beginning
to now.
Let’s talk about the evolution of items
in Mario Kart.
What the hell is that?
What does it do?
Ahh!
It just takes me to a website!
Ooh, look at how tastefully it’s organized.
Today’s sponsor Milanote is a C-tier Mario
Kart item, and an S-tier organizing tool.
You’ve got a game idea in your head right
now, I bet.
We all do.
Whether it’s a side project for fun or something
you want to pitch to investors, you’ve gotta
get it out of your head so other people can
see.
Milanote helps get your personal and group
projects organized and lets everyone involved
collaborate in real-time.
Milanote lets you make beautiful storyboards
and mood boards, notes, inspiration, TODO
lists, and is customizable enough to fit the
structure of your exact project.
They’ve got built-in templates for any type
of project you have, including game design.
We use it for organizing Design Doc videos.
Drop in text, images, notes, links - anything
you can think up, and Milanote will keep it
organized and let you work on all of it together
with anyone you want.
Its modern drag-and-drop interface makes it
dead simple to use and very powerful to help
keep everyone on your team on the same page,
whether it’s 1 person or 50.
Best of all, you can sign up for free!
Click the link in the description and let
Milanote help you take your project from a
dream to a plan.
Thanks, Milanote!
Super Mario Kart is the start.
Not just for the series, but for kart racers
as a genre.
Mario Kart isn’t a sim, obviously.
But it’s also not really an arcade racer
like Cruisin’ USA, Virtua Racing, or San
Francisco Rush, either.
So what separates a kart racer from an arcade
racer?
Turns out it’s items, you saw the video
title.
Items give racers an edge and sabotage the
competition.
They add a HUGE layer of strategy, chaos,
replayability, and skill-balancing to a genre
whose sim-ier side sometimes shies away from
in favor of realism, precision, and a high
skill ceiling.
Items make a kart racer a totally unique branch
of the genre, and Super Mario Kart was the
first real crack at making a gameplay system
like this.
So what makes up the foundation of Mario Kart’s
item system?
Super Mario Kart kicks it off with 9 basic
items: green and red shells, banana peels,
coins, mushrooms, the feather, lightning,
the star, and the boo.
Lots of the classics, and most of them have
stuck around in game after game with their
original function intact.
Green shells, red shells, and bananas form
the bread and butter of the series’ common
projectiles.
Green shells can be fired forward or dropped
behind you, and ricochet off walls until they
collide with an item, or preferably, a racer.
You, unfortunately, count as a racer, and
so the green shell can backfire on you if
it bounces the wrong way.
Red shells will home in on the closest racer
ahead of you.
They’re way easier to aim, though they will
disappear if they hit anything at all.
The homing logic in this game isn’t very
smart yet, so this game’s red shell will
just make a beeline for the next racer, even
if there’s a wall between there and here.
It’s a great close-quarters option, best
used on straightaways and gentle turns.
The banana is a more defensive-minded weapon
that you leave behind for your opponents to
slip on.
Hitting a banana will spin your kart out rather
than exploding it like the shells do, which
is a less powerful, but still effective way
to get a close player off of your tail.
Pressing up on the D-pad while using a banana
will fire it forward instead of leaving it
behind.
It’s very difficult to aim a thrown banana,
as you can easily throw it off track, but
if you’re a real mode 7 aiming superstar,
you can use the banana to bring a leading
opponent back to the pack.
Just don’t slip on it yourself.
Mushrooms are very common and very useful.
They give you a quick speed boost, which is
great in general, but really really great
for creating your own off-road shortcuts.
If you know what you’re doing, you can cut
seconds off a lap time with just one mushroom.
If you don’t know what you’re doing, you’re
gonna find some trouble.
The coin is a Grand Prix mode exclusive.
Super Mario Kart’s coin system lets you
gather coins on the track to raise your max
speed, to pay off Lakitu for his services,
and to do a vaguely Sonic rings-adjacent thing
where if you get plonked with an item or run
into by another racer, you’ll lose some
coins, but it’ll be less bad than getting
spun out if you’re hit while broke.
The coin ITEM just gives you two more coins,
simple enough.
The feather is very situational.
All it does is leap you into the air.
You can use it to dodge stuff.
Expert Mario Kart-icians can also use the
feather to create the most bonkers shortcuts
you can think up.
You can leap over any wall or obstacle with
a feather.
Super Mario Kart tracks are designed to be
very compact, so leaping over one wall can
cut a lap in half, if you find the right place
to do it.
The next two are the much rarer and more powerful
star and lightning.
The star works very similarly to how it does
in Mario platformers.
It makes you faster, invincible to other objects,
lets you drive off-road without losing any
speed, lets you destroy obstacles in your
way, and blows up anyone you happen to bump
into.
And the song is fun.
Lightning is the only multi-target item in
the game, causing anyone not invincible or
being picked up by Lakitu to shrink and slow
down for a time.
Anyone shrunk will get flattened if they’re
run over by a normal-sized player, which will
lose you a ton of time as you drift back down
to the track before returning to normal.
Unless you’re a CPU, in which case you’ll
just spin out.
Computers get all the breaks.
More on that later.
Both the lightning and the star are way more
likely to appear if you’re stuck in the
back of the pack.
More on that later, too.
And the Boo is appropriately the most elusive
item in the game.
You have to be playing a 2 player mode for
it to show up at all, and it’ll let you
steal their item while turning you both invisible
to players and untouchable by items.
Very fun.
This is the foundation for Mario Kart items.
We’ve got things that make you faster.
Things to slow down racers ahead of you.
Things to slow down racers behind you.
And things to make you immune to being targeted.
No matter the game, every new item winds up
falling in at least one of those categories.
A new item might mix and match abilities,
maybe it does a couple of different things
at once, maybe it tweaks the look and behavior
a little bit, but those are really the only
fundamental categories for Mario Kart items,
and that’s been true since the beginning.
How the CPU gets items, however - that’s
completely off the wall broken and crazy in
Super Mario Kart.
CPUs don’t have to do things like ‘run
over an item box’ to get an item.
They don’t even have to have the item be
available for the player to get.
There’s no rules!
Instead of getting items from item boxes,
CPU players each have an assigned item that’s
theirs.
They can use their item whenever and wherever
they want.
DK Jr. can fire off bananas in front of your
kart all day.
Yoshi can use an egg that acts just like a
stationary shell.
Koopa can just literally leave behind a shell.
Bowser can leave behind a fireball, which
acts like a… moving… stationary shell.
Look!
I know those words don’t make sense together,
but that’s what it does!
Toad and Peach get a unique poison mushroom
that will shrink you if you run into it.
Mario and Luigi get UNLIMITED STARS.
THEY CAN JUST USE INFINITY STARS.
It’s not a speed-boosting star, but they
still get the rest of the star parts.
Oh, and every CPU also gets infinite feathers.
Whenever you fire off a shell at a CPU, or
if they’re about to hit a banana peel, there’s
a pretty decent chance that they’ll perfect
dodge by firing off a feather.
Don’t tell them about the feather shortcuts,
or you’d never win.
There’s a reason none of the other games
work like this.
Can you imagine if Mario Kart 8 had CPUs with
infinite stars?
Super Mario Kart is basic by modern standards,
but it sets a very solid foundation that the
series built off of, and is still easily playable
and fun to this day.
This wouldn’t be an evolution video without
some item change, though, and that change
starts with Mario Kart 64.
Mario Kart 64’s tracks are completely different
from the original game.
They’re much bigger, fully 3D, and have
tons more alternate paths for players to drive
down.
Mario Kart 64 removed the coins completely,
so say goodbye to the Coin item.
The feather was playtested in early versions
of the game and found to be way too situational
now that the tracks were so much larger, so
that’s gone too.
The game’s track shortcuts are more dependent
on speed than jumping over obstacles, though
if you’re creative, you can find a few ways
to jump over stuff.
The item boxes went from flat tiles on the
track surface to 3D boxes you crash into to
grab an item.
They’re spread out in multiple places on
the larger tracks - sometimes lined up, sometimes
in messy clusters, and sometimes you can find
a one-off box tucked away to the side.
Psych, that’s one of the game’s new additions
- the fake item box.
It’s a track hazard that looks just like
a normal box but with an upside down question
mark.
Hitting it will stop you dead in your tracks.
It looks pretty convincing, and clever players
can hide one in a group of real item boxes
to trick their friends.
If it’s a normal item box, though, you might
get one of a few new things:
One item is OK, but how about THREE items?
Several of the basics get triple- upgrades.
Triple mushrooms, triple green shells, triple
red shells, and trip… wait… quintuple
bananas.
The triple mushroom is just like the single
one, but there’s three of them.
Wow!
The shells form a circle around your kart,
freeing up your item slot to grab another
thing, but also giving you a shield to block
incoming shells and other track hazards.
And the bananas are in a…conga line…
The bananas are weird in this game, I don’t
know.
Throwing is still impossible.
What if three mushrooms aren’t enough?
Why not INFINITY MUSHROOMS?
The golden mushroom lets you hammer on the
Z-button and boost as many times as you want
for a few seconds.
The camera hates it.
Then there’s the big new item.
This one’s important.
Mario Kart has always had a leader problem.
If first place gets out too far ahead of the
pack, it can be very hard to reel them back
in.
Second place gets brought back with shells
and stuff and the gap to first keeps increasing.
To combat this, Mario Kart 64 introduced the
most important and most controversial item
of them all: the blue shell.
Technically, the spiny shell, but the rest
of them have color names, so it’s the blue
shell.
This one is a heat-seeking missile for whoever
is in first place.
If someone in seventh fires one off, it’ll
lock onto the track center and zoom towards
first place, plowing through anyone in its
way.If someone gets one while in first place,
well they’ve got a self-sabotage option
ready to go.
Look for these super elusive sideways item
boxes, you’ll always get a blue shell.
Triple shells aren’t the only way to play
defense in Mario Kart 64.
Single shells, bananas, and fake item boxes
can be held behind you to let you line up
your shot, but also to shield you from incoming
attacks.
You lose the item, but that’s better than
getting blown up.
Plus, holding an item behind you frees up
the item slot to collect another one.
If someone’s right on your tail, you can
also swoop in front and make them run into
the item themselves, or just fire a shell
backward by holding down before using it.
The holding system really helps make bananas
more valuable as a defensive tool and makes
green shells more likely to be useful even
if you can’t aim.
The game’s sound design has changed, too.
Now you can hear chirps whenever you hit other
drivers with something you used, even if they’re
way off-screen.
They even added a little Doppler effect when
you drive by.
*Wario: wahhh*
One thing that hasn’t changed is the number
of unfair advantages CPU drivers get.
Mario Kart 64 is notorious for having different
rules for human and CPU drivers.
Everyone knows about the game’s rubber-banding
that massively boosts the speed of computers
behind you. And sometimes the computers AHEAD
of you.
Look at this. But they get bonuses with items,
too.
If a CPU hits a shell or a fake item box, they’re
not knocked around for nearly as long as a
human player would be.
Blue shells fired at first place computer
players seem like they should be great at
bringing them back to the pack, but it actually
doesn’t slow them down all that much.
Not like how the blue shell will slow down
your friends when it hits them.
The way the CPU gains items in this game is
also completely nuts.
Triclon and micro500 did a write-up on exactly
how the item system works for computers.
You see them hitting the item boxes?
Yeah, they don’t even get items from that.
About every 20 seconds every CPU gets a chance
to be granted an item, all at the same time,
with the chance for each item determined by
an item drop table that’s completely different
from the one that human players get.
It’s mostly going to give the CPU a banana
towards the front and mix in some speed-boosting
mushrooms and stars toward the back, with
the occasional fake item box dropped in for
flavor.
It’ll never get any red shells, blue shells,
banana bunches, triple or golden mushrooms,
but there’s a roughly 1 in 4 chance, give
or take, that any CPU racer will wind up getting
a green shell, and another 1 in 5 chance for
trailing racers to get a triple green shell.
So what?
Well, the CPU doesn’t know how to use it.
No CPU in this game will ever fire off a shell.
The shell will just sit there in the CPU item
box and keep them from getting any more items
for the rest of the race.
Oh, and if you ever get hit by lightning in
Grand Prix mode, the computer has a 1% chance
of grabbing a lightning, but only if they’re
in 8th place.
You know exactly who to blame.
There’s your suspect.
Mario Kart 64’s changes introduced new series
staple items, but the game is more important
in how it set the ground rules for item play,
in defensive behaviors, collection, and how
items interact with each other in 3D space.
So of course, now that we’ve established
the norms, it’s time to throw out half of
them and go back to 2D.
Mario Kart Super Circuit is a jazzed-up take
on Super Mario Kart for the Game Boy Advance.
Kinda like they took the lessons learned from
64 and shoved them back into the original.
Item tiles are gone, but the coins are back!
Still no coin item, though.
The item boxes are more like they are in 64,
showing up in a few tidy rows along the track.
But the big story is the new items.
We've got *drum roll*
Nothing.
There are no new items.
And they took out some of the old new items.
No fake item boxes, no banana bunch, no golden
mushroom, and you better believe they kept
out the feather.
Instead, the rest of the items change to look
and act way more like they do in 64, with
a few tweaks here and there.
Dragging items to free up a slot is here to
stay.
Single red shells can be dropped behind, but
they won’t move, just like dropping a green
shell or a banana.
Can you imagine if you could fire a homing
red shell backwards?
Game breaking.
Especially because in Super Circuit the red
shell homing now actually works, and can navigate
toward its target.
Around corners, even!
Throwing a banana forward works better, too,
now that it doesn’t go as far.
You can kinda aim it now!
Most of the other items just have a graphical
update, but the Boo actually got a few good
changes.
It still steals things, it still makes you
invisible, but Super Circuit stole an idea
from the best kart racer, Snowboard Kids.
The Boo now scares the hell out of whoever
gets targeted, slowing them down and lowering
their coin count.
When you see it laid out like that it makes
way more sense.
It's a ghost!
It should be scary!
This is the first and last time in the series
that the Boo will be scary.
The CPU racers now actually use items normally,
more or less.
They can fire off shells now, big upgrade.
When you're targeted, you'll see a little
shell icon before you get hit, so you can
defend yourself.
That's nice.
Super Circuit is a middle child, not as raw
as Super, not as daring as 64, just a solid
middle ground.
Strap in though, the fourth one is gonna be
crazy.
Was Super Circuit’s item play too boring
for you?
Yeah, I know.
But now, we’re shifting in a radical new
direction, with an item system so bizarre
you’ll never see it coming.
It’s Mario Kart Double Dash!!
This game’s whole deal revolves around the
pair of drivers you control.
Two drivers mean a few fundamental changes.
Now there are two item slots, and you even
get to switch between the two.
This lets you save strategic items for later,
or change to something defensive if you’re
about to get blasted.
Each item is actually physically held by one
of the characters, and switching items means
swapping drivers.
The kart won't change how it handles or anything,
but it’s still important, and very diegetically
extra.
Your drivers physically holding stuff isn't
just for looks, though.
If you crash or get hit by a strong item,
you can drop your stuff directly onto the
track.
You can lose some important weapons if you're
hit by lightning at the wrong time.
If it’s something like a banana, it just
deploys like you dropped it yourself.
If it’s something like a star, though, someone
else is going to benefit from your misfortune.
For tracks like Baby Park and Luigi Circuit,
where there isn't a ton of space to spread
out, the track gets littered with dropped
items and contributes to the total chaos those
tracks are known for.
If you run into a box, you only get an item
if the kart backseat driver doesn't already
have one.
If you want to hold two, you've gotta swap.
Unless you happen to run into the next new
thing.
With two drivers and two item slots comes
the new Double Item Box.
At random, a normal box will sometimes respawn
to be a double box, which can make two karts
fight for position, now that there's a reason
to aim for one box over another.
If you can't get a double box, you can cobble
one together if you're quick about it.
The item boxes are laid out on tracks more
like they were in Mario Kart 64 with some
clusters, so you can hit one, swap positions
quickly, and hit a second to get two things
the long way.
This whole system is an interesting way to
add a little more technical skill to the process
of getting items.
The game’s changes also include a major
overhaul to the game’s item roster.
Coins.
Out.
Feather.
Absolutely not.
Boo.
Is a driver now, and was elected king.
Fake item box.
Yeah, no one’s falling for that one.
Lightning.
You can’t squish people anymore.
Mushroom and star.
Takes the stuff of whoever you collide with
now.
Blue shell.
Now it’s from a paratroopa I guess, and
it just flies above everyone straight to first
place.
And explodes.
Items are now split in two categories: 9 standard
ones, and 10 specials.
The standard items are all series staples,
available for anyone to get.
Bananas, single shells of all colors, basic
mushrooms, stars, lightning, and the fake
item box.
Special items, though...
Remember how Super Mario Kart had items dedicated
to specific drivers?
Of all things, that's back!
But with real items this time!
Each racer has a special item that only they
can get.
Well, them and their Mario Twin.
Triple shells are now property of the koopas
only.
Wario and Waluigi get to introduce everyone
to the bob-omb.
It’s kinda like if you put explosives inside
a banana, and stuck a proximity sensor in
there for fun.
Seems on brand.
Golden mushrooms are for Toad and Toadette.
Mario and Luigi get a fireball, which shoots
a spread of projectiles in front of them and
ricochet around for a bit.
Yoshi and Birdo get colored eggs that act
like red shells.
Once they hit someone, the eggs crack and
3 random items get dropped onto the track.
Maybe you’ll get that free star.
The babies get a Chain Chomp, the series’
first big ‘catch up’ item.
It’ll automatically drag you along the track,
plowing through anything in the way, then
break off and keep going for a bit.
DK and Diddy get a giant banana, which splits
into 3 little ones after being hit, because
that’s how bananas work.
Bowser and son get the Bowser Shell, essentially
a really big green shell that takes a few
hits.
Peach and Daisy get a new defensive item,
the Heart.
Two shielding hearts surround the kart and
will let you catch the next two things that
you get hit by, so you can use them for yourself.
And Petey and King Boo can randomly get any
of the special items.
The special items system is the first time
the series gave a gameplay reason to pick
specific characters beyond their weight class.
Double Dash isn’t only about new additions,
though.
Despite how important it is in the last two
games, Double Dash takes out your ability
to drag items for defense.
Blocking homing items requires better timing.
Triple shells don’t protect you anymore
either now that Koopa’s learned how to juggle,
and it’s a lot easier to lose your triple
items if you get hit.
You do sometimes get to keep one of the three,
though.
The level of item chaos in this game is much
higher than in the last 3.
This is the start of the idea of getting ‘Karted’,
where you’re robbed of a victory by getting
comboed by items.
Not that the earlier games didn’t have that,
but in this game you WILL get womboed and
comboed.
Double Dash is fun, experimental, and modernized
a lot of the item play you recognize today,
though it sold pretty terribly compared to
the others thanks to it being stuck on the
Gamecube.
Go back and mess around with it.
Even if it’s a little clunky, it’s got
a unique charm.
Tick tock, it’s time to go back to the handhelds
again for Mario Kart DS, the first fully 3D
portable game in the series.
We’re starting to get into a rhythm of the
handheld releases being designed as refinements
of the more experimental console game released
right before.
It takes a little bit from everywhere, but
it feels like a toned down version of Double
Dash in a lot of ways.
The limited power of the DS is reflected in
the game’s much calmer item play.
The items are rendered as flat, unanimated
sprites, which I don’t think ever gelled
quite right with the rest of the game’s
look.
We’re tossing out the part where characters
physically hold items, and we’re back to
how they worked in 64, but hitting some obstacles
or weapons can still cause them to spill onto
the track for everyone else to grab and trip
over.
It’s not as hectic as Double Dash, though.
The item roster had much less turnover in
DS.
It’s pretty standard stuff, with just a
few additions and tweaks here and there.
We’re bringing back the RGB shells, bananas,
mushrooms, lightning, star, feather … wait,
nevermind, and the fake item box.
Now deposed from his throne, Boo returns as
an item that works just like the Boo from
64.
You can actually react to the boo this time.
It can only steal an item while it’s in
the item slot.
there’s a short window after it appears
on your screen before it steals so you can
deny it if you’re quick enough.
The banana bunch is back, rebranded as the
triple banana, with only 3 in the conga line.
It will block three incoming shells now, which
is very useful, but if someone runs into the
line they’ll probably all disappear.
The special items from Double Dash are almost
all gone, except the golden mushrooms, triple
shells, and bob-ombs, which seem to be gaining
more traction as a series staple at this point.
The bob-omb can be grabbed between 2nd and
5th place, and still has that timer and explosion
from Double Dash, or a proximity sensor that
will blow it up when it’s near another kart.
Red shell homing is now a little drift-ier.
On big turns, it might start to home in from
the side, which sometimes makes it skip over
all of those precious defensive bananas.
The lightning now has a staggered effect,
where the further ahead you are, the longer
the shrink will last - yet another way to
help keep everyone bunched together.
Mario Kart DS adds two new items.
The *really muffled* blooper, which is bad,
*back to normal* and the Bullet Bill.
The bullet bill is a streamlined take on the
chain chomp, which was originally back in
this game but scrapped and sort of replaced.
It’s the ultimate no-brainer catch-up weapon,
where the game will auto-pilot you straight
ahead at bullet speed and barrel over anyone
in the way.
Really, most of the game’s item play is
sensible tweaks and minor changes, but the
DS’s second screen does make one fundamental
change.
There’s a lot more info on that thing than
you’ve ever had before.
It defaults to a zoomed-in mini map with drivers
and their active items shown in real time.
The map is detailed enough that you could
just play the game by only looking at the
bottom screen if you really really wanted
to.
The left side has each character’s position
and item slot ready, which makes using the
Boo a little less random and a little more
strategic.
You can try to time it right to grab that
golden mushroom when the odds are in your
favor, or at least you can save it if no one
has anything good to steal.
The second screen makes the fake item boxes
even less useful, as each one is clearly marked
red on the map.
I mean, it was pretty dead obvious by now
what ones are the fake item boxes, but sure
let’s add one more way to tell.
No one’s falling for this anymore.
The item drop tables are overhauled, with
the power items getting way more stuck to
the players in the nosebleed section.
The lightning, Bullet Bill, and golden shrooms
are handed out like candy back there, and
all make this feel like one of the more rubber-bandy
games of the series.
Oh and why not let’s crank up the blue shell
frequency while we’re at it.
That’s fine, right?
Oh.
Oh no.
We might need to do something about that.
This is where the blue shell discourse starts
to reach a tipping point.
With no way to avoid it, blue shells can show
up right at the end of a race and pull the
rug out from under first place.
And that’s it!
Really there isn’t much crazy here.
It’s not as hectic as Double Dash, and more
varied and refined than Super Circuit or 64.
It’s super popular, and if you love snaking
everywhere it’s still pretty popular, but
that’s not the item’s fault.
Time for another console entry!
Time for… yyyou.
Mario Kart Wii is the most divisive game in
the series.
As much as I love things like the track roster
and the addition of bikes, there's a big reason
why you'll see such drastically different
takes with this one.
The item play goes off the rails completely.
Double Dash and DS could get too hectic and
even unfair sometimes, but if those games
started the conversation about 'getting karted',
Mario Kart Wii made it inescapable.
First off, the player count went up from 8
to 12.
That’s 50% more players, which means 50%
more competition and 50% more items shooting
off all over the place.
The item box works just like it did in DS
or 64, no doubles or anything.
We’re off the DS, so there’s no bottom
screen, and we don’t get to see what everyone’s
packing anymore.
We do have a few quirky additions though - the
Double Dash style item warning is back, and
so is the backup camera, last seen in Super
Mario Kart.
The item roster has nearly everything that
appeared on the DS with the functionality
more or less the same, without many item-specific
tweaks.
Squishing is back, not with lightning though.
Believe it or not, the feather missed the
boat.
The king has returned from exile, long may
he reign.
Unlike Double Dash, there’s just no way
to steal items at all in Wii.
If we aren’t going to change how most of
the items work, let’s put in some new ones
for fun.
We’ve got 3: the Mega Mushroom, the Pow
Block, and the Thundercloud.
The Mega Mushroom is like three quarters of
a star, where you get big, can squish anyone,
get a speed boost, can go off-road, but you’re
still vulnerable to some items and obstacles,
which can make you lose the effect early.
It shows up for players a little further ahead
than those who might get a star, so those
tweaks feel about right.
The Pow Block is a nerfed lightning, where
middle of the pack drivers can send a Pow
Block hovering over anyone ahead of them.
A little animation plays and will spin everyone
out and make them drop their items.
You’ve got some counters, though.
If you hit the trick button or shake the controller
as the effect goes off, you won’t spin out
as hard and won’t lose as much speed.
If you’re airborne, you can avoid the effect
entirely, and there are ramps and air things
all over the place in this game.
It’s a little redundant, but it’s not
the worst item.
The thundercloud is the worst item.
Debuting here and definitely not in Mario
Kart Arcade GP, this is a hot potato.
When you get one, it uses itself.
You get a speed boost!
All upside!
Don’t worry about the cloud.
If you bump into someone else, they get the
cloud.
Aww that’s too bad…
oh.
Whoever has the cloud last gets hit by a single-player
bolt of lightning.
It’s a weird one, and can lead to some fun
chaos, but not being able to decide when to
set it off can make it very punishing and
annoying to get rid of, especially in online
matches where the lag makes it much harder
to bump into someone else.
Would it shock you to know that none of these
new items have come back in any of the future
mainline games?
Tour doesn’t count.
With all the extra items and all the new ones
meant for middle-of-the-pack players, races
devolve into total chaos.
Crashing and getting flipped over by items
in Wii is much more punishing than in Double
Dash and even in DS, where you’re losing
all of your speed, like what happened in Super
Mario Kart and 64.
Recovery takes longer, and with all the new
players hunting you down with items in tow,
you can easily get comboed by multiple items
in a row and shoot down the charts.
They cranked up how many blue shells there
are now too.
It’s not uncommon to have 5 get used in
a single race, and someone’s going to save
one for the end.
You can try to dodge it by slipping back to
2nd or by using a mushroom at just the right
time, but if you can’t, you might be looking
at 5th place finishes.
I did some blue shell math.
There’s a 5% chance that 6th through 9th
place gets a blue shell on any given box in
grand prix, plus 2.5% for 5th place.
If all five of those racers grab a box from
a cluster, there’s roughly a 20% chance
that AT LEAST ONE of them will get a blue
shell.
And that’s 20% every time you go through
some boxes, for the entire race.
Even with a cooldown between blue shells,
It’s way too common.
Mario Kart Wii does have a big competitive
scene, so it’s not impossible to get a handle
on the item play, but for casual players the
extreme item frequency can start to make the
game feel like a luck box.
Like I said, Mario Kart Wii is divisive.
If you love to play Mario Kart with a touch
of items, it’s tough to get into.
If you love to play Mario Kart BECAUSE of
the items, well, this is about as good as
it can get.
But this isn’t the end of the line.
We need one more refining step before the
big finale.
Like every other handheld entry, Mario Kart
7’s item play takes a step back from the
experiments in the most recent console game.
We’re down to 8 racers again, and that alone
calms a lot of the chaos from Wii.
Item boxes - the same.
Item slots - we aren’t going back to doubles,
they’re also the same.
Coins - triumphant return!
Now you can grab 10 to get up to max speed.
That can be more important than you think
in this one.
Getting hit with items saps your coin count
by three, and stops you dead in your tracks.
Getting back up to speed can be a chore if
you’re down to just a couple coins.
Sometimes getting hit will actually flip you
BACKWARDS.
That can get tricky to deal with.
You can’t get launched in the air by explosions
anymore in 7, so that’s a plus.
Since we’re back on a dual screen handheld,
the map system returns from DS!
Though it’s way less detailed.
Item boxes, coins, and track obstacles aren’t
marked anymore, so I wouldn’t recommend
staring at the bottom screen while driving.
I mean, it was never a GREAT idea, but now
it’s REALLY not.
Nintendo made some deep cuts to the item roster
for 7.
None of the Wii’s newcomers are back.
The fake item box is gone, rest in peace.
The feather might be gone still, don’t quote
me on that.
There’s no boo.
He’s been exiled to Luigi’s Mansion.
Who’s in charge of this boo-less game of
Mario Kart?
Ugh, no, I’m not getting ruled over by a
blooper just because it’s hanging around.
The rest of the pack made it though - all
the basics, all the triples, all the power
items, and the Bullet Bill made the cut, and
they all work mostly like you’d expect.
The lightning lets you squish people again,
and the blue shell is back to hugging the
track like it did in 64.
No wings, and no safety for those driving
in the center lane.
I like it better this way.
The red shell homing is more predictable,
and lost that little bit of driftiness from
DS, so it won’t skip over your defensive
bananas anymore.
We’ve got 3 new…
well…
2 and a half new items.
Inarguably new are the Fire Flower and the
Super Leaf.
Did you like jamming on Z to fire off the
golden mushroom?
Now you can do that with some more firepower.
The fire flower is a rapid fire projectile
weapon that shoots up to 10 bouncing fireballs
one at a time along the track, causing drivers
to spin out on contact.
It’s kinda like the Mario and Luigi Fireball
special from Double Dash, but now for everyone!
You can hit lots of people, but be careful!
Only 4 fireballs can exist at once, so firing
a fifth will make the oldest one disappear.
Having only shells for projectiles was getting
a little stale, so this is a nice twist.
The Super Leaf is a new defensive melee item.
Your car gets a tail that you can use to deflect
or destroy nearby items, or whack your neighbors
a little.
It’s pretty strong in the right hands, and
you can even get it if you’re one of the
frontrunners!
You can spam the button to get a little bit
of extra air while gliding.
Both the Super Leaf and Fire Flower are stuck
in your item box until the timer expires,
so don’t hold onto them for TOO long.
Also new is the very weird Lucky 7, where
you get a royal sampler of seven items rotating
around your kart, just like the triple shells
do.
Red and green shells, a banana, a mushroom,
a star, a blooper, and a bob-omb.
When you fire one off, it grabs whichever
item is closest to the front of your car,
and with 7 of them zooming around, it can
be very tricky to time things right.
Good luck with that green shell.
Worse yet, other racers can crash into your
spinning buffet and snag the star or mushroom,
crash into shells or bananas, or ruin your
day by exploding the bob-omb and making you
lose everything you had.
The Lucky 7 is interesting, but it’s very
tough to use right.
More often players just fire off everything
at once.
At least you get a star out of it.
Believe it or not, even with all those changes,
the level of item chaos is pretty reasonable
compared to Wii or even Double Dash.
Even online, there can be long stretches of
play without tons of items on the field.
It’s a considerably more ‘fair’ game.
You can still get karted, don’t get me wrong,
but it’s nothing like it was before.
That might sound refreshing or it might sound
boring to you, depends on what you’re looking
for.
I made an opinion poll and it seems like most
of you would say ‘boring’.
Mario Kart 7 isn’t a terrible item system.
It’s fine.
It’s fine.
It’s there.
MARIO KART 7: IT’S THERE.
And that takes us to the modern day.
Mario Kart 8 and 8 Deluxe.
The past decade of Mario Kart has been a series
of small improvements not only from the Wii
U to the Switch, but also from update to update.
Even Deluxe's Booster Course DLC waves have
made real adjustments to the game's item play,
so don't be surprised if there are a few new
tweaks that come out after this video, even
before Mario Kart 9 gets released.
We're grouping both 8 and 8 Deluxe together,
but let's start with base 8.
This was the Wii U's killer app.
By far the console's best seller, the vanilla
version of 8 is a true successor in the mold
of the other console releases.
This isn't a refining step like the handhelds,
even though they did get to port over a lower
screen thanks to the Wii U's gamepad.
With this new power, they went in a bold new
direction.
No longer will we have a zoomed in map in
the lower screen.
Now we have... a... horn.
Honk.
Items and item boxes are thankfully still
the same, but Mario Kart 8 makes one subtle
but important change that we haven't seen
until now.
In most of the series, if you could drag an
item for defense, it would clear the spot
for you to pick up something else.
In 8, you can't, and you're gonna hold onto
that shell until you set it free.
With that change, it's harder for leaders
to get several shielding items and it can
make it a little easier to bring them back
to the pack and overtake.
Not only that, but the coin is back again!
And really likes to give itself to the leaders
as an item.
Having lots of coins is still important, but
you can't defend with a coin, so it's pretty
common for the lead racer to be defenseless.
You don't have to rely on a blue shell or
a triple red to slow them down anymore.
This defensive change also just reduces the
number of items in play in total, which lowers
the item chaos in base 8 by a lot.
Despite going back to 12 racers, the game
isn't nearly as chaotic as Wii.
It's more than 7, but that's probably a good
thing anyway.
So let’s make things a little more chaotic
in 8 Deluxe.
It brought back the Double Item Box.
So are we getting two drivers?
Nah.
While there are two item slots again, you
can't switch between the two.
8 Deluxe proves the less-items-means-less-chaos
theory.
If you jumped from 8 to Deluxe, you can right
away feel the impact of everyone having two
items.
Leaders will probably get a coin AND something
for defense, which does nerf the rubber banding
a little bit.
Mario Kart 8's item roster is full of new
and tweaked things.
Only the Super Leaf didn’t make the cut.
Goodbye, Super Leaf.
The Lucky 7 is now the Crazy 8, which is just
a rich man's Lucky 7.
Everything else from 7 is back, with some
changes.
Every triple item now circles the kart like
shells do.
That means no more conga line, and yes, that
means your triple mushrooms are sitting out
there in the open.
You can crash into someone with a triple mushroom,
and zip ahead of them.
You don't even steal it from them.
It's just a free mushroom!
The Fire Flower can use more than 4 fireballs
at once, so it can be a little spammier.
The blooper...
ugh.
OK, I've skipped it for long enough, I can't
avoid talking about it anymore.
The thunder cloud isn't the worst item, it's
the blooper.
It's terrible in DS, it's terrible in Wii,
it's terrible in 7, and guess what, it's terrible
in 8.
If you’re unlucky enough to get one, all
it does is block the screen of the players
ahead of you.
It doesn’t even block all of the screen,
just like a third of it.
It’s not hard to keep driving without seeing
for a few seconds, so it’s not all that
impactful.
And the blooper is only gettable in one of
those mid- to back of the pack positions where
you should be getting some of the best power
items in the game.
Instead of a star or triple reds, please have
garbage.
*nom*
Anyway, the blooper in 8 got a buff.
Your opponents now skid around a little.
It's also easier than ever to get rid of the
ink with a speed boost, a zipper, or diving
underwater.
Endless Trash.
It’s really just there to ruin my footage
OK, gimme something new.
Mario Kart 8 has 3 brand new items: the Boomerang
Flower, the Piranha Plant and the Super Horn.
Lots of flowers all of a sudden.
The Boomerang Flower is interesting.
You throw a boomerang forward or behind three
times.
The first two have a medium range, and can
hit a kart on the way out or the way back.
The third toss doesn't come back.
The item slot frees up while the boomerang
is out on tour, so if you pick up another
item while it's away or have one in reserve,
the boomerang will put itself into your second
item slot.
If you don't want it at all anymore, toss
it out and pick up a double box, and the boomerang
will disappear.
The Piranha Plant is like the third flower
we've got now.
This one puts, guess what, a piranha plant
in front of your kart, and automatically chomps
at other racers, and it'll even grab coins
and items.
Every time it lunges, you get a little mini-turbo
and the timer ticks down a bit faster.
You can spam the button to chomp manually
and burn through the timer if you want.
It's a fairly automatic way to combine a little
offense and a little speed.
The Super Horn is for the blue shell haters
out there.
Effectively replacing the Super Leaf, it's
a melee-ranged defensive item that gives you
a one-time shockwave that will blow up anything
around you, racers, objects, or otherwise.
It's a direct counter to the blue shell, and
for players in first it can be a lifesaver...
in theory.
In the original 8, it works as advertised.
With 8 Deluxe's changes, though, it's much
tougher to have on hand at the right time.
It's not a common thing to get, and saving
it for a blue shell might mean you drop it
from a lightning, or someone steals it.
The boo is back!
He’ll steal your stuff like before!
8 Deluxe also adds Boo… as… a driver.
Uhh… we’ve got a pretender to the throne
situation.
The kingdom is in shambles.
It says in my notes that there’s one more
new item, but I don’t see it.
Let me see...
Wait.
No.
It’s been decades.
Could it be?
The feather.
It’s back!
… … In battle mode.
It’s still VERY situational, but the drought
is over.
Mario Kart 8 overhauled the item drop tables.
The other games have your chance to get something
based on what place you’re in.
8 changes it to how far away you are from
first place.
Park everyone at the start, and everyone from
second to last can get amazing stuff if the
leader is way ahead of the pack.
The Bullet Bill's distribution table is a
little silly.
It's not unheard of to get one in the middle,
or even near the front.
One Bullet Bill can jump you right to a top
position, for absolutely free.
Mario Kart Wii had a vague item rule customizer,
but in 8 there’s now a more fine-grained
one for private lobbies.
You can set up item class modes, like only
mushrooms, only shells, only bananas for some
reason, frantic mode if you love fun, or as
of Wave 3 of the Booster Course, fully custom
items if you love a very specific kind of
fun.
Mario Kart 8 has a fully featured, robust,
sensible, and fun item system.
New stuff and old.
The balance is pretty good, the game is VERY
popular, and you can make it your own experience
if you want.
Mario Kart 8 has it all.
And that’s all of Mario Kart.
If you’re thinking about Mario Kart Arcade
GP, GP 2, GP VR, GP DX, Mario Kart Tour, or
Mario Kart Live: Home Circuit, no, those don’t
exist.
There’s definitely not dozens of new items
in those games.
I don’t know where this footage is coming
from.
Ooh, what’s that?
If you’d like to see us tackle these games
that definitely don’t exist, let us know,
and tell us where we can find a Mario Kart
GP cabinet.
Let’s talk in the comments about your best
Mario Kart item stories.
What’s your favorite item and game?
What items would you like to see in Mario
Kart 9?
Mario Kart is iconic, thanks in no small part
to its items shaping how each game feels.
The evolution game to game has been subtle,
but the changes have added up to create a
whole new branch of racing.
*chill vibes from Mario Kart 8*