It’s hard to find a genre more hotly debated
than roguelikes.
Whether or not a game counts as a roguelike
can be debated for hours.
Now I’m not about to dive into roguelikes
vs roguelites.
But for me, the more interesting question
is what makes the genre so adaptable.
The fact that so many unique styles of games
are arguably ‘roguelikes’ means there
are some interesting things going on in their
design.
We’ve watched a flood of roguelikes get
released over the past 10 years that all feel
very different, but they still rhyme.
So what is it about the design of roguelikes
that can adapt to so many different settings
and play styles, and how have the most popular
games over time taken that roguelike core
and evolved it into something fresh and new?
Today, let’s talk about the design of roguelikes
and why they’re such a hotbed for modern
game design experimentation.
So what is a roguelike?
It’s definitely this, and this.
But it also could be this.
Or this.
Or this.
The term roguelike comes from old Usenet discussion
boards, where people searched for games that
were similar to Rogue.
Rogue was created in 1980 by Glenn Wichman,
Michael Toy, and Ken Arnold, and released
at first for Unix mainframes, then adapted
for home computers.
It wasn’t the first game that we might today
call a ‘roguelike’, but it became very
popular.
Rogue was the standard, and so the other games
imitating it were called ‘roguelikes’.
Over the next few decades different offshoots
like the Mystery Dungeon games and Linley’s
Dungeon Crawl would borrow tons of elements
from Rogue, refining systems, and slowly morphing
what a roguelike could be.
To try to nail down what exactly a Roguelike
was, a group of developers came together in
2008 at the International Roguelike Development
Conference in Berlin to create a checklist
of 8 must-haves for any pure roguelike:
First, random dungeon generation.
The game should randomly put together dungeons
from scratch or from custom prefabricated
pieces.
Second, permadeath.
No checkpoints.
Your actions could have deadly consequences,
so you better keep an eye out for trouble.
Third, turn based gameplay.
The world only takes action when you do, step
for step, attack for attack.
You can plan your next move for as long as
you like.
Fourth, non-modal gameplay.
This just means that you have every action
available to you from the start of the game
and there aren’t any different ‘modes’
you enter while you’re playing.
It contrasts with a Metroidvania style system
that grants new abilities as you play the
game.
In a pure roguelike, you should be able to
go wherever you want and interact with everything
you see.
Fifth, emergent gameplay.
The world operates under certain rules, like
say flammability, fatigue, health limits,
poison, and dozens of other mechanics.
The rules apply to the world and its characters
just as much as they apply to you.
Sixth, limited resources.
You have a certain amount of health, stamina,
time, steps, or other resources.
Manage them well to stay alive for as long
as you can.
Seventh, hack-and-slash gameplay.
This one’s pretty specific.
In a traditional roguelike you’ll be fighting
through waves of enemies and clearing dungeon
floors.
Eighth, mystery items.
The things you come across on your journey
might have special properties, but you might
not have any idea what they’ll do.
Even if you’ve seen the same item before,
item properties can change in a new life.
This list of 8 high value key factors is called
the ‘Berlin Interpretation’ of roguelikes.
I think it’s a little limiting, but at least
we can use that as a definition for the most
vanilla roguelike, and it’s a great starting
point for talking about how games have tweaked
the basic design into all the different flavors
of roguelike-inspired games that exist today.
Different combos of the eight elements of
the Berlin Interpretation play off of each
other incredibly well, and help create the
feel of a roguelike.
Mystery items and random dungeon generation
make each new session a unique experience.
Turn based and non-modal gameplay make you
feel like you’re driving the game’s outcome
at your own pace, rather than waiting for
the game to unlock something to let you proceed,
or being rushed into making a hasty decision.
Limited resources and permadeath raise the
stakes.
Even though you can just start a new life,
you don’t get the same resources every time.
Every play session becomes something worth
preserving.
But the most important combo of them all might
be random dungeon generation and permadeath.
These combine to make run-based gameplay,
which is the very heart of the roguelike - the
common denominator between almost all the
games with that roguelike feel.
Run-based gameplay is a way to make a game
that feels surprising and fair, rewarding
and replayable.
From a familiar set of base elements it creates
unexpected new experiences.
It rewards understanding systems instead of
memorizing and klutzing your way through the
same encounters over and over.
These game design combos are kind of like
chords in music.
The same chord can be in dozens of hit songs,
each of them with their own feel, but they
all used the same basic tool to get there.
They’re all unique paths using the same
stepping stone.
It’s maybe what’s a little strange about
the Berlin Interpretation.
I don’t think it’s that useful to stick
to a rigid definition.
It’s helpful when you want to study the
elements of a design, but sticking to it too
closely will just get you cookie cutter reskins
of classics.
If you start thinking of a roguelike as a
mosaic of elements instead of a monolith,
you open dozens of new possibilities and really
good spinoff games that still have a core
that’s recognizable as inspired by classic
roguelike design.
So, let’s see what shows up if we start
tinkering with the Berlin Interpretation a
bit.
OK, starting with the strict Berlin Interpretation,
we’ve got Rogue.
Let’s start by tweaking one of the low value
components.
There’s no reason we have to stick with
ASCII graphics.
Put a coat of paint on everything, and give
your imagination a break by showing actual
sprites.
Done.
You’ve discovered Dungeon Crawl Stone Soup,
or Dungeons of Dredmor.
They’re exactly as deep mechanically, but
way easier for a beginner to understand what’s
going on without thumbing through a manual
every two seconds.
Now, let’s start changing some of the high
value components.
What if we start with that turn-based gameplay
rule?
The game doesn’t HAVE to let you think about
your decisions forever.
Real-time combat can still reward understanding
the systems that the game has in place.
It can still be very replayable, and the stakes
can be just as high, but you just won’t
have as long to sit there and think through
your actions.
That sounds an awful lot like Binding of Isaac
or Enter the Gungeon to me.
They’re roguelike experiences wrapped around
a much more action-heavy combat system, but
when you make a run in either of those games
it’s just as compelling for all the same
reasons as a run in Rogue or Nethack.
While we’re here swapping out turn based
gameplay we could get even weirder with it.
Instead of taking out ‘turns’ entirely,
maybe we could use a system that gives them
a new meaning.
What if the turns were musical beats instead?
It would keep the same move-for-move structure
that most Roguelikes have, but you still have
to think quickly to be effective.
Now you’ve made Crypt of the Necrodancer.
You do have to compensate for some of these
tweaks, though.
Necrodancer has to tone down the difficulty
a bit because you have less time to plan.
If it kept the same level of difficulty as
a traditional roguelike it would feel far
too punishing.
It’s hard to think through all the complicated
systems when you’re busy keeping the beat.
Necrodancer still lets you crank up the difficulty
to ridiculous levels, but the base game is
more forgiving.
The game morphs into a roguelike that rewards
‘feel’, improvisation, reaction and flow.
The game’s runs are shorter too, to help
keep a mistake from ruining too much of your
time.
Also, tying a run to the end of the level’s
song is a smart and natural way to force players
to keep moving throughout the level before
time expires.
And, Necrodancer has a killer soundtrack.
Very few roguelikes tie their soundtrack to
gameplay, so that’s another way to make
the game unique and deeply memorable.
Ok.
Let’s change up random dungeon generation.
What if instead of a literal set of rooms
and corridors we have a branching path of
encounters instead?
And keep that real-time combat around, too.
That sounds like FTL to me.
The weapons and systems you build up over
time are very Rogue-inspired, permadeath is
a constant threat, and the emergent gameplay
rules are in full effect with all the different
ways you can take out enemy ships, through
boarding their ship and taking it over, setting
the ship on fire, destroying their oxygen
supply, mind controlling their crew and having
them fight each other, or just blasting them
to bits.
FTL abstracts the idea of a ‘dungeon’
from a series of rooms to a series of encounters,
but it absolutely nails run-based gameplay,
and still very much feels like a roguelike.
Let’s go back to classic random dungeon
generation and now look at the Permadeath
wedge.
One of the most popular tweaks has been in
relaxing the permadeath restriction.
Permadeath is a vital piece of the core of
the roguelike feel, but progression is really
satisfying in games - people like to change
and improve over time.
Making each run feel important and worth preserving
relies heavily on permadeath, so we can’t
just swap it out entirely.
But what if you could keep just a little piece
of yourself between runs.
Now you’ve got Dead Cells and Rogue Legacy,
among lots of others.
Dead Cells and Rogue Legacy don’t just implement
this mechanically. They’re both narratively
themed around the idea of passing bits of
yourself on to the next run.
You’ll still lose most of your progress,
so you’ll want to stay alive, but you also
won’t feel like you’ve wasted your time
if you die by accident after a long session.
Ok, what’s next.
Oh, why do we have to stick to hack-and-slash
gameplay?
Turn based tactics games use similar turn-for-turn
mechanics.
What if we put roguelike elements into one
of those?
You might end up with Into The Breach.
It’s styled as a tactics game, but it’s
turn-based, non-modal, has permadeath, has
a bunch of emergent gameplay systems, there
are very limited resources, and the game is
structured around runs.
That sounds like a roguelike to me.
Unlike other tactics games, Into the Breach
explicitly tells you turn orders and what
actions are going to happen, and makes it
feel like you can ‘solve’ an encounter
if you just think hard enough.
It’s quite difficult too, so you’re going
to feel like you’ve accomplished something
if and when you beat it.
Tactics games aren’t the only gameplay style
we can use.
What if we try, I dunno, a card game?
Slay the Spire is a turn based game where
your ‘moves’ are your hand of cards.
You can only play so many cards, and must
manage your deck, your health and your money
wisely as you get into fight after fight,
to get to the end of an encounter ladder.
That sounds like a run to me.
For another similar spin with a solitaire
vibe, try Solitairica.
It’s a roguelike built around a game of
golf solitaire.
You encounter random monsters to beat up and have to to start back at the beginning if you lose.
The tweaks you can make on the Berlin Interpretation
are almost endless.
Spelunky mixed roguelike gameplay with a great
looking platformer.
Moonlighter took an action-oriented roguelike
like Binding of Isaac and added in character
progression through a shop mechanic system.
Darkest Dungeon mixed in a bunch of JRPG combat
and party building influences.
Invisible Inc started with a tactics game
and added just a hint of that roguelike run-based
loop and wrapped in way more narrative than
you’d expect.
Hand of Fate uses a similar deck-building
system that would show up later in Slay the
Spire, tweaks dungeons and encounters like
FTL, has a real-time combat system, and has
some very high production values.
Toejam and Earl was synthesizing random items,
dungeon crawling, and the 90s back on the
Genesis.
None of these games fit the Berlin Interpretation
perfectly, but they each use many of its rules
as the foundation of their own design.
From those foundations a million new designs
can be made, recognizable but still fresh.
30 years of tweaks, combinations and refinements
have turned a handful of beloved ASCII-art
games into a whole new genre, and a rich vein
for new game design ideas.
[Chill vibes outro from FTL]