Man, I love Zelda.
I love the characters, I love the exploration,
I love finding and using a ton of crazy items,
I love the dungeons, and I… love the bosses.
Sometimes.
*sigh* I wish I loved more of the bosses,
but I think there’s a problem that keeps
cropping up with the way the Legend of Zelda
designs boss fights.
Most of the games have at least one or two
standout, no qualifiers, great bosses.
But other bosses in the same games fall far
too often into a pattern.
A dull, predictable, uninspired pattern.
The Zelda Pattern.
Let’s talk about Zelda boss design, the
pattern the games have kept falling into,
and what other games have done to break out
of it, even if only for a moment.
I know I’m trapped in a pattern … of sponsorships!
Do you know what today’s episode sponsor
is?
Wrong.
Or right, maybe, I can’t hear you through
the screen.
It’s Audible!
My book club is still rolling, and we decided
to read Dune!
Yeah, it’s not new, but it’s a sci-fi
classic for a reason.
I listen while working out, and I’ve found
it a million times easier to fit an audiobook
into my schedule than reading a physical copy,
and Audible lets you select from a huge catalog:
classics, new releases, obscure titles and
bestsellers.
If you sign up now, you get full access to
the all new Plus Catalog, with thousands of
select audiobooks, podcasts, Audible Originals,
fitness and guided meditation programs, sleep
tracks, and more, included with your membership.
Go to www.audible.com/designdoc or text ‘DESIGNDOC’
to 500 500 to get one free audiobook, a 30-day
free trial, and explore their Plus Catalog.
Click the link in the description to sign
up, and get literate as hell, the easy way
with Audible.
Now, I’m calling it The Zelda Pattern, but
it doesn’t describe EVERY Zelda boss, and
it’s a pattern that other games fall into
also, it just seems to happen in tons of Zelda
games, especially the ones made after the
jump to 3D, from Ocarina of Time onwards.
What I’m calling The Zelda Pattern is made
up of three parts:
1. Right before or during the dungeon, you get
some key item, and the boss acts as the item’s
final test.
2. There’s a single-mindedness to the fight.
There’s barely anything else to do besides
the main goal.
3. Earlier in the game you’ve already fought
a boss that did parts 1 and 2.
Each part by itself isn’t a big deal, but
when combined in the same fight the parts
work together to drag down the design.
When you start looking for it, it’s amazing
how many Zelda bosses fall into the pattern.
Look at Ocarina of Time.
First dungeon: the Deku tree.
You get the slingshot, use it for a few puzzles,
and you reach the first boss, Queen Gohma.
To win, you use the slingshot to knock her
off the ceiling or while she’s on the ground,
then swipe your sword to damage her health.
Fine.
Simple, no problems - a perfectly good early
tutorial boss.
On to Dodongo’s Cavern.
Hey, you just got the bomb bag!
Blow up some rocks in a few simple puzzles,
and you reach the boss - King Dodongo.
Throw bombs into his mouth while he’s charging
up to stun him, swipe down, and repeat
the cycle.
Hmm, this feels a lot like Gohma but with
bombs.
But those are just the first two bosses, right?
They’re supposed to be easy and straightforward.
How about the Spirit Temple?
Hey, you just got the Mirror Shield!
Reflect some beams of light in a few simple
puzzles, and you reach the boss - Twinrova.
In phase 1, you...
reflect... beams of fire and ice back towards
the witches.
In phase 2 you reflect… well, absorb, then
reflect…
3 attacks with the mirror shield.
Whenever they’re ready.
C’mon.
There it is.
And then swipe left.
There’s no twist, no mystery, and not really
any challenge - generous timing windows, not
much to distract or watch out for.
There’s no other moves.
Maybe you have to sidestep something a couple
times and position yourself, but there’s
really nothing else going on.
There’s just the wait and the one weird
trick with each dungeon item to defeat each
boss.
It’s not just Ocarina, either.
What about…
Wind Waker?
Oh.
Oh no.
Yeah, it’s here too.
The Dragon Roost Cavern drops off a grappling
hook, which you use to swing around the place
on specific grapple points.
The boss is… wait, it’s Gohma again.
Is that Gohma?
Did she get a haircut?
Says it’s Gohma.
Use your one tool to grapple onto the dragon
tail in the center of the room.
Gohma doesn’t put up too much of a fuss
as you do it.
Do that three times, break her armor, grapple
her in the eye, swipe swipe swipe, and you’re
done.
The Forsaken Fortress.
Get Skull Hammer.
Hit hammer on bird.
Break Helmet, Swipe Swipe Swipe.
Done.
The Earth Temple.
Mirror Shield, again.
Shine a light on ghosts to make them less
ghosty.
Jalhalla is a BIG ghost, like a TRIPLE ghost,
so shine the light, make less ghosty, throw
at wall, make little ghosts, shine light
again, repeat 'til done.
The Wind Temple.
Hookshot.
Use hookshot to complete your sandworm oral
surgery test.
Done.
What about Twilight Princess?
Same issue.
The very first dungeon.
Get the Gale Boomerang.
Travel Boomerang Air to Diababa with a quick
connection in Bomb Bug City.
Repeat with moving targets.
Swipe swipe swipe, done.
Goron Mines.
Arrows and Iron Boots.
Arrow pointy.
Arrow hit glowy, stun boss.
Boots heavy.
Grab chain while heavy boots chain no go up
no more.
Swipe swipe swipe, done.
You see the pattern by now.
There's nothing inherently wrong with this
design formula.
It's not a bad way to teach and ensure that
a player knows how to use a new item.
The problem is the combination of the predictable,
singular focus and the repetition.
Most of these fights revolve entirely and
solely around using the one dungeon item to
do the one thing to win.
There's not much concern about positioning
or any other enemies to distract you.
There aren't many hazards to avoid or even
many combinations of items to use.
The pattern is very single-minded.
Seeing the same basic mechanical fight structure
show up 3, 4, 5 times in a game really detracts
from the whole slew of game bosses you get
through, no matter how cool the setting is
or how interesting the boss character design
is.
The more bosses that follow the pattern in
a game, the more you notice it, and the more
predictable the fights become, which compounds
with the lack of engagement the fights have
as they stand alone.
So how do you fix it?
How do you break out of the Zelda Pattern?
Luckily, snapping off any of the three legs
will do the trick.
Other games that borrow heavily from Zelda
have had some success by just barely tweaking
the pattern.
The first Darksiders is essentially an Ocarina-style
Zelda game with some light character action
combat akin to the original God of War trilogy
mixed in.
Its dungeon designs are in the style of the
classic 3D Zeldas: you find a key item part
way through that becomes the central element
to getting through the puzzles and enemies
that lie beyond.
The game's boss designs also largely follow
the Zelda Pattern, but with a couple of notable
changes.
The first dungeon is the Twilight Cathedral,
which centers around the Crossblade.
It locks on to multiple targets that the blade
will bounce between, a lot like Zelda's Gale
Boomerang.
The Crossblade is often used in puzzles alongside
these sticky bombs that you find scattered,
which will blow up crystals when you light
them by tagging a torch beforehand.
The main boss is Tiamat and is also designed
in part as a final test for the Crossblade.
Toss a nearby bomb onto her, then light the
bombs as you had been doing earlier to blow
them up and bring her down to do some damage.
It's pretty similar in design to the Diababa
fight in Twilight Princess, but the minor
tweaks make a big difference.
Successfully using the dungeon item on Tiamat
takes more effort than in your average Zelda
pattern boss.
You have to aim carefully to stick the bomb
on a spot that you'll be able to lock on to
later with the Crossblade.
The opportunity window is much smaller, too,
and gets shorter on the second cycle.
You have to watch out for a barrage of attacks
and the crumbling environmental architecture
which can get in the way of your perfect shot.
The other tweak is in the second phase, which
shifts the style to a more traditional character
action combat encounter.
You're dodging in and out of a variety of
attacks and getting your hits in whenever
you can.
The Crossblade is helpful here, too, but it's
just another tool in your kit, and you can
use whatever you find most convenient.
It's still not crazy-difficult, but it's not
something you can sleepwalk your way through
your first time.
These small changes barely change the fight's
fundamental design, but they make the combat
feel more well-rounded, more challenging,
and just more interesting.
But even Zelda didn’t always lean so heavily
on the Zelda Pattern.
Many of the bosses from the old games were
very sword-oriented, which was a little same-y
in its own way, but not quite as scripted.
A Link to the Past did start to plant the
seeds of the one-main-item-dungeon idea, but
it wasn’t quite so rigid, either.
Some bosses would have you use the item to
expose a weakness, but it wasn’t yet the
norm.
For some, the key item was an optional approach
like in the boss of the Dark Palace.
You get a magic hammer during this dungeon,
which you COULD use to smash that helmet.
But you could just use bombs, too.
The fights treated the weapons more like suggested
tools rather than the key to open the next
scripted sequence.
By the time the series gets to The Minish
Cap, it was starting to rely on the pattern
more and more.
Though even in that game you’d see some
worthwhile tweaks pop up.
The game's fifth dungeon, the Palace of Winds,
gives you the Roc's Cape, which lets you jump
real high.
At this point in the game, you have the Phantom
Sword, too, which creates clones of yourself
on designated panels, then you can control
all of your clones at once to solve puzzles.
The dungeon's boss is a pair of flying manta
rays, and their fight combines both the cape
and the sword to make a more exciting fight
than if it focused on just one of the items.
You have to use the cape to avoid obstacles
and jump between the two manta rays.
You strike at the weak points of the blue
ray while jumping over its tail.
On the red ray, you use the sword to match
your clones to the formation of the weak points
and attack, all while avoiding projectiles
that can take out your clones on one hit.
It's not a super complicated fight, but it's
infinitely more interesting than the red/blue
dual boss setup that Ocarina's Twinrova did
with the mirror shield.
You aren't using the items in the most rudimentary
way.
You aren't sitting around waiting for your
designated strike window to go attack.
Like the Tiamat fight would later do in Darksiders,
items in the Palace of Winds boss are treated
as just another tool in your arsenal of moves.
It's up to you to piece together how to combine
them in the right way.
The boss feels more like a little action-puzzle
rather than a door with one weird, slow key.
Even something as simple as changing the tool
you use can do wonders for making a boss fight
more interesting.
Back to Ocarina we go, for the Forest Temple
boss, Phantom Ganon.
The Forest Temple is all about the bow, and
during the boss fight, you're surrounded by
paintings that Ganon will attack from.
The game tries to fake you out with
multiple copies of the painting to pay attention
to and figure out which to quickly aim at,
at the right time.
But then the second phase of the fight starts,
and it ditches the bow entirely.
Instead, play magic energy tennis as you deflect
Ganon's attack projectiles back and forth
until he slips up.
It's a change of pace, very fast-paced compared
to a lot of the other fights earlier in the
game, and a clear and much-needed break in
the formula that had been pretty rigorously
followed up until this point.
There's a reason Phantom Ganon is one of the
more well-liked boss fights in the game.
But there is one game that completely shatters
all parts of the Zelda Pattern.
No other game in the series breaks the mold
more than Breath of the Wild, and that includes
boss fights.
The entire game is a trend away from the scripted
sequence, favoring improvisation and clockwork
systems over a defined answer.
In Breath of the Wild, no boss is about the
One Key Item.
The Sheikah runes are all acquired at the
start of the game, and are much more versatile
than many of the items in the series’ past.
The more traditional key items like the boomerang
and bows are all consumable equipment, which
forces the designers to not rely on players
using one specific loadout.
No boss has one single-minded solution.
The bosses are way more open-ended in how
you can fight them.
Using runes, arrows, deflecting attacks with
a well-timed parry, using Champion powers
like Urbosa’s Fury to stun them, using flurry
rushes after dodging just right, using special
weapons and gear to exploit their weakness,
or just going up to the thing and wailing
on it are all perfectly good ways to take
down these bosses.
And that flexibility ensures that no boss
is dealt with in the same manner.
Now the boss fights aren’t perfect of course.
They all have aesthetic or structural problems
too, but at least these aren’t the SAME
structural problems.
They don’t fall into the same old routine
that plagued the boss design in the games
of the past.
It still feels like Zelda, but no part of
the game’s boss design quite fits the old
Zelda Pattern.
Zelda has tons more bosses that both exhibit
and break the Zelda Pattern.
Head down to the comments and let us know
of some other bosses that you’ve seen deviate
from the Zelda pattern in interesting ways,
either in Zelda or in other series.
It’s not easy to know exactly how to spice
up a bland boss design, but by identifying
some common patterns, it can make it easier
to design a boss that breaks the mold.
*chill vibes outro from Twilight Princess*