I have played so much Mario Kart in the last…
well the last couple months, but really for
the last 25 years.
Mario Kart has been the gold standard of kart
racing for so long that it can be easy to
take for granted.
But Mario Kart isn’t a static thing.
There have been big shifts, but gradual ones
too that you can only really see if you zoom
all the way out.
Items and characters, sure, but I’m most
interested in the track design.
Game to game, there are small but meaningful
improvements that can be hard to put your
finger on, but over time they add up and have
taken us from THIS to THIS.
That’s worth talking about.
Let’s take a lap through the tracks of Mario
Kart,
and watch the series’
track design philosophy change over time.
Today's episode is sponsored by Keeps.
Hey, if you're just starting to notice your
hair thinning out up top, you're not alone.
Two out of three guys will experience some
hair loss before they turn 35, but you don't
have to live with it.
You've got options, and Keeps can help you
sort out what will work best for you.
Keeps offers clinically proven research-backed
treatments.
The real deal stuff, not weird supplements
or whatever.
You'll work with Keeps' network of expert
medical advisors and specialists that can
help you get a treatment plan going at about half
the cost of a traditional pharmacy.
Keeps delivers straight to your door and sends
you refill reminders, so you don't have to
think about it again, and you can stop worrying
about your hair.
Hair loss treatment works better if you start
early, so get started today!
Hair loss stops with Keeps.
To get 50% off your first order, go to https://keeps.com/designdoc
or click the link in the description.
That's K-E-E-P-S dot com slash designdoc.
Let’s start at the top.
Super Mario Kart started life as a generic
kart racer.
Miyamoto gave series creators Tadashi Sugiyama
and Hideki Konno the task of making ‘F-Zero
for two players’.
Hardware constraints kept them from designing
courses with long straightaways in split screen,
so they focused on making a game with compact,
go-kart style tracks.
The original characters were just dudes in
overalls and not very memorable, so they tried
putting Mario characters in instead, and it
stuck.
The game is made possible with Mode 7 technology,
which put 2D character sprites on a spinning
3D plane to give the illusion of driving on
a track.
It works!
See?
Perspective!
It looks like 3D!
Kinda!
It’s not quite…right.
But it’s better than a lot of other options.
Better than R.C.
Pro-Am.
It’s impressive tech for the time, but the
tricks also put limits on how the tracks could
be designed.
So what are we working with?
Super Mario Kart has 20 total courses divided
into 4 cups, with the later cups holding more
and more difficult tracks.
Each track is built to take 5 laps, and each
lap might only take 15 to 30 seconds to complete.
It's a quick game, dense with other racers
and stuff to avoid, but even though the laps
are short, it's not as easy as it might seem.
Every track takes place in one of eight biomes,
mostly borrowed from Super Mario World, with
level obstacles to match.
Mario Circuits are the most like a traditional
go-kart track with some pipe obstacles thrown
in for Mario flavor.
Donut Plains are natural grassland courses
with wide turns, a few bridges, and Monty
Moles that jump on you to slow you down.
Ghost Valley takes place on a haunted, rickety
boardwalk with right-angle turns, pits, and
walls that break away when you hit them.
Bowser's Castle is also very angular, with
more traps, lava pits, and plenty of jumps.
Choco Islands are rugged, muddy tracks that
really punish going off-road.
Koopa Beach is quick and sandy, with deep
water pits to avoid and the game's best music.
The Vanilla Lakes are frustrating.
They're ice tracks that alter your kart physics
and obstruct your forward motion with breakaway
ice blocks.
And alone at the end is Rainbow Road, a no-safety-rails,
narrow, challenging track with devastating
thwomps to weave around.
Each track biome feels distinct, and most
get 2 to 4 variants that remix the same elements.
The variants gradually get harder with narrower
tracks and more obstacles to dodge.
Every track has one major limitation, though:
they're all flat.
Sure, jumps break up the design’s flatness
a little, but you're still driving around
on a fancy Playskool play mat.
There aren’t many track landmarks to speak
of, which can make it difficult to tell where
you are on a track at any given time.
The Mode 7 effect also feels a little disconnected
from the character sprites on powerslides.
It's easy to swing wildly off-course while
drifting, especially if you're used to the
controls of the later games.
Lots of the series' other design staples start
with Super Mario Kart, like items.
Even the most basic track comes to life thanks
to the interaction of the track layout and
the items.
Item boxes usually cluster together soon after
the start line, with the occasional solo box
sprinkled around.
This is the only game in the series that does
item boxes like this.
Track shortcuts have been built into the series
from the start.
There are obvious shortcuts like the cut-out
in Mario Circuit 4, but this game also loves
to add weird extra paths.
This 'STOP' dead end.
The boost and jump in Ghost Valley 1.
They're intentional shortcuts, but how they
jut out from the normal track loop makes them
a little more in-your-face than what you'd
see in later games.
But what if you could make your own shortcuts?
The feather gives you so many options to create
your own path.
Ostensibly the feather was about avoiding
track obstacles and items, but check this
out.
Every wall on every track only exists on the
track surface.
You can skip over a HUGE track section by
leaping over walls, gaps and other things
with a feather.
Worst to first - amazing.
It's a little too good, maybe.
A little too game-breaking.
CPU characters could conjure up a feather
out of nowhere whenever they wanted.
If you make a perfect shell shot or set them
up to hit a banana, the CPU could just fire
off that feather and miss it entirely.
Super Mario Kart also introduced the series'
off-and-on coin mechanic.
Gathering more coins meant your kart could
drive faster, and you'd lose coins colliding
with other characters or pay off Lakitu for
a tow.
Get bumped with no coins, and it's like you
hit a shell.
Rows of coins are usually a little out of
the way, but grabbing a bunch can help you
more than make up for the lost time.
Different coin routes helped add an extra
decision-making level beyond just taking the
fastest line around the track.
The coin mechanics wouldn't show up in the
sequel, but they'll be back…
Super Mario Kart was a promising start, and
was full of creative ideas to make flat textures
into living tracks.
It’s still fun even today, but there’s
plenty of room for improvement.
Super Mario Kart gave way to Mario Kart 64
in 1996.
The power of the Nintendo 64 unlocked the
Y-axis, and with it unlocked room for loads
more creativity.
Surprisingly, the characters are still 2D
sprites that change their look as you turn.
It looks a little wonky in some cases, but
early 3D is a different time, man.
The tracks, err, ‘courses’ use banked
turns, hills and valleys, ramps, slopes, and
overlapping parts to great effect.
The course travels around a real landscape,
with much longer laps than the first game,
but now a race only takes 3 to complete.
We're down to just 16 courses, 4 per cup,
but the track variety is much greater.
Each has its own individual theming.
Well, there's a little overlap on a couple,
but they're mostly unique.
Each biome in the original game is represented
by a course here, and in addition, we get
brand new themes.
Jungles, western deserts, canyons, motocross
stadiums, city highways, and, like, a SNOW
theme.
Snow is not ice.
It's different.
The courses are much more thematic than in
Super Mario Kart.
Every playable character is tied into one
of them, and their designs try to reflect
that character.
Mostly.
I'm not sure what Toad's Turnpike has to do
with Toad.
Here we see the start of what will carry over
in most future Mario Karts - track centerpieces.
The courses are designed with, and sometimes
around, major landmarks like this giant Yoshi
egg or Peach's Mario 64 castle.
The track sections are much more unique from
each other, with distinct elements in the
environment that keep the tracks from blurring
together.
Bowser's Castle is the clearest example, having
many individual indoor rooms, a courtyard,
staircases and ramps, a lava bridge,
and two different styles of thwomps, including
THIS unique nightmare.
Throughout the course, this level of distinction
of place is what future games will strive
for, and even though it's not present on every
course in Mario Kart 64, there are enough
for it to feel like the start of a trend.
The designers are starting to add in more
gimmicks, too.
Toad's Turnpike would be an incredibly boring
figure 8 loop, except there's traffic to dodge.
Or ONCOMING traffic to avoid in mirror mode.
Kalimari Desert has a train to beat.
DK Jungle Parkway and Royal Raceway have huge
jumps off zippers to add a little wow factor.
Yoshi Valley is a multi-path course with so
many twists and turns that the game can't
even tell who's in the lead until the end.
Mario Kart 64 is also chock full of shortcuts,
minor and major, safer and riskier, intentional
and not, adding in tons more 'risk vs. reward'
elements that weren't as present in the first
game.
Moo Moo Farms' inside track is full of Monty
Moles to dodge.
Yoshi Valley's shortest routes are also the
riskiest, including a no-guardrails narrow
line at the start.
Koopa Troopa Beach has a ramp to a cave that
cuts out a third of the lap if you aim with
the right speed or hop at the right time to
nail it.
Rainbow Road's leap of faith is one of the
most famous shortcuts of the entire series,
easy enough to try on your own but tricky
enough to feel very satisfying to land.
Fail on any one of these shortcuts, and you'll
be smashed, dropped, thwomped, or cast away
into the void and lose tons of time.
The best parts of the courses are highlights,
but the first trip into 3D left a lot of details
to improve.
The pacing isn't always the best.
Choco Mountain, Wario Stadium, Kalimari Desert,
and especially Rainbow Road are very long
tracks with a lot of 'dead air,' where there
just isn't much to see or do.
Several tracks are light on the theming and
set-piece integration and can be a bit monotonous.
There are no coins, so coin pathing isn't
an option to change the optimal track lines.
Checkpointing is pretty rudimentary, so you
can lose a ton of time if you fall off the
track in the wrong place.
Later games cleaned this up especially.
Overall, Mario Kart 64 is a bold step into
3D and thematic course design for the series,
but plenty of changes are coming.
Before we can go forward, though, the next
game is a detour.
Back to the SNES…
… Sort of.
The GBA is pretty much a SNES.
Mario Kart Super Circuit is a second crack
at the first game, bringing over a lot of
the design approaches and lessons learned
from Mario Kart 64 as well as a few new improvements.
We're back up to 20 tracks over 5 cups, and
each track is a bit longer than the original
game, keeping Mario Kart 64's 3 lap format.
Gone are the basic circle designs.
The track layouts are much more involved,
with lots more hairpin turns, tricky shortcuts,
jumps, and interesting stage hazards like
exploding cannonballs, Boos, and Shy Guys.
The moment-to-moment decision-making is more
complicated, and the game feels more exciting
for it.
Item boxes are placed on a track more like
Mario Kart 64, with fewer stragglers and one-offs
than the original game.
Coin paths are thankfully back and immediately
help again with making the optimal line decisions
a little more interesting.
The themes are back to basics, with circuits,
beaches, haunted boardwalks, and ice tracks,
but there are some new ones, like Cheese Land,
Ribbon Road, and Sky Garden.
Some tracks with older themes have a little
extra atmospheric flair, too.
Luigi Circuit takes place in the rain.
Sunset Wilds has a setting sun that gets lower
with each lap.
The track variety is much greater in Super
Circuit, though there still are 4 Bowser’s
Castle tracks.
At least each of those get a distinct background.
Each version is a bit more difficult than
the last, culminating in some absolute brutal
difficulty towards the end.
Lakeside Park has 2 points with jumps that
can send you BACKWARDS on the track if you
take a turn too wide, which can be easy to
do as we’re back to the loose kart handling
physics of the original game.
This version of Rainbow Road is one of the
hardest tracks in the series, with jumps and
turbo pads absolutely covering the surface.
It’s super easy to lose control and get
launched out into space.
But if you really wanted the old game back,
guess what?
Every single track from Super Mario Kart is
unlockable!
They’re laid out the same, themed the same,
and go back to the 5 lap format.
Well, they did take out the Monty Moles and
other stage hazards.
The inclusion of those tracks makes it easy
to see the sets of small tweaks that have
improved the game over time, and this marks
the starting point of the series’ love affair
with bringing back the classics as much as
possible.
Super Circuit is a cleaned-up Super Mario
Kart - more well-rounded in its themes and
track layouts while adding back in the difficulty
and strategic elements that felt missing from
Mario Kart 64.
However, going back to the Mode 7 flat track
design still ties the designers’ hands a
little from what they could do.
Thankfully, we’re about to enter a whole
new era…
Know what’s better than one driver?
Uh…
TWO drivers…
apparently.
Mario Kart Double Dash!!
came out in late 2003 for the Gamecube, and
I’d say it’s the most experimental game
in the series, with a two-driver gimmick that
impacts the game’s item play through exclusive
items and double boxes.
The more powerful Gamecube hardware opens
the door for many series firsts.
Finally, characters get rendered in 3D.
The karts have a more realistic suspension
as they bounce around.
Karts properly shift and tilt with the track
terrain.
The track surfaces are much more detailed,
with rolling divots and hills.
Drifting is easier to pull off, and tracks
seem to match the drift radius a little more
closely than in previous games.
The game's tracks are all about experimentation.
We're back down to 16 tracks over 4 cups.
The devs planned to add more, but they wanted
to make sure each track felt like it had something
to call its own.
The very first one, Luigi Circuit, is an out-and-back
layout where both sides share a straightaway
going in opposite directions.
You might run into some people or, more likely,
their items.
As the race progresses, the straightaway becomes
more and more like a minefield of bananas
and other items, making it incredibly hectic
for a beginner track.
Double Dash is where the series starts to
lean into thematic track design across the
board.
More details, more one-off elements, and even
the shape of the track layout itself can be
molded to fit a theme.
Daisy Cruiser is an entire course on a cruise
ship, from the upper decks to below.
There are themed side railings, the pool,
the dining hall, and even an alternate path
that takes you through the engine room.
The track even simulates the ship rocking
back and forth with shifting item boxes and
tables.
There’s a lot more verticality in some of
the track designs, too.
DK Mountain is a downhill course with a gigantic
barrel cannon jump to start it off.
The track uses multiple types of terrain - rock,
dirt, grass and a bridge - to make it feel
more like a mountain than a race track.
We’ve got…
well,
A circuit of some kind.
Themed to something, I don’t know.
Waluigi Stadium is another Wa- themed motocross
track, but now with more stuff.
Speed boosting jumps, hoops of fire, a half-pipe,
and moving wooden Piranha Plants.
Compared to the original Wario Stadium track,
this shows off the trajectory of the series’
track design pretty clearly.
Mushroom Bridge and Mushroom City are revisions
of Toad’s Turnpike, with a more exciting
city road layout and different car types like
bomb cars, wiggler buses, and these guys that
drop mushrooms on the track.
In fitting with the city grid theme, Mushroom
City has several pathways a la Yoshi Valley,
but with no clearly better route than the
others.
Peach Beach is a Mario Sunshine-themed track,
full of resident NPCs and Cataquack obstacles
to get that Delfino flair.
Double Dash does use many of its themes twice
on a pair of tracks.
Luigi Circuit and Mario Circuit.
Mushroom Bridge and Mushroom City.
Waluigi Stadium and Wario Colosseum.
You can even see Daisy Cruiser on the horizon
on Peach Beach.
The pairs approach the theme from two different
angles while sharing music.
It’s a small detail, but tying them together
adds a touch of cohesiveness without making
the tracks with the same theme blend together
as much as in the SNES era.
This is also the first game in the series
that puts unique lap rules on individual courses.
Baby Park is a 7-lap trip around a super simple
oval, almost like a bumper car course.
Seven laps on a tiny track with a million
items make this one very chaotic.
Wario Colosseum, however, is such a long gauntlet
that it’s only 2 laps.
Double Dash’s tracks do get more difficult
as you go along.
Tracks are more narrow than in Mario Kart
64, making items tougher to avoid.
The hazards are more aggressive, the snakey
turns are more frequent, and the bottomless
pits are everywhere.
And the difficulty keeps increasing to the
end with the toughest track in the game, Rainbow
Road.
This one's very challenging, with steep slopes
and no guard rails in critical spots.
It’s maybe a little too much.
Some of these turns, like this spiral ramp,
feel like they're not quite made with Double
Dash's physics in mind.
Lakitu's gonna get a hernia at this rate,
poor guy…
Double Dash is the starting point for modern
Mario Kart track design.
Strong theme integration, unique ideas, item
chaos, and taking the ideas that worked in
one-off tracks of the past and adding them
into more places.
This is the first step in making Mario Kart
feel how it feels today.
Now let's take those lessons learned and shrink
'em down for the DS.
Mario Kart DS is one of the most well-rounded
entries in the series.
A nice middle ground between 64 and Double
Dash, more or less.
The kart handling was changed to be a tad
less twitchy than Double Dash and is pretty
reminiscent of how it feels in the series'
future games.
Mario Kart DS's tracks follow Double Dash's
lead on theming but maybe toned down a touch.
New stages are visually striking and spacious,
but some can be slower at points.
We're not quite back to the Mario Kart 64
days, but it's a little closer.
There aren't many groundbreaking new features,
but there are a few.
Yoshi Falls has waterfall currents that can
sweep you away.
Some tracks have rotating floors, a drawbridge,
or shifting platforms to change the route
from under you.
The giant corkscrew in this game's Rainbow
Road is a great novelty, and I absolutely
love getting hit by a shell on it.
The new additions are nice but minor, and
they'll show up again in later games.
The best parts of the new DS tracks are the
creative track themes, with great settings.
Luigi's Mansion is a straightforward but fun
tribute to the namesake game.
Delfino Square combines the best parts of
Mushroom City and Peach Beach by running you
through a town with alternate paths through
alleyways, plus this amazing shortcut jump
across the river.
Waluigi Pinball.
It's Waluigi-themed pinball.
What more do you want?
You're a pinball.
And are dodging pinballs.
Don't hit the sides.
10/10.
Peach Gardens takes you through flower beds
and hedge mazes with roaming chain chomps.
Airship Fortress is an excellent Super Mario
Bros 3 callback as you weave through the hazard-filled
upper and lower decks until you get shot out
of a cannon into a castle spire.
Tick Tock Clock takes you inside a clock-themed
clock where you dodge clock stuff like clock
hands and clock pendulums.
I love clocks.
This game is full of fan-favorite tracks.
Though they aren't all high highs.
There are some shockingly low lows, too.
Mario Kart DS has maybe the biggest disparity
in its track quality of any game in the series.
There are a number of aggressively bland options.
Figure 8 Circuit, which is exactly what it
sounds like.
Long straightaways, gentle turns, and ZERO
shortcuts.
Yoshi Falls has those waterfall currents,
but the rest of the track is pretty much a
take on Moo Moo Farm with inside and outside
lanes on a circle.
Cheep Cheep Beach, Mario Circuit, Desert Hills
and Shroom Ridge are all derivative of past
tracks without much unique to say about them.
We're not talking about terrible designs here,
but it can get boring.
OK, Figure 8 Circuit is actually kinda terrible.
Please don’t bring this one back.
But Mario Kart DS's biggest mark on the series
is how it properly introduces retro tracks.
On top of the 16 originals, we have 16 more
tracks coming back to pad out the content,
4 tracks from each previous game.
Where the inclusion of the entire SNES lineup
in Super Circuit felt like a fun extra, this
is the first time we see significant upgrades
on each of the returning courses.
Now, it's great that the retro track trend
starts here, but it's not the smoothest execution
of the idea.
Track curation is underrated.
Having 4 faithfully recreated tracks from
each game is a great idea, but are these really
the ones you wanted to bring over?
4 SNES tracks that now have a 3 lap limit?
It's another example of how the track design
has evolved, but the layouts aren't very exciting
with the DS gameplay.
The Super Circuit courses are a bit better,
with more demanding tracks in Bowser Castle
2, Luigi Circuit, and Sky Garden.
Peach Circuit is yet another first track and
may be a little redundant.
From 64, we get Moo Moo Farms, Frappe Snowland,
Choco Mountain, and Banshee Boardwalk.
Not bad options to bring over tracks with
interesting thematic elements from a game
that didn't have a ton of them, though Moo
Moo Farms is another basic circle.
The Gamecube set is a real downer.
Luigi Circuit, another first course.
Baby Park has the simplest layout of them
all.
Mushroom Bridge, sure.
Yoshi Circuit - the one that looks like Yoshi.
The tweaks put in are downgrades, though.
Most of the shortcuts are removed, and the
tracks feel way too scaled up in size to the
point of feeling empty.
The majority of these choices are just too
simple when all put together.
Something's off when Banshee Boardwalk, Choco
Mountain, and Sky Garden are the wildest picks.
Too many flat tracks, circuits, and early
game courses.
3 of the 4 tracks in the Shell Cup are first
tracks and the other is Moo Moo Farm.
Why?
Thankfully the next few games will keep
the retro port trend alive and do a more interesting
job modernizing them.
Now it’s time for a real game changer.
Mario Kart Wii.
A robust and funky character roster.
Bikes. 12 racers at once.
The best online play the Wii could struggle
to provide.
And the biggest innovation in the series to
date.
The Wii Wheel.
I mean, the Trick system.
Now, any time you go off any jump, or even
off a bump on a track, you can hit Up on the
D-pad to perform a trick and get a mini-turbo
boost.
In earlier games, there wasn’t really a
point to all the little hills and ramps on
a track.
Now with tricks there’s a reason to use
them as much as you can.
It really messes with you if you go back to
the older games, like something’s missing.
It’s a more obvious speed boosting system
than coins were, whose mechanics were a little
hard to detect if you didn’t know what they
did.
Now tricks just give you an immediate boost
in speed, and can be chained with drifts to
let the real Mario Kart pros separate themselves
from everyone else.
Tricks allow for a ton more aerial play and
strategy, and lots of courses have sections
that only become a good idea if you’re tricking
off of them.
Koopa Cape lets you choose between a river
to help sweep you ahead, the road segments
with items, or the ramps off to the side which
you can trick off of.
Mario Kart Wii’s tracks are full of decision
making moments like this, with more elaborate
split pathways than ever before.
We’re even starting to see Nintendo’s
famous 4-step level design creep into some
of the new tracks.
In many Mario games, a level might introduce
a new idea and iterate on it in more challenging
ways to act as a tutorial that proves you
can handle it whenever the game throws it
at you next.
Apparently, that also works in Mario Kart.
Mushroom Gorge is built around these springy
mushrooms.
At the start of the track, you jump off one
big one.
Further on, now there are 3 mushrooms to line
up and handle.
Finally, the road splits into several long
mushroom paths, one more difficult and rewarding
with item boxes and jumps, and one more easy
to navigate.
Three steps, each highlighting more and more
complex parts of a new element that they would
add into future games.
This multi-step design format shows up in
Toad’s Factory’s conveyor belts and Koopa
Cape’s water currents, too.
The later games don’t commit to this design
convention as much, but you can still spot
hints of it here and there, especially in
early stages that introduce major new mechanics.
The tracks in Mario Kart Wii all have a 3-lap
format this time, but several tracks change
themselves lap to lap.
Coconut Mall’s escalators will change direction
on laps 2 and 3.
Parts of the road in Grumble Volcano will
crumble away.
Dry Dry Ruins has a room filling with sand
over the course of the race, which ends up
blocking the middle path by the end.
The ever-shifting tracks contribute to the
decision-making process and improvisation
that helps make Mario Kart Wii feel distinct
from its predecessors.
Not to mention the wild track concepts.
These are some of the most creative in the
entire series, and can start to feel like
full-blown theme park attractions, like the
mine shaft that dives and weaves underground
like a roller coaster.
There’s a tropical mall.
A volcanic mountain range.
A giant tree.
A ski resort, and stunning underwater tubes.
There’s even a track in a BOX
FACTORY.
This iteration of Rainbow Road is as wild
as it’s ever been - a great and difficult
track that gets the most out of the trick
mechanic by rewarding selective tricks and
punishing those who are tricking carelessly.
Mario Kart Wii’s retro tracks are much stronger
than on the DS, with 16 tracks added.
Besides a visual upgrade, the inclusions are
tweaked with the trick system in mind, adding
new ramps and bumps to trick off of.
Waluigi Stadium in particular fits perfectly
with the new mechanics thanks to its boost
jumps and halfpipe.
Bowser’s Castle 3 from the GBA has tons
of jumps in a row, which is great to trick
off of.
The selection as a whole is very well-rounded.
Mario Kart Wii is a fantastic entry in the
series, with the most creative track concepts
yet and the new trick system that opens up
new strategies and makes every little bump
a chance to get ahead.
Next up, Mario Kart 7, and we’re flipping
back to the 3DS.
Mario Kart 7 is the newest handheld entry
in the series, and like the others, it’s
a middle ground between the previous two games.
It’s a less frantic version of Wii but more
mechanically interesting than DS.
We’re back down to 8 racers, and the tracks
have been toned down a little as far as how
many trick chances there are.
That doesn’t mean there isn’t anything
new, though.
If one gimmick system worked for Mario Kart
Wii, what happens if we add two more?
The Glider and Underwater segments are this
game's big new features.
Both give good opportunities for new course
themes, alternate routes, and changing track
conditions to keep the tracks from getting
stale or repetitive.
The gliders solve a specific problem.
The previous few games have had huge jumps
and launching cannons to help tracks play
with verticality, but as you go off of them,
it’s almost as if you’re watching a cutscene.
The glider gives more of a chance for interactivity
while airborne, letting you gather items or
catch a corner just right on the landing.
Underwater segments are a little more subtle,
changing the kart physics while changing the
scenery.
Their application is a little uneven, though.
When the new bits are done right, they break
up the tracks and provide unique elements
to consider.
Done poorly, they don't do much more than
create a sluggish section of the track.
Coins are back!
They do the same thing as the earlier games,
both for your kart speed and for the decisions
you'll make while driving.
It worked then, it works now, and it complements
the trick mechanic, so it's a welcome return.
I also love another new addition - single
lap tracks.
Some long stages are now a single lap divided
into 3 parts.
Wuhu Loop, Maka Wuhu, and Rainbow Road are
designed as single-lap experiences with set-pieces
everywhere.
Rainbow Road has segments of planetary rings,
moon craters to trick off of, and gliding
segments all set up, so you never do the same
thing twice over a single race.
The new format eliminates a subtle way for
a track to be repetitive within itself, and
like in previous games, the different race
formats help break up the game's rhythm just
enough while creating space for bold track
concepts to flourish.
The new changes aren't as groundbreaking as
tricks or verticality were in previous games,
but the combination of them helps create powerful
tools for variety, creativity, and pacing
for the courses in Mario Kart 7.
There are a few big highlights.
Shy Guy Bazaar is the most unique desert track
in the series, taking place in a Middle Eastern-themed
town at night.
Piranha Plant Slide is a cool twist on a sewer
track, themed around stage 1-2 of the original
Super Mario Bros, with rushing water currents
to move you along (hint hint, return of Koopa
Cape elements).
Wario Shipyard has some great underwater segments
as you drive through sunken ships and get
airtime from currents.
This time, Bowser gets a non-Castle track
with Neo Bowser City, a futuristic city in
the rain with demanding turns and high difficulty.
Music Park is one of the strongest tracks
in the series to date and leans into its theme
hard.
It has 3 long drifting turns on instruments
that play as you drive, drums that you bounce
off of (hint hint, return of Mushroom Gorge
elements), and the final stretch has a rhythm
section where giant notes bounce in sync with
the music, launching you and letting you perform
tricks to the beat.
You can see how important theme integration
is on track quality in Mario Kart 7, as the
weaker tracks tend to be the least extensively
themed.
The proper Bowser's Castle track is uncharacteristically
basic, with just a few halls, an underwater
section, and a ho-hum drive through a volcanic
mountainside.
Cheep Cheep Lagoon sure is underwater and
that’s about it.
The ice track is just called 'Rosalina's Ice
World.'
There's the Comet Observatory in the background.
That's kinda neat.
Mario Kart 7's less interesting tracks aren't
hitting the DS's lows, but the game can still
feel a little reserved and unambitious at
times.
Thank God for Music Park.
The Retro track updates are more extensive
than usual, adding new alternate routes, gliding,
and underwater segments.
Daisy Cruiser's pool and lower deck route
were turned into underwater sections for some
extra flair.
Some shortcuts like in Koopa Troopa Beach
and Dino Dino Jungle are redesigned with
gliders in mind and are a little more fun
to pull off.
SNES Rainbow Road's thwomps are neat because
they make the road bend on impact, which can
be tricked off of.
The changes aren't all upgrades, though.
Kalimari Desert undercuts its whole train
gimmick by timing it to almost never cross
the track with the players.
The water current segments in Koopa Cape are
skipped over with glider bits.
The underwater pipe isn't nearly as fun without
the river current and obstacles.
Newer mechanics don't always mean better ones.
Overall, Mario Kart 7 made some major additions
that gave the series some incredible tools
to work with, but the game didn’t go for
as high of highs as maybe they could have.
Not to worry, though.
Nintendo is pulling out all the stops for
its latest and most eight years ago-ist game
in the series, Mario Kart 8.
Mario Kart 8
It's beautiful.
For simplicity's sake, we're just talking
about 8 Deluxe.
Everything from the Wii U version, including
the DLC, made it to the Switch for a whopping
roster of 48 tracks.
Really, everything from everything made it
to the Switch.
Mario Kart 8 Deluxe takes everything established
before - the strong thematics, the alternate
pathways, the variety, the mechanical elements
- and takes them to their natural extremes.
Add a coat of stunning HD paint, and you got
one of the most beautiful and well-rounded
games Nintendo has ever made, even nearly
a decade after its original release.
The new headlining feature is anti-gravity.
Similar to the underwater segments from 7,
anti-gravity tweaks the handling and physics
of your kart, especially with how collisions
now spin you in place.
The anti-gravity can be subtle on its own,
so Mario Kart 8 combines it with a couple
track design features to help highlight it:
twin roads and walls.
Lots of tracks split into identical roads
that twist around each other, and anti-gravity
helps show both paths off at once without
them looking like a highway overpass.
Walls are used with anti-gravity to give another
interesting alternate pathway, often on the
outside lane of a turn.
They get peppered with boosters and jumps
to help players keep up with the inside lane.
Taking the wall route in tracks like Toad
Harbor or Thwomp Ruins can be a good defensive
tactic to escape some of the course hazards
and item chaos.
There really are no limits to track design
anymore, with new settings and themes that
provide great spectacle as you weave in and
out, over air and underwater, vertically and
horizontally through some of the most creative
track concepts Nintendo has ever created.
The set pieces are bigger than ever.
A massive Bowser golem punches the track as
you weave in and out of his Castle.
Take to the skies, over beanstalks and airships,
and within thunderclouds, as you dodge lightning
in Cloudtop Cruise.
Drive up and down a waterfall.
Why not?
We've got anti-gravity now.
Race in a busy airport, sure.
Or take to the slopes of Mt.
Wario, a track with set-piece after unique
set piece all the way down.
Dolphin Shoals is one of my favorite tracks
in the series, and shows how much potential
underwater tracks truly have.
You start with a straightaway with ramps that
let you breach like a dolphin.
It transitions to a pipe-filled cave that
pushes you through several midair routes,
then you ride a giant eel and do tricks off
its spine, and finally you swirl around a
whirlpool, all with the saxophone goin’
nuts in the background.
The way karts tilt and shift with the terrain
feels the best it ever has, partially thanks
to HD rumble adding to the illusion.
Driving over the different terrains actually
feels different - it’s great.
There are whole new concepts Nintendo uses
in some tracks.
Excite Bike Arena features a little bit of
procedural generation with randomized ramps
and mud patches.
The Animal Crossing track has 4 distinct versions
of itself, taking place during each of the
seasons.
However, one of the biggest gems in Mario
Kart 8 is the amount of work the game puts
into updating its Retro Tracks.
They fully integrate the newer generation
of game mechanics, and are such a huge step
up visually and mechanically that they stand
toe-to-toe with the all-new tracks.
For maybe the first time in the series, there
aren’t really any low points in the roster
of 48.
At worst, it’s like a 7/10.
The setting for Bone Dry Dunes is a little
boring I guess.
That’s about it.
Mario Kart 8 is amazing.
A full realization of multiple generations
of gameplay mechanics and stunning track design
in one single, expansive package.
It deserves to be the best-selling game in
the whole series, and if you haven’t played
it by now, jump in.
Wow, that's a lot.
So that's all of Mario Kart.
Except for the arcade games.
And the mobile game.
And the DLC based on the mobile game.
And that weird play-from-home game that came
out.
If you made the world's greatest Mario Kart
track out of stuff around your house in that
game, let us know in the comments.
Otherwise, head down there, and let's talk
about your favorite tracks and track segments
from across the series.
Mario Kart has taken a long road, full of
fine adjustments to item design, mechanical
changes, and above all, amazing theming, and
they've stayed on track to finish with the
most beloved kart racer of all time.
*chill vibes outro from Mario Kart 64*