[Music from Octopath Traveler]
Octopath Traveler had one of the best teasers
I’ve ever seen.
It showed a vision for how to refresh the
old Square RPG style into a modern context.
But it WAS just a teaser, it didn’t guarantee
that the actual game would deliver on that
vision.
Octopath Traveler is stunning on its surface.
It’s got a great look, a beautiful soundtrack,
and fun gameplay, but it has structural problems
- especially in its story - that take off
some of the shine.
It’s a game whose quality is divided over
the biggest two aspects of any JRPG - the
game mechanics and the storytelling.
Let’s talk about the design of Octopath
Traveler through its RPG mechanics and its
storytelling and explore what went right,
and went wrong.
Octopath Traveler is an RPG dense in game
mechanics.
It’s got tons of equipment, Final Fantasy-style
character jobs, SMT-style elemental and attack
type weaknesses, visible turn orders like
Final Fantasy X, and BP, which works a lot
like the Brave system in Bravely Default.
They all combine to make a very strategic
battle experience.
The combat is all focused around weaknesses.
You’ll want to create a team with the right
jobs to have a wide range of elemental and
physical attack options.
Use every type of attack you can to discover
an enemy’s weaknesses then use that knowledge
to whittle their Guard down to 0, which breaks
your opponent and forces them to skip some
of their turns.
This basic strategy works well to take care
of normal enemies quickly, but boss fights
especially rely on you discovering and targeting
weaknesses.
The game’s bosses are often very resilient,
especially if you’re a bit under-leveled,
and they can easily take out one or several
of your party members if you’re too cavalier
about how you fight.
The battle system is rich with tactical options
and rewards flexibility and adaptation, but
there’s a problem.
If you’ve found the right set of weaknesses
and are exploiting them fully, the boss might
not get many moves against you.
You feel pretty safe, almost like you’ve
‘solved’ the puzzle.
But the bosses tend to be damage sponges,
and you’re left fighting for another 10
minutes to take them down.
Some people like endurance boss fights like
that, but I don’t think Octopath’s bosses
feel like a marathon fight for survival like
some of the best long boss fights do.
Later bosses do switch up their weaknesses
mid-fight, and that can add a little tension,
but it’s not complicated to adapt to it,
and it doesn’t actually change the combat
loop much.
Even so, the combat of Octopath is very nice,
and one of the best parts of the game.
Outside of combat, I love the idea of Octopath’s
out-of-battle actions.
Each character in your active party can do
something specific, called a Path Action,
to almost every NPC in the game.
You can beat them up, charm them into helping
you in battle, press them for more information,
or just rob them blind.
Two of your party members might have the same
type of action, but one may have the risky,
or ‘Rogue’ version and one may have the
less risky ‘Noble’ version of the action.
With more risk, you can reap greater rewards,
but you can also go too far and alienate everyone
in town if, say, you’re caught stealing
too many times.
The range of things your party can do in towns
makes your party composition actually important
outside of battle.
Do you bring your underleveled apothecary?
He might not be the strongest member of the
team, but he can talk to the townspeople and
get some free information.
Do you double up your Hunter and Warrior?
They’re great in fights but they both have
the same path action type, which forces you
to go without some of your options if you’re
too far from a tavern to swap out party members.
There’s one easy decision at least: you
always want the thief.
Sorry Tressa.
There’s just so much stuff to steal.
Merchants?
Yoink.
Sickly kid?
Yoink.
Sickly kid’s mom?
Yoink!
That medicine wasn’t working anyway.
Octopath has wonderful mechanics, even if
they’re not perfect.
The battle system is deep and fun and the
Path Action system makes your party feel like
it’s dealing with NPCs in their own personal
style.
But RPGs aren’t all about mechanics.
I feel the core of an RPG is the story it
tells, and the story of Octopath Traveler
could be told better.
Oh, and here’s your spoiler warning: minor
early and mid-game spoilers ahead.
Nothing major, you’ll be fine.
Your characters are traveling through the
world of Orsterra, which is quite pretty.
Unique and interesting biomes are all over
the place, and the wilds flow fairly well,
from town to town, key location to key location.
I should be clear, the physical world is well
put together.
The societal setup for the world is not.
Each location is a pretty standard JRPG town
that specializes in one thing and one thing only.
It’s even in their name.
COBBLESTON.
SAINTSBRIDGE.
NOBLECOURT.
BOLDERFALL.
SUNSHADE.
STILLSNOW.
MERCHANTPORT.
FORESTZONE.
ILIKECHURCHSYLVANIA.
But the locations aren’t tied together very
well into a cohesive world.
The towns don’t seem to interact that much.
Even within the same town you don’t feel
a strong connection with the rest of the game.
When two of the game’s chapters happen in
the same place, you’re not interacting with
the same NPCs, you’re not dealing with similar
or even related goals, and you’re going
to different locations in and around the area.
The chapters might as well be in two different
towns.
Orsterra's locations feel vibrant at first,
but that world building momentum gets tossed
aside in every new chapter, and eventually
makes the locations feel a bit cookie cutter.
While traveling in Orsterra, you’ll meet
eight people and take them through eight different
‘paths’, or individual stories.
Each character is focused on their own story,
traveling from town to town seeking purpose,
information, freedom, adventure, or vengeance.
On paper it’s a good idea - there isn’t
one ‘main’ character among the eight,
really.
Each is equally important.
You get to pick what character you start as
and then travel around collecting the others
at your own pace.
You don’t even need to get everyone!
But in practice, the freedom of the game’s
narrative comes at a cost - there is nothing
to tie these eight threads together.
Each character is an island unto themselves.
Instead of a critical plot thread with a central
goal, the game tells 8 equally important story
arcs, chopped up and served one part at a
time.
There are no interweaving plot lines, and
worse than that, there pretty much CAN’T
be any.
Any one chapter can only be sure that you’ve
seen the previous chapter of the same character.
It knows nothing about the state of the world
or your other party members.
They don’t even show up in the cutscenes!
It’s almost like the eight characters are
just in each others’ chapters as a favor,
like helping them move or something.
Let’s say you’re in the middle of Therion’s
story.
He’s a thief and has to steal several powerful
artifacts for a wealthy, shady family in order
to regain his freedom.
In any other RPG the rest of your party might
have something to say about his situation.
Cyrus, the world-class mage scholar, might
dive into the mysteries of the artifacts.
Olberic, the steadfast knight, might grouse
about the dishonor of their circumstances.
But not in Octopath!
Everyone else is just hanging around, somewhere
offscreen while the cutscenes are happening.
You’ll sometimes get a chance to hear a
party member and the starring character talk
for a second after a cutscene ends.
They might touch on some character moments,
but they don’t reference events from other
character’s chapters, and they never change
the course of the current plot.
They’re nothing but flavor text, and they’re
easy to miss.
If you don’t have the right people in your
party or even if you just didn’t see the
prompt in the top corner of the screen you’ll
skip over the scene entirely.
It doesn’t even have something like the
Fire Emblem support conversations system where
the party banter might have told a story that
progressed over time.
Instead, the dialogue plays the same whether
Alfyn is still a bright eyed optimist or if
he’s been betrayed a couple of times.
Primrose will say the same thing no matter
if she’s in her chapter 1 or her chapter 4.
It’s funny, the screen even goes into a
weird darkened scene with spotlights when
they start talking.
Kinda like they’re in a stage play for a
minute.
It makes the conversation feel even more detached
from the game world.
When it’s done, the game fades back in and
you continue like nothing happened.
The characters end up feeling a little static
because they ARE static - left without an
arc outside from their personal PLOT ADVANCEMENT
ZONE.
Within each scene, Octopath’s writing is…
passable.
JRPGs are notorious for wildly varying story
quality and the content of Octopath’s story
is certainly not the worst I’ve ever played.
A lot of the character arcs are very standard
RPG tropes, but that’s fine.
Cartoonish villains are thwarted by cartoonish
heroes, with an occasional detour to some
more nuanced and surprisingly dark chapters.
Thanks to the Inquire and Scrutinize path
actions there is a TON of backstory you can
read about most of the NPCs in the game.
They’ll have a little blurb about how they
relate to other people in town.
It does help bring the world to life to a
certain extent, and some of the side quests
make use of it, but the writing can get fairly
long-winded.
The voice acting is… fine.
The actors do an OK job with the script they’re
given.
But sometimes that script is the worst.
Most noticeably with H’aanit.
H’aanit: ‘Tis not the hunt that concerneth
me.
Thou intendest to stoppen off somewhere along
the way.’
The voice actress is doing fine, but listening
to H’aanit’s terrible, fake old English
dialect makes me wince every time.
It’s too bad, her storyline is one of the
strongest of the group.
But it sounds like someone is making up old
English on t he fly and has no idea what they’re doing.
For HOURS.
H’aanit: ‘Letten the hunt beginen.’
Yeah that sounds right(?)
Even with some of its script problems, it’s
the story structure that tarnishes the experience
of the game.
It paints story arcs into a corner that even
a better script couldn’t get out of.
But the structure is not far from being much
more solid.
I have a few tweaks that might fix most of
the problems I’ve had with it.
Instead of making the chapters completely
freeform, force the player to gather everybody.
Keep the ability to meet them in any order,
but over the course of chapter 1 pair up characters
into 4 set groups.
Have those pairs meet another pair over chapter
2, forming two parties of 4 and do 4 mini-chapters,
one focused on each character in the group.
Have EVERYBODY meet up over chapter 3, and
in chapter 4 do the final step in everyone’s
personal arc, then fight the main villain.
Oh, also, have a main villain.
And not one that shows up optionally out of
nowhere.
Because you can bounce around and pick which
chapters to do, you still get some of the
feeling of a free-form story structure.
But now the writers can really rely on characters
knowing about previous events.
The group dynamics can develop, interweaving
plot lines can appear and affect each other,
and character development can happen over
the course of the game.
The main villain plot can keep the story focused
and can let the game’s many personal chapters
play against an overarching threat.
Really, I think adding some more traditional
story structure to this freeform concept could
have made this game into an instant classic.
The game has a gorgeous visual style and very
solid battle mechanics.
The Path Action system is an interesting way
to tie together its character and world building
elements.
But Octopath Traveler’s uneven writing and
its limiting narrative structure bring down
the whole experience.
I have hope for the next game, though.
Octopath Traveler is not a complete package,
but it’s a great proof of concept for how
to revive the 16-bit RPG.
[Chill vibes outro music from Octopath Traveler]