Square Enix is toiling away in their gold
mine, working on their next big JRPG.
It's a big project, maybe the most anticipated
game in their storied history.
It'll be a milestone for their fans and likely
for the future of the company: Kingdom Hearts
3.
Square Enix just announced that the game will
be ready sometime in the next 3 years.
*sigh* Now if I just put three years into
my custom made Square Release Schedule Translator,
account for production values and delays,
it spits out a release date of
NEVER.
While we wait for never to get here, we'll
look at a rather understated and often forgotten
aspect of the original Kingdom Hearts' combat
- the Tech Point system.
Kingdom Hearts is known for its reliable production
schedule, sensible naming conventions, and
flawless writing.
'That was undeniable proof that we totally
owned you lamers.'
'Listen to those cheers, man.
You don't get to decide if you're a hero or
not.
They do.
And they've already made up their mind.'
'Xion...
Who else will I have ice cream with?'
This is... my... favorite series.
And after all of these years, the first game
is still hands down my personal favorite,
and its combat system holds up extremely well.
While the later games got more flashy and
combo heavy, I prefer the slower, weighty,
and more challenging combat of the first game.
While Kingdom Hearts 1 was not perfect and
it could be kinda clunky at times, I felt
that it had the least amount of fluff in its
combat design as most of your combat options
and abilities had a clear purpose with dodge
rolls, magic, guarding, special attacks and
other various skills.
Kingdom Hearts 2 had a bit of a dominant strategy
problem where unless you were playing on the
Critical difficulty, your best option in combat
more often than not turned out to be just
whaling on enemies with your basic attacks.
Kingdom Hearts 1 and Kingdom Hearts 2 are
button mashers.
The first game certainly has its fair share
of mindlessly hacking through enemies, but
there was still a bit of depth.
Compared to its sequel, Kingdom Hearts 1 has
a bit more emphasis on timing and defensive
maneuvers and the individual moment to moment
gameplay felt more engaging partially thanks
to a feature I wish more single player games
would adopt - it’s bonus experience points
system: Tech Points.
Tech Points were a mechanic exclusive to Kingdom
Hearts 1 that granted bonus experience points
for taking special actions in combat, like
hitting weaknesses.
Using Ice on Fire enemies or vice-versa, parrying
attacks by striking at just the right moment,
guarding attacks, or deflecting projectiles
back at enemies all give the player tech points.
What makes this mechanic awesome is that it
rewards players for exploiting your opponent.
You don’t only level up from taking enemies
out.
You gain EXP faster from fighting properly
and basically “getting good”
This mechanic makes sure that the little nuances
in the combat system don’t get lost in the
shuffle, and helps make the different enemy
types feel more unique.
The game teaches you about the system very
early on.
Parrying and tech points are taught in the
optional fights against the kids on Destiny
Islands.
When you parry against Selphie’s whip, not
only does it block her attack, it bounces
off and hits her right on the forehead, giving
you an additional 2 XP - double what you normally
get by just winning the fight.
Another example, when you hit Wakka with his
own projectiles, it stuns him, causing him
to lob his next couple shots.
The fights with all of the kids become much
easier and more rewarding once the player
gets the hang of parrying.
It’s not only a great way to level up quickly
at the start but also a good survival tactic.
Most of the game’s enemies and bosses have
some attack that can either be parried, guarded
or exploited for tech points.
The game also plays around with this system
with special enemies like the white mushrooms
that play a kind of magic “Simon Says”
game for tech points and other various items.
That idea of a full progression system directly
tied to player skill is great, and subtly
different than what most other RPGs have.
A lot of other games have bonus XP systems,
but the systems often work in really arbitrary
ways.
Some implement it as a random bonus like in
Persona 3’s Roulette system.
Sometimes it’s a passive bonus like the
Moon Confidant in Persona 5 or an item like
the EXP share in Pokemon.
Final Fantasy X hands out bonus experience
for getting overkills, but a player can get
around the system by using a ton of MP, or
just by fighting wimpy enemies, so it doesn’t
really incentivize you to get a deeper understanding
of your opponents.
A ton of RPGs implement a vague “end of
battle report” that grades and rewards you
based on your general performance, but it
does very little to actually guide
you into playing better.
(FFXIII) I just destroyed these guys, whaddya
mean I got 3 stars?!
(Tales series) Why do I keep getting negative
grade?!
(FFXV) What does Finesse mean?!
There are some games that take a similar approach
to Kingdom Hearts in using XP as an incentive
for mastery and taking risks.
Bravely Default rewards extra experience based
on how fast you win the fight.
The World Ends with You has an interesting
risk vs reward system that gives you more points
for voluntarily taking on more fights in a
row.
YS Origins gives more XP for keeping a high
combo count.
Batman Arkham Asylum, even though it’s not
an RPG, rewards both high combo counts as
well as varying your combat strategy.
The key aspect in these games and in Kingdom
Hearts, is that bonus XP is an active reward
that directly encourages you to get better
at the combat, rather than granting you experience
for brute force, random luck, or just reaching
some arbitrary point in the game… though
sometimes those all happen in Kingdom Hearts as well.
Positive reinforcement and feedback play an
important role in teaching game mechanics
to players.
Kingdom Hearts is a game where the mastery
of its mechanics lead immediately to in-game
rewards, so becoming a better player in Kingdom
Hearts turns into a faster progression.
This idea of tying skill to progression in
a single player experience is seen in more
modern games, too.
The difficulty of Dark Souls is an offshoot
of this idea - it turned the process of mastering
combat from a recommendation to a requirement
to progress at all.
It’s very unlikely for a player in Dark
Souls to just hack their way through the game
and it's a better game for it.
Kingdom Hearts’ bonus XP system turned what
could have been just another Action RPG button
masher into a game with a surprising amount
of depth, and makes Kingdom Hearts a game
that was just a bit ahead of its time.
*Chill vibes outro from Kingdom Hearts*