Regardless of what game you're playing,
there's always that one level that makes
you so excited just to be alive. It's
like meeting an old friend who's got
chocolate puppies and chocolate puppies.
But with the yin comes the yang. Instead
of that friend with the chocolate
puppies, you have creepy Uncle Stanley
with questionable stories.
What's going on everyone? I'm Warbuff 40
and this is my top 10 worst levels.
F-Zero GX is possibly my favorite entry
in the franchise with the great roller
coaster speed tracks and music, but
everyone knows this game is hard as
balls. While the Grand Prix mode is a
challenge to enjoy, the story mode
enjoys stomping you with cleats.
Now, I am not kidding. After the second
mission, the game becomes ruthless. The
track designs become tricky and devious.
Enemy AI becomes super aggressive, and
mission objectives are evil.
They expect so much out of player
ability that mission six, it becomes the
movie speed of all things. Apparently,
Captain Falcon's arch nemesis, not
Batman, has dropped a bomb to our
machine. And now we have to make our way
down the world's worst highway ever
designed in the middle of rush hour. You
let your speed down even once.
I tried this over and over again, but
with no success. Eventually, I just gave
up because the reward isn't really that
great. Just a couple mediocre cutscenes.
But you got to give props to anyone
who's actually finished this monster.
All right. So, you're playing Mario
Party with your friends. You're
laughing. You're screaming. You're
racing for those stars. You're having a
great time. But unbeknownst to you,
Mario's disembodied right hand has a
heinous scheme. It wants the hands of
others to suffer the same fate it has.
And in order to do so, it lands on one
of those mini games. You know the ones.
Paddle Battle, Deep Sea Divers, Tug of
War, Castaways. All of these mini games
had a common control scheme. You had to
rapidly rotate the control stick in
order to be the winner. However, due to
the design of the N64's control stick, a
lot of players ended up getting a lot of
blisters because the the way it was
shaped, there was a whole bunch of
ridges that would cut into your hand.
This got so bad that Nintendo actually
had to give out gloves to anyone who
ordered them at the time in order to
avoid any possible lawsuits.
That fact alone makes the control stick
mini games more than worthy to be on
this list. You win this round, Mario's
Deceeded Hand. But I got my eyes on you.
[laughter]
[music]
Aside from HalfLife, Halo probably has
one of the best story campaigns in an
FPS to date. The pacing, the weapons,
they're all great. And of course, who
doesn't love doing this? Hey, come back
here. I just want to talk to you.
[screaming]
[crying]
So oddly satisfying.
Of course, with every Halo entry, there
comes the inevitable flood level. I'll
be using Cortana as my example here, but
there tends to be a general checklist
that flood levels go through.
Number one, lack of weapons and ammo.
Number two, boring level design and
aesthetic design.
And number three, irritating enemies and
those godamn prego zombies. You know the
ones I'm talking about, the one that
explode. Ah, hate those things. Damn
preos. You're probably wondering why I
don't have the library from Combat
Evolved on this. Well, simply I didn't
finish the story campaign in Combat
Evolved, but I think we can all agree
the flood freaking suck.
Uh-oh. I think red troopers approaching.
Yeah, that
Pikmin 2 has some truly amazing
atmosphere. It truly evokes a sense of
helplessness, like you're just some tiny
little bug in this large, mysterious,
intimidating world. Even with a full
platoon of Pikmin, you never feel fully
prepared, as just one unexpected attack
could cost you your entire army.
In the perplexing pool, there is a
dungeon in the middle of a southern lake
known as the submerged castle. This area
is only accessible to blue pigmen along
with some purple and whites waiting
below, as well as some Boltman. Now, the
actual level layout isn't anything
special, but should you take too long in
any floor, you get this.
Say hello to the water wraith, an
uncanny water frog that rides upon two
stone columns that act as steamrollers.
It is one of the few creatures that
actively hunts you down. It is
completely invincible and anything in
its path is crushed and killed
instantly, making this one of the
deadliest creatures in the series next
to the smoky Prague. There is only one
way to kill a water wraith. At the final
floor, you have access to purple Pikmin.
You must throw the purple Pikmin onto
the water wraith, which apparently
solidifies it. It doesn't make much
sense, but even when you have it
completely harmless, it's still creepy
as hell. The war rave truly evokes that
affformentioned feeling of helplessness.
And when it's all over and done with,
you hope to never go back to its lair
again.
But, you know, I can't help but think
the war wraith as what it would be like
if Jaws could go on land.
Hey guys, you ever thought about the
greatest game play idea ever? How about
making you stand still and jump for five
minutes? And when we're feeling really
creative, we make you run on this wheel
for 10 minutes and make you enter a
10digit long code. And then there's your
level.
Let me just say we've done a good job
here.
Okay, I think we all know why this is
here, right? But let's just ignore the
obvious reasons why this is so flawed
and let's all just pretend that we are
all aficionados of Disney music. I mean,
you can understand why they went for a
level like this in the Kingdom Hearts
game. I mean, after all, Disney is the
undisputed king of animated musicals.
Now, The Little Mermaid had a lot of
potential to be a great musical level.
There are plenty of songs to choose from
from that film. But out of the five
songs used for Atlantica, only two of
them were actually from the original
film. Those be no-brainers like Under
the Sea and Part of Your World. But the
list is missing classics like Kiss the
Girl or Poor Unfortunate Souls. Nope. No
classic songs for us. Instead, we get
original songs like Swim This Way.
[music]
Oh god, my ears. They're gone. I think
it's safe to say no one wants to have
fitty fun with unholy hybrids like a
duck octopus or a dog tortoise. Where is
Edward Elrich when you need him?
[music]
Okami's Ark of Yamato. I have one word
for this place.
That is all.
Look at all this new security.
How's a guy supposed to break out of
here?
If you were to ask me what was the
greatest achievement this generation,
two words, Arkham Asylum. One of the
greatest superhero or even licensed
games to ever exist, I mean, you're
Batman. Nearly everything about this
game is flawless,
except for the bosses. These fights were
a stain on an otherwise flawless game.
Now, while most of the bosses were
pretty much the same, there were a few
variants, such as the terrible, terrible
killer Croc. Croc boy, is that you?
In the opening scenes, Croc is hyped as
hell. Look at this.
I've got your scent, Batman.
I WILL HUNT YOU DOWN.
GET THAT ANIMAL UNDER CONTROL.
A toy collar won't stop me from killing
you, Batman.
He'll rip you apart. eat your bones.
Makes you want to fight him, right?
Well, let's see what we actually got.
Okay, I'm walking. Walking. Can I run?
Nope, I can't run. H wonder where Croc
is. Hey, there he is. All right, bring
it on.
Really? That was it? The entirety of
this fight is you traveling a maze,
collecting spores while throwing a
batarang at Croc. Nothing more to it.
You know, Croc's intro was misleading. I
need to fix this.
Got to bannered [music]
by turning
the town with the power of a bull.
Ain't no monster. Who is that?
All right, guys. Here's the big one.
We're talking about a stage from The
Legend of Zelda.
There's possibly no level more infamous
than Ocarina of Times Water Temple. It's
been universally panned for its overall
boring structure, repetitive gameplay,
and just general boring atmosphere. But
wait, what if you took everything about
the Water Temple and sprinkled on a
little something to make it just a
little bit worse?
The results being the Water Temple
Major's mass cousin, the Great Bay
Temple.
Kill a monster.
What the Great Bay Temple did that the
Water Temple didn't? Well, for starters,
underwater controls.
Like what you see? Guess what? It
controls just as well as it looks. Yep.
No better way to go through a confusing
dungeon than with even worse controls.
And also, instead of changing the water
levels, you actually have to bring power
to a whole bunch of random gears. And
just when you thought this wasn't fun
enough, wait until you hear about how
you actually have to get to this temple.
Nothing more than going on a painful
scavenger hunt for Zora eggs, which you
use to teach you a song to open up the
Great Bay Temple.
And after all that effort, you
immediately go back in time to reset the
3day cycle, undoing everything you've
done to collect those eggs. Sorry
babies, you don't get to be born.
Now, take everything I mentioned and
compare it to the Water Temple. Doesn't
seem so bad now, right? I mean, it still
sucks, but relatively speaking.
But in the end, it doesn't matter which
water dungeon you hate the most.
Water levels just suck.
Hey, don't agree with this list? Feel
free to post your own in the comments
below. And if you liked what you see,
feel free to subscribe up there. you
know, got a little button up there.
Anyway, uh once again, thanks for
watching. Subscribe if you like it. Uh
if you want to follow me on Twitter,
it's below. And I'll see you later,
guys. Have a good one.