Remember how we did an episode on 
Double Bosses? Time for a sequel.  
TRIPLE BOSSES. There’s… there’s three of them now.
Alright seriously though, there’s actually 
legit game design stuff to talk about here.
A Triple Boss is its own category. It’s 
not just ‘Two Bosses, And A Third Wheel’,  
it’s its own trope. A unique type of gameplay, 
and a unique chance to bring elements that can  
spice up a game’s combat. A triple boss 
can feel like a chess match, but faster,  
where positioning and keeping your head 
on a swivel are the most important things.  
It can give the bosses new ways to 
work with each other, fresh ways to  
attack a party, and give a chance for 
your players to try some new tactics.
With a new format comes new pitfalls,  
too. Don’t want those! That sounds like plenty 
of stuff to talk about. Let’s do Triple Bosses!
Get the workslop off your laptop by learning how 
to code reliably, with today’s sponsor Boot.dev!
New years are the time for new skills, and 
Boot.dev teaches you how to read and write  
computer code. They’ve turned the whole process 
into an RPG. With their bite-sized lessons,  
you’ll learn modern languages like Python, 
SQL, Go, and Typescript, and how to think  
like a programmer to break down problems,
granting you the 
tools to properly run, diagnose, and fix bugs,  
all while making each new lesson easy to flow 
into, one after another, whether it’s for work,  or for your SICK PLEASURES
or a fun hobby. They’ve built 
leaderboards and competitions to test your new  
skills, as well as an active Discord community to 
help you get un-stuck and back on the right path.
Not to mention, how easy they made it to try out. 
You can do every single lesson they’ve posted, as  
a free demo, plus a great refund policy: 30-days, 
no questions asked if you’re not satisfied.  
Click the link and use my code DESIGNDOC to 
get 25% off your first year on their annual  
plan. We keep plugging them because they’re 
that good! We’re serious! Thanks to Boot.dev!
So, what makes a good TRIPLE boss? We’re not 
just talking about any boss, this is one that  
has three, distinct, substantial components. 
Three characters operating at the same time.  
Maybe independently, maybe teamwork, but 
they have to feel like distinct pieces,  
and not just… like a dude with a 
face and two hands and that’s it.
What do you have to think about to make 
a boss with 3 components work in a game?
Well, let’s start with the most obvious bits 
first. Triple bosses can be very difficult.  
Like, a difficulty bump that’s 
inherent to their… triplicality.
For a player, keeping track of 3 things 
at once makes everything more demanding.  
A game designer can work with that, but 
it can be easy to go too far. Your job as  
a game designer isn’t to ‘defeat’ your players. 
It’s one of the first lessons that a DM running  
a tabletop RPG has to learn. It’s very easy 
to keep pushing the envelope, more and more,  
until a fight encounter just isn’t fun for 
anyone. A triple boss can easily cross that line.
Like this Triple Bosses Pizza Tower mod. They 
just stuck 3 copies of a boss into one arena.  
That’s it. The boss fights in Pizza Tower 
aren’t balanced for this in the SLIGHTEST.  
Impossible patterns to dodge, way too much 
going on - It’s for memes, and P-rank Sickos  
Only. Not for general consumption. But 
it is kinda fun to mess around with.
You can make a fight challenging, or noisy, 
or busy but you have to make sure it’s still  
doable. Your job as a game designer is to guide 
an experience, not kick people in the face.
And that line is thinner than you think.
Blasphemous has the Tres Angustias. They’re a 
trio of ghostly sisters that float around and  
group together. You fight them in an arena that 
endlessly scrolls up, with flames below. You  
have to constantly platform upwards, and climb 
the walls on the side all while avoiding their  
attacks. Two of the sisters wield spears that 
they fire at you like sniper rifles, which you can  
parry, and the third has a double-sided mace that 
she’ll throw around the screen like a boomerang.
Occasionally, the three will combine 
into a single entity to fire large  
beams from the floor that each 
take up a third of the screen,  
sometimes two at a time. The worse off 
they are, the more they’ll spam it.
The sisters share the same health bar, and 
hitting two of them at once can increase your  
damage output a ton. Since all three are 
always valid targets, it can be very easy  
to focus a little too much on trying to get 
your attacks in. You might drop your guard,  
and fail to spot another attack behind you in 
time. Triple bosses are really good at creating  
this type of fight, where having great spatial 
awareness gets dramatically more important to  
be able to survive. Having so many targets, 
so many projectiles, and an autoscroller on  
top of all of that makes it difficult to 
juggle everything in your head at once.
The variety of attacks in a triple boss can 
make or break how chaotic the fight gets,  
and it’s easy to go too far with small 
tweaks. If all three sisters used a spear,  
it might be a little too predictable. The club 
throws a literal wrench into your plan, making  
it tougher to settle into any one place for any 
amount of time. No place is safe for very long.
This is skirting right up to that line, where any 
MORE elements to deal with would compound on top  
of the rest, and make it bordering on un-fun 
to a player who didn’t seek out that sort of  
bullet-hell-like challenge. Now that’s not to say 
you can’t make a boss very chaotic, but this space  
is one where small tweaks to boss attack patterns 
might have gigantic impacts to overall difficulty.
Luckily, there are ways to make 
a fight that LOOKS very chaotic,  
but turns out to be more 
doable than it first appears.
Way back in the Double Bosses video, we mentioned 
the Mantis Lords. A majestic and rhythmic fight,  
escalating from a fairly simple 1-on-1, to a 
great 2-on-1 that layered multiple copies of  
a single enemy on top of each other. It’s 
one of the best fights in Hollow Knight,  
and that’s not just me talking. But… 
there are THREE sisters. What if…
And then the Godmaster DLC described ‘What 
If’. The whole DLC is a colossal boss rush  
through the whole roster, plus some extra 
revamped ‘hard’ versions of bosses for fun.  
The Mantis Lords start out like normal, but 
when phase 2 starts… well, hope you’re ready.
It’s really an obvious place to go with the 
fight. All three sisters will dash, dive,  
and pincer attack you, without fail, for as 
long as you can hold out. It’s unrelenting,  
leaving you with basically no time to 
heal, or even to just gather yourself.
This would actually feel like that Pizza Tower 
mod, if not for one important difference. The  
one thing that makes it doable. The rhythm. The 
sisters aren’t going to attack you at ANY time,  
there’s a pattern, and safe places to be 
during those patterns. The rhythm of combat  
lets a player subdivide, predict what’s coming 
next, and actually plan what you’re going to do,  
instead of purely reacting to what’s happening. 
Not so hard now, is it? …well it’s still hard.
Once you have a sense of the rhythm of this fight, 
you can fall into an almost magical flow state,  
dodging and countering on pure instinct. 
The better you get, the cleaner the outcome,  
and you get the satisfaction that feels a lot 
like nailing a difficult song in any rhythm  
game. It’s a performance as much as anything. 
It’s even fun to watch someone else play it!
The rhythm is so important, that when 
you finally take out one of the sisters,  
it almost feels ‘off’. Now you’re missing 
a beat. The fight slows down significantly,  
and all of a sudden gets much easier.
The fight overall is not that complicated, but 
having some organization to the chaos of a triple  
boss fight can let you push the difficulty up, 
and maybe even make something better than the  
sum of its parts. That’s what created one of 
the best encounters in all of Hollow Knight.
So far, this video is heavy on the 
action games, but triple bosses can  
show up anywhere. Some of these ideas 
apply better to one genre or another,  
but some have mechanics that 
can work in unique ways.
A triple boss in a turn-based RPG can do some 
funky things with the game’s turn economy.
Ozzie, Slash, and Flea are very optional, very 
powerful secret bosses in Chrono Trigger. The  
three of them have their own tactics, their 
own double and triple techs - they’re just  
like you! One party versus another, 
in something of a mirror matchup.  
And that lets this fight feel a little 
different than the game’s single bosses.
In something like a turn-based RPG, 3-on-3 fights  
start to really expand the options of 
what teammates can do for each other,  
how they can team up to attack, and how 
players can approach taking the bosses down.
Ozzie, Slash and Flea get turns at about the same 
pace you do. The number of powerful moves the  
three of them get to fire off can be overwhelming 
for the unprepared. You have to figure out what’s  
the best and fastest way to take them out, 
all while you withstand a full assault from a  
full party with powerful abilities, like the ones 
your party has gotten to dish out the whole game.
You have to prioritize targets. Who’s hurting 
the most? Who’s easiest to take out? Which  
characters combine, and can you take one of 
them out quickly to make your life easier?  
Will someone leave if the others fall? Or 
maybe they get stronger when they’re alone?  
The fight format lets you devise your own tactics.
These three are giving you their best shot 
right out the gate. If you can knock one  
of them out, their battle tactics have 
to change. They can’t use triple techs,  
or any double techs involving whoever died, 
so their damage output takes a big hit. The  
hardest part of the fight is that first 
stage, where you just have to withstand  
punishment enough to start to tilt the 
board in your favor. It’s a great way  
to make a boss that plays distinctly from the 
others in the game, and the shifting tactics  
and abilities they get to use feel a lot more 
natural in a fight against three characters,  
rather than trying to shoehorn all that intuitive 
behavior in a fight against a single character.
Chrono Cross of course brought them back, and 
the turn economy and teamwork dynamics work  
exactly as well here as they did in Trigger, even 
with a battle system that can be very different.
The triple boss format gives a great template 
for natural teamwork among opponents,  
and a unique way for players 
to try to meet the challenge.
A triple boss fight isn’t just about the 
bosses. You need somewhere to fight, right?
More combatants means more chaos, and more 
space needed to keep things from getting TOO  
chaotic. You need an arena that’s fit for the 
task. Otherwise… you might end up with… THIS.  
Kingdom Hearts has a miniboss fight 
in Halloween Town. Lock, Shock,  
and Barrel are three tiny kids trying to beat you 
up in a tiny room. The fight is very short - less  
than a minute - but the cramped layout of 
the stage makes for a mess of an encounter.
It’s hard to keep track of what’s going on. The 
Kingdom Hearts 1 camera is a pain even under the  
best circumstances, and wrestling with it in this 
fight is pretty bad. The kids are small and quick  
- easy to lose track of and miss their attack 
tells, so sometimes you get blindsided. Offscreen  
hits happen all the time, and you can get combo’d 
pretty easily by the kids’ spin and roll attacks.
Now, their HP is low, and the 
attacks aren’t too damaging,  
but just because it’s easy to handle 
doesn’t make it less awkward. Good luck  
doing a Level 1 challenge playthrough, 
where their attacks actually do hurt.
Three tiny targets, zipping 
around a claustrophobic arena  
make for a disastrous cluster of an encounter.
Even if the arena seems spacious enough on paper,  
other game mechanics might make a 
triple boss feel a little cramped.
There are a few multi-bosses in Luigi’s Mansion, 
but there’s only one triple boss near the end: the  
Clockwork Soldiers. They’re a trio of… artificial 
ghosts. Whatever that means. Initially static,  
the soldiers come to life once you activate some 
clocks in the background. They start to move and  
try to bop you into last week with their toy 
muskets. To expose their hearts and suck up  
each soldier, you need to use your vacuum to 
spin the wind-up key on each of their backs.
It’s not THAT crazy of a fight, but it’s a 
LITTLE annoying. When you suck up ghosts in  
Luigi’s Mansion, you can’t precisely control your 
positioning. Luigi gets jorked around a little,  
and you can influence him, but not precisely. If 
you’re focusing on just one of these soldiers at  
a time, you’re liable to get knocked out of the 
tug of war by the other two. You kinda just have  
to hope that the RNG of your movement and of the 
other two soldier AIs doesn’t leave you open.
On a normal run, you’ll eventually get 
through this, even if you get hit a few times,  
but getting the ‘gold frame’ award on the fight is 
much tougher. The way gold frames work is that you  
have to drain at least 90% of each ghost’s health 
in a single suck, before they shake out of it.  
Focusing only on one ghost leaves you vulnerable 
from random attacks from the other two, and you  
can get knocked out of the fight quite easily, 
and there goes your prize. You’re at the mercy  
of RNG to keep you safe, and with so much action 
in such a small space, you barely have a chance.
The raw chaos of a triple boss fight 
with three totally independent AIs  
controlling things makes getting 
the gold frame extremely hard to do.
Except… there’s an easier way, though 
the game doesn’t tell you this. You only  
have to get 90% off of the BLUE soldier, 
which is the only one that drops pearls,  
which is the thing that determines what 
type of frame you get. Does that make  
sense for why the blue one is important? Not 
really. Whether that was the plan all along,  
or was added during playtesting when 
everyone tore their hair out, who knows.
Whether it’s teamwork in a turn-based 
game, or the real-time chaos in an arena,  
interaction between each member of the trio 
is what makes the triple boss format unique.  
So what would happen if you took that 
interaction away? Turns out it’s bad!
What would Star Fox be without Star Wolf? A 
squad of rivals. Your team against theirs,  
head to head, in a great changeup level type 
as you trade in a rail shooter for an actual  
dogfight. But you might be thinking 
- ‘Wait, Star Wolf is a 4-man team,  
not a triple boss. This shouldn’t be here.’ And 
you’re right! I’m talking about Star Fox Assault.
Star Fox Assault did some downsizing. Pigma’s 
been kicked out for being Pigma. Andrew… yeah.  
So now it’s just Wolf, Leon, 
and the newcomer, Panther,  
and they’re all out for revenge. Still. 
Again. But THIS time… the fight’s bad.
A triple boss at least sorta implies that 
the three components will work together  
towards a goal. This fight doesn’t have that.
Star Wolf appears from the north, and each 
fighter will wait for you to head on over.  
There’s really no urgency. They stay in 
their own respective corners of the map,  
and won’t react until you’re in the aggro zone. 
They don’t seek you out, and they won’t even fire  
on your two wingmates, who also won’t fire 
on them. They’ll tail you as you approach,  
but you just need to somersault behind them 
and light ‘em up. If you happen to be in  
exactly the wrong part of the Venn diagram, 
you might accidentally get double teamed,  
but that’s about as dangerous as the game lets 
them get. Pick them off one at a time and move on.  
It’s a really sad downgrade of a fight from what 
Star Wolf does for the other games in the series.
Three characters that never team up, or impact 
each other at all is missing the point of the  
format. It’s not unlike the Boom Boom and 
Pom Pom fight we talked about in the Double  
Bosses episode. No interaction between the 
bosses makes the fight into three distinct,  
worse fights, and throws away an opportunity 
to fit something unique into the game.
Now, what if you take the opposite route?  
Lean in on highlighting the interactions 
between each boss. Turns out, that’s good!
The original Hades had an excellent 2-on-1 boss 
fight with Theseus and Asterius, where both  
combatants played distinct roles that played off 
each other to make the fight a stiff challenge,  
but not too messy or unfair. Both characters felt 
different to fight, and who to prioritize was an  
open question for players to decide on their own. 
It’s only fitting that Hades 2 would up the ante.
At the end of Oceanus lies a musical trio: 
Scylla and the Sirens. They block your way,  
and won’t move without a fight. Scylla, Jetty 
the Guitarist, and Roxy the Drummer each play  
their own role. Scylla is the tank of the trio 
- a diva singer with an invincible clamshell  
covering her back, and firing off attacks 
like a spinning laser, a flamethrower shriek,  
and a homing music note. Jetty is more 
mobile, dashing around to create shockwaves,  
bubble projectiles, and a stun beam. Roxy can’t 
move from behind her drum kit, and controls your  
movement in the space by creating Area of 
Effect attacks that move around the arena.
None of the three band members are a big 
deal individually. When fighting together,  
though, their overlapping attack patterns get 
chaotic quickly, keeping you on your toes.  
There’s only the one health bar on display, but 
each member actually has their own portion of it,  
and will get knocked out of the fight 
when you deal enough damage to them.
Oh, did I mention that the soundtrack was tied 
to each character? As you knock out band members,  
the musical layer they’d be responsible 
for gets knocked out of the mix. 
Love that.
Once all the band members are down, they 
rejoin the fight and a second phase starts  
in one of three unique ways. One of the 
trio will get the ‘Featured Artist’ buff,  
and the spotlight will be on them. Their 
part is made more prominent in the mix,  
and their attacks are amped up. You 
can take out the band in any order,  
but your decision might be based on your 
build, or who the featured artist is.
Scylla and her band are a great escalation of 
the group fight concept from the original game,  
where each of the three gets a clear role. Their 
presence is acutely felt through mechanics and  
aesthetics while they’re still alive, and the 
way you approach the fight, what build you’re  
coming in with, as well as the randomized Featured 
Artist element, can make the same fight play out  
in many different ways. A perfect format for a 
boss you’ll be running into over and over again.
Since a triple boss can lean heavily on the 
interactions between characters, you can design  
a fight where players messing up those synergies 
becomes a critical part of how players can win.
Dark Souls has the Gank Squad - Lautrec 
and his two body guards. Midway through,  
Lautrec kills the Firekeeper, the lady keeping the 
central hub’s bonfire alive, and with it kills a  
really convenient place to do bonfire stuff. But, 
there’s gotta be a way to bring her back, right?  
All you’ve gotta do is take the Black Eye Orb off 
her body and bring it across the world. Once you  
do, you can fight Lautrec, invading his space just 
like how you invade the games of other players.
Lautrec isn’t alone. He has two body guards - 
a spellcaster and a knight armed with a spear  
and shield. Lautrec himself is the most mobile of 
the three, and can pierce through your block with  
curved blades. It’s a pure 1-on-3 fight - there’s 
no way to call in backup. But do you need it?  
Not if you know the trick. The triple fight is 
a bit unfair, but Lautrec is actually your only  
goal here. Kill him and the fight ends. Good 
thing too, because a straight-up 1-on-3 with  
these guys is a tall order. You’re encouraged to 
try and play smart and find the right approach,  
and not try to overpower the encounter. 
Even if that means cheesing the fight.
With the right build and equipment,  
you can beeline for Lautrec and take him down 
before the other two get a chance to interfere.  
Or maybe you want to separate them a bit, 
luring Lautrec out with a ranged weapon,  
or using the level’s geometry to try to separate 
the members a bit and take them out one at a time.
It’s not exactly a ‘free’ fight, but it’s a 
pretty dramatic difference in how successful  
you’ll be depending on how you approach it. 
It’s a boss designed to be just a bit unfair  
in a straight fight, and how open the encounter 
is to rewarding different approaches the player  
takes helps Dark Souls make sure a bunch of 
different playstyles can have their time to shine.
So we’ve gone over how if you’re not careful, 
triple bosses can veer towards unbalanced,  
cramped, chaotic, and hopeless.
But sometimes, if you really 
know what you’re doing,  
that can be exactly what you need to 
help players find a better way forward.
Dark Souls 2 treats the triple boss more like an 
interesting punishment. The Ruin Sentinels are  
three copies of the same Towering Hammer-wielding 
knights. It’s an arena split between a small  
broken balcony on the upper level and a large 
lower pit. As you walk through the fog door,  
you’ll be on a balcony with one of the 
Sentinels right next to you. The space  
is cramped, but you can deal with him easy 
enough. He’s not much of a close-range guy.
But if you try to get by him and jump 
down immediately, now you’re in trouble.  
There are two more sentinels waiting 
below, and that fight won’t be easy,  
much less if you’ve got the balcony sentinel 
following behind. Fighting all three at once  
is intentionally unfair. They all have 
sweeping attacks that cover each other  
and simply overwhelm you, giving 
you no real chance to counterattack.
Even if you stay up in the balcony, you can’t 
screw around. Take long enough and the two from  
below will jump up, and make it a 3-on-1 
fight in the cramped upper level. The game  
makes the trio’s synergies a punishment 
for letting things get out of control.
This fight is a triple boss where speed and 
landscape matter. A more basic version of this  
fight, where the game simply throws all three 
of the sentinels at you at once in a flat arena  
would be a frustrating nightmare. It wouldn’t 
even be out of character for Dark Souls 2,  
but I don’t think that that version 
would be anyone’s favorite fight.
Catching one of the three sentinels essentially 
off-guard at the start of the fight,  
and using the time that they’re split up to your 
advantage might be the only way you’re going to  
make this fight doable. It’s not something that 
affects your defenses, or your damage output,  
but the tactics of a triple boss can come 
into play to make a fight that actually  
feels like a unique format. ANY game could 
do good with more of that type of variety.
Alright, if we’re going to do a quadruple 
boss episode, I need every example you can think of. 
Head to the comments. Give me any boss fight that you can think of that has 4 or more members. Or, just talk about your favorite triple boss formats  
down there. If you’ve got a cool idea for 
a triple boss kicking around in your mind,  
float it by your fellow video 
watchers, and see what they think.
Triple bosses are an opportunity. For 
teamwork. For tactics. For friendship. And  
for love. In short, have a threesome. 
Happy New Year! Signed, Design Doc.
*chill vibes from Deltarune*