Everyone loves super moves.
It’s that time where you can squeeze all
your rage into a bitter little ball, and release
it at an appropriate time.
Nothing feels better than landing that thing
that takes off half the HP bar of a boss or
of this guy halfway across the world, and
nothing feels worse than doing all of that
buildup and missing everything.
Supers are almost by definition the most powerful
moves a game is going to offer you, but there
are so many ways that a game can give players
that power, and balancing them with tradeoffs
is often what creates the signature feel of
that game’s combat.
Let’s take a tour of super move systems,
and see the give and take that comes with
real ultimate power.
Hey, if you’re watching these videos, there’s
like a 99% chance you’ve got a game design
project kicking around in your brain.
Maybe you’ve got some notes in a notebook.
I think it’s time that you move all those
ideas to a better place, like today’s sponsor,
Milanote!
Milanote is the easiest tool I’ve ever used
to help you and your team organize all of
your creative projects and look good doing
it.
Milanote has built-in game design templates
to help keep all of your notes and references,
storyboards and moodboards, graphics, and
links organized and updated so everyone can
see what’s going on, and they have a full
mobile app ready to go so you can work on
it wherever inspiration strikes.
Mike’s got some of his own game ideas kicking
around on his Milanote boards.
It’s like Roller Coaster Tycoon but everyone
running the place is kinda sketchy.
Looking good!
We’ve also used it for organizing notes
for our videos, and it’s flexible enough
to work there too, no problem.
It’s great for solo stuff, but it really
shines when you have a team all working on
the same thing.
You can slap in notes, images, videos, tasks,
and more, and connect it all together.
Let me just slap this in here…
Brilliant.
Teams can collaborate in real time on these
visual boards, so you can be confident that
everyone’s on the same page and working
towards the same vision.
If you’re in school, you could start using
it for group projects.
Send the link over to whoever you’re working
with, and you’ll all see exactly what everyone’s
working on.
Milanote is free.
Free!
Can’t beat that.
And there’s no time limit, so jump right
in!
Use the link in the description to sign up
now and you’ll get entered into a drawing
to win a free Premium account, just for Design
Doc viewers.
Click the link in the description to get started.
Your game design ideas deserve their own space
on Milanote.
Super moves have a sort of paradox baked in.
They’re meant to be game-changing moves
- the ultimate reward in a combat system and
the strongest thing you can do.
They have to be really, really good to make
the payoff worth the work.
But they also can’t be TOO good.
An overwhelming super move dominates the rest
of the game’s strategy and makes any other
option almost meaningless in comparison.
So, every game has to figure out some way
of balancing their most powerful moves to
make sure they straddle the line between ‘useless’
and ‘overpowering’.
Now, what that balancing looks like can be
a lot of different things.
Risk, timing, approach, opportunity cost - developers
can try to balance a super with almost anything
they can think of, and what levers they choose
to pull can completely change the flow and
feel of a game’s combat system.
Let’s start off real basic.
The most common kind of super, in fighting
games at least, is the super move that relies
on filling a meter before you can use it.
But then, how do you fill the meter?
Often, the meter fills by you doing some damage
in the game.
Ya Punch Bison, then ya get spicin’.
These super moves act as a bonus for fighting
well over a period of time.
To get a better payoff, well, fight better.
Basic super meters show up in every genre,
not just in fighting games.
Hyrule Warriors has that classic button-mashing
Musou combat, beating up hordes of enemies
with simple combos.
Those combos and some pickups lying around
build a meter that lets you perform several
different kinds of supers.
Straightforward special attacks, the rare
'focus spirit' supers that use up your magic
gauge, or the Weak Point smashes where you
can really punish a staggered target.
Each attack gives you a flashy, feel-good
payoff that blows away everything around you.
The system is simple, but it still has that
constant rhythm of build up and release that
a good super system has.
Splatoon has plenty of ways for you to build
and use your meter.
Every kit has one of a dozen or so different
special weapons that function as the game's
super moves.
Many are bombastic attacks like the Shark
Bomb, a crab tank that's great at holding
the front line, and lock-on missiles to scatter
your opponents.
Some specials are more about utility, like
boosting teammates or revealing enemy locations.
To build your meter, all you have to do is
ink up some terrain.
You’ve got choices to make - do you fight
off the enemy team directly and build
meter naturally, or do you hang back,
ink terrain to build meter quickly, and pop that
special in a more coordinated attack?
It’s not a complicated system, but it’s
extremely flexible, letting you dial in your
tactics to exactly what the match requires
at that time.
The super meter can be even simpler and still
generate a lot of depth in combat.
Punch Out has a very simple kind of super
meter in its Star Punch system, but it gets
a lot of mileage in how it plays with risk
and reward.
Punch-Out is a game of dodging and counter-attacking.
Your opponents have distinct tells for their
attacks, and recognizing what’s happening
and how to properly counter them is the foundation
of the game’s strategy.
If you figure it out and hit back in the right
place at the right time during taunts or attacks,
you earn a star.
You can use it right away, and that punch
will do more damage than normal, or you can
bank the star and wait until you get more.
More stars do more damage, but also if you
hit an opponent at juuust the right time with
a three star punch, you can even KO them one
blow.
As opponents get tougher, using star punches
wisely becomes more important.
Some fights are extremely difficult to win
without it.
You have to be careful, though.
Any time you get hit, you lose your banked
stars and will have to start over.
Earning stars works a little differently with
each fighter, too.
Some are easy to earn with simple counterpunches.
Others require split-second timing to hit
them before an attack lands, which makes getting
one star difficult and racking up three without
getting hit pretty daunting.
The Star Punch system elevates the game past
just a race to zero HP.
The timing required and the risk calculations
you have to make to use Star Punches wisely
give the game its signature gameplay feel,
and that payoff of nailing a Triple Star Punch
helps make all of the learning and memorization
feel worthwhile.
Not every player has the patience to wait
around.
Forget setting up, screw nuance.
What if I wanna use a super whenever I feel
like?
Can that work?
Some of Soul Calibur 2’s super moves are
unblockable, and they aren’t connected to
a meter at all.
Several unblockables make you charge up before
you can use them, but others are available
at all times.
These unblockable moves do a ton of damage
if they connect, and can turn the tide of
a match no problem.
But if you don’t have to do anything to
use one, what keeps players from spamming
these unblockable moves all the time?
Well, in Soul Calibur, they’re horribly
slow.
Not all of them, but most of them.
They have huge windups, a fiery particle effect,
and you should be able to see them coming
a mile away.
Landing one of these supers raw on a halfway
experienced player is really unlikely.
They’re cumbersome to set up in a combo
to make them hit, and by being unviable compared
to other options, these unblockables have
become one of the more ignored mechanics in
the game.
OK, so fill the meter, and do the biggest
punch.
Hm.
It’d be pretty boring if every super was
just a big punch.
All a Super has to be really is just very
powerful.
That power can take on totally different forms.
Tons of single player action games use a super
as a transformation.
Use your resource to enter a powered up state
with either an enhanced version of your moveset,
or a whole new one.
Devil May Cry’s Devil Trigger is the go-to
vanilla case that includes both.
The specifics vary game to game and person
to person, but entering Devil Trigger typically
makes you faster, stronger, and you get some
healing regen while it’s active.
After some upgrades, you can get some exclusive
moves like summoning phantom swords.
In nearly every iteration, Devil Trigger’s
strength is balanced by its brevity.
It doesn’t last super long, even with a
full meter, so it’s more of a bonus than
an overwhelming strategy.
It can help a lot, but it doesn’t overshadow
your basic combat skills.
Devil Trigger is a great emergency option
to help you out of a jam, and if you have
everything under control, it’s a great tool
that’ll let you really start styling on
your opponents.
Jak 2 had its own iteration of a transformation
super, but it’s really underpowered.
Dark Jak can be activated once your gauge
is full, but all you get is a moderately more
powerful melee attack.
The game is largely built around gunplay and
keeping your distance from enemies, but while
you’re Dark Jak you have to run up to everyone,
and you’re taking hits the whole time.
You’re just as vulnerable like this as you
were originally, and you can’t take that
many hits.
Rushing into the line of fire, or even worse,
a group of enemies already firing at you is
a good way to get dead.
It’s kinda useless.
Kingdom Hearts 2 introduces Drive Forms, a
superpowered state that upgrades your core
moveset and improves your movement options.
Beat up dudes, fill this meter, and when you’ve
filled it completely enough times, you can
trigger the change.
Over the course of the game, you unlock 5
different forms, from the offensive melee
abilities of Valor, to the magic-oriented
Wisdom, to the “nostalgia beats all” of
Limit Form.
Each drive form has its own flavor to keep
your combat approach from getting too stagnant,
and each can be leveled up to get you better
movement options even when you aren’t using
your super.
But all of this power comes at a horrible
cost.
Each time you use a drive form, there’s
an increased chance of it backfiring, and
instead turning you into an Anti- form.
Anti-Form is this heartless-looking thing
that still gives you a big speed bonus, but
your attacks are much weaker, your defense
is terrible, and you cannot heal.
Most importantly, you don’t have a way to
get out of the form besides to wait for the
meter to run out or for combat to end.
It’s deliberately the worst of the drive
forms, and is designed to leave you in a vulnerable
state.
If you start to rely on Drive Forms too much,
you’re just getting closer and closer to
triggering that Anti- form, and that can be
a disaster if it happens in the middle of
a tough boss.
Do you want to risk using it on these little
guys and make that chance of Anti-form go
up some more?
Do you even need to risk using a drive form
to take care of this boss, or can you manage
without it?
The risk of an Anti-form makes the decision
to use your super a lot less cut-and-dry.
If you want to go even more extreme, the original
Dot Hack series has you covered with Data
Drain - a super skill that greatly weakens
enemies and bosses, and is required to defeat
some of them, but will also give you a full-on
Game Over if you use it too often.
Including using it when you’re forced to.
Yeah, try not to design soft locks into the
fabric of your game.
Supers often take center stage in combat,
but that’s not the only way.
You can still make a decent super system out
of mechanics that are a little more passive.
Just do whatever you were gonna do anyway,
and a little later you get some super powers.
Trance in Final Fantasy IX is the game’s
limit break system.
A Trance gauge fills up, and once it’s full
you automatically go into a powered-up state
that increases any damage you do, wipes away
negative statuses, and gives you access to
stronger abilities.
Whenever you make a hit that fills up the
gauge, you immediately go into trance, no
matter if you’re fighting some random lil’
guy or even if the hit that filled the bar
just KO’d the last remaining enemy.
You don’t have a choice, you’re going
into trance whether you like it or not.
Once you’ve had a handful of turns in the
mode, or if the battle ends, the Trance wears
off and the bar is empty again.
FFIX’s Trance is notorious for being almost
impossible to strategize around.
It takes about thirty years to build up, and
that last hit comes at almost a random time.
It’s very difficult to set up Trance to
happen when you’d like it to.
Pep in Dragon Quest XI is mostly the same
idea as Trance.
Once your character gives and takes enough
hits, they can become ‘Pepped Up’, which
grants predetermined stat buffs and cranks
up their critical hit rate.
The buff lasts for 6 to 8 turns but you can
cash it out to have a character use a special
‘Pep Power’ that they’ve learned throughout
the game.
Many Pep Powers are used by a single character
but there are also special team attack powers.
The team attacks requirements can vary, either
just one character being pepped up while someone
else specific is in the party, or some that
need the entire party to be Pepped Up at once.
Just like Trance, it can be inconvenient to
use Pep Powers efficiently.
You kind of get it when you get it.
You can’t even SEE the meter this time.
At least it comes around more often than FF9.
While useful, the powers aren’t so strong
that you’ll build your whole strategy around
them, especially with the prerequisites for
the team attack powers.
Some side quests force you to use a specific
Pep Power to complete, but you might be waiting
around a bit to set it up.
For both FFIX and DQ11, the super moves are
very worth having, but the lack of ability
to strategize around them undercuts how much
they can contribute.
They aren’t overpowered, but they almost
act more like random bonuses rather than part
of the texture of their games’ battle systems.
Supers can be balanced by just the sheer cost
of using one.
The bigger the move, the more it should cost,
right?
If you’re going to rely on the cost of power
to make the player think twice about using
it, you’ve gotta make sure that cost is
big enough.
If not, you can fall into the same trap that
Metroid Prime 3 ran into.
Hypermode lets Samus tap into the raw power
of Phazon, making her arm cannon and other
weapons super fast, more powerful, and to
top it off Samus essentially becomes invincible.
Your health bar is replaced with a Phazon
meter, and any attack drains the meter, returning
you to normal once it empties.
At first, that’s that.
But over time, the Phazon starts to corrupt
Samus.
If you stay in Hypermode too long, you can
enter an ‘Overload’ state and the Phazon
meter starts to fill back up on its own.
If it gets to the top, the Phazon finishes
the job and you get a game over.
What would you pay for all of this power?
One MILLION energy tanks?
A gaJILLION?
You get unlimited destruction for ONE energy
tank.
(wait, that’s it?)
The story justification for Hypermode and
Phazon is nice, and the mechanic is trying
to incorporate a risk-reward element, but
there’s a lot of reward for a very low amount
of risk.
The balance isn’t there.
It’s very easy to pay the single tank to
kick it off, devastate basically anything
in front of you in Hypermode, and recharge
your health from all the stuff you just blew
up.
The Overload meter drains on using weapons,
so… just… keep firing your weapons.
You can even prolong Hyper Mode by just not
burning up weapons TOO quickly.
Hypermode is a dominant strategy that overwhelms
any tactical considerations in the game’s
shooting mechanics, flattens the experience
and saps some of the fun out of it.
You don’t have to use meters in your super
system, of course.
If you want something a little less tied to
specific player actions, you could try using
a cooldown.
Cooldowns can let anyone get a super at a
set schedule, and then choose how to deploy
it after the fact.
The timer itself gives devs a pretty easy
option to balance and fine tune the system.
And no matter how badly your player is playing,
they at least get to once in a while have
a cool move to call their own.
Most MOBAs are built with this as part of
their strategic core, and the mind games that
involve what you’re opponent is capable
of, depending on when they used their
super move last, greatly shapes how matches
play out.
If you’re going to share the information
about the cooldown timer, this system can
even be used as a warning.
Red Alert 2 broadcasts the cooldown timers
for its superweapons, and the ticking clock
can give players a clear short-term goal to
try to take the problem out before the timer
reaches zero.
Cooldowns are sort of halfway between the
‘use-once’ rhythm of X-factor (which we’ll
talk about later) and the ‘play-to-build-meter’
rhythm of the standard meter supers.
It’s not necessarily better or worse than
either, it’s just another option to tailor
the feel of the game to what you think would
be best.
Whether you’re right or wrong is for your
players to decide.
You have to be very careful with how often
you hand out these types of big super moves.
If players can use them too often, it can
completely negate the importance of any other
strategy.
Mario Tennis Ultra Smash is more or less like
the earlier Mario Tennis games, but with one
important difference!
Oh.
It breaks the game.
The Mega Mushroom makes your character big,
and lets you reach and angle shots to almost
anywhere you want them to go.
It’s really easy to not lose when you’re
like this.
Once one character uses a mega mushroom, that’s
very likely the end of the point.
Now, if they were hard to get, maybe that
would be an interesting powerup to have, but
instead the game rains them down on both of
you CONSTANTLY.
EVERY point.
BOTH sides.
They even stop the game, change the camera
angle, do a cutscene you can’t skip, change
the camera angle back, and then resume the
game.
Every time anyone gets one of them.
Which, again, is every point.
You almost CAN’T have a long and satisfying
rally, because you both get game ending super
moves every five seconds.
Handing out supers like candy might sound
like fun, but when they happen so often, these
special moves get much less special, and the
normal moves become totally irrelevant.
The game shrinks, from a full game of tennis
to a tennis-flavored sprint to a powerup.
Super moves can be more than just big damage
dealers.
One of the biggest strengths of a super move
is how it can punctuate combat with an amazing
moment of spectacle.
I’ve had plenty of great looking supers
to choose from all video long.
But what happens when your flashy super moves
are a bit too flashy?
Kingdom Hearts 3 may have gone a bit overboard
with its Attraction attacks.
Sometimes, some of the enemies you fight will
have a green circle on them, hitting them
will give you access to an Attraction attack.
Disneyland itself will tag in, so you can
live your dream of shooting fireworks at fools
from the Thunder Mountain Railroad train.
This is amazing.
And it’s amazing again!
And pretty good again.
And… uh wow these are kinda long, aren’t
they.
The biggest problem at the game’s release
was how often the option came up and how easily
you could hit it.
You could be building up a big combo, hitting
a ton of enemies with a fast finisher like
a big spell command or a keyblade form change,
but then one of those green circles appears
and you accidentally trigger the Mad Hatter
teacups.
You’re now stuck playing a minigame you’ve
already played.
The novelty of Buzz Lightyear astro blasting
your opponents wears thin faster than you
might think, especially when normal combat
would’ve taken care of them, and the whole
system becomes very disruptive to the flow
of the game.
Then they patched in an option to turn most
of them off.
Problem solved.
Super moves are also good to use as a catchup
mechanic.
It doesn’t feel great to be stuck going
through the motions of a game whose outcome
is assured, so super moves can be a great
way to help a losing player get back in the
fight.
In the Advance Wars series, CO Powers are
super moves that can drastically change the
abilities or costs of your units.
It’s another meter to fill up, and when
it does, you can build stuff for way cheaper,
or have your units defend more easily, or
make your tanks tank way harder, or whatever
else makes sense for your elementary school
general to do.
But how do you fill the meter?
Well it’s gonna take some sacrifice on your
units’ part.
You build some of the meter by attacking,
but you can build a TON of it by getting attacked.
In a game where one bad encounter can really
hinder how you do, filling more of the super
meter bar can be a nice consolation prize.
Racing games are notorious for weird catchup
mechanics, and Nintendo just invented an even
weirder one.
F-Zero 99 is everyone’s favorite surprise
of the fall.
Everyone’s, not just mine.
It’s the first series entry in 20 years,
but it’s reworked from the ground up to
work as a 99-player game.
Race around a SNES-era F-Zero track, beat
everyone else, and don’t run out of health.
It’s a simple game, with most of the chaos
coming from the sheer number of racers bumping
into each other until they explode.
Getting lost in the pack can be a death sentence,
but the game has an all-new catchup mechanic
that helps you elevate out of the melee - the
Skyway system.
When this gold meter fills up, you can spend
it all to break away from the pack and hop
onto a better, more exclusive track high above
the fighting masses.
The Skyway is on rails to keep you from falling
off, and just covered with boosters that cut
you through the lower track’s twists and
turns.
Nothing lasts forever, though, and soon you’ll
be back alongside everyone else.
Hopefully you’re a lot further ahead than
you were before.
The further behind you were to start, the
longer you get to stay up on the Skyway.
The easy road isn’t automatic - you can
still miss boosters even if you can’t fall
off of the Skyway, and some parts of it give
you a better shortcut than others - so good
timing is important.
If you use it right, it’s very versatile,
with direct shortcuts, skips for difficult
track sections, a great defensive escape if
you’re low on health, and since you can
only fall off of the Skyway on a straightaway,
you can time it just right to stay up there
for even longer than normal, not to mention
how much pinball action you get to stay out
of down below.
Now getting up there, that’ll take some
crafty moves on your part.
You build the meter with these special Gold
Sparks, which pop out from other players as
they bump into each other.
Special gold bumpers also spawn sometimes
towards the back, and bumping them will get
you a bunch of sparks.
Tying the sparks to player collisions gives
those in the back of the pack the best opportunity
to collect more of them faster, which helps
develop an ebb and flow to each race.
You’ll likely get 2 or 3 Skyways per track,
and as the field narrows down, so do the amount
of sparks and the number of times you’re
likely to fill the meter.
The last race in Grand Prix mode only has
20 drivers left, so you’ll barely get a
chance to use it, and you’ll have to rely
on your core racing skills to come out ahead
at the end.
The Skyway is a very original mechanic for
the series, and the genre.
It’s powerful enough to massively improve
your odds of winning, but tapers off enough
when it counts to keep it from being that
ultimate trump card that can make these types
of supers the only thing that matters in the
game.
It’s a brilliant piece of game mechanic
balancing that helps solve a nagging catch-up
problem that other racing games often have.
Supers that get implemented as catch up mechanics
can be a double-edged sword.
One of the most contentious systems appears
in Ultimate Marvel VS.
Capcom 3 with its X Factor mechanic.
UMVC3 has a standard super meter, but also
every character gets to activate a separate
X Factor mode once a match.
You get a massive attack boost and health
regen, and the effect gets much stronger and
lasts longer the fewer characters you have
left on your team.
At max level 3, the X Factor is so strong
that it's rallied against by both casual and
competitive players alike.
Making a mistake against someone using X Factor
can cost you the game, even when you're far
ahead, as landing even basic combos can easily
kill most characters.
X Factor can be versatile, and you do only
get to use it once per match, so you have
to strategize around it, but the dramatic
late turn can feel unearned.
It can lead to all kinds of mind games and
strategic play, but it can feel overtuned
at level 3, snowballing a match that can seem
like it cheapens or even nullifies playing
the game well beforehand.
For many players, losing via X Factor can
feel worse than just losing normally.
Not all fighting games approach a super system
with careful competitive balance in mind.
Some games just lean into the fun of it.
Ever since Brawl, the Final Smash has been
a staple of Smash Bros in casual and party
modes.
With the Smash Ball item turned on, one will
pop up on the stage from time to time, and
when it does, it’s a mad dash to break the
pinata.
If you’re the lucky soul to do it, you can
activate your Final Smash - a devastating
super move as long as you’re not one of
these.
The Final Smash is likely to KO all but the
healthiest opponents if it lands.
Each character’s Final Smash is unique,
but the majority are just about landing one
basic initial hit - easy for anyone to do.
The chaos and randomness inherent to determining
who gets the Smash Ball on top of the ridiculous
imbalance of how powerful the moves are means
the mechanic wasn’t ever going to be fit
for competitive Smash.
Turns out, borderline undodgeable supers do
not make a great meta.
Smash Ultimate even dipped a toe into making
it less random and more of a meter system,
where you can use a toned-down version of
your Final Smash once you fill it, but that
still mostly highlights how far out of balance
the original setup is.
If you don’t mind that it’s out of balance
though, you can crank up the spectacle and
just make the whole thing as fun to play as
possible.
If you’ve got your own ideas for a new super
move system, sign up for Milanote and start
planning it out on a board over there.
They’ll help you organize your thoughts,
those boards are great.
Signup now to get in on the free Premium account
drawing for Design Doc viewers.
Link’s in the description!
Head down to the comments and let us know
what you’re thinking, or let us know about
some unusual super move systems that try to
balance their power in other ways.
Super moves have to be strong to be worth
doing, but something must keep them in balance.
Design the system with a give-and-take in
mind, and you’ll set your players up for
a big payoff.
*chill vibes from Street Fighter 6*