Sleep in video games can cover a lot of 
ground. It’s a status effect, of course,  
but it can be so much more. It’s a restoration 
tool and a hindrance. It can be a tiny speed bump,  
or the worst thing to happen to your turn 
economy. It can be a dose of realism,  
or if you do it wrong, it can wreak havoc 
on a game’s pacing. With so much range,  
it’d be a good idea to get 
a sense of all your options.
Get comfy, I sleep.
Ad Bit Voice Man: Wake up dan, 
you're late for your programming job
Dan: Wha, what? But I don't 
even know how to program.
ABVM: Then hurry up and learrrrrn. 
At today's sponsor Boot.dev.
Dan: Boot.dev is your perfect intro on the path 
to become a professional programmer. They’ve made  
a full set of Python and Go programming language 
classes, put them all into a big gamified website,  
and take you by the hand to teach you how 
to code like a pro. These are bite-sized,  
self guided lessons meant to help you get 
your feet wet as a backend developer. If  
you’ve ever been curious about learning 
to code, but didn’t know how to start,  
Boot.dev is going to be way more 
effective than trying to wing it yourself.
They’ve designed it to make sure you’re never 
bored, always giving you the next achievable  
goal. Stick with it, and you’ll be shocked at 
how far you’ll go, and it’s way cheaper than  
going straight into university classes. Go on a 
journey of self discovery through coding! That  
sounds nice. Boot.dev members also get access 
to their Discord, full of people learning right  
alongside you. When you get stuck, there’s plenty 
of people to talk to to help you get unstuck.
Boot.dev is even available for free in 
Guest Mode, so you really have nothing  
to lose. Pop over there by using the link 
in the description and sign up with my  
code DESIGNDOC to get 25% off your first payment 
for Boot.dev. 25% off your first month or year,  
depending on what you choose. Go get 
yourself a new skill over at Boot.dev.
OK, let’s start with some of the 
common basic sleep mechanics in games.
So what can sleep do? One: sleep… 
can… cause you to sleep. Yep. Alright,  
the first thing we’re talking about is the part 
everyone has a sort of intuitive sense for,  
but how that gets translated into 
a game will have subtle variations.
Everyone’s familiar with sleep as a status effect.  
You wanted to do something? Too 
bad, sleepyhead! Wake up first.
Different genres will have different approaches 
on what sleep means for their systems.
In turn-based RPGs, sleep is often 
used as a long-term stun. A blocker  
that keeps you from taking your turn. 
How long it lasts depends on the game.  
Some let sleep expire automatically. Some 
keep you asleep until you do something,  
either getting rid of the status with a spell 
or item, or maybe just slapping someone awake.
There’s a bunch of overlap with 
stun and paralysis effects,  
with subtle tradeoffs to make each status feel 
different. Sleep might last a little longer,  
but be more difficult to take hold than a game’s 
paralysis effect. Sleep might guarantee that a  
turn gets skipped, while the other statuses 
just give a chance for that to happen.
When a sleep effect does land, 
the time it takes to kick in can  
sometimes vary. In some games it’s 
instant, but not others. In Pokemon,  
the ‘Yawn’ move makes a Pokemon drowsy for 
a turn before they fall asleep the next.
Other sleeping moves like Sleep Powder and Sing 
take effect faster, but are less accurate. Some  
moves synergize with sleep, like Dream Eater, 
which damages a sleeping target and heals you,  
or the Wake-Up Slap, which is extra 
powerful if you’re waking someone up  
with it. There’s also specific counterplay to 
sleep. Chesto Berries wake you up immediately,  
and Insomnia keeps you from falling asleep 
at all. If you set it up beforehand,  
a move like Rest can fully restore you and 
a Chesto Berry automatically wakes you up,  
removing the drawback. It’s like a free 
full-restore! Pokemon has a lot of nuance  
built into its sleep mechanic, 
way beyond just skipping turns.
In action games, using sleep on 
offense can be about timing. Sleep  
can take your opponent out 
of commission for a while,  
and buy you a lot of time to set up a 
big combo, or just one devastating blow.
Any attack in Monster Hunter on a sleeping 
target does double damage. Build your  
character to inflict sleep more often, and you 
can afford to do extremely slow moves. Set up  
your most cumbersome attack and do some big 
boy damage. It doesn’t even have to be moves,  
really. Surround the monster with 
explosive barrels, you’ve got the time.
Heck, you can even use that sleep time to recover 
yourself. Sharpen your weapons, heal, take care of  
other issues. It’s a great way to reset the 
fight if it’s getting a little out of hand.
The effect doesn’t have to be a two-way 
street, though. If a game isn’t meant to  
be competitive PvP, it’s very common for 
sleep to affect computer characters one  
way and player characters another. In Monster 
Hunter World, if you’re about to fall asleep,  
you aren’t knocked out immediately. 
You greatly slow down first, and have  
a small window to cure the effect before 
it takes hold and leaves you vulnerable.
There’s a big difference in how sleep can feel in 
a game when you inflict it vs. when it’s inflicted  
on you, and there are plenty of pitfalls to watch 
out for, but we’ll get into that more later.
In the Kirby series, sleep isn’t a 
status inflicted by enemy attacks,  
but it’s one of the copy abilities you 
can get. Don’t go out of your way for it,  
though. It’s one of the few abilities you actively 
should avoid. When you get it, you sleep. That’s  
it. Nothing more. You wake up in a bit. It’s an 
interesting obstacle in the game, sort of a poison  
pill for Kirby’s suck ability that might cause a 
problem if you’re blindly grabbing any ability you  
see. For a kid-friendly game, it’s a very clever way 
to mix in some very light negative consequences.
There’s another major category of 
sleep effects that games commonly  
use - refreshing and restoring your capabilities.
Baldur’s Gate 3 extensively uses 
mechanics from Dungeons and Dragons,  
which makes sleep almost a necessity.
No matter how much you’d like to, you can’t fight 
forever. When you’re out adventuring in DnD,  
or in Baldur’s Gate, your resources are 
always draining. Your HP is going down,  
you’re burning up spell slots to cast things, 
you’re using abilities you have a limited amount  
of - your bag of tricks keeps getting lighter. 
To recharge, you have to take some time to rest.
Baldur’s Gate splits rest into a 
couple things - a ‘short rest’ and  
a ‘long rest’. Short rests are meant 
to be brief pauses to gather yourself  
before venturing further into the dungeon. 
In universe, it’s like stopping for an hour.  
You might get a little health back, some 
classes get a few spell slots refreshed,  
but if you ran yourself ragged, you aren’t 
going to be all the way back to full power.
A long rest is, well, a longer rest. It’s 
closer to falling asleep and waking up in the  
morning. Your health replenishes, all your spell 
slots refill, and you’re basically good as new.
The problem is it’s not usually convenient to 
stop and just take a nap in the middle of a  
scary forest, or a dark cave, or wherever you 
find yourself. Just because you want to take  
a break doesn’t make the world stop for you. If 
you’re asleep for 8 hours, anything can happen.
There’s an early example found in an encounter 
with an owlbear and her cub. You could fight the  
creature, if you’re up to it, but you can avoid 
confrontation altogether. If you play your cards  
right, you can even get your own owlbear cub at 
camp. The fight with the mama is a limited-time  
offer, though. If you leave and go long rest, when 
you return, everyone’s dead. Goblins, the owlbear,  
everyone. The cub’s somewhere else. In this 
game, some opportunities will pass you by.
Sleeping isn’t without its own opportunities, 
though. Long rests often trigger story events  
and camp life segments. You’ll learn more 
about party members and can make decisions  
that influence both your relationships 
and maybe even how they perform in combat  
later on. You never know what might 
happen next when you shut those eyes.
There is another problem though. You’ll 
need camp supplies to do a long rest.  
If you don’t have enough on hand, you could 
opt for a Partial Rest instead - something in  
between short and long. Get half of your spell 
slots, half your HP back, and be on your way,  
though now you definitely don’t have enough 
supplies to rest again, so be careful out there.
The difficulty that you have in fully 
restoring your health creates a lot of  
the drama of a dungeon. Pressing 
on might risk losing everything,  
but stopping might be just as dangerous. Choosing 
between two bad options with real consequences for  
each one is a great way to raise the stakes and 
drama of a story and to make players plan ahead.
So sleep can provide a bunch of mechanical… 
stuff, but lots of other status effects can  
do that too. What’s so useful about 
adding a sleep mechanic specifically?
There’s an intuitive quality to sleep 
that helps ground the in-game effect to  
something more relatable to the player. If you see 
‘Scarlet Rot’ as a status effect in Elden Ring,  
well, you could probably get the 
sense that it’s something bad,  
but what exactly is bad about it could 
practically be anything. If ‘sleep’ shows  
up in a game, you won’t have to do quite so much 
tutorializing about what the effect might be.
For games that try to bring a more realistic 
and grounded flavor to their setting,  
like simulations, survival games, or role 
playing games, that can be a great asset.
Citizen Sleeper is a narrative-driven RPG 
derived from a very tabletop-like gaming  
experience. You’re an escaped robot, hiding as 
a refugee of sorts in a space station that has  
seen better days. Really, everything in 
this game has seen better days. Through  
odd jobs and friendly connections, you 
build up a little bit of a life here,  
as you pursue answers and try to 
carve out a future for yourself.
But there’s only so much you can do in a cycle,  
and so many more things that demand your 
attention. Each die at the top of the screen  
works kind of like a bundle of energy that 
you spend to perform a task you want to do.
Each morning you roll your dice and 
spend them throughout the day on  
tasks - to track down leads, to work for 
money, or to help your friends in need.
Higher numbers lead to a better chance of success,  
but win or lose, you’ve 
spent that dice for the day.
Maybe tomorrow will bring better things.
As the days go on, your body degrades. You 
get less good at regenerating your dice.
A major mechanic is to get enough money to afford 
the medicine that keeps your deteriorating robot  
internals alive just a little bit longer. Sleep 
is used in this game to hit the reset button,  
but a little piece of yourself is lost every time 
you wake up again. Use your limited time wisely.
It doesn’t have to be all stark and serious,  
though. A lack of sleep can be 
fun, too. In a… twisted sense
The Sims is the world's most 
accurate simulation of human life,  
and models sleep in a realistic way. It’s 
not really an option or a convenience,  
One way or another, your Sim is going 
to have to turn in for the night.
As the day goes on, your energy bar 
drains. You can hold off the decline a  
little with some coffee, but really you’re 
supposed to nap in a chair or go to bed.
If you try to power through anyway, 
you’re fighting a losing battle. As  
you get more tired in the more recent 
games, your mood deteriorates. Your sim  
will try to veer off towards bed if 
you don’t force them to stay awake.
If they run out of energy entirely, they 
pass out and collapse wherever they’re  
standing. You’ll pass out mid sentence. Or 
into your Cheerios. Hope you’re not swimming.
Sleep is also a great way to give an in-universe 
reason for some quality of life features.
Outer Wilds is one of the most on-a-schedule 
game I can think of. Things happen at specific  
points of time, and you might have to wait for 
those moments to come around before you can  
progress. You could wait in real time, 
or you could doze off. Shut your eyes,  
watch a timer tick forward, and choose 
to wake up whenever you want. Outer Wilds  
updates its state without having to show you 
its progress until you’re ready to rejoin the  
world. Sleep gives a more skeuomorphic way 
to time travel to the time frame you need.
Sleep is often used as an alternative 
to combat. It takes a little more  
effort to fight your way through the game 
without destroying everything on the way,  
so the extra work usually comes with extra perks 
to make it worthwhile. Dave the Diver uses sleep  
as a way to loot better material. You're 
diving in this ocean to do story missions,  
but along the way you've got to catch the fish 
you're going to serve at Bancho's Sushi Bar.  
If you take the time to tranquilize the fish 
rather than stab or shoot them, your catch gets  
a three star rating instead of one. You get more 
meat, which means more customers can be served,  
which means more revenue. Sometimes you get 
special drops that unlock better dishes.
The game pays you back for making 
an effort to take the scenic route.
If you want a more ‘fun’ version of sleep, go 
study up on some stealth mechanics. Stealth  
games create fun by balancing action and 
inaction. Risk and reward. How close can  
you get to these guys? Do you have the patience 
to wait a cycle, or are you gonna push your luck?
But some of these mechanics can 
start to feel out of the player’s  
control. Waiting for the right cycle 
feels a little passive. One way that  
stealth games can add back some 
player agency is through sleep.
Stealth and non-violence can go hand 
in hand. Dedicated stealth games often  
push you towards avoiding combat and 
violent action as much as possible,  
and sleep can be a tailor-made tool for that.
Metal Gear Solid uses sleep all the time 
through tranquilizer darts. They let you  
non-lethally blaze your way through 
guards by taking them out yourself,  
rather than having to wait for their behavior 
to eventually line up with what you need.
The mechanics of the tranquilizer have 
evolved over the years. In Metal Gear Solid 2,  
your silenced tranquilizer is one of your 
most powerful tools to get through areas  
with stealth - as effective as a gun, but without 
raising nearly as much alarm in the process. Your  
darts’ effect varies depending on where you land 
your shots. Headshots put guards out immediately,  
but a leg shot might need a few seconds 
before sleep can take hold. The sleep  
effect is temporary, and others can 
come by and wake up affected guards,  
so you aren’t permanently removing a threat, 
but it should give you enough time to let you  
go where you need to. Sleep in this game is 
a weapon best used on unsuspecting guards,  
though. If you’re already being hunted, 
tranquilizing a guard or two can only do so much.
In Metal Gear Solid 3 and 4, the game built in 
more rewards for getting through stealthily.  
Lethal weapons are more powerful in these 
games, so it takes even more skill to get  
through without violence. The new CQC system 
also gives a closer-range stealth attack  
option. Taking enemies and bosses out without 
killing them can get you lots of special gear  
to use. Some encounters themselves even 
become much easier if you had taken a  
less violent path through the game. You 
can even tranq wild animals like snakes,  
which you can capture to later eat 
or throw at guards to scare them.
Metal Gear Solid 5 lets the enemies adapt to 
your tactics, including sleep. Are you putting  
everyone to bed with tranq headshots? They 
might wear helmets now. Use sleeping gas a  
lot? Guards break out their gas masks. You 
can capture and recruit sleeping soldiers  
out in the field to then work for you at your 
home base, earning you money and research for  
more equipment and upgrades. Sleep in Metal 
Gear is a tool, built to open up different  
playstyles and give you tons of options 
to get through the game how you want to.
So sleep is a useful idea to mix into a game,  
but it’s not without some problems. Games 
that use sleep have to work around some  
of its specific pitfalls. Lots of them 
involve how sleep is often an obligation.
Kingdom Hearts: Dream Drop Distance runs into a  
big pacing problem with how sleep 
shows up at inconvenient times.
In 3D, you play as both Sora and Riku, each 
with effectively their own separate campaigns  
to complete. You’ll visit the same worlds, 
sometimes in different areas, progressing parallel  
storylines, and fighting their own respective 
boss fights. The two campaigns aren’t identical,  
but there’s some repetition in there. You still 
have to complete everything to actually finish the  
game. Now, you might assume that you’ll just 
pick one campaign and do that until it ends,  
then start the other one. Not so! The game will 
make you swap between the two. Not at any specific  
story beat or anything, but as part of the game’s 
titular Drop system. This meter drains over time,  
and once it hits zero, your character will 
IMMEDIATELY fall asleep on the spot and you’ll  
swap to the other campaign. Doesn’t matter what 
you’re doing. You could be mid-fight on a boss and  
you’ll still collapse. And the boss’s health will 
reset when you eventually come back here. Fun!
It’s a bizarre choice. Swapping at non-specific 
intervals makes for jarring problems with the  
game’s story pacing, and emphasizes some 
of the more repetitive parts of the game.
You CAN mitigate the Drop mechanic a few ways. 
You can extend the timer with consumables,  
called Drop-Me-Nots. You could manually 
drop and swap characters yourself, which,  
if you realize it, you could just jump right back 
into your original character if you’re forced out.  
There are some minor buffs you’re missing out on 
if you do that, but that’s not a dealbreaker. The  
mechanic mostly serves as a nuisance, taking 
you out of the flow at unexpected intervals,  
and either forcing you to manually override it, 
or kludge through the other character before  
jumping back to the story you were in the middle 
of. It’s extremely disruptive, and even though  
it’s prominent enough to be in the game’s title, 
it’s not a fun or helpful addition to the game.
If you’re not careful, an obligation to 
sleep in a game can feel like a chore.  
Even more so if a game comes up with 
some weird punishments for not sleeping.
The world of Brave Fencer Musashi runs 
on schedule, complete with a day-night  
cycle and even days of the week that NPCs, 
shops, and events all adhere to. Obviously  
the schedule ties into character and story 
progression, but it also affects moment to  
moment gameplay. Brave Fencer Musashi makes use 
of a ‘tiredness’ resource. As time ticks away,  
you get more tired. As it marches closer to 
100%, it gradually affects Musashi more and more.  
Movement speed goes from running, to jogging, 
to walking, to slow walking. Attacks get slower,  
weaker, and shorter in range. You can still 
jump like normal, but almost everything else  
is impacted by how tired you are. It feels like 
your controls are degrading bit by bit as you  
become more tired. Turns out that’s kind of a 
problem for a platforming action RPG like this.
Don’t think you can just power through with 
bad controls, though. Regardless of whether  
you’re fighting or exploring, once you hit 100% 
Musashi will unleash his ultimate attack. Sleep.  
He falls asleep on the spot and gradually 
restores tiredness and HP. Time speeds up,  
too, so you don’t have to wait as long as you 
might fear, but you’re still out of commission  
for a good minute, and you better hope that 
enemies aren’t all up in your biz. You’ll fall  
asleep no matter what you’re doing, including 
mid- boss fight, so don’t put it off too long.
You eventually learn how to take naps, but until 
then, all you can do is chug healing stuff,  
stay at an inn, or wait for the sweet embrace of 
sleep to come over you. Side note - I like how  
there are actual vacancies in this hotel, like a 
real hotel. You almost never see that in games.
Brave Fencer Musashi tried to inject 
a level of realism by making sleep a  
resource to manage throughout the game, but 
its execution gives it a little too much of  
a chance to annoy instead of just block. 
It can cause the game’s pacing to drag,  
and its effects on movement are just barely 
enough of a problem to make the whole mechanic  
add up to a significant annoyance. Workable 
idea, maybe needs another refining pass.
So if a sleep system can feel 
like a chore and a punishment,  
how do you fix that? You could try 
to flip around what sleep does.
Instead of not-sleeping being a punishment, 
make sleeping feel like a bonus.
Final Fantasy XV DOESN’T have sleep as a status  
effect at all! It’s got more than 
30 of them, but none are sleep.
Final Fantasy XV uses sleep as a 
mechanism for character progression.
Every time you get XP, you don’t get 
the benefits immediately. You have to  
wait until you check into one of the game’s 
many hotels, or one of the campsites to get  
Ignis to cook something and then turn in. 
You only get your levels starting the next  
day. Not every accommodation is equal, though. 
Better hotels give better XP bonus multipliers,  
up to tripling your experience if you visit 
a hotel suite fit for a prince. I mean,  
c’mon, of course Fantasy Super Venice is 
gonna have a nice hotel - I mean look at  
this place. I’d be three times better 
in the morning if I slept there too.
Lots of other Final Fantasy games have hotels as 
an afterthought. A nice refresh, but completely  
unnecessary to stop in, unless the story forces 
you. In Final Fantasy XV the styling of sleep  
in this manner contributes to the ‘road trip’ 
vibe, punctuating bits of grinding with rest,  
and giving more of a reason to flip frequently 
between the wilderness and back in town.
So that’s sleep. Before you go to bed, 
go to the comments. We’re talking about  
even weirder sleep mechanics that 
didn’t make it into this episode.
Sleep is super adaptable when it’s put into a 
game, but it can come with a lot of baggage.  
It’s intuitive to players, but it can be 
a limitation. It can be a thing to avoid,  
or a thing that changes the way you 
play the game completely. As long as  
you watch out for the downsides, a little 
sleep might just be what your game needs.
*chill vibes from NiGHTS into Dreams*