Fast travel is one of those ultra-basic, bedrock
tools of game design.
Some games almost DEMAND to have SOME kind
of fast travel system.
But the devil is in the details.
It’s like a wrench.
The same wrench can fix a loose connection
or be thrown into a running engine and do
a lot of damage.
How a game implements its fast travel is the
difference between solving a problem, ignoring
it, or creating a whole new one.
Let’s talk about the different shapes a
fast travel system can take and how you can
craft one that fits just right.
But first, fast travel to the end of your
project with Milanote!
Do you have a project in your head right now?
Let’s get it out of there and free up some
space.
Milanote is a powerful tool to help get your
personal and group projects organized.
Mike and I have been using it to plan episodes
for a couple of years now.
It’s the fastest way I’ve found to get
text notes, images, links, and files grouped
together to get your whole team working towards
the same vision.
There are built-in templates for lots of project
types, including game design.
No matter the structure of your game, Milanote
lets your team stay creative and hold all
your game making plans in one place - storyboards
and moodboards, TODOs, notes, and inspiration.
Did you see something that sparked an idea
that you want others to see?
Drop it in.
Have a plan to change a level?
Draw your ideas right on the picture, and
get feedback right away.
It has a modern, easy-to-use interface that
everyone can pick up, whether you’re a project
manager, artist, designer, or programmer,
and no matter the size of your team.
Milanote’s intuitive drag-and-drop interface
and built-in templates are made to help everyone
be the best they can be.
Best of all, Milanote is free to sign up.
Click the link in the description and let
Milanote help take your projects from a dream
to a plan.
Thanks, Milanote!
What’s the point of fast travel?
Yeah, haha, it’s traveling fast, duh.
But…
why do we need it?
We’re not fighting against reality here.
You can’t teleport yourself from New York
to Paris, but a game can take you from Caelid
to Leyndell in two seconds, no problem.
Games are a world created - unbound by reality.
All parts of them, including travel, could
be anything you want them to be.
They could take any structure.
Think about a point-and-click adventure game,
like Ace Attorney, where you’re just teleporting
from point to point whenever you move around.
In that game, there’s no need for fast travel.
ALL travel is fast travel.
The only time that fast travel can be A THING
AT ALL is when moving around comes with some
cost of time and space.
Fast travel is a tool to cut down that cost.
But…
what is it exactly that we’re cutting out,
and why was that cost put in the game to begin
with?
Fast travel isn’t one single thing.
If you’re putting in a fast travel system,
you’ve got a lot of options.
Let’s start with with something basic, like
teleporting.
There are roughly 25 trillion games that let
you jump from wherever you are to a number
of set points of interest on the map.
Maybe it’s the front door of a big city
or the save point in a church just after a
boss you fought ten hours ago.
In most games, fast travel is pretty close
to teleportation.
It could just be literally that.
One second, you're on a beach, and the next,
you've loaded into the Broken Reality Zone.
Fast travel that lets you instantly jump to
points of interest is super convenient.
Skyrim is your classic example.
There are hundreds of points of interest that
you can teleport to if you've already been
there.
Just go outside, bring up the map, and pick
your spot.
The points of interest are so frequent and
densely packed together that you're rarely
more than a minute away from any point on
the map.
Other games like Breath of the Wild and Elden
Ring are a little more reserved with their
teleportation points.
In those two, fast travel is tied to just
the more important areas, like Shiekah Towers
and shrines or sites of grace.
They work the same as Skyrim, though - just
open the menu and zip around.
Being able to jump around the map is a major
factor that lets these open-world games maintain
their 'go anywhere, do anything' philosophy.
Whenever you get bored or hit a wall, jump
out of there and find something new to do.
Teleporting from point to point can even be
a technical convenience.
Did you get stuck on level geometry?
Instead of soft locking, now you can just
teleport away.
Teleporting can also be a godsend for completionists.
If a player has already checked off large
chunks of what used to be there to do, teleportation
can let you skip over a long, eventless stretch
of walking, and helps keep the late-game from
feeling like it’s wasting your time.
Teleportation-style fast travel is so common
nowadays that it’s easy to overlook, but
don’t forget that it became common for a
reason.
It’s really handy.
A little less common are games where you can
only go between fast travel hubs.
These will teleport you around the same as
the last ones, but you have to get to a hub
to be able to travel to another one.
The diegetics of this style are usually stronger.
Instead of just going to a menu and fading
out to a loading screen, this might be shown
as a city bus network or save points you have
to get to to make the fast travel work.
Hub-to-hub is less of a Get Out Of Jail Free
card than the anywhere-to-hub model.
You have to do a little work to get to where
you want to be.
Games that go hub-to-hub have to worry more
about where all the hubs are placed.
How many of them are you going to have?
Too many, and you risk undercutting the beautiful
world your game should be exploring.
The best open-world games usually pride themselves
on the things that happen in between the things
you're going to.
The serendipity of not really knowing what
you’re about to find on the other side of
that hill.
You’re supposed to get distracted by the
things you find along the way in these worlds.
If you’re just zipping around to the places
you know about, you’re not going to spot
a random korok seed, or a mini-dungeon, or
a falling star, or a surprise boss.
This world isn’t meant to be twenty boss
fights strung together - it’s meant for
you to LEAVE the beaten path, not skip over
it.
Put down too many hubs and players might spend
less time looking at vistas and more time
looking at menus.
But too few hubs, or too many in the wrong
place, can be a problem too.
Final Fantasy XIV’s Aetheryte network is
a crystal-themed, teleport-y styled system
with a fee based on the distance traveled.
Nearly every zone in the game has one to three
of the crystals to use, of wildly varying
placement quality.
Some of the older zones featured in the 2013
relaunch had Aetheryte crystals placed wayyyy
out of the way from common quest areas and
objectives.
Your reward for paying in-game currency to
fast travel was to slow travel through some
more uneventful terrain.
The most infamous crystal problem shows up
in the main story quest.
There’s a primary base of operations you
visit all the time called the Waking Sands,
sitting within Vesper Bay, a small port village.
Vesper Bay is not surrounded by an Aetheryte.
The closest one is to the east, in another
small town called Horizon.
Just about everyone had to teleport to Horizon,
then take a minute-long trek to Vesper Bay.
Not once, either - you kept coming back several
times during major questlines.
The travel time added up in a hurry.
There are some light story reasons for why
it’s designed the way it is, but c’mon,
would it kill you to bring that crystal a
little closer?
Now, all you secret super fans know the real
way of getting to Vesper Bay.
You go to another city and take a SECRET FERRY.
Shh.
Don’t tell the new players.
They’re never gonna figure that one out,
ha ha haaaaaa.
Ohhh, wasting time…
The trip to Vesper Bay was such a common complaint
that it became a meme in the FFXIV community.
By update 5.3, the developers finally started
giving out a consumable item called the Vesper
Bay Aetheryte Ticket, which sent you to where
you wanted to go directly.
I, of course, didn’t realize the tickets
were a thing until after I finished A Realm
Reborn’s story.
That one’s on me.
At least the Waking Sands doesn’t matter
after you get past it in the story.
Square has fixed the bigger problem, at least.
The recent expansions of XIV have been more
careful about story quest locations and Aetheryte
placement.
The same principle applies in mass transit
in real life as in video games: Cluster your
hubs where people want to go!
There’s one thing I don’t like about teleporting,
though.
It’s a little too divorced from the game
world.
It’s not the worst thing you could do, but
there’s something about it that breaks immersion
a little bit for me.
You do have other options, though.
What if you thought about faster travel from
a level design angle?
I’m talking about shortcuts.
It’s super common in action-adventure games
to design a level’s layout with shortcuts
in mind.
If you’ve just beaten the boss at the top
of a dungeon, it’d be annoying to backtrack
through the whole thing to get out.
Some games cut to black or just warp you to
the front.
Dark Souls usually gives you something like
a ladder to kick down or an elevator to activate
that lets you speed your way to the entrance
again.
Plenty of Zelda games have unlockable doors
and other shortcuts that let you get around
more quickly as you progress.
They could get creative with them, too.
In Ocarina of Time, you can plant magic beans
in some overworld areas as child Link, then
warp to the future, where those beans have
grown into magic plants that can give you
access to more areas as adult Link.
Metroidvanias often build their character
progression around blocking you from taking
the shortcut somewhere until you’ve gone
far enough to unlock specialized moves.
As you unlock things like a high jump, a speed
boost, or a morph ball, you’re gradually
opening up the world and streamlining your
travel.
There are some parts of Metroid Prime where
later abilities let you just skip over level
design components.
Once you find the space jump, you can hop
over this morph ball segment that you used
to have to track through.
The power to make shortcuts doesn’t have
to come from within you, though.
Maybe you just pay a guy.
Spelunky is a roguelike with a set series
of levels to go through in order, but you
can skip a lot of the easier ones if you’ve
talked to the Tunnel Man.
You’ll find him at the end of an area, where
he’ll ask you for items.
Pay the man a few times, and he’ll create
a tunnel that works as an instant warp from
the start to the deeper parts of the cave.
You only have a few options for where you
can take the tunnels - there are only a few
'hubs' in this case - but you will pass through
them on every run.
Skipping levels isn't as much of a problem
in this roguelike as it would be in, say,
Hades, where you're slowly building your character's
skills over a run.
Your character progression in Spelunky IS
what items you carry.
There are no health upgrades or secret skills
other than what the things you find will give
you.
You can take on the final boss from the start
of the game if you can manage to get to the
end, and using the tunnels can make it much
easier to get there in one piece.
In this context, level skips ARE fast travel.
It doesn't look the same as fast travel in
a game like Skyrim, but Spelunky's tunnels
cover the same function in a different form.
So we’ve got teleporting.
We’ve got shortcuts.
How else can we get around the world quickly?
Well, we could just go straight to the source
here.
What if you focus on character movement?
Just make that way faster?
Go ride a bike.
Get on a horse.
Steal an airship.
Do whatever movement you were doing before,
but at like three times the speed.
Now, this one isn’t as fast as teleporting
to where you want to go, but speeding up your
natural movement gets you the added bonus
of control.
You have full reign over where you want to
go and how you get there.
You can spot things along the way, and stop
for detours, just like with your base movement.
In the best-case scenario - if your movement
is fun enough and fast enough - you can even
make teleporting fast travel feel unnecessary.
It's good to keep around as a fallback, but
you CAN make players prefer to get to where
they're going on their own.
This is, I think, the best part of Insomniac's
Spider-Man games.
Moving around as Spidey is not only fast but
extremely satisfying, too.
You transition from free falling to swinging
to wall-running to vaulting, seamlessly.
But there's depth
in your movement kit that lets you get around
even faster, and you can tinker and practice
with getting the most out of it on the way
to your next objective.
The way you move in the game feels great,
but the density of things to do helps as well.
You always have something just around the
corner, be it collectibles or spontaneous
side missions that you can jump right into
if they catch your eye.
The game supports the intrinsic satisfaction
of swinging around with plenty of extrinsic
reasons to go from place to place without
teleporting there.
It’s honestly easy to forget that the teleport
is even an option.
Personally, the only time I think about it
is when I have to get to the complete opposite
side of the map.
Otherwise, I’m gonna take a little more
time.
The range of fast travel options in Spider-Man
are still a great quality of life feature
for getting to the next story beat immediately,
or when you’re doing cleanup for a completionist
run, but the game found a way to make its
movement engaging enough for it to not be
necessary.
Spiderman’s traversal options are very fun
to use, but another, more subtle reason they
work is that they’re almost always ready
to go.
They’re very convenient to use.
That’s not always the case in other games.
Breath of the Wild has a teleportation-style
fast travel system that players use pretty
often to zoom around to a tower or shrine
in a specific region, but that’s not the
only method that Nintendo built to get you
around this landscape.
Horses are here too, and they’re around
to help you zip through areas in a much more
fine-grained way, though they aren’t without
some major drawbacks.
Horses aren’t free.
You gotta get one yourself.
Find one in the wild, sneak up to it, mount
it, and tame it.
Once you’ve got a new friend, go to the
Horse DMV and get all your paperwork in order.
Name it at one of the many stables across
Hyrule.
You can park multiple horses at the Horse
Garage, and call them out as needed, to go
riding off into adventure together… is what
I want to say, but horses in this game come
with a lot of inconveniences that make them
very situational.
On smooth, open terrain, horses are great.
On rough terrain, don’t even bother.
Your horse will e-brake and refuse to go forward.
They can’t cross rivers, mountains, or deserts,
which is fine because there aren’t any of
those anywhere.
You can hop off and go up the cliff yourself,
but in this game, horses aren’t magic.
They’re horses.
You won’t be able to call it back by your
side to continue on, because it’ll either
be too far away or it can’t find a path
to get to you.
If you find another stable, an NPC can magic
the horse back to you, but you’ll have to
get to one on foot…or by shrine.
Either way, it’s just inconvenient enough
to make it a hassle to bother with the horse
in the first place.
What most often happens is that you’ll take
a horse for a minute or two ride towards something
interesting, get blocked by terrain, dismount
to explore on foot, and forget about your
horse entirely.
The game’s DLC added some special equipment
that you can find to fix the issue.
It’s magic!
It’s straight-up magic.
Teleport your horse to wherever you want,
and go on your merry way.
That gear is well out of your way, though,
and they also added a motorcycle that runs
on rougher terrain, completely outclassing
every horse.
Breath of the Wild’s efforts to give a realistic
underpinning to their fast travel horses do
just enough to nerf the option from a convenience
to an inconvenience.
No matter what form it takes, fast travel
dramatically changes how traversing through
a game feels.
With that much power, though, it’s easy
to undercut the design of a game.
We’re gonna have to think about some limiters
here.
All that power should come at a price.
How do you give players fast travel options
without giving them free rein?
Most of the time, games force you to get somewhere
the slow way at least once before you can
travel there.
Visit the Pokecenter, and you can fly back
to it - that sort of thing.
If you could get to an end-game zone and skip
the context for how you're supposed to get
there, you'd be throwing a player into the
deep end.
You'd send people into areas full of mechanics
players don't understand, story beats they
haven't heard, power levels they need but
don't have, equipment they don't know exists,
and a world state that they have no context
for.
Making players actually reach locations manually
at least once can assure that players have
the context they need to understand what they've
gotten themselves into.
You could also limit fast travel by forcing
players to pay resources to use it.
It could be cash, secret gems, keys you need
to gather - anything you have to get from
the world through normal play.
This gives an extra incentive for players
to interact with other systems.
Some games tie unlocking fast travel to story
progress.
For many Final Fantasy games, the airship
was the fastest way to get around, and usually
didn’t unlock until the second half of the
game, or even later.
At that point, players are fully invested
in the story, know the major landmarks of
the world, and have several optional plot
threads and side quests to work towards at
their own pace.
It’s not all-or-nothing, though.
You can use the story to unlock fast travel
options more piecemeal than that.
Metroidvanias structure themselves around
this, but it shows up in other genres, too.
Pokemon Scarlet and Violet gives you a vast
region to explore, but you can’t move around
very well in it.
Until you make a new friend.
Very early on, you team up with one of the
box legendary Pokemon that you can ride as
a living bike.
It’s a mediocre bike, but we can make some
upgrades.
One of the major questlines involves going
around and hunting for legendary ingredients
guarded by gigantic boss Pokemon.
Do that, and your weird hair buddy will make
a delicious sandwich.
Your bike guilt trips you into feeding it
the sandwich.
It’s cool, though, because each time that
happens, your traversal options expand.
With every ingredient you find, you unlock
new abilities like sprinting, swimming, high
jumps, gliding, or climbing, making reaching
different parts of the world much easier.
Unlike a Metroidvania, you aren’t totally
shut out of these areas without these powers,
but traversal becomes less of a headache with
each new one.
It does a good job of balancing exploration
with a satisfying sense of progression.
Fast travel down to the comments and let’s
talk about movement and fast travel.
Teleporting around is too basic, I want to
hear about the weirder systems that you all
know about.
Fast travel is powerful - sometimes too powerful
for a game’s own good.
Getting the right combination of convenience
and power without undermining discovery and
shoving people into menus is a tough balancing
act to pull off, but it can be done.
*chill vibes outro from Tunic*