You know, it’s not anyone’s fault.
Sometimes games and game mechanics just drift
apart.
RPGs and random encounters used to be inseparable,
and now they can barely stand to be in the
same room.
But it wasn’t always like that.
There were some good times, right?
Let’s open the book of memories and see
how RPGs and random encounters got to know
each other, how they started to get on each
other’s nerves, lost the magic, and broke
up.
Who knows, maybe if they tweak a few things
here and there, they could become better for
the experience.
Maybe find another genre.
Wait, what’s this?
Better be a wooloo.
Oh wait, Milanote.
Excellent.
You ever try to organize a project using post-it
notes, napkins, and memories?
It’s terrible.
You’re losing stuff all the time, there’s
no cross-platform support, no one can read
your mind.
Just a terrible experience.
Know what’s better than that?
Today's episode sponsor, Milanote!
Milanote is a tool that helps game designers
keep track of their storyboards and mood boards,
and collaborate with their teams to keep everyone
on the same page and keep it all organized
in one place.
We love it and use it for making our videos
too.
Here’s the one for the video you’re watching
right now!
Milanote uses a drag-and-drop, freeform canvas
to help your entire team - designers, programmers,
artists, and managers - create boards that
help visualize your projects.
The UI is sleek and modern, and Milanote even
has plug-ins made specifically with the workflow
of game designers in mind.
Sign up for free using the link in the description
below, get organized and get your projects
GOING, with Milanote!
Random encounters have a bad rap now.
If you mention that a game has a random encounter
system you’ll get an immediate, visceral
disgust from a chunk of the crowd.
It wasn’t always like that though.
It used to be a staple of RPG game design,
and game mechanics aren’t usually added
in to be annoying on purpose.
In a modern context, random encounters have
a lot of problems, but you have to remember
that they were built for another age...
Like plenty of other RPG tropes, random encounters
come from tabletop role-playing games.
In many of them, as your party travels the
world the DM will roll dice on occasion.
The roll might determine what types of monsters
you fought, how many of them there were, or
even if you found any at all.
The idea was adapted wholesale to JRPGs, just
with the game rolling the ‘dice’ silently,
all the time.
Games would program in designated zones where
you could fight monsters, and roll every so
often to see if you would fight something.
It looks like a simple system, but there’s
a lot more going on under the surface.
It might be easier to see what it’s doing
with something to compare it to.
Take an action game from the NES era.
You’re walking around and it’s pretty
clear what you’re going to fight.
This guy?
Hostile.
Go get ‘em.
Maybe you jump on him, or use a weapon, maybe
a secondary weapon.
Pretty simple.
The combat and travel screens are the same
screen too, rather than triggering a different
‘mode’ of play.
It works as a combat system, but especially
in the 8- bit generation, this type of combat
would force some pretty severe technical limitations
on your game.
Modern RPGs have tons of processing power
to work with, but back in the heyday of the
random encounter there were harsh limits to
what you could put on the screen.
NES games could only display 64 sprites of
either 8x8 or 8x16 pixels shown in front of
a background.
You think THIS is the sprite?
No, THIS is the sprite.
This is a bunch of sprites.
Those 64 drawable sprites had to cover everything,
from UI to characters to special effects.
Game Boy games could only show 40 sprites
at a time, and only 10 different ones per
screen line.
There’s only so much you could display at
any one time.
One secret benefit to random encounters was
how it let a game switch modes, and let the
processor only draw the things that were relevant
to the battle going on at the time.
You free up as much as you possibly can to
show big sprites of unique monsters, groups
of monsters, unique battle UI and controls
rather than having to tone everything down
because the NES processor can’t handle the
detail you’re aiming for.
Second, there’s a role for the element of
surprise in a game’s design, and random
encounters are, if nothing else, a fire hose
of surprise.
But surprise can come in many forms.
Let’s look at Pokemon.
Pokemon’s mechanics rely heavily on random
battles.
How many times when you were younger did you
have a dilemma?
Your team is on their last legs.
You’ve got just a bit further to go before
town.
Between you and safety is a patch of tall
grass.
Will you make it?
What will you find in there?
Can you handle it?
Or will you get sent back to the last town?
Or another scenario.
Maybe you’ve got a team you’re training
with, but you might be pushing your luck a
little.
If you head to a new part of the world, maybe
you can get some good training in, but maybe
you get unlucky and something truly powerful
shows up all of a sudden.
Is your team prepared?
Did you bring enough stuff with you?
Or are you in way over your head?
The randomness of the battle system gives
you the chance to feel that gripping suspense,
dread, and maybe relief once you get through
to the other side.
If you could just see what was lurking in
the grass, you wouldn’t have that level
of suspense.
The random encounters also make it way easier
for the game to make different biomes and
even different patches of grass feel mysterious
and very different from one to the next.
Hiding the encounter behind a hidden roll
of the dice rather than seeing them on screen
lets you have a much more nuanced Pokemon
encounter rarity system.
A patch of grass might have a 50% chance of
something common, a 45% chance of something
else, a 1 in 20 shot of something rare, or
a 1 in 8000 chance of something really surprising.
It’s a mechanic that’s hard to replicate
with other systems.
If you knew at a glance what Pokemon were
where and exactly what you could immediately
fight, the thrill of the hunt disappears.
Random encounter systems are a vehicle you
can use to build mystery.
Honestly, though, I’m stretching a bit here
to find the positives.
Random encounters CAN be interesting systems,
but there are SO many trap doors that a game
designer can fall into.
I mean, the system is LITERALLY a trap door
generator.
The random encounter system has gone by the
wayside because it’s just annoying in most
situations.
It was traditional, but that doesn’t make
it any better.
The system’s unpredictability can lead to
drama, but it’s incredibly easy to go from
‘dramatic’ to ‘frustrating’.
Random encounters are poison to pacing.
Their whole job is to keep the player from
whatever it was they were doing before.
If their goal wasn’t ‘find a new monster’,
the fight is going to interrupt their goal
in a way that might be difficult or impossible
to work around.
Random encounters are especially terribly
suited in exploration and puzzle-focused dungeons,
which is unfortunate because they show up
together all the time.
Periodic interruptions are a great way to
lose your train of thought.
In an exploration context, you might forget
which paths of a dungeon you’ve already
gone down.
The game gets in its own way.
Mt. Moon in Pokemon is one of the worst offenders.
The cave isn’t too terribly huge, but with
the small screen and lack of distinguishing
landmarks it’s still pretty easy to get
lost.
Once you do, and even if you’re not lost,
you have to fight about ten billion Zubats
to get out.
*Zubat screech* You’re not helping.
In a puzzle context, random encounters don’t
work much better.
You might forget where you were going with
that glowy piece, or where you had to push
the statue next.
The dungeons in Golden Sun had Zelda-style
navigational puzzles with key items, but everywhere
in those same dungeons you could be caught
up in random fights.
The longer you struggle with the puzzle, the
more fights you’ll get into.
Even once you know how to solve the puzzle,
executing the solution still takes way longer
than it should because of the extra fights.
In either context, the random encounter is
an unwelcome interruption that actively frustrates
the process you’re taking towards the goals
the game wants you to achieve.
But even in a straightforward dungeon, without
puzzles and without major exploration elements,
random encounters can STILL have a fatal flaw.
Even if you know exactly where to go and what
to do, you could pull a Skies of Arcadia on
the Dreamcast and crank up the encounter rate
way too high.
Random encounters can be a slow-acting poison.
Everyone has different levels of patience
for interruptions, but each random encounter
erodes that patience, bit by bit.
Once you’ve sapped someone’s patience
for the mechanic, they’re no longer having
a good time playing your game.
Since everyone’s level of patience is different,
it’s difficult if not impossible to tune
the rate of random encounters properly to
make it fun for everyone.
As the generations marched on, the more powerful
consoles loosened the restrictions that made
random encounters so popular.
Without the restrictions, there were new questions
to answer: If random encounters were clunky
and aggravating, what could replace them?
Well, what if you COULD just show the enemy
now?
Sorta.
Lots of games put monster-y sprites on screen,
but what monsters the sprite represents are
randomly generated after you walk up and start
the fight.
It isn’t too strenuous on hardware, so even
some NES games like Zelda 2 did it, and many
more used it as the generations went on.
Using generic icons lets you keep some of
the mystery of what you’re about to fight
that you’d get from a random battle system
while opening the door to more combat options.
Games like Mario and Luigi or Persona 3 used
it to add an additional tactical layer that
couldn’t be done with the usual random encounter
system.
If you approach the monster from behind or
get an attack on them in the field, you’ll
get an advantage at the start of a battle.
Persona 5 uses stealth mechanics with generic
monsters that can give either side advantages
in battle, and tie in to a dungeon-wide alertness
level that over time can change how difficult
each fight will be.
OK, what else could we do…
What if you could choose how many monsters
to fight at once?
Sorta.
The World Ends with You goes a la carte with
its non-scripted encounters.
At any time, you can enter a “sense mode”
where enemy icons will appear on the field.
You can choose up to four to fight in a row,
which feeds into a risk and reward system
that can get you better stuff at the end of
the chain.
You have much more control over when you fight
enemies and how much risk you’re willing
to take on.
Something else…
Now that we’ve got the computing power to
handle it, what if we just put everything
on the battle screen at once?
You lose all of the mystery about what lurks
in the area you’re walking through, but
in exchange you get to play with some new
tactical wrinkles.
Xenoblade enemies are all visible on screen
at once, and each enemy has its own unique
behaviors for how close you’ll have to get
and what you’ll have to do before it starts
to attack you.
Some attack on sight, some react to the sound
of you running nearby, and some are docile
and won’t initiate combat at all.
The world mixes easier and harder enemies
in something that starts to feel like an ‘ecosystem’,
but it also makes you have to watch your back,
lest you accidentally draw aggro on something
way out of your league.
So random encounters are bad and we’re better
off without them.
Done.
Wait.
No.
Not so fast.
Just because there have been a bunch of games
with bad random encounter systems doesn’t
mean the idea is unsalvageable.
Here and there, games have been experimenting
and there have been a few interesting options.
The first fix is the easiest, and probably
the oldest.
Since the encounter rate can cause so much
frustration, let players have some say in
how often encounters happen.
Either use a slider, like they do in Bravely
Default, or even something as simple as items
or abilities that stop encounters altogether
is better than nothing.
The Repel in Pokemon, the No-encounters ability
in Final Fantasy, or the encounter toggle
option that you see in some of the modern
ports are very crude tools to keep annoying
random encounters away, but they are tools.
And if you’re worried about players becoming
underleveled if they choose to avoid encounters,
you can tweak that part of the battle system
too.
You don’t have to fight a thing in Final
Fantasy VIII, the enemies level up with you
if you even try.
Though that game is its own can of worms.
Anyway, it’s still possible to create a
battle system that lets players use no-encounter
tools, at least to some extent.
Wild Arms 3 has a Migrant Seal system, which
cleans up another big annoyance that random
fights can run into.
Backtracking through early locations can make
you fight monsters that are way under-leveled
for your party’s current strength.
The Migrant Seal lets you manually skip the
encounter rather than sit through the battle
setup for something that isn’t very interesting
to fight at that stage of the game.
You could also look back to the random encounter’s
DnD roots for ideas.
Mimics are chests that look exactly like a
normal chest that holds an item, but when
you try to open one, it’ll just attack you
instead.
The idea plays around with the expectations
of where random encounters can happen.
They aren’t truly random, but for new players,
they’re unpredictable.
If a Mimic is introduced early enough, it
will set the stage for players to feel uncomfortable,
wondering just where the next enemy could
come from.
It even puts a hint of a random encounter
system in genres that don’t usually have
them.
But if you’re really looking for something
different, take cues from the fan community.
The Nuzlocke run in Pokemon is a fan-created
mode of play that leans into the game’s
random encounter system but uses a few extra
rules that completely change its character.
The main ones are: you may only catch the
first wild Pokemon you encounter in any area
you visit, any Pokemon that faints is permanently
out of commission, and you have to nickname
each Pokemon you catch so you can get more
attached.
All of a sudden, random encounters become
both a high-stakes way to add to your fragile
team and a terrifying roll of the dice if
you encounter the wrong monster at the wrong
time.
The game becomes A TRILLION times more dramatic
with just those simple rule changes.
So yeah, random encounters aren’t a completely
lost cause, but they’re tough to work with.
Head on down to the comments.
I want to hear your horror stories about random
encounters, and if you’ve heard of any other
games that make good tweaks to the formula,
let us know.
Random battle mechanics were a clever way
around a technical problem and still have
some role in introducing suspense to a game,
but they’ve been slapped in and misused
in countless designs over the years.
They’ve been left behind in modern game
design for good reason, but they aren’t
totally unsalvageable.
Random encounters are a relic, but with a
very careful touch, you might be able to recover
something worthwhile.
*chill vibes outro from Final Fantasy X*