Mario has a long tradition of iconic boss
fights.
For a lot of us, Mario bosses were one of
the first impressions of what a boss fight
even meant.
But iconic doesn’t mean ‘best’.
As the years and decades roll on, Mario bosses
have started to feel a bit… same-y.
That’s not the worst thing in the world.
Even if the fights are real basic, they're
still a good introduction for new players.
They can get them familiar with part of the
design language of video games.
But those fights had still lately seemed a
little hollow.
Then along comes Super Mario Odyssey.
I was fully prepared for its bosses to be
more of the same, but they’re not.
The boss design in Super Mario Odyssey marks
a real step up in how Nintendo approached
their flagship series.
Let’s talk about Super Mario Odyssey’s
boss design, through a few examples, and hear
from the designers themselves about how they
managed to make something fresh and unique,
while still making it recognizably Mario.
Before we start I want to talk about today’s
episode sponsor, Skillshare!
Going into the new year I wanted to stretch
my creative muscles a little bit and dive
into some aspects of graphic design that I
hadn’t focused on before.
I found an amazing class on Skillshare on
logotype design that fit the bill perfectly.
Jessica Hische, who has redesigned the logotypes
of a bunch of major companies, teaches the
class, and the level of clarity that she teaches
with is just astounding.
Her class opened my eyes to a deeper appreciation
of typography that I didn’t have before,
and I’m going to take that with me going
forward.
But Skillshare is not just for typography.
It has thousands of courses on UX, animation,
illustration, photography, productivity and
lots more that you can use to get your own
personal epiphany, for less than $10 per month
with an annual subscription.
The first 500 people to click the link in
the description will get a 2 month free trial
of Premium Membership so you can explore your
creativity.
So, Mario Odyssey.
It follows the other mainline 3D Marios, and
it borrows and builds off of those older “sandbox”
style games.
They’ve doubled down on having a more coherent
narrative.
Bowser has taken Peach again for a forced
wedding.
He jets around with some sketchy wedding planners
to steal precious artifacts and resources
from a bunch of other kingdoms, and Mario
has to follow behind, fix the worlds, and
fight Bowser.
The story is more integrated than a lot of
the other games in the series, especially
in its bosses.
Mario 64’s bosses were only there for gameplay
purposes, with no real storytelling power
whatsoever.
Take this bomb and make it... a big bomb.
He's like... king of the bombs.
Take this Boo and...make it a big boo.
We can call him...
big... boo.
Next week I'll tell you my plans for the Whomp.
I'm fired aren't I?
Sunshine’s island setting was a little more
coherent, and the game integrated some of
its bosses into a conflict for each location.
However, the series’ boss approach regressed
a little in Super Mario Galaxy.
It had unique bosses, but they once again
were more like cool-looking one-off encounters,
and didn’t tell much of a story between
them all.
Odyssey’s bosses take Sunshine’s approach
and go a little further.
Its major bosses are designed to have a sense
of place and purpose to a greater degree than
any of the other games in the series.
Odyssey’s bosses aren't put where they are
by accident - they're chosen to work in each
kingdom's style.
Nearly every boss in Odyssey is either a part
of or a consequence of Bowser’s wedding
plans and they each fit well within their
respective Kingdoms.
Let’s look at the game's 2nd major boss:
Knucklotec in the Sand Kingdom.
He was the first boss the design team had
created.
Character art lead Sho Murata said that Knucklotec
would 'become the benchmark for subsequent
boss designs.'
Knucklotec isn’t just some mook that Bowser
sent after Mario.
He’s a guardian deity of an ancient relic in an ice cavern underneath the Sand Kingdom.
Bowser stole the relic for his wedding, exposing
Knucklotec's icy head to the rest of the sand
kingdom, which made the temperature drop.
You know, it isn’t a DEEP plot or anything
but they made an effort.
Knucklotec is a mix of both familiar and unusual
design conventions for Mario.
While his core design of giant floating head
and fists isn’t exactly new ground for a
Mario boss, his design aesthetic is.
His Mesoamerican theme, his texture, the stop
motion-like animation, these are very alien
to Mario.
The art team wanted players to 'feel like
they'd stumbled into an unknown land upon
meeting this character.'
Unusual aesthetic, familiar mechanics.
Knucklotec feels like he belongs in the Sand
Kingdom, and he interacts with it in a way
that makes him feel placed there intentionally,
not randomly.
He's not just a boss for the sake of having
a boss battle.
For a game themed around travel, and seeing
what's out there in the world, bosses with
a distinct place and an overarching purpose
fit in so well.
That doesn’t mean the gameplay is an afterthought.
The Knucklotec fight makes great use of the
capture mechanic by allowing you to take over
the boss’ giant fist like a Bullet Bill
and finesse your way through his projectiles
to make a big counter attack.
It works great as a final test in that classic
4-step Mario level design approach.
Introduce a key mechanic and steadily build
up challenges to teach players how to apply
that mechanic.
Knucklotec feels like a well-designed Mario boss with an un-traditional spin.
but Odyssey's supposed to be about seeing the world. Knucklotec is just the beginning.
As you travel through the world you fight
different bosses.
Each feels at home in their respective kingdoms,
too.
Bowser needs flowers for the wedding bouquet?
Well there's a flower robot in the steam gardens
that seems exactly where he should be.
The wedding's fireworks display is supposed
to be controlled by the Robobrood, who you
fight in a Japanese festival themed world.
The extra details that the designers put into
making these bosses feel like they belong
adds a ton to the game's charm and memorability.
They help make the game feel like a big cohesive
adventure instead of just a random series
of levels, something that hasn’t been emphasized
in a mainline Mario game since Mario Sunshine.
At roughly the halfway point, Mario travels
to one of the game's most distinct and contrasting
kingdoms, New Donk City.
It's the most visually striking level of Odyssey,
and it's a huge stylistic contrast to the
rest of the game.
It definitely doesn't feel like it fits in
the Mario brand identity, but that's a big
part of its appeal.
New Donk City's boss is the Mechawiggler,
and it's designed to be visually and mechanically
distinct, just like the city.
The Mechawiggler shows up at the top of New
Donk City Hall, sucking away the city’s
power.
Go get 'em
It draws from the classic Mario wiggler design,
but it's more than just one of those with
an industrial theme.
It's got the spherical segments and the big
red plug that kinda looks like a nose, but
that's where the similarities end.
The conceptual designs for the boss were a
little closer to that classic Wiggler form,
but the final design went further.
They made it more realistic and buglike which
in turn made the Mechawiggler look more unnerving
and hostile.
5 ominous glowing eyes.
4 spider-like legs on each of the body segments
instead of just 2 caterpillar
legs in the standard wiggler.
Character Artist Jumpei Yamashita describes
how the Mechawiggler 'seems to be made of
a mishmash of discarded materials.
These elements were added to enforce its depiction
as a parasite absorbing the city’s energy.'
It’s one of the most monstrous designs of
the series.
Once you go and fight the thing, the fight
mechanics are also very unusual compared to
the rest of the Mario boss canon.
It’s this scrappy industrial monster caterpillar
that you fight in a third person shooter style
in the middle of a dark and stormy city street
as it crawls on the sides of buildings and
walls.
You fire at all of its glowing segments to
stun it and open it up for a big assault.
It’ll attack by launching balls of electricity
and charge at you through portals.
The Mechawiggler is not an especially difficult
fight, but stylistically it's very far from
Mario tradition, and that's what makes it
stand out.
This is where the game starts to feel like
the travel theme isn't just for show.
The game’s called Super Mario Odyssey.
You're traveling through purpose-built worlds
of strange and new experiences in the Mario
universe.
Mechawiggler drives home that you're getting
far from home.
But New Donk City is just a stop along the
Odyssey.
As Mario travels, some of the campaign’s
locations play around with the usual Mario
level tropes.
The Snow Kingdom’s Shiveria seems like a
typical snow level at first.
Then you fall into an underground den inspired
by Scandinavian architecture, chock full of
seal people and a surprising racing segment.
The Luncheon Kingdom is full of pastel colors
and low poly food.
The color palette might throw you off, but
this is Odyssey's take on the traditional
Mario 'Fire Level'.
According to Rikuto Yoshida, this kingdom
was actually designed “to show the breadth
of this game’s design, acting as a land
in direct contrast to the photorealistic Metro
Kingdom.”
But the biggest contrast is in one of the
last stages of the campaign: The Ruined Kingdom.
It's not a full stage.
Instead it’s a short path to fight the least
Mario-looking boss in the entire series: The
Ruined Dragon.
The dark and drab, hopeless world is about
as far from Mario tradition as you could possibly
get, and you're gonna fight a boss to match.
Look at him!
That ain't Yoshi.
There’s almost no bridge to get you ready
for the sudden stylistic and mechanical jump
that happens when you arrive at the Ruined
Kingdom.
Before, in New Donk City, there was at least
a strong undercurrent of Donkey Kong themed
stuff - girders, posters, Pauline herself
- that makes it feel a little more Mario-y.
Sho Murata says “This stage creates a sudden
visual shift in the second half of the game,
so it was purposefully constructed to be the
most out of place among the kingdoms.
Instead of designing our own original dragon
from scratch, we went for as stereotypical
a design as we could manage.”
The dragon’s visual design had to work both
stylistically and mechanically.
Since you have to climb on top of his head
to reveal his weak spot, the art team had
to make his head shape both look like a dragon
from a distance and look climbable up close.
They came up with a rigid stair-like design
for his jaws.
The art direction in the Ruined Kingdom is
impressive.
The desaturated purples and grays in the decayed
ruins and the stormy cloudscape with the moon
peeking out creates an incredible atmosphere
for the battle.
Ironically, part of the tone shift in this
level comes from how the boss is fought.
After an entire game of using the capture
mechanic, you suddenly don't.
You fight him in a much more traditional Mario
boss style.
The unusual patterns of the dragon’s lightning
projectiles and shockwaves are fun to avoid.
It gets even more intense in his post game
rematch where there are crazier lightning
patterns and an ice floor.
By avoiding the usual 'Mario' theme, they
help make the endgame feel like Mario is very
far from home.
And then Mario gets to the end of his Odyssey,
as far away from home as possible - The Moon.
'The Moon Kingdom’s
motif is clearly space, but not the dazzling
space that appeared in Super Mario Galaxy;
instead, we planned a stage set in the dark
vastness of a more realistic version of space.
We emphasized the isolation one would feel
in the farthest reaches of the world and aimed
to make the entire region symbolize a wedding
hall.'
The Moon is the end.
The end of Mario’s journey.
The endpoint of the narrative the game has
been telling.
And in the lonely wedding chapel and the game’s
last sequence, you get to play the logical
conclusion of the gameplay as well.
The boss itself might not be anything crazy
compared to the Ruined Dragon or even the
Robobrood but the end sequence that follows
is.
You know what I’m talking about.
Or if you don’t, go play the game.
It’s worth seeing for yourself.
Kudos to the designers at Nintendo for making
a location and a finale that put the perfect
cap on the story.
Mario Odyssey is extremely well put together.
It’s thematically consistent, delivers a
great sense of place in each of its kingdoms,
and pushes the series’ boss design to new
heights.
Nintendo’s attention to detail makes Mario
Odyssey a trip worth taking.
*chill vibes outro from Super Mario Odyssey*