The corpse run is a gaming staple. Sure, 
it’s just ‘go get your body back’, but  
even that one idea is made up of tons of little 
choices. A corpse run can be a tiny speedbump,  
or full of complex systems that your players 
have to plan around. It can be an afterthought,  
or so important that you have to drop 
everything and deal with it RIGHT NOW.  
Each game has its own style, and each style 
has its own consequences. The corpse run is one  
game design idea built from a hundred bricks, 
and designers get to choose each one by hand.
And best of all, there’s no 
way to screw it up! Everyone loves a corpse run … right?
Let’s get into it. Today we’re 
dissecting the best corpse runs in games.
You ever want to learn to code? You’ll love 
today’s sponsor, Boot.dev. Seriously, these  
guys have made a great tool to gain real coding 
skills that you can apply to your existing job,  
or it’s great if you want to figure out 
if a career in software is right for you.
Boot.dev uses tools from modern game design to 
make it as easy and fun as possible to develop  
your skills in real backend development 
programming languages, like Python, SQL,  
Go, and TypeScript. You earn XP, get loot, 
grind challenges, and before you know it,  
you’ve got a real new skill. Mike 
got his degree in Computer Science,  
and he’s tried this out, and he can attest that 
this thing teaches you the real-deal stuff,  
not some random fluff. In fact, if you’re 
a Computer Science student right now,  
Boot.dev is a great tool to get a little more 
practice in on your nuts-and-bolts coding skills.
Boot.dev has a 30-day no-questions-asked refund 
policy, and the site is full of free demos on  
every one of their courses, as well as an active 
Discord community there to help people like you  
learn how to code the right way. Go to Boot.dev 
and try out what they’ve got for free, then use  
my code DESIGNDOC to get 25% off your first 
year on their annual plan. Thanks to Boot.dev!
Alright, let’s get everyone on the same 
page quick here. What is a corpse run?
In some games, after dying, some part of you 
is left behind. It could be your paycheck,  
your car keys, your experience - something is 
saved for you to grab during a later run. Getting  
back to this point may let you recover some or 
all of these components, and continue on your way.
The idea is almost as old 
as video games themselves.
You can go back to the late 1970s, 
with MUDs - Multi-User Dungeons.  
These are ancient MMO precursor games. Think 
Rogue, but mostly text based, and made for  
multiplayer in the time before the Internet, and 
they were the first games to have a corpse run.
And actually it would take a while for 
games outside of MUDs to adopt the mechanic.
One of the first more modern games 
with a corpse run, and one that,  
as a video editor, I appreciate for 
having showable graphics, is Diablo.
When you die in Diablo, you’ll respawn 
in town with your non-equipped inventory,  
but your actual equipment and gold 
is left behind where you fell.
After you revive, you can run to the same 
spot and touch your own corpse to get it  
all back. Keep in mind, though, that 
nothing about the world resets. That  
tough mob that showed you your own intestines 
the first time? It’s still hanging around,  
camping by your loot. The world doesn’t 
pause when you grab items either,  
so juggling your inventory can be tough to 
do while you’re still in immediate danger.
So that’s all fine, but what’s so compelling 
about a basic corpse run anyway? Why corpse run?
Well, it’s really good at making 
you want to keep a character alive.  
Having to respawn means you actually 
lose something, and players can feel  
that threat of loss hanging over every combat 
encounter. Contrast that with a lives system,  
or a game where you load a save after game 
over. Death doesn’t feel quite so consequential.
But corpse run mechanics can do 
more than threaten a player with  
loss. It gift-wraps a nice and tidy goal to 
players right away: Go get your body back,  
where you last saw it. The goal is built FOR YOU - 
an immediate challenge built for you to personally  
overcome. You have to get to the furthest place 
you’ve been. You have to re-face a challenge that  
beat you before. Do better than what you’ve 
done. And your prize is a big chunk of loot,  
redemption, and the chance to continue 
in the game as if you never died at all.
As far as goals go, that’s pretty darn decent.
So, can you do it? Can you 
overcome the odds? It’ll pay  
off if you can! And if you can’t… 
hmm… yeah… we’ll talk about that.
There’s some bits in this vanilla 
version of a corpse run that seem  
like rough edges to sand down, but 
you can see why the idea has legs.
The mechanic fits well in action 
games, RPGs, and Roguelikes,  
and it’s surprisingly flexible, too. There 
are LOTS of different angles you can take.
I’d wager the style everyone’s most 
familiar with comes out of Fromsoft.
Fromsoft adopted the corpse run, and 
tweaked it just a little to make a  
defining feature of what would become 
Fromsoft’s own genre, the Soulslike.
In Demon’s Souls, you start as a normal guy, 
in the worst world, livin’ his best life. 
Once you die, which is very likely very soon, you 
respawn in Soul form. Half of your max health is  
gone, and you can't summon other players to help. 
On the ground where you died is a bloodstain,  
and tied to that spot is your soul, and all 
the souls you collected. Since souls in this  
game are both currency and experience, 
you'd very much like to get those back.
So now you’ve got a goal.
Demon’s Souls and its successors are games built 
around enemies trapping and ambushing players all  
the time. You have to get used to methodical 
dungeon crawling, and making a point to not  
take on more than you can handle. If you slow 
down, learn your toolkit, and proceed carefully,  
you might survive. If not, you’ll die again, with 
a new bloodstain, and if you hadn’t recovered your  
last bloodstain, all that currency tied 
to the old one will disappear forever.
The corpse run mechanic here helps to reinforce 
that slower playstyle. Observation, caution,  
and patience pay dividends, and carelessness gets 
punished, quick and severe. In a game like Diablo,  
if you failed a corpse run, your now 2 
lives ago body would still hang around,  
getting cold. You should still be able to get all 
of your items back on a second run, as long as you  
don’t leave the game. In a Soulslike setting, 
the corpse run has incredibly high stakes.  
The tension ratchets higher as you get closer and 
closer to your bloodstain. You only have one shot  
to get this back, so you have to make it count. 
Good job. Now stop dying. What did I just say?
The more severe losses in this style 
shapes both what you do on the run itself,  
and what you do to not need to do a 
corpse run in the first place. These  
mechanics reinforce each other. 
But the details can be flexible.
Each FromSoft game afterwards kept working off of 
this same basic template, with little changes to  
the system from title to title. In Dark Souls 1, 
the big penalty to your max health was removed.  
Losing half of it was maybe a little too 
big of a punishment. Having to do what you  
couldn’t do before, with half the margin 
for error is… well, it’s pretty severe.
Dark Souls 2 split the difference, making 
you lose 5% of your health on each death  
until you restore yourself. Still a 
penalty, but not quite so daunting.
Bloodborne switched things up a little. 
This time, random jerks near where you died  
can absorb your bloodstain, too! You’ll get 
your money back over their dead body. Before,  
you could maybe cheese the system a little 
and beeline for the bloodstain to grab it,  
and then book it out of there. Now you’ll 
actually have to defeat something to restore  
yourself, adding to the pressure 
and pushing you to learn your foe.
Elden Ring let off the gas a lot 
more. With more frequent checkpoints,  
many placed right before boss 
encounters in the overworld,  
the average corpse run isn’t nearly as 
long of an actual run as it used to be.
But it’s still not easy.
No matter the exact details, the Soulslike 
is the template for the modern corpse run,  
moreso than MUDs or Diablo, especially 
in the console space. I’d argue that  
the very punishing nature of the idea kept 
it from being more widely adopted earlier,  
but Fromsoft’s focus on making a difficult, yet 
fair game helped revive the popularity of the  
mechanic. It’s an even less forgiving 
version than what we saw in Diablo,  
but I think it contributes a lot to 
the distinctive feel of a Soulslike.
It’s easy for a corpse run to 
focus almost entirely on mechanics,  
but you can mix in more story bits, too.
Hollow Knight’s corpse run has strong 
integration into its narrative, feeding  
into who your character is. When the Knight 
dies, he leaves behind his shade. He loses cash,  
and his Soul gauge is broken, which is what you 
use to fire off spells. The Shade isn’t just a  
bloodstain to collect, or a random enemy powered 
up like in Bloodborne. It’s actively hostile,  
floating towards you to attack when 
you approach. It’s a piece of you,  
so it evolves as you progress. It’ll gain 
the same spell abilities that you’ve learned,  
and use them against you. This treatment 
of the bloodstain as a reflection of the  
knight’s lost power adds some fun lore 
and a gameplay twist to the mechanic.
If you died far from a checkpoint, or 
in an awkward spot, or if the Shade is  
just too big and scary for you to deal 
with today, you could choose to avoid  
it altogether. A special NPC in the hub 
town can be bought off with a rancid egg,  
and the Shade will be summoned right 
to you to fight where you stand.
You COULD make it even easier for yourself, but 
that’s only for the really really good Knights.
So far, the Corpse Runs we’ve talked 
about have been in pretty heavy games.  
A lot of serious tones, serious bones, 
and demanding tasks. You might think a  
corpse run would have no business in 
a Mario game. Doesn’t fit the tone.
But, y’know, you don’t always 
have to CALL it a corpse run.
A death in Super Mario Odyssey makes you lose 
just a handful of coins. Assuming you didn’t  
fall into a pit or something, 10 coins 
will be left in a ring where you died,  
and you can pick them up on your next run.
In these games, 10 coins is not a lot of 
money. They’re not critical to progression,  
they’re just there to let you buy cosmetics 
for funsies. So you wind up with none of the  
pressure of a game like Dark Souls that almost 
demands that you get your stuff back immediately.  
This turns it into more of a ‘Oh yeah, I remember 
dying there’ marker - a reminder of what you’ve  
done before, and if you get past that point, of 
your improved skill, if you really overthink it.
You can absolutely inject a light dash 
of the flavor of a corpse run in a game,  
without having to go all the way 
towards punishing difficulty.
Tunic does this too, getting a half-step 
closer towards other Soulslikes.
You drop 20 bits of gold, tied to 
a ghost of yourself that you need  
to retrieve to get your money back. Die 
again, and that ghost is overwritten. Gold  
is a bit more functional in Tunic, 
with actually useful items to buy,  
but you aren’t going to be in THAT 
big of a money hole here either.
A touch more tension, that fits a 
little better in the world of Tunic,  
and even if these changes don’t make the run 
functionally that difficult, the presence of the  
mechanic helps the game as it tries to match 
the style of its Soulslike contemporaries.
Before we get too much further,  
I’d be remiss if I didn’t shout out World 
of Warcraft here for completeness sake.
Classic WOW had the notorious walk of shame to 
get your body back. The mechanics aren’t anything  
too crazy, but this is an MMO, so sometimes a 
corpse run was a great excuse to socialize with  
guildmates. A chunk of time to talk about what 
went wrong on a raid, or what to do on the next  
one, or just having the time to talk without 
the pressure of the game getting in the way.
Alright, mask off. I’m sick of giving 
this mechanic like 200% benefit of the  
doubt. I really don’t like the corpse 
run. I never did. I get why it’s there,  
I never liked it. And most 
of you seem to agree with me.
I thought it was mixed, but when I sent 
out the preview post for this video,  
I was surprised at how almost universally 
negative the mechanic was being received.
The compelling elements of 
a corpse run - difficulty,  
tension, FOMO, real stakes - also 
bring with them some real negatives.
For example, it’s actually kind of 
tricky to decide where to put the body.
When Shovel Knight takes a dive, 3 
sacks of money come flying out and  
will stick around where you ate it, no 
matter where. They hold a decent chunk  
of the gems you had in your wallet, and 
those gems are used for tons of useful  
upgrades, so it'd really speed up your 
progress if you could get those back.
Depending on where you died, these bags can 
be very hard or even impossible to recover.  
Your most common death will be falling down a pit,  
and those bags will float RIGHT above that. 
Or right on the hardest part of a platforming  
challenge. Even if it IS impossible, 
you can’t know that for sure, right?
You can get locked into a cycle, the 
game tempting you to chase your losses,  
to the exclusion of doing anything else in the 
game. Is that good for the overall experience?  
I’m not a huge fan, but maybe some people like 
it. I’ll give them a mulligan on this one.
Shovel Knight’s impossible money bags might be 
a deliberate choice, but Blasphemous takes an  
approach that seems a little more unintentional. 
Blasphemous lets multiple bloodstains, called  
Guilt Fragments, stick around between lives. For 
each Guilt Fragment left out in the world, your  
max magic meter is reduced, and so is how much 
magic and money you gain back for hitting enemies.
So far, not so bad. I like the part where 
they don’t get rid of a Guilt Fragment if  
you die again. You can pick up like 5 
of them in one life if you want. But  
Blasphemous doesn’t really care where these 
fragments get placed in the world. Sometimes  
they’re roughly where you bit it, but they 
can, and do, bug out and become straight up  
impossible to reach. Inside walls. On a 
bed of insta-kill spikes. Great places.
Thankfully there’s some recourse, where 
you can visit a Guilt Statue and reclaim  
your stuff for a small fee, but that 
feels like a real quick fix for the  
problem. It’s an issue with a corpse 
run - you have to think about, test,  
and refine how you’ll place your markers 
in the world. Dark Souls puts them on the  
ground where you were a few seconds before 
dying, though that’s not fool proof either.
Blasphemous 2 fixes the problem 
somewhat, with less glitchy spawns,  
and often putting the guilt outside 
of boss arenas where you died.
If you’re going to use a system like 
this, make sure you focus on making  
it possible to succeed in as many cases as 
you can. No one likes it when their custom,  
personalized goal is secretly impossible.
Minecraft has a corpse run of 
a sort, and it’s kinda strict.
On death in Survival mode, your inventory 
falls out of your pockets like a pinata.  
It’ll all just float right there until 
you come back around to pick it up. But  
your ores and helmets and stuff do 
have somewhere else to be tonight,  
so you’ll only get 5 minutes to show up before it 
all disappears. Do your items care that you might  
start your next life more than five minutes away 
from where you died? What a weird question. No.
Your inventory can definitely be thought of as 
your progression in the game. Losing crafted or  
rare items can easily set you back as much as if 
you had lost a level or two in some other RPG.
Having a time limit to recover 
your stuff can be an extremely  
punishing angle to put on a corpse run system.
All these games we’ve talked about have to walk 
a fine balance. Simple or complex? Punishing,  
or lenient? A consolation prize, or 
a complete restoration? Time limits,  
social elements, persistence … there’s 
just a lot of different options to tweak  
to find what type of balance would 
fit best in that particular game.
But even great games can have complex corpse 
run mechanics that might not turn out great.
Silksong's corpse run is pretty traditional, 
but I think this is the one that finally  
broke me. The mechanic divides players to a 
degree that I haven't seen in other games.
Compared to Hollow Knight, Silksong simplifies 
things. You aren't fighting a ghost of yourself.  
Instead, Hornet will leave behind a silk cocoon, 
your rosary currency, and will take a hit to  
her Silk Spool - the Soul Gauge equivalent - 
to its original base amount. Any expansions  
you've gathered are inaccessible until you 
break open this cocoon. You’ll also recover  
a lot of Silk when it breaks, so you can use it 
strategically during fights to refill your meter.
It's left roughly where you died. If you're in 
the middle of a boss arena, or where a horde  
of enemies show up, something that happens ALL 
THE TIME, you can’t retrieve the cocoon unless  
you commit to the fight again. You MIGHT be able 
to cheese it by dying right next to the arena’s  
entrance, and grab it outside of the cutscene 
trigger and leave, but that’s not a guarantee.
That’s one of the big problems. A corpse run 
pushes players to commit to retrieving their money  
from an encounter that they more likely than not 
had serious trouble with. That means more deaths,  
and more and more money left in the cocoon 
for each time you recover it and die again.  
Silksong is much more difficult than its 
predecessor, and demands lots of patience,  
reaction speed, and discipline to 
overcome tough fights. The cocoon  
locks you into a ‘sink or swim’ method 
of play, being brutally punishing for  
players who wandered into a fight they 
were nowhere close to prepared for.
The sunk cost and the fight to get to the cocoon 
can bring the game’s pace to a screeching halt,  
as the player spends hours running back to their 
body, just to bang their head against a wall again  
and again if they aren’t yet ready or if they 
just aren’t enjoying that particular challenge.
A large fraction of an audience might be 
completely fine with that. Committing to  
overcoming these long odds can 
be INCREDIBLY rewarding once you  
finally do win - but that’s only IF you 
do eventually win. There are just as many,  
if not more people, who won’t, or 
at least can’t yet, and for them,  
abandoning the game altogether might 
suddenly become the most appealing option.
All of that is made more complicated by 
the game’s focus on exploring the space.  
It’s all about finding upgrades and 
items that will make you stronger and  
help you overcome the game’s challenges. 
There are ways around tough challenges,  
like completing some Flea Caravan 
quest to skip the Moorwing fight,  
but you’re just as likely to stumble into 
something you clearly aren’t equipped to handle,  
and the cocoon system can easily punish 
that instinct to explore by locking you in.
Now, it’s not all bad. There are a couple 
interesting systems in here that smooth  
over the run. At some vendors and machines, you 
can convert your currency into a Rosary String,  
or a Rosary Necklace for a small service fee. 
This turns your cash on hand into an item,  
which means these come with you after you die, 
and you can use them to get your cash back. You  
can also use a Silkeater item to retrieve your 
cocoon from anywhere, similar to the Rancid Eggs,  
and you don’t need to find the right NPC or even 
fight anything! There’s even an equippable item,  
the ‘Dead Bug’s Purse’, that lets you 
keep half of your rosaries after death,  
though that takes up an equipment slot, 
so that’s probably too big of a downside.
The problems with Silksong’s corpse run 
aren’t unique to Silksong. Hollow Knight,  
and most Soulslikes run into 
these same things to some degree,  
too. But the game’s tremendous difficulty makes 
each of the pain points so much more painful,  
and makes this system a major point of friction 
for many. Team Cherry undoubtedly saw this coming  
and gave many options to try to mitigate 
that friction, but Silksong is still the  
perfect example of why so many players are 
allergic to a corpse run. It can add tension,  
allow for interesting decision-making, and can 
give you catharsis when you finally get your body  
back, but it can be a huge difficulty spike, 
and it’s constantly risking frustrating and  
alienating players. It can kill pacing, push 
people to play in a style they don’t want to,  
and keep them away from elements of a 
game that they’re more drawn toward.
It’s a tremendously hard thing 
to balance, because you have to  
balance for so many different kinds 
of players all at the same time.
So that’s the corpse run!
The vanilla type is not my favorite mechanic, but 
I’ve enjoyed some games that have something sorta  
like a corpse run. Talk in the comments. Or, 
maybe you’ve got a fun corpse run story. Losing  
really good gear in an MMO, some bloodstain in 
an inconvenient place, let us know down below!
Corpse runs are two-faced mechanics. To some 
players, it’s exactly what you need to up the  
stakes of a game. To others, it’s a discouraging 
way to lose progress and an annoying extra step  
that pads out the game. Who’s right? Well, they 
both are. Take a crack at addressing both sides  
of the argument, match mechanics to the vibe, 
and a corpse run might bring your game to life.
*chill vibes from Silksong*