Boss gimmicks can be tons of fun. Done right,  
they’re a breath of fresh air that gives players 
something to talk about. But designing one can  
be fun in the way that skiing off course 
is fun. Maybe you discover something new.  
Something truly original. An unspoiled vista of 
game design to call your own. Or you break your  
legs running into a tree. Gimmicky bosses are 
a high risk, high reward way to create a new  
combat encounter, and there have been plenty of 
horror stories coming from those who have tried.  
So today I want to try to spot some of the warning 
signs. Maybe you can avoid some of them yourself.  
Let’s bring some guardrails with us, and take 
a look at some really terrible boss gimmicks.
Learn to read, write, and speak 
fluently in tons of languages  
with today’s sponsor Mondly! Pearson has 
been teaching new languages for decades,  
and they’ve helped 110 million people 
learn with Mondly for years now.
It’s filled with bite-sized lessons for 41 
different languages, each focused on more  
of the practical vocabulary and grammar that 
you can use day to day. Dip in for 10 minutes,  
and learn a lot of useful stuff. The app 
adapts to your skills, with daily, weekly,  
and monthly goals to help you get up to speed 
quick, and retain the language for the long term.
Mondly’s lessons and audio materials 
are recorded with native speakers,  
which helps learners form accents correctly. 
It has speech recognition tech built in and can  
give you pronunciation tips - one of the tougher 
things for any language app to teach. If you’ve  
never found out how fun it is to get more fluent 
at a language, you should definitely try this out.
Mondly’s available for mobile and on PC in your 
browser, and since it’s back to school season,  
it’s on a huge sale right now. Go 
to mondly.app/DESIGNDOC to get 96%  
off lifetime access to 41 languages and 
start learning today. Thanks, Mondly!
So what are we calling a ‘Gimmick Boss’? 
It’s pretty basic, really. It’s any  
boss that severely shakes up the game’s 
normal rhythm. I know that sounds vague,  
but there’s tons of room to play with.
Boss gimmicks are a reaction to an instinct to 
shake things up. To make sure you aren’t designing  
the same type of boss encounters over and over 
again.A gimmick boss is just a boss that makes  
a conscious effort to swerve, and what a ‘swerve’ 
means can be completely different game to game.But  
when a boss gimmick falls flat, very often 
it falls into one of a handful of categories.
The first common gimmick boss problem is 
phoning it in. If you’re making a gimmick boss,  
you’ve gotta be bold. You’ve gotta commit! Boss 
gimmicks that hint at a promising mechanic,  
and then pull their punches, set 
players up for disappointment.
Super Mario Sunshine is a platformer at heart, 
but just calling it a platformer undersells its  
main gimmick - FLUDD, your friendly neighborhood 
water jet pack. Sunshine’s bosses are unorthodox,  
and show off a bunch of experiments in how 
FLUDD can expand your movement options,  
and how those can change what 
a platformer boss can be.
For every by-the-numbers boss like 
Petey Piranha or Gooper Blooper,  
there's a fight that does things unlike any 
other in the series. The giant mecha Bowser  
that you fire bottle rockets at while riding a 
roller coaster. Going underwater to clean up an  
eel's teeth from above. Fiery Chain Chomps that 
you need to spray to cool off. Even the bosses  
that are still kind of platform-y, like Bowser in 
the tub, are exaggerated from what you’d expect a  
normal platformer boss to be, thanks to the 
new movement options that FLUDD allows for.
But one fight is somehow both the weirdest and 
least interesting major boss in the game - King  
Boo in the Casino Delfino. On top of a giant 
roulette wheel, King Boo pops up in the center  
with a slot machine. The different rings of the 
roulette wheel rotate in different directions,  
and won't stop until you ground pound 
a special tile. This does not matter.
King Boo is the keeper of the slot machine. Not 
much happens until you spray him a little to  
start the reels. Depending on your RNG, a few 
things can happen. You can get coins to heal,  
a random assortment of 6 enemies, hazardous 
bubbles that also drop water to refill your pack,  
or best of all, you can have fruits and 
hot peppers spawn. That one's the only way  
to deal damage for some reason. He'll 
shrug off the fruit, so toss a pepper  
onto his tongue and THEN hit him with the 
fruit. Repeat that 3 times, and it's over.
The weird setup is memorable, but there's 
shockingly little going on here. You don’t  
have a platforming challenge, a puzzle or 
any verticality that FLUDD could help with.
King Boo doesn't have any real attacks 
of his own to worry about. The spinning  
floor is no big deal. You just spin 
the slots, clear out any enemies,  
and wait around for the fruit to spawn. There's 
a lot of waiting. It's not strictly RNG hell,  
the game does improve your odds of getting the 
cycle you want if you start getting unlucky,  
but that just puts a ceiling on the 
waiting - you'll still have to wait.
You aren’t using the water stream to stop 
the reels. You barely use FLUDD to fight,  
or move. You aren’t even doing something like  
shorting out the machine with water to 
get something to happen. In the end,  
the fight just isn’t about much of anything. 
King Boo winds up feeling like a time-waster.
There’s never a great time for 
a bland boss gimmick. But there  
is a worst time! Whatever you do, 
don’t phone in a gimmick final boss.
Crash Bandicoot 2’s a classic PS1 era platformer. 
It’s full of a bunch of solid if not spectacular  
boss fights that ask the player to be precise 
with their movement in order to win. Every now  
and then, the game mixes things up by changing the 
rules of movement with a special vehicle segment.  
A motorized wakeboard, riding a polar bear, 
running TO the camera in a chase sequence - these  
add variety to how you play, and are still 
close enough to the game’s standard platforming  
challenges to feel like they belong. The zero 
gravity jetpack levels, though, are not the same.
Only a couple of stages toward the end of the game 
use the jetpack, where Crash navigates through  
lasers and mines and stuff. The controls for the 
jetpack are very floaty, which makes it difficult  
to be precise, and easy to crash into hazards. 
The usual fix players took is to take it much  
slower - inching through each stage, especially if 
you were trying to do a completionist run and grab  
everything. The jetpack is not a great movement 
option, but not everything has to be great.
Unless it’s the final boss. Crash 2 also made 
the entire final fight a jetpack sequence.  
You’re chasing Dr. Neo Cortex through a bunch 
of hazards in space. If he makes it to the exit,  
he wins. It plays like a lot of the other jetpack 
stages, but with Cortex floating ahead of you. The  
fight itself is pathetically easy - just attack 
him 3 times, and the player will probably have  
this thing in the bag in a minute or two, even 
younger audiences. Cortex doesn’t fight back,  
either - he’s also floating around the 
mines with caution. Catching up to him  
is a non-issue. The hazards just slow you down, 
they don’t kill you. There’s not much going on  
visually, either. It’d be underwhelming as a 
mini-boss, much less as the game’s final boss.
This fight feels like it’s phoning it 
in just as much as the King Boo fight,  
but the negative impact is higher 
thanks to when it shows up.
The gimmick doesn’t cover for this fight 
failing to deliver at the typical goals of  
a final boss. Without spectacle, without 
challenge, and without a fresh mechanic  
that’s fun on its own terms, the Cortex 
fight is a poor end cap to the game.
If you’re having a hard time 
coming up with a gimmick concept,  
one of the more straightforward options 
is to convert a boss fight into a puzzle.  
Instead of simply attacking a boss until 
it keels over, the fight can be about  
solving something first. Though creating a 
satisfying puzzle is tricky in its own right
Your job in Trauma Center is to go toe-to-toe with 
a bunch of genetically engineered super viruses  
called GUILT. Each time a new GUILT variant 
shows up, it’s essentially a boss stage. One  
of them is this happy triangle cuddlebug called 
Triti, and it’s the most puzzle-y of the set.  
You have to remove the triangles by taking out 
the thorns in the intersections. Simple enough.
I am a design doctor after all. 
Alright, let’s take this out, and…
Oh right, it spreads.
Yeah. OK, wow, it REALLY spreads, 
huh? Let me just do this here,  
annnnnd… game over. Great. 
Guilt claims another victim… Me.
Once you start pulling out the thorns and 
triangles, you’ll find that Triti will start  
to spread quick. You need to carefully 
remove the thorns straight upwards,  
then the triangle membrane once it’s 
free, or else the thorns will come  
back and the triangles will spread. You 
can’t just pick out all the thorns first,  
then the triangles - you won’t have 
time. They regenerate too fast.
How exactly do the triangles spread? Great 
question! The biggest problem this boss has is  
the unclear rules for what causes more triangles 
to appear. Other than the thorns being present,  
the exact cause and effect is unclear. It’s very 
easy to create a situation where there are more  
triangles added than you have time to remove. 
If you don’t hit the ground running and take  
out a big chunk of Triti early, it’s very easy to 
cross a tipping point and fall hopelessly behind.
The ‘correct’ way to fight this thing is 
so obtuse that new players often feel like  
they’ve lucked their way into winning, if they 
can win at all. The game’s own explanation is  
no help. For this video I listened to a 
couple people explain what the rules are,  
and I still don’t 100% understand it. 
The unclear puzzle mechanics make it way  
more likely that you get past Triti with 
the cheesy solution: use Healing Touch,  
your magic doctor magic. Slowing down time lets 
you win in seconds. Is cheesing it the way it was  
supposed to be solved? I doubt it, but at least 
it keeps this from being a game-ending boss.
Puzzle gimmick bosses can be fun, but an unclear 
puzzle easily makes for a bad gimmick boss.
Alright, so you’re going bold with your 
gimmick boss, right? Great. Watch out for  
the next problem, though. The Beginner’s 
Trap. Here lies the bosses whose gimmicks  
are impossible to react to. It’s roughly the 
opposite of ‘Tough, but fair’. Beginner’s Trap  
bosses have some catch that a new player can’t 
predict, can’t really adapt to on the fly,  
and in the worst cases, also give heavy 
penalties for unavoidable failure.
You can't talk about boss gimmicks without 
bringing up Fromsoft. They've made a name for  
themselves with brutal bosses, and for better 
or worse, the team isn't afraid of changing  
up their boss fight formula. The range of styles 
can get pretty extensive. Sometimes it's a hoard  
of suped-up normal enemies. Throw 'em in a 
special arena, or feature a unique attack.  
Add in a special stipulation the player needs to 
handle. Make the boss' weakness hyper specific  
and see what happens. Fromsoft bosses are not 
stuck doing the typical dance of dodge and  
damage. Maybe it's Dark Souls 2's chariot fight, 
finding cover in a narrow hallway before you get  
run over. Or Elden Ring's Renala, whose shield 
must be taken down by taking out the load-bearing  
mook first. Bloodborne's Micolash is a deadly 
game of pursuit through a castle maze. And  
is bad. Fromsoft’s boss design has the range, 
even if there are some misses mixed in there.
Their biggest miss might be Dark Souls 1’s Bed 
of Chaos. A giant mess of branches holds two  
magic seals you need to reach and destroy, 
before you can get into the center to reach  
the boss’ actual weak spot. By itself, the 
boss isn’t great, but it’s not THAT unusual.  
It’ll sweep the arena floor with its long 
arms, and it’ll take some quick reflexes to  
spot and avoid. Each seal is located at the 
sides, and it’s a little tough to get to the  
first one while dodging, but it’s doable. After 
that, though, the floor starts to break away,  
and falling through means an instant death. The 
boss becomes a platforming challenge. You know,  
the thing Dark Souls is good at. Now you 
have to navigate a maze of death pits,  
while still keeping an eye out for the sweep 
attacks. Getting hit not only damages you,  
but there’s a good chance you’ll get knocked 
into one of the pits. The boss is too big to see,  
so these swipes often come in fast from off 
screen. The floor pits are predetermined,  
but there’s no clue for what’s about to 
break away before it happens. If this is your  
first time here, I hope you’ve got your guessing 
hat on. Your clumsy heavy jump and your memory are  
the only things keeping you from having to start 
over. Every time you fail, it’s a 1 to 2 minute  
trek back to the door, though thankfully the 
seals you already took care of will stay broken.
Once you guess your way through, the middle 
opens up. Now you have more arms flailing,  
all the pits from before, new lava pillars, and 
you have to make a leap of faith and dive into  
the center. This leap, onto a root with a weird 
hitbox, is basically the climax of the fight.  
Make it, and you’re home free. But you’ll 
probably miss it at least once. Start over.
Bed of Chaos is a mess of an encounter, 
consistently rated one of if not the worst  
fight in the series. Dark Souls’ notorious 
difficulty only works when the difficulty  
comes from the challenge of executing on 
subtle signs. On learning when to attack,  
when to defend, and how to recognize when 
to change tactics. Bed of Chaos holds too  
much randomness - too many cases of guesswork, 
for that covenant with the player to hold up.  
The clunky platforming mechanics don’t 
help, and the labyrinth of death pits  
make things worse, but Bed of Chaos owes 
its reputation to its unpredictability.
It’s possible to combine several pitfalls 
at once. Combine a beginner’s trap,  
a puzzle boss with limited 
solutions, punishment on death,  
and tough action mechanics, and 
you can create a real problem.
The tail end of Megaman 2 has 
an awful mini boss at the end  
of the 4th Wily Castle stage. The 
Boobeam Trap isn’t a giant robot,  
or a robot master. Megaman is trapped in 
a small room with 5 mounted dome turrets,  
some blocked off behind destructible walls. The 
dome turrets will charge up and fire powerful  
shots straight at you. They come at you fast, 
so watch your back, and maybe bring an E-tank.
To clear the map, you have to hit the 5 domes, and 
2 walls to get to the domes. But there’s a catch.  
The ONLY way to destroy both the walls and 
the turrets here is with the crash bomb. No  
other weapon will put a dent in these things. 
Even with crash bombs, there’s another catch.
Assuming you had the foresight to get here with 
the crash bomb fully loaded, you still only have  
at most 7 shots to use. You need to hit them 
all. It IS possible to clear the room with it,  
but EVERY shot has to count. Oh and don’t 
forget about all the dodging from before,  
or you won’t even get a chance to fire off all 7.
Anything less than perfection (or a spare e-tank), 
and you’re dead. Your weapons don’t refill on  
death, so you can almost softlock yourself if you 
die too late into the fight without any ammo. Then  
you’ll just have to grind out weapon energy in 
the preceding stage before you can try again.
This thing is the most inflexible 
and punishing fight of the game,  
and maybe the series. You have absolutely 
zero other ways to attack the fight,  
and almost no room for error - and 
this is still just a random miniboss.
The fight has no warning about how restrictive it 
will be to fight. You’re thrown straight into the  
deep end and left to fend for yourself. Thankfully 
it’s a short fight if you know what you’re in for,  
but on a blind casual playthrough, this 
thing’s brutal. An unyielding challenge  
of a flavor that we barely ever get in a 
modern game, and maybe for good reason.
OK, let’s do one more category. 
I’m calling it ‘Aiming Too High.’
This is for the really ambitious 
terrible boss gimmicks. We’re  
talking bosses that introduce all-new 
mechanics that absolutely do not work.  
The fundamentally un-fun. The swerve 
takes the game into an experimental  
gameplay style that just doesn’t click. 
They shot for the stars, and missed.
NiGHTS Journey of Dreams for the Wii isn’t a 
game with a lot of punchy stabby shooty going on.
It’s a lot more flying through rings in a 2D 3D 
world. The only offensive moves you really have  
against enemies are looping around them, grabbing 
them, or running straight into them. You don’t  
even take damage normally. If you get hit, it 
shaves some time off the clock. Since the game’s  
moveset is so atypical, most of the bosses 
go for more gimmick focused designs. They’re  
closer to action puzzles. You’re more likely to be 
navigating or manipulating the stage than you are  
to do any direct combat. Some of the bosses are 
OK, like the Clown Balloon you push into a bed of  
spikes. Some of them are a lot worse, like Bomamba 
and her entourage of… cat balls.
The fight takes place on a triangular board 
with some holes. The balls will spawn,  
and you have to use the levers on 
the sides of the board to tilt it  
around and get the balls into the holes 
while dodging the occasional projectile.
Did you notice that the game doesn’t 
focus on physics during normal gameplay?  
This fight’s the exception. It feels 
terrible. Ball-based physics puzzles  
were not a strength of the mid-2000s Sonic Team.
The cat ball's momentum feels wrong. Way too 
floaty and way too slow. They’re very lightweight,  
and they’ll hop in the air for no reason as you’re 
tilting the board. More often than you’d think,  
you’ll overshoot your target. It’s 
not so bad in the first fight,  
where there are guardrails on the board to help 
guide the balls to where you need them to go,  
but those are gone in the second fight, where 
they also add little hills to make it even  
more annoying to control. The camera angle is 
far too low while you’re tilting the board,  
so you can’t quite see where the ball is in 
relation to the holes and you can misjudge  
how you have to adjust the board. You can 
only tilt down and to the sides, so every  
time you overshoot or need to move away to dodge 
a projectile, you’ve gotta fly over to another  
handle on another side of the board to try again. 
It’s both too simple and too unwieldy to be fun.
The Bomamba fight’s gimmick 
doesn’t feel like refined gameplay,  
more like a high concept that 
wasn’t iterated on enough.
In practice, it’s a tedious fight, putting 
the spotlight on a physics model that makes  
you feel like you’re failing at 
the most basic job in the world.
Even a style of boss that would be pretty normal  
almost anywhere else can become a bad 
gimmick in the wrong circumstances.
Neon White is a mix of parkour action, a touch of 
shooting, and one of the friendliest introductions  
to speedrunning that a game has ever been. 
Every map is a unique chance to get better,  
and push down your best time. The 
gameplay is about fluid movement,  
efficiency, skips, shortcuts, refinement, and 
repetition. And repetition. And repetition.
The boss fights are 3 of the 
same clunky shooting gallery.
Neon Green, your ultra-Anime antagonist rival 
with a mysterious connection to your past, is the  
target of the game’s handful of boss stages. Each 
stage is a cinematic obstacle course, not all that  
unlike the normal game, with one important change. 
You have to take Neon Green’s health bar down to 0  
to win. In any other game, that would be THE most 
normal boss fight design you could come up with.  
In this game, the focus was never on whittling 
down enemy health. Neon Green is a bullet sponge,  
and he’s got a shield around him. Take out all 
of the crystals powering the shield as fast  
as you can, and depending on where you are, he 
might fly away, or let you beat him up a little.
The boss fights are a lot longer than most 
of the game’s levels. It does make the fight  
way more cinematic, but it comes at a cost. You 
have no more health than normal and dying late  
in the boss fight might take you back to the 
start. The fight is a highly scripted affair,  
so you’re going to have to do that whole 3 
minutes again, and again, until you get it  
all right. The repetition that works for shorter 
stages works against the longer boss fights. It’s  
the inverse approach to a lot of my favorite 
levels in the game, where the small mistakes  
you make aren’t that bad, because the entire 
level is over in a matter of seconds. You’re  
on a much shorter loop to fix a problem with 
your execution. The boss fight length tilts the  
dynamic the opposite way. Instead of feeling 
aspirational like in the rest of the levels,  
trying to improve your play in a boss stage will 
fill you with dread. Neon Green shows that no  
matter how basic the gimmick might look on paper, 
there are no guarantees with gimmick bosses.
You know, there are more terrible bosses out 
there. I know you’ve got one in mind. Tell  
us about it in the comments, and maybe we’ll 
feature it in a future episode. The weirder,  
the better. Terrible boss gimmicks 
are often a case of reaching way  
beyond what a game’s capable of 
handling. Gimmicky bosses are fun,  
but no matter how crazy your ideas get, just 
make sure your game can stick the landing.
*chill? vibes from Super Mario Sunshine*