Some games can get away with a loner player
character.
A strong and independent protagonist, playing
by their own rules who don’t need nobody.
Not every game, though.
Most game protagonists need someone else around
to show them the ropes.
Someone to bounce ideas off of.
Someone to help them up when they’re knocked
down.
A sidekick.
Sidekicks can fill a lot of different roles
in a game, but they all live somewhere on
a spectrum: from a well-realized, indispensable,
three-dimensional character, to a cardboard
cutout - a barely-disguised plot delivery
device.
You probably want to move away from the cardboard
cutout side, but that’s gonna take some
work.
Let’s talk about what goes into a good sidekick.
It’s easy to fall into a rut and make the
same stuff for dinner over and over.
I’ve done that, but lately I’ve gotten
way more variety in my life thanks to today’s
sponsor Hello Fresh.
HelloFresh delivers pre-portioned, chef-crafted
meals to your door, and has over 40 to select
from each week.
Check this out!
I never cooked with candied peanuts before,
but now I have.
If you’re short on time, they’ve got Quick
and Easy dinner options designed to take just
15 minutes to make.
That IS faster than going to the supermarket
after all.
Hello Fresh also now has snacks, too, and
sides.
Check that out. That's me! I did that.
And it was really good!
Shop the HelloFresh Market and get over 100 different add-on items shipped at the same time.
Try it out!
There’s never been a better time.
Go to HelloFresh.com and use code 50DESIGNDOC
at checkout for 50% off PLUS free shipping!
The link’s in the description below, too.
HelloFresh.com and use code 50DESIGNDOC.
Thanks, HelloFresh!
Game sidekicks can fill a ridiculous number
of shoes.
A sidekick can be a companion, a teacher,
a spokesman, a diegetic tutorial, a living
utility knife, a compendium, or an instant
plot starter.
But with so many roles they could fill, sidekicks
are sometimes saddled with responsibilities
by default, and when they don’t live up
to expectations, it’s very easy for an audience
to dislike a sidekick.
You’ve seen a lot of this, I’m sure.
Lots of companions are thought to be nags,
pestering nuisances, backseat drivers, helpless
boat anchors, or unintentional obstacles,
all breaking your immersion and taking you
out of the fun in one way or another.
Sidekicks require a careful touch to keep
out of the Contempt Zone, and what to watch
out for will depend on what exactly you want
one to do.
Probably the most common use of a sidekick
is as a way to give information to the player
in-universe.
No data logs and text boxes, just your friend
telling you what's up.
The Zelda fairies in the two N64 games are
the classic vanilla examples, for better and
worse.
Navi in Ocarina of Time and Tatl in Majora's
Mask are primarily there to guide the player
in various ways.
That can be contextualizing the world, giving
objectives, lending hints on how to get past
enemies or puzzles, highlighting points of
interest, and especially providing tutorials
for new game concepts like Z-Targeting.
They do their jobs well, though they're especially
notorious for how overbearing they can be.
Navi is infamous for chiming in every twenty
seconds about something, even things you've
dealt with before.
Tatl reigned it in to be less intrusive.
She doesn’t pop up as often and instead
of yelling out annoying voice lines, she gets
your attention with a little bell chime that
doesn’t hit a nerve nearly as much.
Most of the later Zelda companions kept driving
in a less intrusive direction and got more
utility added on top, but that all went
away with Skyward Sword.
Fi is Navi EX Ultra Savage.
Everything people didn’t like about Navi
is ramped up with Fi.
The original release of Skyward Sword is extremely
hand-holdy, with Fi interrupting the action
all the time to give obvious gameplay tips
and restate mission objectives and info the
player JUST heard, or saw.
Fi is explicitly written as a cold and calculating
robot, which leaves little else to save her
character.
It’s tough to know when a sidekick should
chime in, but that doesn’t mean that the
answer is ‘chime in all the time’.
The interruptions destroy the pace of the
game for no benefit.
The HD re-release drastically toned down Fi’s
hints and made most of them optional, where
the player could call on her when they wanted
the info, which by itself fixes most of the
problem and made Skyward Sword, if not great,
at least much less of a chore to play.
You might think the fix is to crank down how
helpful your sidekick is.
If people don’t like a backseat driver,
just do the opposite, right?
Be careful what you wish for.
It can be just as frustrating to have a borderline-useless
companion character - someone who has basically
nothing to say when you directly ask them
for help.
Paper Mario: Sticker Star has many problems,
and… oh wait, I’ve gotta do something
first.
OK, Sticker
Star has Kersti, a magical…
sticker fairy who needs you to collect a bunch
of sticker MacGuffins from Bowser.
She’s got some light sticker power gimmicks,
but she’s mostly there as a hint system,
which this game definitely needs.
Sticker Star isn’t that different from an
old-school Sierra-style point-and-click adventure
game with a lot of unintuitive, hyper-specific
puzzle solutions It’s easy to get stuck.
Thank God Kersti’s here to get us back on
track.
Hit me up with that sweet sweet advice Kersti…
oh come on.
Kersti doesn’t consistently work as a hint
system.
Often when you call on her, she’ll say some
fluff about the area, or she’ll say that
the thing you need is somewhere.
Thanks, Kersti.
No consistency is about as useful as no hint
system at all.
She MIGHT be more specific or might tell you
where you can find what you need, but only
if you’ve had the item you need already,
otherwise you get nothing.
Sometimes it’s the opposite for some reason.
If you HAD the right piece of the puzzle in
the past but don't have it now, she won't
give you any real hint as to what you might've
needed.
Good luck!
Hint systems can be a great responsibility
for a sidekick to take care of, but if that’s
the mechanism to get out of a jam, you really
should make sure they can deliver in your
hour of need.
Stretch the idea a little further, and you
can get a sidekick that’s basically a living
piece of the user interface.
808 in Hi Fi Rush is a living metronome - well,
along with the rest of the world - and can
help you stay on and get back to the beat
to perform more effective attacks and defensive
maneuvers.
Sparx in the Spyro series represents your
health, can pick up nearby collectibles, and
even points you in the direction of where
to get more.
In Phantom Hourglass, THIS Zelda fairy is
the literal cursor you control on the touch
screen, and Link will blindly follow wherever
it goes.
It might seem weird for a character to stand
in for pieces of an interface, but they’re
both supposed to work to guide you to what
you need to do.
The overlapping responsibility makes it a
surprisingly natural fit.
We can go beyond a guidebook and UI, though.
Sidekicks can be the source of a lot of the
player’s core abilities.
A central gameplay mechanic might be tied
directly to what the partner can do or can
provide.
Mario Sunshine has FLUDD, a robotic water
pack that can spray water for attacking enemies,
cleaning goop, or for moving around the world.
The water mechanics were the big new thing
added to separate the game from Mario 64,
and what better way to teach you how to do
them than to have your partner just tell you?
Mario Odyssey's hat mechanic is its main draw,
so slap some googly eyes on your cap, give
it some dialogue and now you’ve got a partner.
Cappy gives you tons of more movement and
attack options.
You can throw it forward, use it as a stepping
stone to jump off of, and most importantly,
possess the mind of whoever you see.
It acts as a typical guide, too, giving out
hints and showing you points of interest as
you travel through the world.
It feels a little like visiting all of these
places with a friend.
But sometimes you don’t know what you’re
missing until it’s gone.
Both Cappy and FLUDD are briefly taken away
from you over the course of the game, and
not having them is immediately felt.
The movement mechanics they’re responsible
for are fundamental to most of the puzzles
and challenges the games throw at you, and
without those mid-air movement options, you’re
stuck with just your core Mario platforming
abilities.
It gets a lot tougher to move around, especially
in Mario Sunshine’s case.
The relief you feel when you get FLUDD and
Cappy back is real, and it’s on a deeper
level than just missing them being around.
Now, don’t count on Cappy being in the future
Mario platformers, FLUDD never came back either,
but as a way to center the unique mechanics
of a new game, you could do a lot worse than
a one-off companion.
But why stop at just one mechanic?
What if your sidekick is a living Swiss Army
knife?
Banjo-Kazooie and its sequel let you unlock
a ton of moves as the Bear and Bird duo, but
even though you’re moving around primarily
as Banjo, it’s really Kazooie that’s doing
the heavy lifting.
The vast majority of the moves that you learn
across both games are the Bird’s responsibility.
She does it all!
She pecks, attacks, swims, glides, springs,
runs, flies, shoots eggs, drills, puts on
sick Jordans, and is a gun.
Banjo’s just got, like, a roll…and a backpack.
Their Odd Couple dynamic gives the writers
something to work with, but the imbalance
in what each of the two is responsible for
mechanically can raise some questions, where
one character is clearly contributing more
on this adventure than the other.
It’s not brought up much within Banjo-Kazooie,
but its spiritual successor Yooka-Laylee balances
the responsibilities a little more evenly,
and that can help solidify the pair as being
two parts of a greater whole.
Sidekicks can also help other character’s
personalities shine through, just from how
the sidekick contrasts with others.
As a character, Jak in the original Jak and
Daxter is barely anything.
He plays the straight man without saying much
at all.
A classic silent protagonist.
His partner Daxter is a wisecracking Looney
Tune.
But since Jak isn’t going to pipe up here,
Daxter is left to do more of the story’s
leg work than he could honestly handle.
It’s a little easier though when your companion
has another personality to play off of.
Daxter has to rely on the game’s other NPCs
to do that job.
He’ll snark his way through a plot conversation
to help move things along while Jak mostly
just stands there.
A shoulder shrug here and there is most of
what you get, but it’s not much to build
a character off of.
Daxter becomes a bit overbearing as a comic
relief sidekick with no one to consistently
play off of, and Jak ends up being completely
forgettable as a protagonist.
The duo needed an overhaul.
As the series went on and drastically changed
in tone, Naughty Dog felt that Jak needed
his own personality, and, like, dialogue.
In Jak 2, Jak became a more grounded and serious
character for Daxter to bounce off of, and
now he could bring moments of levity to a
tonally darker game.
both of them became stronger characters thanks
to the contrast.
The banter becomes more real, as the characters
can rib on each other and Jak can properly
act as the straight man to Daxter’s antics
rather than just standing around.
The game lampshades the change in Jak’s
personality too, so the writers knew exactly
what they were trying to fix.
The new ability for the two to play off of
one another helps sell the audience on their
friendship and lets Daxter be more of an actual
sidekick rather than an overburdened character.
Sidekicks don’t have to be passive helpers,
though.
They can be there for the adventure just as
much as you are.
The story happening to you is happening to
them too, after all, and you’re gonna work
this thing out together.
The Ace Attorney series is full of sidekicks.
Your assistant helps you investigate crime
scenes, nudges you in the right direction
during cross examinations, serves as a comedic
foil, acts as a handy plot device, and forges
a close bond over the game with Phoenix, or
Ryunosuke, or whoever the star attorney is
in that game.
But Capcom does love to raise the stakes by
accusing them of murder in, oh, roughly every
other game.
It’s an instant motivator, raising the stakes
of the case now that you have a personal connection
to seeing justice be done.
By the end of the game , the two feel like
they’ve been on a journey together and come
out of the experience as better people, and
not convicted felons.
Sidekicks that work as story wingmen can make
delivering the plot feel a lot more natural
and less game-y, if that’s what you’re
going for.
Lots of game conversations have a side purpose.
They're there to let you, the person on the
couch moving the sticks around, eavesdrop
and learn important details about what's going
on.
You don't live in this world, you don't know
what these characters should logically know,
but you'll need to learn about it somehow.
If you’re jumping into Horizon: Forbidden
West, the main character Aloy is written and
portrayed as a living person, with a history,
preferences, all kinds of things.
But a lot of the time there's no sidekick
around - it's just Aloy in the wilderness.
Horizon Forbidden West made a kind of weird
choice, where Aloy will just mumble to herself
some gameplay hints and objective reminders.
It’s sort of like an internal monologue,
but out loud.
In isolation it comes across as strange behavior,
when you’d think a character would just
think the hint rather than say it out loud
to no one.
What I’m saying is Aloy needed a robot cat
to talk to…or a child
God of War 4’s story is the relationship
between Kratos and his son Atreus, and explores
their relationship as they travel to deliver
the ashes of Atreus’ mother to the highest
peak of the Nine Realms.
The father/son dynamic is always at the forefront,
starting off extremely strained and becoming
closer as they travel together.
Kratos is cold and distant at first, and Atreus
is just trying hard to process all the things
he’s experiencing for the first time throughout
the journey.
Seeing the two slowly develop a better understanding
of each other IS what the game’s story is
mostly about, and is the game’s greatest
strength.
Kratos teaches Atreus how to survive in the
world, and Atreus helps Kratos learn how to
open up a little more along the way.
That character development is even baked into
the gameplay.
You as Kratos get to observe Atreus as he
becomes more confident.
As a sidekick, Atreus gets more powerful and
useful over time to help you deal with enemies.
He’ll help you translate Norse writing and
give you bits of lore he’s learned.
You also have to deal with Atreus’ fits
of anger, overconfidence, and defiance, where
he feels not just like a CPU-controlled puppet,
but an actual person with a will of his own.
Atreus as a sidekick shows off what you can
do when you fully commit to treating your
sidekicks as real characters, tying together
what that should mean for the gameplay and
the narrative, and shows off what it can look
like for a character to progress alongside
you as you both make a lifechanging journey
together.
But sidekicks don’t have to be stuck being
the second banana.
They can be the actual true protagonist after
all.
If a game’s player character is a fish out
of water, or especially if they’re more
of a silent protagonist, the COMPANION might
be way more important to the story than you
are.
If nothing else, their story arc might be
way more fleshed out.
Midna is wayyyy more important of a character
in Twilight Princess than Link is.
You might have the destiny, but Midna’s
got the story beats.
She’s a ruler, overthrown by Zant and cursed
into this HORRIFYING impish form that NO ONE
COULD POSSIBLY LOVE.
Turn on SafeSearch.
She’s desperate to find a way to restore
herself and plot revenge by any means necessary
to those who have wronged her.
You’ve got to save Hyrule again from…
whoever it is threatening Hyrule this month…oh
hey it’s that guy Midna doesn’t like,
that’s convenient.
Midna’s character arc carries Twilight Princess.
She starts as selfish and ruthless, in single-minded
pursuit of her goals in a world that has wronged
her.
She’s not responsible for Zant coming to
power, oh no.
She’s owed one kingdom, and Link is just
the tool for the job - a handy means to an
end.
Link, can you trust her?
Well, what are your other options?
About a third of the way through, Zant nearly
takes Midna out, a sacrifice is made to save
her life, the Zelda-is-present box gets checked,
and Midna has a change of heart, reflecting
on the damage that Zant has done and gaining
a sense of duty to see this thing through
for the sake of everyone else.
It’s not the most complicated story arc,
but it’s effective and endearing.
Her warming up to you over the hours doesn’t
make her any less of a fun character either.
By the time you get to face off against Zant
for real, she doesn’t pull any punches.
Plus, as a partner, she’s helpful, providing
decent but not overbearing hints, quality
of life hooks like teleporting you and objects
around, as well as giving a fun team-up attack
to help build a stronger bond between the
two of you.
In a series not well-known at the time for
deep character arcs, Midna gave a way for
Nintendo to open a new door for Zelda characterization
without imposing too much change onto Link
himself, just in case it didn’t work out.
Turns out it did.
Sidekicks don’t have to be limited to being
a PRO-tagonist.
The main villain can be your buddy, too.
That sounds fun, right?
Like in Portal 2.
We’ve got Wheatley and GLaDOS.
The start of the game is retreading a lot
of the first one, as you work through GLaDOS’
test chambers while she jabs at you from the
other room.
The writing in this one is real good.
Wheatley pops in from time to time in the
background as the more helpful side of the
robot coin, or at least as helpful as Wheatley
is capable of being.
Once we hit the halfway point, everything
takes a turn.
Wheatley and GLaDOS change places, and Wheatley
cannot handle one ounce of actual responsibility.
You’re now stuck in the long-abandoned parts
of Aperture, where you find GLaDOS.
Stuck to a potato.
With Wheatley drunk on power and with no other
options, GLaDOS does a bit of a face turn
and becomes your companion.
It turns into a perfect time to, of all things,
humanize her, get a lot more backstory, and
it’s just really really funny.
Both Wheatley and Glados don’t contribute
all that much to the gameplay of Portal - that’s
still mostly just physics puzzles in new and
exciting locations - but they’re both instrumental
in the game’s story, and are the core of
life and charm that the game relies on.
Get your commenting gloves ready.
Let’s talk about unusual companion characters.
Secret betrayals, complete useless boat anchors,
NPCs that stand right where you want to be
- the best and worst companion characters
you can think of.
Games with sidekicks almost always task them
to do some heavy lifting, either in conveying
the story, tutorializing mechanics, characterization,
or even just as a central focus, but the most
memorable companions are designed carefully,
and they can shoulder the load.
*chill vibes outro from Twilight Princess*