Today’s episode is sponsored by Surfshark
VPN
Anyone making a game wants it to be worth
playing.
But what about making one worth playing...
AGAIN?
A ‘Replayable’ game might feel like just
another word for a ‘Great’ game, but it’s not.
Replayability is an independent characteristic.
You can make a great game that's almost worthless
to play again.
You can make a bad game very replayable.
But what actually makes a game replayable?
Today we’re taking stock of a bunch of different
ways to make a game worth replaying.
These aren’t the only ways to do it, of
course, but a big chunk of any game's replay
value falls into a few broad categories: Novelty,
Creativity, and Evolution.
But there’s a flip side to each category.
Just as there are things to add, if you want to make a game as replayable as possible,
there are things to avoid.
Staleness.
Inhibition.
Stagnation.
But hey, don't worry too much.
Even the most replayable games have a little
bit of the dark side in them.
Y'know, nobody's perfect.
Now, let’s go through each category, and
see how they all help a game become replayable.
Oh yeah, but first we gotta pay the bills.
Surfshark is a VPN, and you want a VPN.
If you use public WiFi, you pretty much NEED
a VPN.
VPNs encrypt your sensitive data, like banking
info, passwords, photos, videos, and web traffic,
from prying eyes, like hackers or THE MAN.
But Surfshark isn’t only great for privacy
and security.
Do you realize how much streaming TV is out
there that you’ve never heard of?
Surfshark can get around region-locking.
With just a couple clicks you can make your
computer look like it’s in dozens of countries
around the world.
Get ready for…
Japanese Netflix.
You could find the next Terrace House before
anyone else does.
And, Surfshark is the only VPN that lets you
use one account on an unlimited number of
devices.
You’ve got nothing to lose if you just want
to try it out.
They’re offering a 30-day money back guarantee!
Head over to the link in the description and
enter the code DESIGNDOC for 83% off, and
an extra month for FREE!
First, and maybe the most straightforward
category is Novelty - a game’s capacity
to provide new content in a second go-around.
If replaying the game effectively means playing
a totally new game, well yeah, of course that
game’s replayable.
This falls entirely on the shoulders of developers
to deliver enough content and structure it
so players don’t, or can’t, see it all
the first time.
That’s novelty, and some great ways to deliver
it are through branching paths, multiple playable
character styles, and procedural generation.
Branching paths aren’t just about dialogue
trees and narrative structure.
That IS a popular option, but branching paths
can also be about optional side quests or
mission branches.
Star Fox 64 is a classic example.
Almost every mission has a special side objective
that determines the next stage.
The work you do in previous stages can affect
future ones, like having certain characters
appear to help you out.
Discovering these paths makes each run stand
out from the last, and you can easily get
a dozen unique playthroughs before you see
all of the content.
Games with multiple endings fit here too.
It’s an easy and effective way to give a
compelling reason to go through the same story.
Disco Elysium has the most elaborate narrative
structure I’ve seen in a long time, with
countless twists and turns, big and small,
that the story can go down based on player
choice, or just the luck of the dice.
A game can also deliver novelty through unique
character classes, or character builds with
unique mechanics that make the game feel very
different on the next playthrough.
They can be as simple as a long distance combat
class like Mages and Archers vs. melee focused
Brawlers and Knights.
Or, you could go more granular - skill trees,
stat allocation, weapon styles, equipment,
and other stuff that lets players customize
their character to their heart’s content.
Some more traditional retro games like Bloodstained:
Curse of the Moon provide multiple characters
to choose from.
Bloodstained has 3 distinct allies to recruit
that you can switch to at any time who all
have their own abilities.
You can take out those 3 allies yourself to
gain new abilities for the main character,
or you can just completely ignore them and
stick with your default move set the entire
way through the game.
That’s a bunch of very unique playthroughs
by itself and that’s not even counting the
branching paths within the levels themselves.
Another option is to mix in new content through
a flood of environments and items, and procedural
generation can be a great way to do it.
Especially if each run through the game doesn’t
come close to touching all of the possible
options.
Roguelikes are a whole genre built around
rationing out new content through procedural
generation.
Hades, Spelunky, and FTL all give their players
unique challenges by randomizing their dungeons,
scenarios, items, and encounters.
Each challenge is using the same base game
mechanics to make them familiar enough, but
every run forces players to adapt based on
the unique circumstances they’re given.
Some runs will provide a bounty of great items
while others will starve you, but each run
is always unique enough to be unpredictable
and novel, enough to keep you from getting
complacent, and that unpredictability makes
each of those games supremely replayable.
Well, that was easy.
Just add more new stuff right?
WRONG.
There are opposing forces.
Just as there are things to add, there are
things to avoid.
Things that hurt novelty and make their games
less replayable.
Let’s call it Staleness.
Instead of branching paths, a game could have
restrictive linearity.
Instead of characters with new mechanics,
you get characters set in stone.
Remember, these aren’t necessarily things
that will make a game worse, but if you’re
aiming for replayability, these things could
make you miss your mark.
Games with single, rigid storylines aren’t
as easy to replay.
Take the Ace Attorney series.
The games are amazing but the story is the
story.
Once you’ve played it, you’ve seen it
all.
Cinematic action games like Uncharted can
be just as limited.
Of course, that’s by design.
The designers of those games weren’t aiming
for replayability with their more cinematic
playstyle.
They chose to make a good, but less-replayable
game.
Rigid player character development, and a
lack of varied optional side quests falls
into staleness too.
Final Fantasy XIII is infamous for both, with
a strict character leveling system that doesn’t
allow much experimentation and a notoriously
linear hallway environmental design with little
side content.
Branching narrative structures can also back
their way into staleness, with false choices.
Options that don’t actually go anywhere
will disillusion your players, once they get
wise.
And they will get wise.
Telltale’s adventure games set up major
choices that seemed to impact the story.
But if you ran through the game again the
secret was revealed.
For lots of choices, no matter what road you
took, you ended up in the same place.
The illusion was shattered, and for a lot
of players it retroactively soured the system
they enjoyed before.
Yes, it’s very tough to actually generate
the amount of content you need to make satisfying
branching narratives, but those are the stakes
of the style of game you’re making.
Players will see through the shortcuts.
OK, category number two is Creativity.
Where novelty comes from the GAME, creativity
comes from the PLAYERS.
It's the home of user-generated content and
clockwork systems.
Games that let players run free with the tools
they're given to make their own fun, and then
come back again to make something completely
different.
This is where open-world games, simulations,
and sandboxes shine.
The obvious examples are games focused on
user generated content: Mario Maker, Dreams,
Little Big Planet.
But also games with good modding support like
Warcraft 3 and Skyrim.
The core game is a platform for endless content
and infinite replay value, as long as the
community is strong, the tools are good, and
the servers are still running.
The more self-contained flavor of creativity
shows up in sandbox games.
They give players a wide open space, the freedom
to come up with their own goals and the tools
to get the job done.
Minecraft and Terraria are the gold standards.
Yeah, there are some bosses that the developers
have added that you could try taking down,
or weapons and armor you could craft, but
you could also build your own private super-island.
Make your own farm.
Program a computer to play Minesweeper.
It's all up to you.
These games are designed to provide a platform
on which to build your own stories, and the
randomized world design can accommodate infinite
adventures.
Other flavors of open world games get their
replayability from a clockwork system.
Breath of the Wild, Metal Gear Solid V, and
Hitman thrive by building a diorama to tinker
with, tear apart, and reconstruct to meet
concrete goals in your own non-traditional
way.
It's rare for a task in these games to have
a single solution, or even just a handful
of solutions.
Their systemic design and wide variety of
tools let players think up ways around problems
that the devs never imagined.
Simulation and management strategy games like
Rollercoaster Tycoon, Sim City, and The Sims
scratch a similar itch.
They set up an end goal of creating a thriving
civilization, city, business, or home, but
the way you get there is entirely up to you.
Since you're blazing your own trail, it's
super easy to make your next playthrough completely
different.
But now let’s flip it.
Inhibition lives where players don't get the
right tools to express themselves.
Some games have good clockwork systems but
don’t do a great job of encouraging players
to explore them.
They may have issues with a dominant strategy.
If one playstyle is obviously more powerful
than others, it saps the fun of coming up
with new, creative, and viable ways to solve
problems.
Metal Gear Solid V’s systemic gameplay creates
a ton of ways to approach a task, but the
tranquilizer gun is so often the simplest
and most effective tool in your toolbox.
To fix it, a game might have to add a system
like limited resources to help discourage
using the same solutions over and over, and
get players thinking creatively about their
true range of options.
Games that rely on user-generated content
live and die on the quality of their creation
tools to get players to replay.
Tools that are limited, difficult to use,
or games with bad curation and discovery systems
will drag the whole experience down.
And now with games that rely on online services
to distribute user-generated content, there’s
a fun new problem: someone, for any reason
or no reason at all, could pull the plug on
the services at any time.
ModNation Racers was a fantastic kart racer,
with great support for users to build their
own tracks and share them online, but once
the servers were pulled,
it took the entire game down with it.
One decision, made years after release, made
a game go from very replayable to nearly unplayable.
Open world games get their replay value by
providing the space to creatively do things,
but the genre is so hard to build because
the devs have to fill it with a LOT of things
to do.
Lifeless open worlds undercut the reason to
come back.
L.A. Noire has a huge open world that you can
explore but there is literally nothing there
to support it.
Nothing to really do.
Open-world games also have to watch out for
making their mission designs too rigid.
Red Dead Redemption 2 struggles with this.
Outside of story missions, you’re given
this sprawling open world with great freedom.
Inside the story missions you are restricted
to do exactly what the game wants you to do.
Even though it looks like you're still playing
in the game's open world sandbox, if you step
out of line you insta-fail a lot of missions.
The clockwork nature of the world in Red Dead's
case can even sometimes come back to bite.
This conflict between the open world and story
is frustrating for many, and makes the story
itself more tedious to replay.
OK, third category: Evolution.
It’s the fun of getting better at a game
over time, and the hidden depth that a game
can hold in waiting until players are ready
to reveal it for themselves.
This one creates replayability from a give-and-take
- a little from the dedication of its players
and a little from the design of its creators.
Top on the list is competitive multiplayer.
It’s a straightforward way to get players
to come back over and over and hone their
skills.
In nearly every genre, and with a deep enough
game, a good multiplayer match will unfold
a little differently every time.
With the right design, this can make a game
replayable forever.
Look at Super Smash Bros. Melee and its 20-year
run of popularity.
As people discovered wavedashing, movement
tech, and the rest of the depth hidden in
the game, it became a game that rewarded you
more the more time you put into it.
Rocket League is just soccer with RC cars,
but the game’s skill ceiling is incredibly
high.
It’s more fundamental than just video games,
too, look at how chess has stayed replayable
for hundreds of years with the same rule set,
and it’s more popular now than ever.
Games don’t have to be as timeless as chess,
though, to be in this category.
The evolution of a game’s meta over time
also makes it more replayable, no matter if
it’s driven by player skill changing over
time or through rule changes the devs make.
Hearthstone, Overwatch, and others have historically
had great success getting players to come
back thanks to the changing meta.
Even if you don’t love where the game stands
right now, a changing meta is a powerful tool
for getting people to replay a game.
Single player games can use tools in the evolution
category too.
High scores and leaderboards fit here, and
have been used to make a game more replayable
since the arcade era.
Get better at the game, prove it by getting
a high score, and get public bragging rights.
The best kind.
Arcade game design added strict time limits,
limited lives, brutal difficulty, and short
bursts of gameplay, mostly to encourage you
to pump quarters in, but it also gives a framework
that dovetails well with this style of replayability.
For single player games on home consoles,
you can see another type of evolution in difficulty
options, challenge modes, and ranking systems.
Ranking systems are an approach similar to
the arcade style that still works outside
the constraints of the arcade.
In a game like Devil May Cry or Bayonetta,
you’ll be graded during each fight, contributing
to an overall stage ranking, and as you play
you’ll see yourself go further up in rank.
But how far can you go?
To find out, you’ll need to replay the game.
Practice, memorize and master combos.
Evade all attack patterns, and learn lots
of other nitty gritty details of the game’s
balance.
And as you learn, the game gives you that
immediate feedback through new and higher
rankings.
Just like high score boards, ranking systems
made it easy to aspire to, and to prove, your
mastery.
Now this last one’s a fun one.
So far everything we’ve talked about has
been pretty intentionally placed by the developers.
But it doesn’t have to be.
Communities can build around any game, and
will start to poke at the structure of the
game as written.
If the game doesn’t explicitly give you
enough challenge, or if you just want to make
your own challenge, you totally can.
Speedrunning is fan-driven gradual mastery
of a game, done by replaying it over and over,
aiming for goals the developers may never
have thought possible.
Figuring out how to set up a perfect lap skip
in Mario Kart 64, clip through walls in Luigi’s
Mansion, or warp everywhere in Ocarina of
Time is just a different challenge to face,
a different skill to master, even if the developers
never put it in intentionally.
Self-imposed challenges like Nuzlockes in
Pokemon, no-coin runs in Mario, low level
challenges in RPGs all push the limits of
what a game’s depth will allow, and what
the game’s players are capable of doing.
And then there’s evolution’s flip side,
too.
Stagnation.
There are plenty of design decisions that
can make a game stagnate, and be less fun
to replay.
But just like some elements of evolution can
happen by accident, some stagnation can be
out of your control.
In order to keep the replayability high for
a game that relies on evolution, devs have
to watch for things that might make players
not want to grow, change, mature, and develop
their skills over time.
A multiplayer-focused game only lives if there’s
a community to play it.
If the player base is small enough to make
a match hard to start, the game is toast.
Bots can help boost lagging player counts,
but it’s not a total fix.
The bots don’t change.
For skilled players, they can become easy
to predict, and to play against.
The surprise and adaptation you get when playing
against real people is just not there, and
that cuts against the original draw of multiplayer.
Or, the player base itself could strangle
the life out of a game.
If the people who stick around a game’s
multiplayer are all very high level players,
it’s very difficult for new players to stick
with a game when they get destroyed repeatedly.
Fighting games run into that problem all the
time.
Even with a thriving player base, a game’s
strategy has to stay compelling, game after
game, if you want players to come back.
If the meta sucks, the game stagnates, and
the evolution disappears.
Dominant strategies are poison to any competitive
multiplayer game, just as much as they hurt
single player games with clockwork systems.
One overpowering playstyle can lead to a stale
meta, boring matches, and make players flee
to something more interesting.
Anyone who played Super Smash Brothers Brawl
competitively can tell you the horrors of
Meta Knight, whose dominance in the competitive
scene made the meta very stale very quickly.
The game couldn’t be patched, and over time
Meta Knight caused a fountain of toxicity
and then apathy in the Smash community.
Then there are things that just directly make
the game unpleasant to play over and over
again.
Anything that makes a game more annoying to
play makes it a little less likely someone
will stick around long enough to learn and
love your deep meta, or your amazing game
balance.
One way to ferret this out is by thinking
about whether a game is speedrun-friendly.
Speedrunners hate RNG.
Heavy RNG can drag on a game.
A little randomness and luck can keep things
unpredictable, but over-relying on it can
take away player agency.
You can’t get good at the random number
generator, so if players feel like their losses
boil down to a bad dice roll, that’s not
a great incentive to keep playing and improving.
Animal Crossing Amiibo Festival almost always
comes down to the sheer luck of a dice roll.
The game expects you to replay it to unlock
cosmetic rewards and mini games, but the reliance
on luck makes it a nightmarish slog to play
the first time, let alone to replay.
Speedrunners also hate unskippable cutscenes
and long tutorials.
They’re terrible timesinks, and are so easy
to avoid.
Just give players some kind of out, any out,
and it fixes the problem instantly.
PS1-era Final Fantasy speedrunning would be
way more popular if the run time wasn’t
half forced cutscenes.
In general, keep asking yourself, ‘For someone
replaying a game, what aren’t they replaying
it for?’
Then figure out ways to reduce those things.
Making a game replayable is like tending a
garden.
Replayability can be sourced from something
the developers add, through Novelty, from
what the players bring through Creativity,
or from both through Evolution.
But remember, replayability has to be cultivated.
Staleness, Inhibition, and Stagnation can
act like weeds, and strangle the life out
of a replayable game.
Leave us a comment below with some of your
favorite examples of games that create replayability,
and how some have destroyed it.
Tend the garden well, and you might make a
game that lasts a lifetime.
*chill vibes outro from Hades*