It’s October, my favorite holiday is 
right around the corner, and that means  
it’s Spooky Season. And I think right now is 
the perfect time to talk about spooky levels.  
It’s a stone cold classic theme. It’s hard to 
come up with one that designers love to use  
more.
 It’s everywhere - every genre and every target audience can
appreciate a dash of Halloween,  
or a scary something-or-other. When I asked 
friends for their favorite spooky levels,  
I got way more examples than I have time to 
mention. The theme’s not limited to pumpkins  
and ghosts, though. Game developers have tons 
of options at their disposal for scaring up a  
level. Lots of aesthetics, of course, but lots 
of fun narrative themes and mechanics, too.
Let’s open up Design Doc’s local 
branch of Spirit Halloween,  
and talk about how games scare up a level.
Oh hey, it’s today’s episode sponsor Factor! 
Sometimes I don’t feel like cooking a whole thing,  
especially for lunch, but it’d still be nice 
to have something nice. Factor lets you have  
all the convenience of takeout but the flavor and 
variety of a home-cooked meal. They’ll ship you a  
pack of meals to put in your fridge, and you just 
heat it up for all of 2 minutes in the microwave.  
You’ve got time for that. Meals are fresh, never 
frozen. I’m sure you’ve seen some of those frozen  
options from your supermarket - this ain’t that, 
not even close. This is a thousand times better.
You can choose from 35 meals every week, with 
options from keto, calorie conscious stuff,  
vegan, vegetarian - just about 
any dietary preference you might  
have. My dietary preference is ‘does it 
taste good’, so that makes it real easy.
I like to put it on a plate, but you 
could just go for it if you want.
Head to FACTOR75.com or click the link below 
and use code DESIGNDOC50 to get 50% off your  
first Factor box and 20% off your next month of 
orders. That’s code DESIGNDOC50 at FACTOR75.com  
to get 50% off your first box plus 20% off 
your next month of orders. Thanks, Factor!
So one clarification about what we’re going to 
talk about - this is SPOOKY levels. Not always  
SCARY levels. If every level is scary, all 
the way through, that’s more of a horror game,  
and that’s a whole different thing. The way I’m 
thinking about it is spooky is a mix of one part  
Scary and one part Cozy. Like a dangerous cozy. 
Cozy with a knife. For games that have them,  
spooky levels are often a change-of-pace. They’re 
perfect for a game that isn’t really scary,  
but likes to dip in for the look, 
or to switch up the gameplay,  
or to explore some deeper character themes 
that a spooky setting might help them do.
But the easiest one to talk about is 
spooky aesthetics, so let’s start there.
If you just want a quick hit of something 
seasonal, there’s lots of options for  
making a level aesthetically spooky without 
having to tie it into some greater plan.
There’s the reskinning work to get an 
existing asset into the seasonal mood,  
like the Halloween maps that show up every 
year in Team Fortress 2. That’s quick and easy.
But if you’re not going to go very deep with 
the scares, make sure you’re aiming high on the  
amount of them. A couple ghosts and a graveyard 
isn’t going to cut it. Go all out. Like how Banjo  
Kazooie’s Mad Monster Mansion is packed to the 
brim with every haunted house trope at once.
Windows boarded up. Skeletons and 
hostile gravestones. Secret passages  
and rooms filled with spider webs. Locked 
gates and a hedge maze. Ghosts to dodge,  
and ghosts to trick yourself. Spooky music 
and stock owl sound effects. A disembodied  
hand playing a pipe organ. A scary bad N64 
camera to fight in the spelling part. You  
even turn into a toilet pumpkin! No 
part of this level is left un-themed.
A lot of the fun of a spooky level comes from 
the aesthetic itself. Even if a level doesn’t  
do anything specific outside of changing 
its look, that alone can be enough to set  
a level apart. It doesn’t have to only 
be creepy or scary. It can be whimsical,  
darkly comedic, action packed, 
melancholic, or just psychedelic and weird.
If you don’t want a Mad Monster Mansion, 
try a Haunted Hotel from Mario Sunshine,  
not all that different from a normal hotel, but 
if it worked for Stephen King, why not here?
The theme is full of chances for parody. 
One of Pizza Tower’s spooky levels is  
a Five Nights at Freddy’s homage with 
jump scaring animatronics and cameras,  
and after dodging your way through, you gain 
the ability to fight back on the return trip.
The tone can be as light as you want. 
Costume Quest is a full-on Halloween  
RPG about going around trick-or-treating in the 
neighborhood. Nothing scary, but plenty festive.
You can accommodate lots of different settings. 
Gravity Circuit’s Junk Yard is full of zombie  
robots and sticky glob hazards, with a 
master mechanic-slash-doctor as a boss fight.
They can be a window into the darker side 
of a game world’s history. The Shadow Temple  
in Ocarina of Time was a historical 
Sheikah torture chamber and crypt,  
haunted by the spirits of enemies of the 
Hyrulean royal family. And the Dead Hand. Have fun, kids.
It doesn’t even have to be all that internally 
cohesive. Mystic Mansion in Sonic Heroes is a  
grab bag of haunted tropes, from goofy skeletons 
and pumpkin ghosts, to robot paintings that come  
to life. Even without a ton of connective 
elements, the visuals alone are fun enough.
Of course, spooky levels can be about way 
more than aesthetics. Some really great ones  
set themselves apart by weaving together 
the vibe with the right mechanical focus,  
and that combo can look very 
different depending on the genre.
If you want to build a unique spooky level,  
choosing a level gimmick that matches 
can help. Darkness is a popular option,  
especially in platformers. Dark stages 
become a challenge of navigation, where  
you don’t have enough information to be totally 
secure. It’s not everyone’s favorite gimmick,  
but it can make a level stand out, as long as 
you’re careful. Shovel Knight did a good job.
The Lich Yard is a classic action-focused horror 
stage, along the lines of what you’d see in a  
Castlevania. Starting in the stormy outskirts 
of a medieval village, you work your way onto,  
and then into, a graveyard and the ruins of an 
old crypt. You’ll fight through hordes of skeletal  
knights and ghosts that can only be stunned, 
not killed. The platforming challenges come  
from two main gimmicks: platforms that sink when 
loaded with too much weight - not so tough - and  
areas of total darkness - way tougher. In 
those, everything but specific background  
elements and a few enemies are coated in black. 
You can’t even see your own shovel self. You’re  
only sure of where you are when you’re standing 
in front of the contrasting background elements,  
or during brief flashes of lightning. You’ll have 
to use your… object permanence… to get around.
As you progress, the stage will keep throwing 
you into setups meant to trick you. It’s not a  
simple space to navigate, especially when 
the darkness is combined with platforms  
moving in and out. The further you go, 
the more the stage is covered in darkness,  
with less pockets of contrast to use. You’ve got 
to use what little information you have to make  
split second decisions, all while getting 
hounded by ghosts and enemies hiding in the  
shadows. I hope you didn’t forget about the 
new sinking platforms, too. They’ll get ya.
The building darkness helps ratchet up the 
tension as you progress, but the stage could  
have easily become overwhelming if the devs went 
too far with it. One of the keys to making this  
stage not a horrible experience lies in the way 
the game gives out just enough resources to let  
you feel like you can do this. The lightning 
flashes might not seem like much at first,  
but as you go deeper they can mean everything 
when you have nothing else to go on. Not every  
room is dark. You do get a break every now 
and then, which is another smart touch to  
help players regroup and keep the sequence’s 
building tension from turning into annoyance.
Once you make it through, your prize 
is a cool fight against Spectre Knight.  
Basically the Grim Reaper with teleports, 
and even the ability to bring the stage  
darkness into the boss fight to take cover. 
You’re good at it by now, you’ll be fine.
The Lich Yard is a gimmick stage for 
sure, but it uses darkness smartly,  
and knows how to give the right kind of 
help to keep all of the scary benefits  
without some of the trope’s usual drawbacks.
A change of pace with a spooky level theme can 
be a great time to experiment with a change of  
genre mechanics. A platformer doesn’t 
have to stay purely as a platformer.
The Mario series loves to use a Ghost House 
stage archetype in its mainline games,  
and they use puzzle-y mechanics all the time. 
Ghost Houses often revolve around finding  
secrets and overcoming obstacles, while the stage 
tries to trick players the whole way through.
Ghost Houses debuted in Super Mario World. The 
level isn’t designed as a simple straight shot  
obstacle course decorated with a bunch 
of Boos. Following the clear path ahead  
of you will only send you back the way you 
came. Players have to look for hidden exits,  
using things like P-switches that reveal secret 
doors that will get you closer to the true exit.
Even when you think you’ve found the way out, 
the game’s later Ghost Houses, like the one in  
Forest of Illusion, feature multiple exits that 
reward some extra thorough exploration. Sure,  
you COULD go through the first door you see in 
this hidden corridor, but if you keep looking  
just a bit longer, you can get an alternate 
secret exit and a 3-UP for your trouble.
For a brief moment, Super Mario becomes 
an escape room as you solve the mystery  
of how to get out of the mansion, and the ghost 
theme feeds into the vibe. Unique, but cohesive,  
and absolutely still Mario. That’s a formula 
for making something familiar, yet memorable.
If you’re trying to figure out how 
to add a spooky level to a game,  
remember that they don’t have to exist just 
for their own sake. Some of their tropes  
can be very convenient ways 
to solve practical problems.
Open world games almost all run into a problem 
with sequencing and player access to events.  
The draw of an open world game is the ability to 
explore anywhere at your own pace, but without  
any more guidance, players can easily stumble 
into situations they either can’t deal with,  
or have no context for. Jumping into the middle 
of a questline by accident doesn’t help anyone.
But maybe a ghost can fix it.
There’s a ghost ship in Wind Waker. While 
you’re sailing around minding your own business,  
you might spot a derelict pirate ship with 
an aura. Pretty spooky. Let’s go after  
it. … Huh. It IS a ghost ship, I guess. 
Well, put it out of your mind for now.
Hours pass. You’ll likely hear bits and 
pieces about the ship as you travel. The  
fishmen by where it spawns talk about seeing 
it on some nights. The ship is part of the  
infamous Triforce Quest in the endgame. 
One of the Triforce pieces the player’s  
looking for is on the ship, but you really 
shouldn’t be messing with it until later.
To get on the boat, you’ll need a Ghost Ship 
Chart that you can’t get until right before  
the Triforce Quest starts. Once you have the 
hookshot, you can get onto this little island,  
hop in here, do the mini-dungeon, and grab 
the chart. Is it clear that you need to head  
over here to make progress? Not really. But it 
definitely keeps you from getting here too early.
Blocking off the ship could’ve been done by 
not having the ship spawn, but there’s no  
mystery in that. It could be a normal ship with 
a locked door or something else that needs a key,  
but we’ve seen that already. The ghost angle 
gives the whole thing some extra flair while  
still doing the keep-the-player-out job that 
the game needs to do on a basic mechanical  
level. It’s one of the game’s many elements that 
adds life and intrigue to the blank ocean canvas,  
and is one of the few highlights in 
the otherwise tedious Triforce Quest.
If you’re sick of the same 
lock-and-key gating, maybe add a ghost.
Some games have levels that go 
for a more extreme tonal contrast.
There’s a spooky planet in Outer Wilds. The Dark 
Bramble. The planet just looks like bad news.  
Hostile architecture, evil snarls of vines 
and thorns, and at its center is a maze of  
chambers holding everything from implied horrors 
to explicit horrors. The Dark Bramble is a foggy  
tangle of a maze, and full of fanglyfish 
- the only hostile wildlife this game has.
The maze layout is non-Euclidean. Chambers 
expand and loop back around on themselves,  
and the lights that serve as the only landmarks 
can be misleading. Without a guide or very careful  
charting, you’re likely going to get lost. Oh, 
and whatever you do - Don’t. Make. A sound.
Also don’t kamikaze them.
You’ve got no defenses against an anglerfish’s 
bite, and you’ll be hard-pressed to outrun one.  
With no way to fight, and no way to get away, 
you’ll have to stealth your way through this  
maze. Anglerfish react to noise, and it’s never 
very clear how loud is too loud for these guys.
Your best bet is to play it safe - creeping along,  
crawling adrift past these terrors as you hope 
that you haven’t gotten yourself lost in the  
process. There’s important stuff to find in here, 
so facing your fear is definitely worth doing.
The Dark Bramble is a hard contrast with 
the rest of the game. Everywhere else is  
chill and helpful. A struggle-against-nature 
explorer’s mentality with friendly characters  
to give a helping hand along the way. The 
bramble is lonely, hostile, confusing,  
and tense - built to unsettle you every second 
you’re here. The contrast, and especially when it  
gets combined with tense stealth mechanics make 
this thing stand out. It’s a very spooky level.
I said in the beginning that a game that 
is scary all the way through wouldn’t be  
a candidate for this video, but 
I’m going to make an exception.  
Resident Evil Village’s Dollhouse. 
Resident Evil is obviously meant  
to be scary all the time, but the Dollhouse 
is a completely different flavor of terror.
Resident Evil can often be conflicted as to how 
scary it is. The Regenerators in RE4 or Mr. X  
in RE2 can be scary, but for large chunks the 
games are more action-oriented. You’re usually  
armed to the teeth. You’re mostly able to take 
out the threats around you - be it zombies,  
or better zombies - as long as you don’t miss 
too many of your shots. So how can a survival  
horror game like this become spookier? 
Try playing with the power dynamics.
Donna Beneviento’s dollhouse is built for 
psychological horror. It’s maybe the scariest  
sequence in the whole series.  
Your weapons are 
confiscated, and you’re left in an eerie house 
filled to the brim with porcelain dolls. The genre 
has shifted, from action-packed survival horror,  
to pure horror. The tone shifts too - things 
become much more quiet and puzzle-focused.  
Without a zombie threat, you can really focus on 
the atmosphere. 
You have to get uncomfortably close  
to a doll in the central room, taking it apart 
to reveal keys and puzzle clues. The tension  
builds as you progress. You go room to room,  
solving creepy puzzles, as you try to get a 
key item at the bottom of the house’s well.  
Right at the end when you think it’s done, it 
sounds like something was unleashed. If you  
make your way back to the central room, the 
doll is gone, with only a bloody trail left  
behind. You have to walk the dark hallways until 
you find yourself face to face with ‘The Baby’.
You still have no weapons, so you’ll just have to 
avoid it. Don’t let it spot you. Hide. In closets,  
under beds, anywhere you can find until 
it wanders off. Get the final key items  
you need and make a mad dash back to the 
elevator exit with the baby hot on your  
trail. If you can make it out, you get one 
final encounter with Donna and her doll,  
running through the house to finally 
finish it off and regain your equipment.
The Dollhouse is an amazing change of pace 
right in the middle of an otherwise great,  
but more traditional Resident Evil experience. The 
whole sequence proves that even after all these  
years of running from zombies, Resident 
Evil still knows how to tweak its own  
formula to shake you out of your comfort 
zone, and send a chill down your spine.
So… what’s the opposite of The Baby? How about  
‘The Fear’? His boss fight 
is definitely not spooky.
The Fear in Metal Gear Solid 3 is one of the 
goofiest fights in the series, and that’s  
saying something. He’s no Peter Parker, but he 
is a spider man. This guy’s got spider venom,  
double joints, he can scurry from branch to branch 
in the treetops, he’s got a creepy forked tongue,  
like a spider, snake eyes, like a spider, 
and he’s hidden by spider active camouflage.
This COULD be a cool fight straight out of the 
movie Predator. An antagonist preying on your  
own fear, making you unable to trust 
your own senses, setting up traps for  
you to stumble into, and jumping at the 
slightest rustling. It doesn’t do that.
If this stage is going for fear, it doesn’t start 
off very well. He shoots you with a poison dart,  
and then starts talking. It’s hard to set up 
the scares with a really on-the-nose monologue  
about how scared you’re about to be. Once 
you’re in it, every time he does anything,  
there’s some sound cue that blatantly telegraphs 
what he’s about to do. He says “FEAAAAR’ when  
he jumps. He’s an anti-jumpscare. He’s not able 
to hide very well, either. Even if you couldn’t  
see his really obvious camo, or couldn’t wait 
for the batteries on that thing to wear off,  
you could just pop on your thermal goggles and 
take out any hope of tension. Not only can you  
see The Fear no problem, but the thermal 
goggles even point out the stage traps.  
What’s up with this hot rope? Or you could 
even feed HIM poison. I’ve tossed SEVERAL  
expired poison dart frogs and watched 
him eat ‘em all back to back until he  
keels over.
It’s not hard to imagine a version of this 
fight that’s far more fearful. The venom  
he injects you with could play a bigger 
role, making you unusually paranoid and  
jumpy at the rustling around you. 
Is it The Fear, or just the wind?
In the actual fight, you can immediately 
pause the game and cure yourself. The Fear  
even suggests that you do that! Out loud! 
The scares are undercut by overexposure,  
and any feeling of helplessness goes 
out the window when you realize how  
MANY tools you have at your disposal 
to neutralize the tension. 0/10 spooky.
Overall, I think the most common 
theme of a great spooky level is  
how they give a game an excuse to 
break out of the expected formula.
Some of Batman Arkham Asylum’s most memorable 
moments show up in the Scarecrow encounters. At  
three different points, Batman will get the 
Scarecrow’s fear toxin sprayed in his face,  
and have his greatest fears brought 
to life. DUTCH ANGLES. I mean,  
spooky architecture. I mean, the origin story 
family stuff you’ve seen a hundred times by now.
They’re neat segments - the levels will 
morph around as you travel through them.  
The space might turn into an infinite 
hallway or a room with an exit that  
leads you right back to an entrance. A roach 
infestation might appear. The brickwork around  
you may start to crumble. Random papers 
will be scattered by impossible winds.  
Your assumptions for what will happen next 
will go out the window. These story sequences  
all give nice, creepy little vignettes that 
explore Batman’s past and psyche. His fears  
of what happens if he fails as a hero. How that 
fateful night in Crime Alley continues to haunt  
him. Even the blurry line that separates him and 
what he does from someone as twisted as The Joker.
By the third and final Scarecrow sequence, 
they just shatter the fourth wall. The game  
pretends to crash, rebooting into 
an alternate version of the game’s  
opening with Batman and Joker’s roles reversed. 
It culminates in a fake-out Game Over screen,  
complete with bogus advice. After 
each of these story sequences,  
Batman goes through a stealth platforming 
challenge in a nightmare to work his way out  
of the control of the fear toxin. The whole thing 
feels like a scripted, but more refined version  
of the Eternal Darkness Sanity Effects that 
won so much praise back in the Gamecube days.
The Scarecrow segments in Arkham Asylum aren’t 
the most subtle, or elegantly written sequences,  
but their surreal presentation helps keep 
players from getting too comfortable,  
and make a highlight that sticks with people, 
especially during that first playthrough.
Man, I love Halloween. Head to the comments 
and tell us some of your ghost stories. What  
games do you know that do justice to the 
spooky theme? Even unintentional stuff,  
like if you found some spooky bugs. Or head over 
to our scary good Patreon and see all the extra  
Design Doc stuff that a buck a month can get ya, 
like our newsletter and ad free episode previews.
Spooky levels are a perfect 
change of pace - a fun aesthetic,  
interesting thematic elements to explore, 
and a great reason to try out some different  
mechanics. Play around with some level 
theming, and you might… scare… YOURSELF!
*chill vibes from Sonic Heroes*