Welcome to my shop!
If you’re here for the big sword, that guy
bought the last one.
I’ve got other stuff though.
Whatcha comin’ in for?
A moon scroll?
You look like you got that moon scroll vibe.
No?
I got a 1976 Black Dragon out back if you’re
interested.
Let’s see here…
Lucky drops?
Cat Hat?
Oh, we got a new centaur heart today.
Best hearts in town right here.
Rock Candy?
Ghost powder?
Secret key?
Or just the usual?
Who doesn’t love a good game shop?
But not all shops are built the same.
A shop can be anything from the most basic 
exchanging of money for 
stuff, to a more complicated
system of bartering and negotiating, all the
way up to a set of mechanics so detailed and
nuanced that it BECOMES the game.
Since so many games are going to have shops
in them, it makes sense to make them as fun
as possible, right?
I think so.
Let’s talk shop.
If you’ve ever thought you might want to
become a programmer, but you weren’t sure
if you were cut out for it, I’ve got the
perfect fix for you: Try our sponsor Boot.dev.
They’ve taken a curriculum of Python and
Go programming classes and gamified the hell
out of the whole thing.
Boot.dev takes you step by step through learning
how to become a backend developer, with bite
sized, self-guided lessons.
The folks at Boot.dev believe the smartest
way to learn to code is to make sure you’re
never bored, and I think they’ve done a
great job.
As long as you stick to it, these lessons
will have you coding like a pro.
It’s a perfect tool for taking that first
step towards becoming a professional programmer
- way more effective than trying to wing it
yourself, and way cheaper than university
classes.
You also get access to Boot.dev’s Discord
community, full of people learning alongside
you.
Get the exact help you need when you get stuck,
and help others like you get unstuck.
All of their content is also available for
free in Guest Mode, so if you’re curious,
pop over there and sign up just to see what
they’re all about.
Click the link in the description box and
use my code DESIGNDOC to get 25% off your
first payment for Boot.dev.
That’s 25% off your first month or year,
depending on the subscription you choose.
Try it out!
Thanks to Boot.dev.
So how do you make a shop more fun?
Well, your options depend on what you want
your shop to do.
Game shops can handle a lot of different types
of things.
How complicated do you want it to get?
You can go way past just buying and selling
stuff.
Let’s break it up into a few levels, getting
more complex as we go up this big tall department
store of a metaphor, floor by floor.
At the start, though, it IS just about buying
and selling stuff.
Level 1: Basic Shops
If you want a no-nonsense, vanilla game shop,
you’ve got about a thousand RPGs to choose
from.
Super Mario RPG might be the most vanilla
of them all.
These shops are reliable sources of consumable
items, and basic, level-appropriate gear.
Not the best stuff.
Not the flashiest.
Not the weirdest.
Just the most sensible.
One common role of a shop is to provide a
way for a player to stick to a progression
curve in games where you get more powerful
over time, like in most RPGs.
As challenges get tougher, a shop can provide
a baseline of tools that ensure a player has
a clear path to make further progress in the
game.
Spend some coin to get a leg up on enemies
if you need it.
Sell your old stuff, since there’s not much
of a point to keep it on you, and get more
money to buy more stuff.
Grind for coins if you still don’t have
enough.
If you’re stuck, the shop can give you the
tools to get un-stuck.
Super Mario RPG’s equipment scales pretty
linearly, so there aren’t even many interesting
tactical choices you have to make.
Most of the gear you buy in one of these shops
is a straight upgrade.
The close-by dungeons might have some secret
treasure chests with some better gear, but
if you need a fallback option, these shops
are right here to give you just enough to
keep you moving forward in the game.
So if that’s the blandest shop you can find,
let’s start ratcheting up the spice.
What about selling stuff in a shop?
Game shops aren’t forced to adhere to any
real-life limit on what or how much a shop
could buy or sell.
In some cases, that can be disastrous for
game balance.
Elder Scrolls shops have limited funds.
You can’t just offload your house full of
cheese wheels onto one guy and expect him
to give you more than the fantasy equivalent
of fifty bucks.
In Elder Scrolls, since most everything
is stealable, a shop with unlimited buying
power could immediately wreck the game’s
economy, letting you sell as many forks,
plates and papers as you could hoover up,
and turning all that garbage into the most
expensive thing the game had.
Elder Scrolls’ merchant money limits put
at least a little bit of a cap on how many
shenanigans you can pull.
Not that you CAN’T pull any shenanigans
with the shopkeepers, but the game at least
makes it a little tougher to do.
Maybe you don’t quite have the funds to
get what you REALLY want to buy.
Some games give you another option.
A Link Between Worlds gives you access to
almost everything in the game from the outset,
through Ravio’s special item shop.
Everything.
From the hookshot, bows, bombs, and staves
- all of that is here, right away!
You don’t even need to pay much!
That is…
IF you’re just renting it.
For not much money, you 
get to rent all this stuff.
The only catch is that if you get a game
over, you have to return everything you’ve
rented.
That can get very pricey in a hurry if you
rented out the entire stock of Ravio’s shop
at once.
For a much higher price, you can just permanently
buy everything instead, which not only lets
you keep the items on death, but gives you
the ability to upgrade the items later to
sexier, more powerful items.
Link Between Worlds’ gameplay loop and structure
are carefully designed with this rental system
in mind.
The game lets you tackle dungeons in any order
you want.
The high price and major benefits of ownership
work together to create a long-term goal to
work towards, and makes rupees in the overworld
that much more important to collect.
It’s an experiment in semi-open design that
opened up some new possibilities, even if
the dungeons themselves wound up being a little
too focused on a single dungeon item, instead
of all the possible options a player could
possess.
Basic shops don’t need to stick to traditional
items and consumables.
You could put lots of other kinds of things
up for sale.
A shop can take over what might otherwise
be shoved into a skill tree.
Like in the new Prince of Persia: The Lost
Crown.
It uses shops to buy the upgrades at the center
of the game’s character progression.
It’s a Metroidvania, so all of your core
abilities will be found as you progress in
the main story, but there are lots more helpful
extra perks you can find and earn as well.
There aren’t any consumables, and selling
items isn’t an option, but these shops give
you access to non-critical, power-enhancing
items.
Equipable amulets that give special perks.
Weapon damage upgrades.
Increased arrow capacity.
Additional potions and better healing efficiency.
There’s a lot to choose from and none of
the upgrades are very cheap, so choose wisely.
All of these sorts of upgrades would, in a
lot of other games, be shoved into a more
abstract setup, like a skill tree in a menu,
but there’s nothing preventing these things
from being items in something more skeumorphic,
like a physical shop to visit.
Skill Tree shops can have a downside when
they’re filled with both short-term consumables
and long-term upgrades.
These run the risk of clashing with each other.
Devil May Cry has a skill tree style shop
where the bulk of your moveset needs to be
bought.
The game’s moves vary in price, with more
broadly useful moves like the gap-closing
‘Stinger’ being cheap, and more powerful
late game abilities like Level 4 Swordmaster
being much more expensive.
The series’ early games also provide consumable
healing items for purchase, but they are bought
with the same currency.
Why waste the money on a temporary fix when
you’re trying to save up to get a permanent
upgrade?
Worse yet, they keep ratcheting up in price
the more you buy, which is double punishment
for a new player who needs healing the most.
Devil May Cry 4 tried to address this issue
by dividing its items and upgrades, tying
them to two separate currencies.
Proud Souls for upgrades and Red Orbs for
consumables.
This kept the two items from competing directly
with each other, though they do keep getting
more expensive as you buy more of them, so
you have to prioritize.
There is an option to fully respec and reset
the cost of upgrades at any time, so you couldn’t
paint yourself into a corner if you did something
wrong.
Eventually it was simplified in Devil May
Cry 5.
Consumables were de-emphasized in general,
with basic healing items being removed completely.
The ‘Devil Breaker’ weapons are consumables,
I guess, but they’re so cheap that it barely
matters.
The series took a while to get there, but
it has been a cautionary tale in how items
competing for your purchase can clash, and
to carefully consider whether the benefits
of one type of item might come at the cost
of something else.
Now it’s good to make a shop convenient
and easy to use, but there can be a charm
to making the shop a little…
quirky.
Lethal Company does it through the shop interface.
Lethal Company is all about you and your friends
collecting scrap on hostile moons and trying
not to hilariously die to SCP-style monstrosities.
E.D. - ‘I need to see what I’m trying to kill!’
‘Oop…’
*startled noises from everyone*
Dan - ‘Get ‘em! Get ‘em!’
‘Welp…’
‘E.D.’s dead.’
You have to reach a profit quota before time
runs out by selling that scrap to your cosmic
horror corporate overlord.
Maybe make a little extra on the side to upgrade
your stuff and make your scavenging easier.
The shopping in Lethal Company is obtuse on
purpose.
You’ll be using your ship’s ancient computer
terminal to buy everything.
Use the computer’s old command line system
to access the store, order equipment, and
install upgrades.
By typing it all out.
Manually.
After ordering, a delivery pod will land somewhere
nearby, and you can go pick up your stuff
off the ground.
Unless something happened to it.
Or you.
Who knows?
Your funds are shared across the group and
anyone can use the terminal to order anything
they can afford.
Your group will have to figure out how best
to use the system amongst yourselves.
In the process, you’ll probably figure out
how to WORST use the system.
Little Jiminy buys a TV instead of actual
gear, or something.
Even if you don’t make it back alive, at
least your group will get a story out of it.
No refunds!
Let’s get weirder with these basic shops.
What if you made one really really small?
Roguelikes get a ton of mileage out of shops
that only have like 3 things for sale and
they’re all randomized.
Roguelikes are a type of game that tend to
work better when you can’t plan out your
exact route.
Improvisation is what brings a run to life.
Stacking all the money in the world won’t
help you if you’re only able to get a mediocre
item.
Or, if you see something really good, maybe
you sell off everything you got to stretch
a little and grab it.
You don’t know what you’re going to be
able to get, which means you’ve gotta be
ready to swerve when an opportunity presents
itself.
The items need to be generally useful, though,
for this to work.
If you give players 2 different kinds of garbage,
the shop might as well not be there.
Randomized inventory shops are also perfect
places to showcase new items.
A weird sprite you haven’t seen before showing
up in a shop is a quick ticket to sparking
the imagination of a player.
Someone saying ‘I don’t know what that
is’ is a powerful incentive.
Even if the item isn’t strictly better,
maybe the player wants to take it out for
a test run, now that the opportunity has come
knocking.
Deckbuilders get a lot of 
mileage out of randomized 
stores, too.
My favorite newish one is Balatro, a deckbuilder
where your starting deck is just a normal
deck of cards.
Play the best poker hands you can, and rig
the deck in your favor to get higher and higher
scores and multipliers.
Between rounds you can buy jokers, which can
work together to create dramatic combos and
boost up the points you get per hand.
Your strategy in a run can be changed on a
whim if you see an especially great joker
become available.
The types of hands you play and what order
you choose to play them in can depend entirely
on what jokers you’ve been able to acquire.
Mix in the Planet cards that boost the value
of a specific hand, the Tarot cards that can
give any number of bonuses, and the Spectral
pack that can rewrite your deck on the fly,
and you’ve got a lot to choose between in
such a small shop.
The products in the shop in Balatro define
the type of run you’ll have, but the game
isn’t just governed by random chance.
Your success requires you to use the shop
smartly, to recognize opportunities that come
your way, and pounce on 
them before they disappear.
Going up?
So far, the shop has been the shop.
You don’t get much say as the player about
what the shop looks like.
But that can change, too.
Shops can evolve just like anything else,
and if player actions make it happen, that’s
a recipe for a long-term player goal.
One easy way to do it is change up what you
can buy depending on the time.
The Goldenrod Tunnel is a secret shopping
district underneath Goldenrod City in Pokemon
Gold and Silver.
It’s like a little mall, and different shops
are available at different times of the real
life week, a feature made possible thanks
to the Clock that this generation added to
the game.
Buy your Pokemon’s friendship with a sick
haircut.
But not on Mondays.
Buy some herbs on the weekends.
Or stop by on Monday MORNING and get some
bargains on a bunch of expensive stuff.
Real shops have hours of operation, fake ones
can too!
You can change a shop by changing how prices
are determined.
O’aka XXIII is a traveling merchant in Final
Fantasy X.
He’s carrying a bunch of stuff, and he’ll
follow you to the ends of the earth to sell
you some.
O’aka asks you for periodic donations, and
if you oblige him, he’ll reward you with
better prices for everything he brings to
you later in the game.
Pretty steep discounts, too.
He’ll even ask you midway if his stuff is
too expensive, and he’ll listen to you!
He’ll even listen if you tell him his stuff
is too cheap, though I don’t know why you’d
do that.
Players being able to affect game prices can
make game shops feel a little more alive.
A little more like a person is running the
shop, and a little less like just a table
of items and prices.
Don’t get, like, TOO clever, though.
Playing games with the price of things rides
a very fine line before it gets more annoying
and cumbersome than fresh and fun.
Star Fox Adventures makes you play a dumb
hi-lo game instead of just knowing what price
something is.
Guess the price!
Go on, guess!
Nope!
That’s too low.
You can save like 3 scarabs per item by wasting
your time, or make the shopkeeper mad enough
to kick you out with nothing.
And then you can go right back in and do it
again.
Fun!
You can even get some extra scarabs right
around the corner from the shop, so what are
you really saving?
Ultimately the haggling in Star Fox Adventures
is just too rigid to be interesting.
There isn’t any real randomness or flexibility
in bargaining here.
It tries to make the world more immersive
but it really just makes buying stuff take
longer.
Star Fox isn’t even close to the only game
that has tried to get weird with basic shop
mechanics.
Is choosing things in a menu too practical?
What if, to buy something, you had to annoy
everyone around you?
Phantom Hourglass adheres to that classic
Nintendo tactic of shoving in every new platform
feature SOMEWHERE in a big new release, come
hell or high water.
The DS came with a microphone built in, so
guess who’s gonna have to look dumb on a
bus?
It’s you!
In between blowing out candles, dust, and
windmills, you meet Eddo, who will sell you
a Salvage Arm so you can grab treasure from
the bottom of the sea.
You could pay anywhere from 200 to 1000 rupees,
depending on HOW LOUD YOU… sorry.
How loud you yell into the microphone when
you buy it.
Blow out your voice for a steep discount.
Of course, you could game the system.
People immediately figured out that you could
just blow into the microphone slot to do the
same thing.
Or tap on it with the stylus, that’ll work
too.
The game’s not too particular about it.
Now you can play Phantom Hourglass on the
bus.
Shops can involve entire systems that take
your patronage and turn them into much more
complicated effects on other parts of the
game.
The World Ends With You is a very particular
RPG that revolves around fashion, and the
intricate details of how your clothing brands
interact with the world at large.
The entire game takes place in Shibuya, and
the neighborhood’s trendy shops.
The game’s mechanics are deeply tied to
who you’re wearing and what pins you have
on, and the stat bonuses you get depend on
how those brands are received in the areas
you’re fighting in.
You’ll want a wide variety of brands to
switch between, thanks to the game’s ‘Trend
Chart’ system, where a brand’s popularity
waxes and wanes over time in an area.
There’s no ‘best hat’, there’s only
a ‘best hat for today’.
Your gear might be buffed or even nerfed depending
on the brand’s standings.
You have some influence over the chart if
you complete fights while wearing a specific
brand in an area, but you’re still going
to want a variety of styles to pick from to
take advantage of the trends already present.
The shops can help you dress for success,
of course, but they’re also home to a relationship
system.
The more you buy from a specific store, the
friendlier that proprietor becomes, and the
more expansive that shop's inventory becomes,
too, granting additional abilities on clothes
you can buy.
The more you shop, the more options you get.
The result is a game that pushes players towards
being flexible with their gear, and helps
keep any one loadout from being the best option
in all scenarios.
Just like fashion, you have to keep tabs on
trends to stay on the cutting edge.
Maybe you’re looking for something a little
more dangerous than a normal shop might have.
Secret shops can be just like normal shops,
but with a little bit of window dressing you
have the material for a story moment, a cultural
vignette, or a great place to find some fun
new characters.
Secret shops work best when they’re a hard
contrast with the ‘normal’ shops in the
game.
Crazy Redd in Animal Crossing New Horizons
runs his own shop, filled with rarities and
treasures beyond what those literal children
over there can ever get you.
He’s got the Mona Lisa, dammit.
Somewhere out back.
Come by his secret boat on your secret beach,
or just head to Harv’s island and he’ll
do some business with ya.
But Redd is out to make a bell or two, and
what better way to do it than to foist some
bootleg artwork onto an unsuspecting rube
such as yourself?
If you’re looking for the real stuff, there’s
a strategy to buying fake art to encourage
that slot to be replaced with real art, but 
this whole deal is probably 
more for completionists.
Buy some art if you want.
Let’s change… what we expect to get out
of a shop.
Shops provide a place where you can stop in,
not just for items with stats, but for tips,
story leads, or just to chat a bit with whoever’s
behind the counter.
Many of the most memorable shops owe their
impact to the strong personalities of their
shopkeepers.
Deltarune has (as of now) five different major
shopkeepers, each with their own distinct
style, personality and purpose.
Seam is a wizened old mystic cat, running
a shop with some normal goods and some mysterious,
story-relevant goods.
Seam likes to put on a front, but they clearly
know a lot more about what’s going on behind
the scenes in the story than they first appear
to.
Spamton is an obsessive, deals-crazed weirdo
who you can barely communicate with.
Also deeply tied to what’s going on behind
the scenes, but in a different, colder way.
Sweet Cap’n Cakes is a bunch 
of foes-turned-friends, 
here to exposition their way into your heart.
Swatch is a shopkeep oozing maximum competence,
and maximum service.
He’s just doing his job, but he’s doing
it impeccably.
And Roulx Caard is a complete joke.
Now there’s a guy.
He’s got the best shop music, though.
The stores and items themselves aren’t anything
special.
Maybe a secret item here and there.
But the personality of each shopkeeper leaps
out of the screen, and creates a strong impression
that adds some dynamism to some of the otherwise
slower parts of the game.
NieR Automata has one hell of a special shop
and uses it to do one of the few overt callbacks
to its prequel game.
Emil was a major character in NieR, and it
doesn’t make… a LOT of sense as to why
he’d show up here at first glance, thousands
of years later, but that wouldn’t be the
weirdest part of this game.
Newcomers might not have any clue what’s
rolling around here.
After encountering him in the story, Emil
will randomly appear in several of the overworld
areas, blazing a trail in a scrappy little
cart with his own personal shop theme on blast.
He’s got some higher quality goods, but
you’re gonna have to put in some work to
get his attention.
Intercept him on his route, and shoot him
to knock him over, then conduct your dark
business.
Emil’s shop is a bit of fanservice for series
veterans, while still being a strong enough
personality to make it one of the more memorable
events in the game for everyone.
Let’s go up another level and… what the
hell happened here?
Uh…
I think we’re in a lawless area.
Or a PvP zone.
What if you break the shop mechanics entirely?
Stealing from shops is a popular one.
Link’s Awakening has a classic interaction.
The shop mechanics make you haul items up
to the register to purchase.
Or, if you felt like it, you could run for
the door instead.
If he sees you try to sneak out the door,
he’ll just ask you to pay.
He’s not always looking, though.
Leave by juking around his line of sight,
and BAM, five finger discount.
You did it!
Uh.
Hope you never need to get back into that
shop again.
You’re a memorable face.
The shopkeeper instantly spots you if you
enter a second time, and the penalty for thievery
is CERTAIN DEATH.
AND your name is permanently changed to ‘Thief’,
just so everyone knows what you did.
The rest of the game plays the same, but it’s
a fun touch.
Other games let you do more with thievery.
Spelunky has a legendary shopkeeper.
He’s got his cozy little store here.
You can trade in your gold for a handful of
randomized items.
Basic stuff.
But this shop is so tiny.
The exit is… right…
there.
I could just pick this up and run out the
door, no?
What’s this guy gonna do?
Well, this guy doesn’t take too kindly to
thieves.
If you take anything, if you break anything,
if you tear down the shop, or if you try to
take out the shopkeeper, he’s gonna go berserk.
And you’re the only one down here, so he’s
gonna take it out on you.
If we’re being honest, you probably did
it, even if you didn’t.
But maybe you make it out of the level without
getting killed, with your fancy new weapon.
You didn’t just steal from a lone shopkeeper.
He’s part of a big ol’ network of them,
and they all talk, somehow.
You are very banned from all shop franchises
throughout the caves.
Even if you manage to kill one of them, no
shopkeeper will ever do business with you
again.
Trying to set foot in one of their stores
after an incident will make them politely
escort you from the property, with a gun.
Sometimes it’s even one of the guns he has
on sale!
Spelunky 2 works much the same way, but with
a forgiveness mechanic.
If what you did isn’t quite so bad, maybe
just some light assault but not murder, you
might get a second chance, but only if you
stay out of their hair for a while.
They’ll let you know when you can come back.
Getting rid of a shopkeeper isn’t an impossible
task by any means, but it’s gonna take some
clever thinking and thorough knowledge of
the game’s systems to pull it off.
It better be worth it.
Lots of other games will let you fight their
shopkeeper, if it makes sense at all.
Usually as some secret boss-level character.
Starting the fight might be as straightforward
as smashing into them, or it might take a
little more finesse to figure out how to unlock
it.
Cobalt Core just shoves the option into a
menu.
It’s a roguelike deckbuilder, drawing inspiration
from both FTL and Into the Breach simultaneously.
Use your cards wisely to beat up enemy spaceships
and make it through.
At each repair yard, you can get Cleo to help
you out and fix your deck of cards.
Or you can fight.
You sure about this?
You’re immediately thrown into an intense
fight.
If somehow you make it out alive, your reward
is this broken pair of glasses.
And none of the repair bays are open for the
rest of the run.
What?
What did you expect would happen if you beat
the shopkeeper?
You won.
You had your fun.
Alright, let’s get out of here.
Onwards and upwards one more time, to the
penthouse.
You’ve made it.
All your hard work and selling garbage to
tourists has paid off, and now you own the
damn shop.
Here’s where all the games where you run
the item transacting business live.
OK, so I’ve already gone over two of the
big ones in this category in the Item Shop
video from a few years ago.
Shorthand: Recettear is cute, but rough to
play, especially these days.
Moonlighter is way more polished, but a little
hollow once you get deeper into the game.
So it’s been 5 years, what new stuff do
we have?
Let’s rapid fire over a few.
There’s actually still not a ton of these
around.
That’s weird.
There’s a few solid ones, though.
There’s Winkeltje, if you’re looking for
a more Sims-style item shop game.
There’s Potionomics, which has some cool
bartering mechanics on top of a roguelike
deckbuilder.
Use your cards wisely to maximize your profits.
Potion Craft has a cool visual style and a
cool map for mixing ingredients, though I
really don’t like the amount of what I can
only describe as waggle you need to do to
mix things.
Not enough time pressure, either.
No bustle.
And Shop-Like, which is a shop like.
Check back in in 5 more years, and maybe we’ll
get the item shop game renaissance we all
deserve.
Well, there’s no floor higher up from here,
so I’m going to rely on you all to do a
little more construction.
I’ve left some famous shops out of this
episode, so now’s your chance to head to
the comments and give a 
shoutout to your favorites.
If it’s got a unique mechanic that we haven’t
talked about, all the better.
The shop concept gives a ton of room to mix
in extra mechanics and personality.
Game shops can be anything you need them to
be, from a simple exchange of stuff for other
stuff, to a hangout for memorable characters,
to a narrative linchpin, up to and including
becoming the entire game itself.
Invest in its purpose, and you can make your
shop the most memorable part of a game.
*chill vibes from Dead Cells*