So you’ve decided your game needs a rhythm
part in it.
Or maybe you want to create a new rhythm game
from scratch.
Great idea!
You’ve caught the Rhythm Bug.
We were gonna call it ‘Beatmania,’ but
that was already taken.
Be careful, though!
You’ve wandered into a dark forest.
One false step and you could fall victim to
the silent killer: BAD RHYTHM UX.
Rhythm games depend on great UX.
I can’t think of a genre that’s as closely
tied to its interface as rhythm games.
If an RPG has terrible menus but a great story,
you can manage.
A really janky-looking shooter that feels
good to play can sell millions of copies.
But a rhythm game with a weird UI or one that
feels wrong can be dead in the water.
Good interfaces aren’t simple to design,
but there are plenty of easy things to do
that can improve a mediocre one, and there’s
a shocking number of rhythm games that just
don’t bother.
Let’s take a tour of the current state of
rhythm game UI and UX and look at how to put
the ‘fun’ in ‘fun-ctional rhythm game
user interfaces.’
Look around you.
Does your space say…
‘me’?
Or does it say ‘me need posters’?
Go pick up some really nice ones at today’s
episode sponsor, Displate!
Check this out.
I’ve decorated this wall with a bunch
of new posters, and not just any posters.
METAL posters.
You put them up with magnets!
I’m never going back to paper posters again.
Displate has thousands of designs ready to
ship.
I love these artistic options.
Displate hosts amazing artists that are putting
up new designs all the time, and your purchases
support them directly.
If you’re more in the mood for official
branded content, Displate has partnered with
lots of your favorites like Star Wars, Marvel,
sports teams, and lots and lots of video game
companies.
I really like these things.
They’re faster, way more durable, and I
think they look better than framing paper
posters.
It took me 2 minutes to get their magnet mounting
system on my wall, no tools required, and
then a couple of seconds to get the poster
up.
You don’t have to worry about nails or hammers,
or framing anything, or aligning stuff right.
I can instantly swap one poster for another,
too.
I have no idea how they could even make it
any faster than this.
It’s great.
Get yourself something nice over at Displate
by clicking the link in the description.
Right now, you’ll get 22-33% off at checkout,
but only if you use the link in the description,
and you’ll be helping support this channel
as well.
Thanks, Displate!
OK, so this is NOT gonna be about UX issues
at the very highest end of rhythm gaming.
This isn’t for the full combo super freaks,
you’re all too good for this.
Someone submitting scores to Life4 has different
needs than a general audience that just wants
to play a game with some rhythm elements.
But there will be things here that are useful
for everyone.
Let’s start with something foundational.
There’s a challenge that every rhythm game
has to deal with: timing is everything.
The entire game, the ONLY part OF the game,
is syncing up the animation on screen, the
audio track, and the player’s inputs.
Get any of those elements out of sync with
the others, and playing the game becomes almost
impossible, let alone making it feel good
to play.
But, even though rhythm games are lag-dependent,
that doesn't mean they have to be lag-free.
The average rhythm game plays a lot like a
rollercoaster.
The notes are on a track, and you deal with
each note as they come to you.
If you can match what that track expects you
to do, you get a high score.
These rhythm games don’t involve a lot of
decisions and branching paths, and because
of that, you can actually sidestep lag entirely.
It doesn't matter how much input lag there
is, or how long it takes your TV to output
the visuals and sound.
All that matters is that they're synced up.
No matter your input lag, you can shift the
game’s audio and visuals to compensate.
Even if it's ridiculously slow, like a half-second
of lag on a projector TV, the game can delay
the visuals and audio by a half-second to
match.
To the player, the game will feel like it's
synced up again.
But to take advantage of that, you do have
to code the game to do the adjusting for you.
It’s a large chunk of why it’s so hard
to go back to rhythm games made in the pre-digital
TV era.
Consoles were hooked up to TVs through analog
RF adapters and RCA cables with little to
no lag, so games from that era could assume
that there was no need to put in a way to
adjust for it.
If you play one of these older games on a
modern TV, that assumption isn’t true anymore,
and with no way to adjust for it, you’re
simply out of luck.
Vib Ribbon is laggy, but at least the timing
windows are forgiving.
Parappa is almost unplayable on most modern
hardware without any way to calibrate.
Inexplicably, Parappa’s 2017 remaster STILL
didn’t add a calibration option.
U rappin bad.
Forever.
But modern games know better.
Most people’s home entertainment systems
will have some amount of lag, and we can adjust
for it.
But there’s no telling how MUCH lag anyone’s
particular TV and audio setup has.
They might be two different amounts, even.
How do you figure out how much delay a game
needs to feel like it’s synced up?
There’s the manual way.
Ask the player how much delay there is, and
just trust that they’re right.
Some games do it like this.
Pick a number, test it out, then adjust manually
if it doesn’t feel right to you.
But do you know what number is right?
How do you know?
You’re probably going to have to guess and
check a few times before you nail it.
But is that REALLY the best a game can do?
I don’t think so.
There’s also a more automatic way.
Why don’t you...
Reggie: PLAY. THE. GAME.
Just play a practice round of a game and don’t
score it.
Average out how far off the beat the player’s
actions are from where the game THINKS they
should be.
That difference is the lag, and the game can
set it automatically.
If the player was genuinely trying, that’s
all you need.
They don’t need to know about lag, how their
TV works, or any manual setting at all.
The best UI is sometimes the one you don’t
even know is there.
Better yet, you can combine this calibration
step with the game’s tutorial and get both
out of the way at once.
That’s what Rhythm Heaven Fever does.
As you start, you’re taught how to play
the game.
It’s not too hard.
The game plays an audio track, and all you
have to do is press the button to the beat.
That’s what you’re gonna be doing anyway,
so why not warm up with this?
The game figures out how far off you are on
average, sets the delay in the background,
and sends you off on your merry way.
Lag syncing is not sexy, but it’s absolutely
necessary for modern rhythm games.
Streamlining the process and making sure every
player goes through it, even those who have
no idea what input lag is, builds the bedrock
that holds up the rest of the game.
OK, we’ve gotten through the setup.
Now we can get to the main event.
If you aren’t careful, rhythm games can
seem like they require a lot of memorization
to play properly.
Seeing a flood of notes to hit can overwhelm
new players - like you’re being thrown into
the deep end with no context.
It’s way more fun if you don’t need to
study a note chart to do well, or at least
good enough to pass it on your first go.
The difference between games that feel like
memorizing and games that feel breezier and
more accessible often comes down to how well
they support sight reading.
Sight reading is a term borrowed from the
music world.
It’s the ability to play a piece you’ve
never heard before by just looking at the
sheet music and taking a crack at it.
For rhythm games, sight reading involves being
able to play a song by just going for it and
hitting the notes as they come to you.
Being able to do well on something you’ve
never prepared for is one of the most satisfying
parts of rhythm games and gives a real payoff
to sticking with a game over the long haul
and learning all of its quirks and features.
It makes you sort of feel like you’re predicting
the future.
But for a game to support sight reading, it
needs to give some tools.
How can you help players keep the beat?
It could be through color cues.
Dance Dance Revolution has used them since
the start.
The arrows flash different colors depending
on what part of the beat they’re supposed
to be stepped on.
Quarter notes, eighth notes, sixteenths, and
even triplets all look different from one
another.
After a while, you’ll develop a sense of
when even the isolated arrows are supposed
to be pressed just by what color they are.
DDR is a very sight-readable game, thanks
in part to its rigorous use of color to help
guide players through unfamiliar step charts.
Or you could use shape cues to help make a
chart more sight-reading-friendly.
Guitar Hero and Rock Band lay out their note
highways on a board that looks like the fretboard
of a guitar, with new frets whizzing by right
on the beat.
You can tell at a glance when an approaching
note will need to be played by how it lines
up with the frets, and you can see when an
isolated note has to be hit off beat.
A Dance of Fire and Ice does the same thing
with the layout of the path of a song.
As the path twists around, the change in direction
from square to square tells you when you have
to hit the game’s single action in order
to keep progressing.
The songs aren’t famous - the game doesn’t
expect you to know them before you play - but
you can play a level and get through it all
the same just by reading the shape of the
path ahead of you.
Beat Saber runs into one unique sight-reading
issue.
The game works by you swiping at boxes with
your VR laser sword, and the arrows on the
boxes tell you which way you have to cut them.
It’s really fun and one of the best ‘you
can’t do this anywhere else’ use cases
for VR.
Once you get to the harder difficulties, though,
it’s very easy for those arrows to get hidden
behind other boxes.
You play it for a while, and you’ll get
a sense of the arm motions that those boxes
are trying to get you to do, but good luck
figuring that out the first time you play
through a chart on Expert Plus.
You can’t sight-read what you can’t see.
There’s another strain of rhythm games in
the spotlight lately: rhythm hybrids.
Games from other genres that fold in rhythm
elements to help them stand out.
Hi-Fi Rush is a rhythm character action game.
BPM: Bullets Per Minute is a rhythm FPS.
Mad Rat Dead is a rhythm platformer.
Mixing in rhythm elements is great for making
a game feel like a fresh take on a genre,
but it doesn’t come for free.
Rhythm hybrids have to watch out for things
that a pure rhythm game doesn’t.
Lots of them run into an attention-splitting
problem.
These hybrids make players think about all
the things that matter in games of the original
genre, PLUS rhythm elements.
It’s easy for players to drop focus on one
side or the other.
There’s only so much attention to go around.
Pure rhythm games don’t have that focus
split.
Beat Saber doesn’t have to do as much to
remind you to keep the tempo.
So how do these hybrids try to steer you back
to the beat?
Hi-Fi Rush does just about the most labor-intensive,
and probably most effective, thing you can
do: animate EVERYTHING to the rhythm.
The world of Hi-Fi Rush bobs and sways to
a global rhythm, and the game isn’t subtle
about it.
The game’s setup involves your iPod getting
compressed into you, and thanks to magic or
something, everything around you keeps the
beat in your heart.
Every step you take follows it.
Every attack lands on time, and strong attacks
take two.
Every piece of background music is set to
a tempo.
Everything, all the way down to the platforms,
the machinery in the background, and even
the little graphical flash effects, follow
the beat.
As the world goes, so should you.
Your attacks and dashes are meant to be timed
to it as well.
If you do it right, a little note appears,
and they’re a little more effective.
Try to attack off-beat, and you lose a combo,
don’t get the damage bonus, still have to
wait around for the attack to happen, and
your ranking at the end of a section will
be a little worse.
The world is nudging you constantly to keep
the beat with positive reinforcement, and
that makes the game’s rhythm elements deeply
tied to the world, not like something optional
or tacked on at the last second.
That commitment to the rhythm is very important.
No Straight Roads is what it might have looked
like if Hi-Fi Rush hadn't gone all the way
with it.
No Straight Roads is another character action
game built around rhythm.
Enemy attacks, obstacles, and some minigames
move in sync, but YOUR attacks and movement
don't.
You're just running around like this was a
typical character action game.
Without your character sticking with the rhythm,
that part of the game's design immediately
feels way less essential, and when parts of
the game stick to it and other parts don't,
it can make the game feel like it's clashing
with itself.
It's not from a lack of effort.
The devotion you need to pull this off is
very tough to do.
The little details are expensive to create
and maintain.
Metronomik is a small team on a budget, and
to expect the same out of them as you'd expect
out of Tango Gameworks isn't fair.
They can't do miracles.
No Straight Roads is an extremely creative
game with some good set pieces that occasionally
remind me of the best parts of Psychonauts.
But as a rhythm-action hybrid, it's missing
a critical piece.
Even with great intentions, the little details
make all the difference in how the final game
feels.
Rhythm hybrids have another problem that pure
rhythm games don’t.
Their audience doesn’t self-select for rhythm
game skills.
The highest ends of pure rhythm games look
like a blur to someone unfamiliar with them,
but lots of these rhythm hybrids just look
like other action games.
Someone who doesn’t feel comfortable with
rhythm might not bother trying Project Diva,
but they might want to give BPM a shot.
They won’t have the knowledge and instincts
that a veteran rhythm game fan takes for granted,
but that doesn’t mean they can’t get a
little more comfortable, especially if the
game helps smooth over the gap.
It’s always better for a game to try to
meet players at their skill level, wherever
that is.
So how can they help rhythm game newbies get
into the groove?
Visual assists can help a lot.
Crypt of the Necrodancer, Mad Rat Dead, and
BPM all prominently display a timing bar that
lets you see when you’re supposed to be
doing things.
Without that cue, you’re relying on a player
to intuit what the beat is supposed to be.
The rhythm assist bar can show someone quickly
and consistently whether a player is hitting
early, late, or on time.
They’re designed to be prominent and eye-catching,
which helps reinforce that this is the way
to play and improve at the game.
Hi-Fi Rush has one and even lets you flip
it on and off, so players can get all the
benefits of a rhythm assist bar while they’re
getting used to the game, then declutter the
UI when they get more comfortable.
Rhythm hybrids are great entry points to this
style of game, and the right UX can help get
people past the intimidation to become new
rhythm fans.
I couldn’t get every game I wanted to in
one of the points, so here are some rapid-fire
rhythm games I want to make sure I don’t
leave out of this video:
Osu - When a fan community takes the lack
of a new Ouendan personally
Mad Maestro - The most royalty-free of all
the music games, and the one that uses the
PS2 pressure sensitivity pads that is not
named Metal Gear Solid.
DDR Solo - for one brief, shining moment,
there were 6 arrows
ParaPara Paradise - A game for a dance style
from 20 years ago
Melatonin - Looks like Mob Psycho, plays like
Rhythm Heaven
Before the Echo - That little boy is playing
3 DDR games at once!
Everhood - What if Undertale was a rhythm
game?
Rez - It... it's just vibin’
Sayonara Wild Hearts - I’ve talked about
this too much
Did anyone hear about the DDR DVD game that
was just a looping video with a plastic mat
that had no electronics in it?
Does ‘No Interface’ count as a ‘Bad
Interface’?
Head down to the comments, and discuss that
and whatever other weird rhythm game UX you
can think of.
Every rhythm game that comes out seems to
invent its interface from scratch, so there’s
plenty more to talk about.
Also, check out the link in the description
for Displate for some great posters.
Thanks to Displate for sponsoring.
Good UX isn’t a given, but the basics aren’t
all that hard, and getting it right sets the
stage for a great rhythm game.
*chill vibes outro from Hi-Fi Rush*