You’ll NEVER defeat God Two if you don’t
first defeat ME, the BASEMENT KING!
Game bosses are a big deal.
Final bosses get all the glory and their own
personal soundtrack, but first bosses are
important, too, and are much easier to overlook.
The first boss is where many games kick into
second gear, and a misfire there can take
a game off the rails before it even really
gets going.
Still, there are tons of different ways to
make a first boss memorable and effective,
depending on what facets of the game you want
to emphasize.
Let’s talk about first bosses and how to
design that initial big encounter.
Know what game could use a first boss?
Mini Metro.
A fantastical… transportation monster you
have to defeat in… uh...
London.
Alright, I need to work on my worldbuilding,
which I can do with today’s episode sponsor, Skillshare!
They’ve got a class called Science Fiction
and Fantasy: Creating Unique and Powerful
Worlds.
It’s tough to create a world from scratch
and even tougher to make one in sci-fi or
fantasy when the rules can be basically anything
you can imagine.
Lincoln Michael takes you through some guidelines
and principles that can help you make a cohesive,
unique setting full of vibrant characters.
Get access to that and thousands of additional
classes on Skillshare.
It’s an online learning community built
by and for creative and curious people, full
of experts teaching you about writing, graphic
design, productivity, animation, illustration,
and way more.
Skillshare classes get straight to the point.
Most are under 60 minutes with short lessons
to fit into your schedule and zero ads.
You gotta sign up quickly, though.
The first 1000 people to click the link in
the description will get a 1-month free trial
of Skillshare, so you can explore your creativity.
Try it out.
It’s really good!
Why are first bosses so important to a game,
anyway?
Sure, they COULD be like any other boss you’ll
find later in the game, but the best first
bosses can play many special roles.
They can be an introduction to how bosses
generally go, a first major test on your understanding
of a game’s mechanics, a natural climax
within a game’s opening chapter or level
that hooks the player into the rest of the
game.
The first boss lives in a place that holds
big opportunities.
How that first boss gets designed can vary
depending on what you want to emphasize with
it - the game’s mechanics or the game’s
story.
These aren’t exclusive.
Some first bosses do both, but we’ll get
to that later.
Either way, the first boss helps kick the
game into its next phase by establishing what
the chapter-sized gameplay loop looks like.
It’s not the final destination, but it is
a heading.
Mechanics-driven first bosses focus on taking
what you’ve learned early in the game, twisting
it, changing it, or moving it forward.
They can be straightforward but more demanding
tests.
They can force you to consider parts of the
battle system you’ve learned so far in a
different light.
Some even act as gates, guaranteeing that
you know what you’re doing before going
any further.
Hollow Knight doesn’t guarantee that you’ll
encounter him as your first boss, but more
often than not, you’ll start with the False
Knight.
The False Knight is an excellent mechanical
warm-up and is a template for how the game
expects you to approach the fights to come.
Look at him.
He’s huge!
His gigantic jumps, shockwaves, and big arcing
mace swings are all pretty intimidating.
At first.
He’s not a pushover, but he looks tougher
than he is.
These big attacks follow an easy-to-predict
pattern.
You’ll quickly find a nice rhythm of dodging
and hitting.
Get a few hits in yourself, and you’ll see
he wasn’t so tough on the inside after all.
Now that you have some more confidence, the
second phase begins.
The False Knight’s voice now hints that
he might be the one panicking.
*False Knight panicking noises*
The attacks are faster, and falling rocks
are added to the mix.
If you’re feeling adventurous, you might
discover that you can hit the rocks back at
the boss if you get the positioning and timing
right for some extra damage.
This fight is a simpler template of the ones
to come.
Later bosses use this same multi-stage pattern
and have their own environmental and tactical
secrets to discover.
But what if the player is struggling and getting
low on health?
Well, that’s an intentional learning moment,
too.
Remember, this is one of the first bosses
- it’s not meant to be very punishing yet.
There are lulls where the player can regain
some health with their slow healing ability,
but only if you can identify the right times
to use it.
The game wants you to be careful with your
healing.
If you try to do it at the wrong time, you
can easily do more harm than good.
The game is teaching you that maybe it’s
better to learn how to not get hit in the
first place.
The False Knight is a great expectation-setter.
It’s an approachable introduction to the
patterns of future fights, with a boss who
will try to intimidate you, secret tactics
to discover, and an emphasis on timing over
healing, but all of that in an encounter with
relatively low stakes.
Another great use of the first boss is to
quash some bad habits before they become too
ingrained in the player.
The original Skyward Sword’s combat system
was designed with motion controls as its centerpiece.
You swung the controller in a specific direction,
and Link would more or less mimic what you
were doing.
Enemies would have these weird-looking defensive
stances to blatantly telegraph how you’d
have to swing your sword to get around.
Some enemies change their stance, and you’d
change how you attacked to compensate.
It looks ridiculous in isolation, but the
nuance of the directional sword swings, positioning,
and a new shield-based parry system freshened
up the usual Zelda combat with something that
could only be done on the Wii.
This had a ripple effect on the standard ‘use
dungeon item to win’ style of Zelda boss
design.
Skyward Sword’s emphasis on swordplay led
to one of the more exciting opening bosses
in the series, Ghirahim.
Ghirahim is a natural escalation of the combat
the game had given you so far, but his fight
acts as a filter for combat styles.
If you had waggled your way through all the
normal enemies up through this point with
reckless sword swings, Ghirahim served as
your wake-up call.
After a great introduction that establishes
Ghirahim’s sadistic and overconfident personality,
the fight starts with him toying with you.
He’s unarmed and just holds out his hand
with a red aura around it.
If you strike there, he’ll grab the sword
with his bare hand.
If you don’t pull it away quickly enough,
he’ll disarm you and take the blade for
himself, swinging at you for a bit before
chucking it back at you to try again.
He won’t take the initiative in the fight.
He waits for you and only counterattacks if
he takes your sword.
You have to get through his defenses by taking
full advantage of the motion controls.
Lead his hand with your sword, then quickly
strike in another direction.
After a few more hits, Ghirahim will start
to take you a bit more seriously, pull out
his own sword, and start the second phase.
He’ll use new moves that emphasize speed
and timing and teleport around.
You have to quickly read his stance and strike
when he leaves himself open.
You can run, parry, or even counter his new
moves if you read them properly.
Once you seem to have understood how to counterattack,
the fight will end, and he’ll leave you
to fight another day.
The whole encounter is pretty demanding for
a first boss in a Zelda game, but in a way
that makes sure you understand some of the
more advanced aspects of this new, somewhat
gimmicky control scheme before the game gets
too far along.
It’s not terribly difficult once you pass
that test, but the filtering purpose of the
fight makes it feel very different than the
usual early Zelda boss fare.
The most straightforward way to botch a first
boss is to make them too hard.
It’s OK to challenge the player, but you
don’t want the first boss to be a severe
difficulty spike - at least not unless you
have something else planned.
The first boss in Megaman Network Transmission,
Fireman, is absurdly difficult for a fight
you’ll reach in the first 20 minutes of
the game.
Fireman hits hard - his attacks take a quarter
of your health and come at you very quickly.
It’s very tough to avoid, especially for
a player just beginning to get the hang of
things.
Your own basic attack is pathetically weak
at this early stage, so your best bet of getting
through alive is hoping that your sub-weapon
and ability chips include something powerful.
Also, you get those abilities at random from
a deck of cards you can draw from every so
often.
You can customize this deck but you won’t
be doing that this early on.
It’s actually a good idea to wait outside
the boss room and re-roll your sub-weapon
chips until the game decides to give you a
decent loadout before you start the fight.
Win or lose, the fight is over in 30 seconds.
There’s nothing wrong with a stiff challenge,
but the first boss right after a heavily-tutorialized
and easy stage is a weird time to put a difficulty
spike that even later bosses don’t often
reach.
The game has a lives system, too, so lose
too many times, and you’ll have to start
the whole level over from scratch.
The quick-twitch gameplay, disproportionate
damage output, randomized elements, and unforgiving
lives system combine to make a boss uniquely
unsuited to be the first boss.
OK, so what else can first bosses do besides
provide a mechanical challenge?
First bosses are great places to put a big
inflection point that properly kicks off the
game’s main story.
They serve most often to resolve the first
crisis and an opportunity to start a longer-term
one.
They can reveal that while you’ve won the
battle, it’s just the first act of a much
longer campaign on the horizon.
It marks a place where you can feel safer
assuming that the player knows the basics
of the setting and characters, and you can
use that as the staging ground to build the
deeper narrative.
Story-focused bosses usually take a longer
time to set up than mechanics-focused ones.
You’ll have to build more backstory and
information into the fight to make taking
them down feel like a good payoff.
Kamoshida in Persona 5 is… wow.
He’s trying to speedrun his way to jail.
Kamoshida is a walking arrest waiting to happen.
No one else seems to be doing anything about
it, so you kids have to take him down yourselves,
I guess.
The Kamoshida dungeon sets up Persona 5’s
main story threads, and how you’ll go about
taking out the untouchable people in the game’s
society.
Kamoshida is an incredibly easy villain to
hate thanks to the pre-boss setup for his
zillion crimes and how they directly affect
the central cast, and sets up a good immediate
revenge story.
It creates and resolves the first iteration
of the loop that you’ll keep going down
for the rest of the game, establishing the
origins of the phantom thieves as well as
setting up the deeper mechanics of the metaverse
that will play a bigger role later.
The dungeon and boss fight are metaphors for
Kamoshida’s crimes, which helps keep it
all feeling like a cohesive package.
Kamoshida is a first boss that is great at
setting up the game’s story and themes,
while giving immediate goals and a great sense
of satisfaction once you take him out.
Story-focused first bosses are great vehicles
for selling an abridged version of the game,
but it is better if it’s ABRIDGED.
Take Ace Attorney.
Oh, you don’t think Ace Attorney has bosses?
Nonsense!
They’re like the visual novel equivalent
of a Monster Hunter game.
They’re filled with nothing but bosses!
The first villain of Ace Attorney is Frank
Sahwit, and he’s as guilty as you can get.
You know he did it, you saw him do it, now
just take him down.
The case gameplay isn’t as intricate as
it will get in the later cases - this one
just focuses on reading comprehension and
pointing out the contradictions to his story.
He can’t help but perjure himself over
and over again, so the case is pretty speedy
from start to finish, but that fits perfectly
in this game.
Ace Attorney is at its most fun when you finally
corner a criminal as their story collapses
on itself and watch them have an over-the-top
breakdown.
The tension in the courtroom rises with each
testimony that you find contradictions in,
and you get closer and closer to the part
where he throws his toupee at you,
and Frank’s case is an abridged version
of that to show newcomers what the payoff
to one of these cases can be.
It's great for hooking players into the series.
Justice For All, the second Ace Attorney game,
does the same thing.
The exact same thing.
But worse.
Richard Wellington is super guilty.
He’s a snooty con-man who CLEARLY did it,
and he’s about twice as unlikeable as Frank,
but his case is twice as long.
Wellington serves no greater purpose beyond
Justice For All’s tutorial, so it’s not
as if his case builds towards a larger plot
arc.
The case is just as simple as the original
tutorial but padded out over more time.
Returning players don’t get a mechanically
satisfying case to solve, and new players
don’t get that immediate story payoff like
with Frank.
Wellington ends up feeling more like filler
because it tries to have it both ways.
Justice For All is a sequel in a story-heavy
series, so it’s not very likely a new player
will start with this case, anyway, and won’t
really need an abridged starter case to understand
the game’s appeal.
With a weaker sense of purpose, Wellington
becomes a weaker first boss.
It’s a lesson that the series has learned
from, however.
Most of the rest of the first culprits in
the series are incorporated more organically
into the main storyline, making them more
elaborate and satisfying to play while still
being solid introductory bosses.
But you know, nothing is keeping a boss from
being both of these at once.
Some really excellent first bosses are both
deeply ingrained in the story and have fun
mechanical tests and twists.
Toriel is the first real boss in Undertale,
and her fight is the definitive conclusion
of the prologue, heralds the rest of the story
to come, and is the first major consequential appearance
of the game’s signature Spare mechanic.
Toriel appears right in the beginning to save
you from a flower, then very, very carefully
guides you through the next environmental
puzzle to her home.
By the time you want to leave there, she’ll
reluctantly try to stop you from accessing
the areas beyond - for your own safety.
The fight itself is, on its face, not all
that special if you approach it like a typical
RPG boss, but all of Toriel’s dialogue and
actions point to how reluctant she is to be
fighting you.
Undertale’s battle system is most notable
for its Spare mechanic, and this is one of
the first major chances to use it if you choose.
The fight becomes way more interesting when
there’s no fighting.
Toriel will half-heartedly prod you to either
fight or run away, but doing neither is always
an option.
The earlier tutorial fights she helps you
in revolve around talking it out with your
opponent, and this one can be, too.
Keep showing mercy, and the dialogue will
slowly change without repeating, which helps
signal that you are actually getting somewhere.
If you get low on health, she’ll even deliberately
stop trying to hit you.
Keep it up, and you’ll gain the ability
to resolve the fight without violence, which
cements to the player that this is a viable
option.
Not only do you get to keep going in the story,
but the act of sparing has dramatic consequences
to the rest of the story structure.
The playstyle the player chooses is the most
consequential decision they will make in a
run of Undertale, and it all starts by sparing
Toriel.
So that’s a couple of things to focus on
when designing a first boss.
Check out the discussion in the comments and
let us know your favorite first boss that
really set the tone for the rest of the game,
or maybe you’re thinking of one that cranked
up the difficulty faster than you expected.
Thanks to all you commenters, by the way,
I don’t mention it enough but I love the
quality of the discussion that pops up in
the comments on my videos.
It’s a rare thing to see.
First bosses are a tone-setter, and help great
games start out on the right foot.
*chill vibes outro from Sonic Mania*