*theme from Outer Wilds*
What’s more natural than a day-night cycle?
Every morning is a new beginning, and has
been for all of time.
Every one of you, everyone you’ve ever known,
and all who will ever be.
We’re all locked into the rhythm of the
cosmos.
No matter what comes to pass, the sun arrives
tomorrow all the same… … where were we?
Oh, right, video games.
It’s no surprise that games use day-night
cycles all the time, but just because they
pop up everywhere, that doesn’t mean every
game uses them in the same way.
They can show up as anything from a graphical
tweak to a thematic coating.
From a simple timer to a dose of realism in
an immersive sim.
From a thing that shows up as a different
skybox to one that determines what type of
game you’re even playing.
Let’s talk about how games can use a day-night
cycle, and how you can make one worth waking
up for.
If you're working day and night to get a project
done, you'll want to look at this episode's
sponsor, Milanote!
Milanote is a fantastic tool to help you get
projects organized.
It's a slick and easy online interface where
your project can live, holding all your storyboards
and mood boards.
Notes and themes.
Todos and inspiration.
Milanote keeps everything in one place so
your whole team can stay creative.
It's especially great for distributed teams
with different schedules and can help keep
everyone on the same page working towards
the same vision, no matter if they're a night
owl or an early bird.
It's incredibly easy to use, whether you're
a designer or an artist, a coder, or a manager,
and no matter the size of your team.
Milanote has intuitive drag-and-drop controls
and built-in templates for game design, so
if you've got a game idea kicking around,
take a spin on Milanote to help get your thoughts
together.
It's free to sign up!
Click the link in the description to help
take your projects from a dream to a plan.
Thanks, Milanote!
Games need to change.
Wait, hang on, not like that.
I mean it more literally.
Games need to change as you’re playing them.
If the experience of playing a game starts
one way and never changes, that game won’t
hold a player’s attention for very long.
Now, having a game change over time is not
that hard to do.
The idea of change is so broad that it can
mean almost anything.
In an RPG, maybe the story changes and moves
forward.
In a game like Rocket League, the rules are
the same, but the opponents are always playing
a little differently, and the depth of the
game’s mechanics lets you get a little better
at them over time.
The experience of playing the game is not
the same at hour 1 as at hour 100.
It changes.
Day-night cycles give you a ton of different
possible ways to set up some kind of change,
and you can use different elements of that
theme to make the change make sense in the
context of the world you’re making.
Anything from aesthetics, to story setup,
to discrete gameplay modes, to connecting
your game to real life.
You’ve got lots of options.
But let’s start with the most straightforward
one.
You don’t have to do all that much to take
advantage of a day-night cycle.
It can just be about aesthetics.
You can make your game look a little different
to evoke day and night, and that by itself
will give a taste of a changing world, even
if it’s just a superficial change.
Super Mario Sunshine is all about that glorious
daylight.
For every shine sprite you collect, you bring
a little bit more brightness to the main hub.
Most stages you enter take place in broad
daylight, but there are a few exceptions.
Serena Beach dips into the twilight to create
a unique haunted house atmosphere.
One stage, though, covers a full day and night
cycle.
Pianta Village.
The ancestral home of the Piantas host 8 shines,
each one alternating between night and day.
The changing atmosphere lends itself to a
sense of progression as you collect each sprite.
The stage events feel like they happen over
several days, even culminating in a little
festival in the end.
Compared to the other stages, Pianta Village
feels a little bit more like a lived-in location
rather than just a course for Mario to jump
around in.
You don’t even strictly need an actual cycle
to get some of the feeling of one.
If certain areas of your world are just always-day
or always-night, you can get the benefits
of an area feeling clearly distinct from others
while getting to skip making two separate
versions of the area.
Take Toad’s Turnpike from Mario Kart 64.
It’s a sunset highway track, whose atmosphere
is more tied to the time of day than the others.
The track is… well, it’s a boring figure
8 whose only saving grace is the heavy traffic
you can run into.
But it definitely has a mood.
What would happen if you converted it to daytime?
Well now it’s just my morning commute.
That ain’t right.
Dark City Treno in Final Fantasy IX is perpetually
in the dark.
Most everywhere else in the game is rendered
in daylight, so the visual distinction of
the building facades and cobblestone streets
in the flickering lamplight gives Treno a
very distinct and identifiable feel as a city
full of casinos, theaters, and nightlife.
The cycle isn’t a true cycle, of course.
There’s no Light City Treno.
But the second you leave, the world goes back
to daylight.
The world gives the impression of changing
by just the way you move through it, even
if the places themselves don’t change.
OK, let’s go a little deeper than just the
aesthetics.
How can day and night affect a game’s story?
Plenty of games take place over the course
of a day and use the changing time as good
set dressing to establish the mood.
Devil May Cry 3 opens in twilight for its
first two missions, then transitions into
night as Dante enters the ancient tower where
the bulk of the game takes place.
At the end of the first act, you reach the
top of the tower to confront Vergil, set against
the dramatic backdrop of a rainstorm and a
full moon.
By the end of the game, the journey is complete
as dawn breaks, and the characters are ready
to move forward.
It's not a SUBTLE metaphor, but it's a nice
background detail.
Resident Evil 4 uses the shifting time of
day and the lore about how the Las Plagas
parasite works to ramp up the tension and
difficulty.
Las Plagas is weak to sunlight, and as the
game shifts from day to night, the enemies
infected by Las Plagas get more dangerous
and more difficult to defeat.
The areas that you’ve already passed through
in the day become much more oppressive when
you have to double back through them later
on.
The shifting time in Resident Evil 4 and Devil
May Cry 3 tie into the setting and the lore
to help create striking setpieces and organically
manage the rising stakes as you get further
in the game.
Let’s get out of aesthetics and lore for
now.
What else can a day-night cycle do?
Besides setting up the story, the day night
cycle in RE4 also impacts how you play the
game, but that isn’t the only approach to
take.
It’s super common to have a cycle where
playing in the day and playing at night are
two different experiences, and what you’re
doing depends on what part of the day the
game is in.
Action-adventure games will implement it like
this pretty often, and over the years, the
Zelda series has had a couple of different
spins on this style of day-night cycle.
Like in Ocarina of Time.
If you're almost anywhere other than a town
or a dungeon area, time will pass, and the
sun will rise and set over a few minutes.
At night, different enemies spawn compared
to the day, but more importantly, different
world features would change on a schedule.
The drawbridge to Hyrule Castletown would
close for Young Link in the evening.
Some NPCs, quest lines, or even mini-games
would show up or be hidden based on whether
you arrived in the morning or at night.
You’ll have moments like being given an
egg to hang onto.
As morning comes, the egg hatches into a fully
grown chicken that you use to wake up a farmer
to progress.
The flow of time becomes an ingredient in
the puzzle-solving equation, which gives more
charm and more depth to quest design beyond
just a fetch quest or a series of tasks to
check off.
Though, there are a couple of issues with
scheduling events for certain times of day
that you have to work around.
What do you do if you need to be at a place
at a set time and you get there way too early?
Do other stuff while you wait?
Meh.
Wait around?
That's not fun.
How about time travel?
The Sun's Song lets you swap between day and
night as necessary, which lets you set up
the schedule how you want it.
For games like Elder Scrolls or Outer Wilds,
this might look like 'Resting' for a few hours,
but it's all a different coat of paint on
the same idea.
Time travel, no matter how it looks, helps
keep the scheduling from becoming too inconvenient
to be fun.
Majora’s Mask makes the whole game around
this.
It’s about managing a scripted schedule
as a 72-hour timer ticks down.
People, questlines, and events aren’t only
affected by the time of day, but also which
day or night in the 3 day cycle it is.
The game’s central threat is the moon coming
down, and things get more and more ominous
with each passing day.
You have to work within the cycle, resetting
it as necessary to complete tasks and gain
permanent upgrades and progression items that
you take back with you as you start the clock
over.
You have to be at the right place at the right
time with the right stuff and skills to complete
what you have to do.
The first night there might be an attempted
robbery you can stop to get a reward.
You might complete a task so you can open
up the next step in that questline for the
next afternoon, something that can get complex
with quests like the one to get the couple’s
mask.
This one takes up nearly the entire 3 day
cycle where you are doing a long series of
specific tasks at specific times in order
to reunite a young couple before the moon
falls.
Wind Waker did the same type of day-night
event scheduling as Ocarina but added some
more complications.
Night time had an extra detail in that the
phase of the moon was important for some quests.
You can't find this ghost ship right here
on just ANY night - you gotta wait until the
moon's right.
Or, y'know, magic song your way out of it.
Twilight Princess, same deal, but, uh oh,
there's no magic song.
There's a side quest to find 40 hidden Poes
throughout Hyrule, and most of them only appear
at night.
You could teleport around to manipulate what
time it was, but it'll just take you to mid-day,
which isn't gonna help find any Poes.
It might seem like a copout, but time travel,
and especially fine-grained time travel, can
fend off a lot of design issues when you’re
dealing with schedule-centric quest design.
Skipping that feature for the sake of realism
introduces some other problems, but I’ll
get to that later.
Enough about Zelda.
What about games in other genres?
You can use a day-night cycle to change their
gameplay, too.
Often, it’ll be a backdrop for implementing
different phases of a game.
Like in Mario Party 6.
The whole thing is themed around a day-night
cycle that flips every three turns.
Yeah, Mario Party 2 had a board that sorta
did this before, but in THIS one, it’s part
of EVERY board.
And it’s more elaborate.
Each game board has unique mechanics influenced
by the time of day.
Some boards keep it simple and have different
paths that open up as day turns to night.
Others might change the price of a star or
unlock new events.
That’s not all, though.
The minigames are also influenced by the time
of day.
Sometimes it’s just cosmetic, but some minigames
change their goal completely.
One has you platforming on top of paratroopas
during the day to get as high as you can,
while at night, you have to fall down, avoiding
those same paratroopas.
Snowflake Lake does something even more complicated.
The rules on Snowflake Lake are a little unusual.
Instead of traveling the board to collect
stars, you start with 5 a piece and have to
steal from your opponents to get more.
Ride a chain chomp around the outer edges
until you catch someone and take their stuff.
Day and night heavily influence how strong
this mechanic is.
During the day, you only roll one dice block
when riding the chain chomp and can play it
safe in the center of the board to avoid anyone
else stealing your stars.
At night, the center is blocked off, and players
can pay to get up to three dice blocks to
roll while riding the chain chomp.
The rhythm of day and night creates different
phases of intensity and adds a ton of strategy
to a match.
It feels like a completely different game
compared to the other boards, both in the
game and the whole series.
I love Snowflake Lake.
My friends do not.
The day-night cycle of Mario Party 6 works
as a modifier to remix existing games and
boards, adding strategy to a series that could
use more of it and a ton of variety to help
keep the game from getting too repetitive
too quickly.
Moonlighter uses a day-night cycle to split
the game in half, into a day-phase, where
you’re running a shop selling adventuring
gear, books, and some fantasy-tinged groceries,
and a night-phase where you’re fighting
your way through dungeons, room by room, collecting
the groceries and books from chests and whatever.
The shift in gameplay style is the metronome
that sets the pacing of the game in broad
strokes.
You don’t have to always stick strictly
to the schedule.
If you want to fight stuff by day once in
a while, you can.
But most often, you’re flipping between
the two on that day-night cycle.
The change in time prevents one side or the
other from overstaying its welcome.
Survival games are usually pretty aggressive
in how they use day and night mechanics.
Don’t Starve, Minecraft, and Terraria are
built around finding food, crafting tools,
and building a shelter for survival.
The whole reason you need a shelter is because
of the night.
More aggressive enemies will spawn that you
probably won’t be able to deal with very
well, especially early in the game.
In Don’t Starve especially, you need to
set up a light source like a torch or a campfire
to keep the scariest parts of the dark at
bay and to maintain your character’s sanity
meter.
Survival games are about staying on top of
all your draining bars, and your ability to
survive at night is treated as a stress test,
almost like an abstract, systemic boss fight.
If you can overcome the worst of what the
night can throw at you, you get to live another
day.
So we’ve talked about how day-night cycles
can change the look of a game, or tie to its
story, or determine how its gameplay can change,
but that’s true for other kinds of themes,
too.
Like if instead of a day-night cycle you made
a game around elements, the elements could
make the game look or play differently to
reflect that theme.
There is, though, one unique superpower a
day-night cycle can do that would be hard
to replicate any other way.
A well-designed day-night cycle is an amazing
way to connect any game world to life outside
of the game.
Every bit of Animal Crossing revolves around
the day and night cycle that matches your
system’s clock and calendar.
It tries to mimic real life as much as it
can.
Sunrise and sunset will change depending on
what the season is.
Shops will open and close at specific times
of day.
Events happen at set hours.
The progress you make can depend on when you’re
playing, like how ordering items from an in-game
catalog will get them delivered to you in
the next literal day.
When you start to build new town features
like the museum or the town hall, that takes
real, actual time to complete.
The villagers have their own schedules determined
by the time, as they wake up and go to bed
at different hours depending on their personality
type.
Bugs and fish will appear and disappear at
certain times of day and different seasons.
The cycle mimicking the real world creates
the unique feel of Animal Crossing as something
you want to check in on daily, rather than
something to get through in a marathon session.
There’s one big problem with tying a game
to the real, actual time, though.
Very few people play games at random hours
of the day.
If you have an event in your game set to go
at 4 in the morning, not very many people
are going to see it.
Certain features can be harder to access depending
on your personal schedule.
If you can’t play Animal Crossing until
after 10pm, you can’t go to any of the shops
because they’re closed.
If you can’t play on a weekend, more things
will be restricted.
I’m not a morning person, so I can’t do
anything with the stock market, which only
happens on Sunday mornings, which are my least
favorite of all the mornings.
New Horizons does allow you to adjust these
times by an hour with ordinances but it can
still be inconvenient for certain players.
Another way around it would be to just speed
up the clock.
Shenmue tries this.
This will untie the game from the real clock,
but that feeling of realism can still stick
around if the rest of the game is built around
time passing by.
When the game first came out, one of Shenmue’s
most stunning features was its grounded depiction
of the town of Yokosuka.
Well, minus the karate fights.
The whole town is on a realistic, albeit sped-up
schedule.
Everything opens and closes at normal business
hours, and you have your own life to manage
- work, home life, and of course, investigating
the mysterious man who killed your father
and his secret mirror while kicking his henchmen
in the face.
We still know nothing about this man, 3 games
and 20 years later.
Now, being a realistic, grounded depiction
of a Japanese town, time travel isn’t really
an option.
A store closing up for the night right when
you need to get in is a cool idea to see once,
but it gets quickly eclipsed by the annoyance
of having to actually wait for the next day,
even if it’s on a sped-up schedule.
They were still feeling out how to balance
realism and convenience.
So there you go, aesthetics, story, gameplay
and realism.
More often than not, a game picks one or a
couple of those aspects to emphasize when
they do a day-night cycle.
But every once in a while some developer tries
for the clean sweep.
All of them.
Like Pokemon.
Pokemon’s day night cycles aren’t all
implemented in the same way, but you can find
the full spectrum of options in one game or
another.
Pokemon’s day-night cycle first shows up
in Gold and Silver.
The real-life time of day dictates the time
in game.
Or at least what’s on your system clock.
Playing at night has a simple filter over
the screen.
Sometimes.
Not gen 3.
More important is how different times of day
or days of the week would cause different
events to happen.
This bug-catching contest only happens on
Tuesdays, Thursdays, or Saturdays.
Other events tie to how much time has passed.
To bait out certain Pokemon, you would need
to slather trees in honey and then wait a
few hours before it would start working.
Planting berries also took a few actual hours
to work.
The biggest impact the day-night cycle had
on the series was how it tied to Pokemon behaviors.
Some were only findable in the wild by day.
In generation 4’s Old Chateau, ghost Pokemon
appeared at night.
Some Pokemon need the right time of day to
evolve, like Budew.
Two of the Eeveelutions were only gettable
if you paid attention to the clock.
You have items like the Dusk Ball that has
a higher catch rate at night.
Day and night are frequently used as design
motifs in the series There are at least a
dozen Pokemon associated with either the sun
or moon.
Gen 7 is named Pokemon Sun and Pokemon Moon,
and their day-night cycles are offset 12 hours
from each other, so the morning in Sun is
nighttime in Moon.
The whole series is a grab bag of day-night
mechanics, and if you don’t really like
the implementation in one generation, just
wait for the next and it’ll change.
Let’s talk in the comments about your favorite
cycles and unique takes on day and night that
you’ve seen other games try.
Day and night are a scaffold that games can
build off of to make unique aesthetics, frame
stories, and help keep a game fresh by setting
the right time for a change of pace.
If you’re careful, day-night cycles can
help inject a dose of realism in a constructed
world.
*chill vibes outro from Xenoblade Chronicles*