Speedrunning is very very easy.
Check this out.
Time.
Nailed it.
I love speedrunning.
Well, watching speedrunning mostly.
I love how it’s an extra game that lives
within every game.
Speedrunning combines puzzle solving, technique
analysis, and perfect execution to make a
work of performance art that can be amazing
to watch on its own and even more beautiful
if you understand its context.
I have a ton of respect for people who put
in the countless repetitions it takes to get
an amazing run, but getting into high-end
speedrunning is daunting.
It’s a time sink and can be incredibly frustrating.
It's bad enough when any wrong move can throw
away hours of work, but even worse when things
out of your control can do the same thing.
But you can design a game to be more speedrun-friendly.
A few simple tricks can help give more people
the thrill of a great run, whether you're
a casual player or chasing world records.
Let's talk about speedrun-friendly design,
what games can do to smooth over frequent
speedrunning problems, and how to give the
thrill of The Run to everyone.
Speedrun your favorite podcasts with some
earbuds that can handle it, like today’s
episode sponsor Raycon!
I’ve used them for years when going for
walks, but I can speedrun those walks into…speed…
runs thanks to their optimized gel tips that
give you a perfect in-ear fit.
I’ve actually started jogging lately and
my Raycons aren’t budging, it’s nice.
Raycons are priced right, too - you get quality
audio for about half the price of other premium
audio brands, and you still get high-end features.
Noise isolation and awareness mode.
3 customizable sound profiles for high-bass
music, balance, or clarity mode for podcasts
and audiobooks.
Siri and Alexa support.
8 hours of playtime on a charge plus another
32 hours of battery life in the capsule charger.
And they’re sweat and water-resistant!
Like I said, I’ve been exercising with them
and have had no issues at all.
Click the link in the description box or go
to buyraycon.com/designdoc to get 15% off
your Raycon purchase.
I love my Raycons, and I think you will too.
Thanks, Raycon!
So, designing for speedrunning.
First off, remember that speedrunning is a
complement to an existing game.
It's not the main event.
It's not a substitute for the core game being
fun, and it's not a great compromise to make
something better for speedrunners and worse
for everyone else.
We're going to talk about the win-win fixes
- the things that will make speedrunning better
and are generally just good ways to polish
games.
Speedrunning is obsessed with not wasting
time.
Every run tries to eliminate as much waiting
as possible, so to make a game more speedrun-friendly
let’s first try cutting out some things
that force players to wait around.
The most glaring example is the unskippable
cutscene.
Speedrunning is not a thing for first-playthroughs.
Cutscenes are for the people playing the game
for the first time to help them fall in love
with it, but speedruns are done by players
who already love the game and are familiar
with the whole thing.
They've seen the cutscenes before.
Unless you're skipping cutscenes with glitches
or something, there's no route to optimize
and no tech to use.
You should be able to skip any cutscene.
Thankfully this is way more common now than
it used to be, but lots of games are nightmares
to speedrun because of long unskippable cutscenes.
Like most early 3D Final Fantasies.
Or this cinematic before a tough boss fight
in Kingdom Hearts.
Or even Max Payne 3, released in 2012 with
no skip option somehow.
It doesn't even have to be a true cutscene.
The walk-and-talk sequences from the Batman
Arkham games are in-engine but play out like
a cutscene.
Or autoscrollers.
They’re like cutscenes you can fail.
All of these are the same basic problems in
different form factors.
The cutscene skip option needs to be something
you have to do intentionally.
You don’t want the much larger group of
first-time players to be able to skip the
cutscenes by accident and miss out on what
you worked so hard to make.
You’ve gotta put your good UX hat on to
keep that from happening.
Single-tap skips are way too risky.
Someone mashing a button to finish a level
might end up skipping a cutscene if you set
it up poorly.
Instead, you can put in either a press-and-hold
option or a confirmation screen.
Press-and-hold skips save button-mashers from
themselves and also let people back out if
they start the process by accident.
Confirmation prompts take two actions to commit
to the skip, as long as you make sure you
highlight a ‘Cancel’ option by default.
Menu options like ‘Cancel’ or ‘Back’
that don’t change things are called ‘non-destructive’
options, and it’s good UX practice in general
to highlight those by default to save people
from unfortunate mistakes.
The second-most glaring problem is the unskippable
tutorial.
The same logic applies here - tutorials are
for the first-time player, not those who play
the game faster than any human has before.
The fix is a little different than the cutscene
one, though.
Unavoidable text boxes slow down the players
who don’t need them.
But you again have to make sure new players
aren’t going to either miss or mash through
a tutorial box by accident in a way they can’t
recover from.
Not knowing how to do a move you’ll need
to do later can be much worse than missing
a key cutscene.
The most promising fix is the ‘prove it’-style
tutorials, where you can zip through by just
demonstrating the skill the game’s trying
to teach you.
Think of the ones where someone tells you
how to double-jump and there’s a platform
you can only get to by double-jumping.
New players can stop to learn how and veterans
can just go and do it without slowing down.
Celeste has a great prove-it tutorial.
This stylish cinematic where a bird teaches
you how to mid-air dash is the only time the
game stops to teach you something, and it
only lasts a couple of seconds.
Everything else is taught through trial and
error, where first-time players will learn
pretty quickly about jump heights, how to
use the dash, wall climbing and stamina, springs,
and traffic light blocks.
The game's optional strawberry collectibles
lie in places that help solidify the lessons
and get players familiar with the finer details.
Speedrunners can just go and do them without
stopping at all.
The levels are meticulously designed to give
players hands-on experience without bringing
the action to a halt.
Celeste goes even further with its much more
difficult B-Side and C-Side stages, meant
to serve as a training ground for the game’s
advanced techniques.
If you can make it through these, speedrunning
on a higher level is within your reach.
If you can’t figure out how to make a player
prove it, you can still give speedrun-friendly
text box tutorials.
Just make sure players can re-open them if
they want.
Veterans will be able to mash through, but
new players that accidentally skip it can
just re-open the box.
Though, sometimes skipping is a good thing.
Completely skipping parts of a game is something
speedrunners do all the time.
If you want to build in a kind of official
skip for those who know what to do, all the
better.
Elden Ring lets you skip the tutorial entirely
on a new game.
Just don’t fall into this pit.
It might actually be a little too easy to
skip.
Some new players have been drawn up the staircase
and thrown right into the main game if they
didn’t understand or read the dialogue in
the room.
Fromsoft had to add a tutorial box for the
tutorial.
OK, what else can we do?
Speedrunning is not just about time-saves.
It’s also about failure.
For every perfect run there might be dozens,
hundreds, thousands of them that aren’t
up to par.
Players are going to spend a lot of time retrying
a level, so minimizing how long it takes to
reload is another big key to making a game
speedrun-friendly.
Stuntman is not.
Stuntman is not that far off from a game built
around speedrunning - it’s you performing
a bunch of driving tasks as a … stuntman.
For a movie being filmed.
It’s a cool concept.
You have to nail your timings to get the special
effects to line up, all with the director
in your ear telling you what to do and when
your cue is.
It’s tough, too!
The timing windows are pretty tight.
You’ll need some skill to get through it
all in one take.
Screw up, and the whole production has to
reset.
Now that would be annoying enough in real
life, but this is a video game, so it’s
not gonna take an hour to get everyone to
their places, right?
Wrong!
Retrying in Stuntman involves reloading the
entire level from scratch, taking just as
long on the first try as the tenth.
And we’re talking about PS2 load times,
they’re brutally long.
Stuntman is a cautionary tale about one unfortunate
design feature taking down an entire experience.
Being retry-friendly isn't only about load
times though.
Some games make learning how to speedrun a
level more fun.
Demon Turf lets you set checkpoints anywhere
in the stage, which makes it super convenient
to practice what would otherwise be very risky
routes.
Smart quality of life tools make it a lot
easier to bring a new player up to speed.
The last easy win is to take out the role
of randomness.
Relying on a random event causes so many restarts.
Other than finding some very esoteric RNG
manipulations, there’s no way to work around
a problem caused by a roll of the dice.
A run ruined by RNG is just as much of a waste
of time as a long cutscene.
Sometimes worse.
Random loot drops are very common, and getting
the wrong drop at the wrong time can end runs
single-handedly.
Random stat allocations upon leveling up in
Fire Emblem can have the same effect.
If you can’t get the right stats on the
right character, you might not be able to
pull off some tricks during a run.
Dependence on AI is another common source
of RNG drama.
That could be enemy routes, spawning behavior,
how they move, or what they target and when.
Speedruns for Goldeneye on the N64 can be
hugely dependent on how the enemies path to
objectives, or how Natalya travels from place
to place in her escort missions, or where
this scientist spawns.
If any of those happen wrong, that’s an
instant run-ender.
Now, not all game types will be able to reduce
RNG without wrecking their game.
Card games are built around random chance.
Mario Party won’t be able to remove RNG
without turning it into... not Mario Party.
But if you can, making a critical path that
doesn’t involve randomness can make a game
much more speedrun friendly.
So up until now, we’ve been talking about
the little details you can do to make speedrunning
better, but there’s a bigger issue here.
High-end speedrunning isn’t really for everyone.
The time commitment, the repetition, the research,
the hours and hours of grinding.
It’s all daunting, no matter how fast the
reload times are or how many cutscenes you
can skip.
The highs are high, but the grind is real,
and real long.
What can we do about that?
What if you could get most of the feel of
pursuing records without quite so many downsides?
Kind of like a fast-food version of speedrunning.
Speedrunning for the masses.
What parts of the speedrunning experience
can you emulate in a more beginner-friendly
form factor?
And that brings us to Neon White.
Haha, suckers, I’ve tricked you.
This video was my secret love letter to Neon
White this whole time.
No, the story’s not very good and there’s
some terrible dialogue I know.
Shut up, that’s not the point.
I think it’s just about the perfect accessible
speedrun-focused game.
Neon white is one of the best introductions
to speedrunning thanks to how it coaches you
step by step, from the very basics to getting
world-class times.
The game meticulously creates a drip feed
of goals to aim for, guides you to the tools
you need to reach those goals, and then encourages
you to blaze your own trail to the top.
Neon White is built around speedy times and
Neon Ranks.
You have to reach a certain Neon Rank to unlock
the next set of levels.
To climb up the Ranks, you just have to beat
stages quickly enough to get a Gold or Ace
medal - a fast time or a very fast time.
Easy enough, right?
Not so fast.
You'll probably be too slow if you just play
a level once.
Don't worry, though.
The game wants to help you out.
After a few runs, the game will show you a
hint.
This little floaty hand icon shows you where
to go to cut time and get that ace medal.
It's not going to tell you how to do it exactly,
it just suggests that there IS a path that
way.
Those hints aren't only suggesting a path,
though.
The process of figuring out how to go down
that path can also teach you a little about
the more subtle tech of the game.
Each card activates a secondary movement-related
power when you discard it, like a double jump
or a grappling hook, but lots have little
side effects in addition to what they normally
do.
Godspeed is a dash, but dashing also kills
the demons you pass through.
Purify is a sticky bomb, but you can jump
very far if you rocket jump off it and even
farther if you rocket jump off two at once.
Every card has its official use, but there’s
plenty of unofficial ones you'll need to know
to get the game's secret top-tier Red Medal
developer times.
Even the way you think about basic pathing
will change once you see what the hints hint
at.
Taking a detour off the 'intended' path might
let you skip a third of a level and teaches
you to look out for more corner-cutting skips.
It has all the polish we've gone over - skippable
cutscenes and tutorials.
No autoscrollers, really.
It's extremely retry-friendly.
It has very little RNG and has tons of subtle
tech to learn.
But that's not enough to make it so accessible.
Neon White does a very smart thing by building
all the tools you need into the game itself.
Look at timers.
LiveSplit is very easy to install and customize,
but it’s still an external tool you need
to seek out and download.
ANY barrier, no matter how small, will keep
some percentage of your audience away.
You want to make it completely effortless
to start doing speedrunning things.
Neon White keeps track of your timers just
by playing the game normally and automatically
updates your times on its own version of the
second important thing: leaderboards.
All speedrunning is is a competition between
rivals to improve over time.
The chase for a world record is great, but
honestly, only a small handful of people will
ever be close to the top of the ladder.
What about the rest of us?
Friend leaderboards let you get that feeling
of striving for first place while being more
fun by pitting you against people you already
know.
Not to mention, your friends are probably way easier
to beat than the single greatest player in
the world.
The same competitive drive is there for you
and your friends as there is for the world-class
speedrunners, just in a way that can be reached
over an afternoon and not months.
And then you have that one friend you can’t
beat no matter how hard you try!
Here’s MY time, and here’s TEVY’s time.
Just ahead of me!
Forever.
Because I can’t do racing lines right.
Freakin…Tevy.
Neon White is built to steadily advance you
step by step, from a player just getting through
levels to competing for better and more efficient
times, to cutting corners to get through even
faster, to combining advanced movement, weapon,
and navigation to achieve things that even
the devs couldn't do.
It's just about the perfect encapsulation
of the process and payoffs of speedrunning
in an easy-to-digest package that won't take
over your life.
Neon White gives you all the tools you need
and would love to see how far you and your
friends can take it.
Get your commenting hats on and meet us down
below.
Let us know about speedrun-friendly games
you’ve fallen in love with, your own personal
rivalries with your friends over leaderboard
times, or stories about trying your hand at
a world record chase.
Speedrunning can be daunting, but it doesn’t
have to be.
With the right tools and design, a game can
help foster a community that can take a game
to places the designers never dreamed of.
*chill vibes outro from Super Monkey Ball*