Wake up, everyone!
It’s snowing!
And Santa’s here!
With hot chocolate!
It’s a December miracle!
Who wants Frostbite?
No one?
Fine.
But how about some great winter levels?
I could go for some of those. I always thought
it was interesting that you could slap in
a level theme like a snow level into almost
any genre, and with the right focus and a
few customizations, you could make something
that both fits the theme and the game, no
matter what type of game it is.
I’m starting a series where we go over common
level themes and how games create memorable
levels from familiar components.
And since it’s winter, first up is Winter
Levels.
Sometimes it’s ice.
Sometimes it’s snow.
Sometimes it’s a non-denominational Winter
Holiday, but it’s always an option for a
level theme.
Come inside, warm up by the monitor, and let’s
talk about what makes for a great winter level.
But take off your shoes first.
Oof, those are kinda rough.
You need to up your shoe game.
Might I recommend…
some Vessis?
They’re waterproof!
And, like, really good shoes besides.
They’re made from DYMA-TEX, a dual-climate
knit material that keeps your feet cool in
the summer, warm when it’s cold, and dry
all the time.
They’re lighter than clunky boots and more
comfortable, too.
I’m wearing them right now as my daily shoe,
and they’re super comfortable and actually
do for real keep the snow and rain out.
There’s always a ton of snow on the ground
around here in the winter, and when I go for
a walk, I don’t have to worry about it,
thanks to my Vessis.
And they look better than my old shoes.
Check out their Holiday Sale at vessi.com/designdoc.
Get the style and size you want now before
they sell out.
If you missed the sale, you can use code DESIGNDOC
at checkout to get 15% off your entire order.
Vessi is sponsoring this episode, but I wish
I knew about them sooner.
Go get some good shoes for the holidays, for
you or someone you like who needs good shoes!
Link in the description.
So, winter levels.
There are a bunch of common flavors.
Ice lakes and frozen tundra.
Snowy mountains and arctic woods.
Ski resorts and Christmas towns.
Winter levels have a style of their own that’s
plain to see.
You know what’s weird about winter levels,
though?
It’s rare to see one show up as the ‘default’
level.
A player’s first experience with a game
is almost never in an ice storm.
Unless we’re talking about a game where
the whole thing is snow-themed, your introduction
to a character and the game world is rarely
winterized.
Oh, sure, there are a lot of games that start
off in the snow.
Red Dead Redemption 2.
Borderlands 2.
God of War Ragnarok.
Crash…
2.
Pikmin…
2.
Uncharted…
… 2.
I think you see the asterisk.
There’s a good reason, though.
Winter levels can be about more than just
a graphical change.
Winter levels tend to mess around with the
basic mechanics of a game.
Slippery platforms, reduced visibility, cold
temperature survival - the snow theme comes
packaged with a sampler pack of options to
tweak the ‘default’ state of a game.
Games where a chunk of the audience already
knows what the ‘base’ experience is supposed
to be, like in, say, a sequel, seem to have
a little more freedom to use an ice theme
right out of the gate.
Plus, a snowscape is a really easy way to
implement a ‘different’ aesthetic at the
start of a sequel, even if you don’t want
to use any gameplay tweaks.
Lots of those sequels start off with a snow
level in aesthetics only.
The floor isn’t ice.
You can probably see everything on the map
pretty well.
The winter is just set dressing - the game
isn’t trying to trick you.
Yet.
But aesthetics-only winter levels are a small
corner of the landscape.
They could be so much more.
Winter levels have a zillion options to tie
in unique mechanics.
The variety of options also lets designers
adapt the theme to different genres by targeting
the kinds of mechanics that those genres find
most important.
Like in platformers.
Platformers are about precision and physics.
Jumping and running.
Winter levels in platformers are an excuse
to mess around with the physics of the game.
Slippery platforms change how you can run
through a level.
How precise you have to be to jump on whatever
it is you’re jumping on.
Icy physics is a tried-and-true way of ratcheting
up the difficulty a bit once a player has
gotten used to how the game controls.
Most of the time, icy platforms just have
less traction and you keep up your momentum
for longer.
Once you can’t stop on a dime or accelerate
out of danger normally, that forces you to
rethink how you move.
It works in 3D as well as it does in 2D.
Maneuvering around this bully on top of an
ice rink in Super Mario 64’s Snowman Land
forces you to think carefully about momentum
if you don’t want to fall in the icy-cold
water.
In a physics-based marble game like Marble
It Up, you have to hit patches of ice with
enough speed so that you can use that momentum
to go up slopes.
You also have to account for the inability
to turn which can be tricky.
If you do things just right, you can often
use ice to gain even more speed.
A rare version of platformer ice physics shows
up in Ristar.
Once you hit ice, you just have no control
over your momentum at all.
You can jump but you keep moving forward until you grab onto
something, or slam into a hazard.
Every game is a little different in exactly
how slippery the ice is, or if you have a
way to mitigate the effect, like by wearing
ice skates or something.
What feels slippery enough to be fun but not
so out of control as to become frustrating
will take some trial and error.
One of my favorite winter levels doesn’t
even look like one.
Allegro Presto from the original Rayman is
a music-themed stage where you’re platforming
on a musical staff and avoiding sharp notes.
It’s not at all themed around winter, but
every part of the staff has ice physics.
Most of the rest of the game is platforming
off of rocks and leaves and drums and pencils
and other types of ground with normal physics,
but this one is start-to-finish slippery platforming.
You can run, build up speed, and fling yourself
into the distance in a way that you don’t
really get to do in any other level in the
game.
Allegro Presto’s icy-but-not-wintry design
shows how changing up the platforming physics
can make a level stand out from the rest.
If you want to see what could be the most
elaborate take on what winter levels can do
for a platformer, check out Donkey Kong Country:
Tropical Freeze.
It’s the sequel to Donkey Kong Country Returns,
a sort of revival and reimagining of the SNES
Donkey Kong Country games.
In the first one, there were a ton of different
biomes to platform through: jungles, beaches,
canyons, mines, factories, ruins, and volcanoes.
But no ice levels.
Weird.
The devs took note, and for the sequel, EVERYTHING
gets to be an ice level.
The island is invaded by frost vikings and
you have to fight your way back.
When you finally return, the island has been
frozen over top to bottom.
This last world’s main gimmick isn’t JUST
that it takes place in a harsh blizzard.
Each area is a location from the previous
game, now with an icy makeover.
Ice jungles, ice beaches, ice factories, and
so on.
There are a ton of easter eggs, too, where
little bits and pieces from the original worlds
will show up in the background.
The level design in Tropical Freeze is more
than just asset reuse and a nostalgia trip,
though.
Each old stage gets transformed with the ice
theme to create a unique fusion.
The frozen jungles have much more unstable
terrain, crumbling as you pass through.
The beaches full of wrecked ships become a
sea of glaciers.
The cliffsides are now dealing with perpetual
avalanches and blizzards.
All of the dangerous machinery from the factory
area is now dangerous AND icy.
The fusion of old themes makes every stage
stand out while making them all feel more
like part of the same world.
It’s an incredibly clever way to, at the
same time, show the player the impact of the
villains and to turn a once-familiar location
into a substantially more dangerous and climactic
final world.
Ice works in more than just platformers, though.
Any action game that relies on precise movement
can throw a curveball by using a slippery
floor.
Overcooked is a chaotic cooking game where
you and your friends have to go from station
to station to get your food made on time.
It’s very fast-paced and intentionally gives
you just barely not enough time or resources
to comfortably do what you’re being asked
to do.
You’re bumping into each other as it is,
so once they introduce an ice floor in one
of the kitchens, it’s completely nuts.
Now, Overcooked plays into the chaos for laughs
anyway, so losing your traction is more funny
than frustrating.
But you could easily imagine this becoming
frustrating in a more serious, higher-stakes
game.
Or a more serious, higher stakes… whole
genre.
Like fighting games.
Very serious.
Not the place for ice floors.
If winter is just a backdrop in a fighting
game stage, that’s totally fine.
Winter backdrops show up in tons of places,
but most fighting game designers are smart
enough to not mess with the mechanics, even
with a good excuse.
Fighting games are nothing but precision,
timing, positioning, and execution.
Ice floors are the opposite of all those things.
Doesn’t work.
You ever see an ice floor in a fighting game?
Probably not.
Well, maybe one.
Soul Calibur 2.
Ivy’s Egyptian Crypt stage has an ice variation
complete with a slippery floor.
In Weapon Master mode, which is a mix of story-ish
events and fights built around modifier settings,
some of the fights happen on ice floors that
also let you fall out of the ring way more
easily.
It’s miserable to play on.
You can picture it in your mind, it’s that
bad.
As a one-off gimmick though, not a big deal.
Driving games are all about precision, too,
though they can use ice and snow just fine.
Probably because there’s an extra dose of
realism to the situation.
Forza Horizon 4 has you spending plenty of
time on wintery tracks, and the different
physics that the track change provides gives
an extra challenge, but one that’s appropriate
to the setting.
Mario Kart isn’t as realistic as Forza,
but its ice tracks can be fun.
They’re usually designed with wider turns,
so if the snow makes you drift a little wide,
eh, don’t worry about it.
Worry about the snowmen.
Snow-based vehicle segments in other types
of games can be fun diversions to change up
the gameplay loop for a bit.
Half of all the Sonic games have you sledding
on a whale, boarding away from an avalanche,
or tricking off an icy halfpipe.
They give an excuse for some speedy antics,
even if only for a bit.
And, of course, dedicated snowboarding games
like SSX are their own whole thing, fine-tuned
from the ground up for their physics and controls
to feel just right.
Now, precise, physics-based controls aren’t
what every genre relies on to be fun.
Strategy games are about reacting to seeing
enemies flood into your base, killing your
dudez.
It’s a genre about information and logistics.
They’re about choosing when and where to
strike.
A winter level in an RTS might not use ice
floors but instead might lean into the visibility
problems you get in a blizzard.
The fog of war is already a concept in plenty
of strategy games, and a blizzard gives a
thematic excuse to tinker with how exactly
the fog of war works.
In Fire Emblem, a snowy tile won’t slow
you down, but weather conditions might throw
a wrench into your plans.
In The Binding Blade, a blizzard reduces your
visibility, which can set you up to be ambushed.
Fire Emblem has permadeath, so surprise fights
can be especially scary.
In other games, snow gives a penalty to movement,
which is a serious problem when the point
of the game is about moving units around to
where they need to be.
In The Blazing Blade, a snowstorm can come
and go during some missions, and lower mobility
for any unit that isn’t inside a building.
In Advance Wars, you will sometimes be fighting
Blue Moon, a sort of Scandinavian, northern,
wintery-themed place.
The COs all match that theme, some more than
others.
Each CO has unique powers that tie to their
personality more often than not.
Olaf’s units get to move around normally
in snow that slows down everyone else - a
big enough bonus for that to count as his
entire advantage over the other COs.
Shooters can also use a winter stage as a
reason to play with visibility and sightlines.
It screws around with how you play a shooter
if you can’t see what you’re shooting
at.
Star Fox Assault’s 4th mission takes place
on Fichina, an ice world in the middle of
a harsh blizzard.
Your first goal is to infiltrate a climate
control station to clear the weather.
The station is blocked off by a barrier, and
to disable it, you have to take out multiple
generators by yourself on foot, or in the
Landmaster.
You’re constantly dealing with low visibility
so you have to rely on your radar.
It makes the open plains and cliffsides you’re
fighting over feel much more confined than
they would be otherwise.
Besides visibility issues, shooters are also
built around a weapon economy.
Gaining and losing ammo is a major consideration
in how fights are constructed, and Lost Planet
uses its icy setting to give a thematic reason
to have an unusual economy.
Lost Planet takes place on E.D.N.
III, an ice world full of spooky scary monsters.
The game’s economy revolves around thermal
energy, which you gain from the bugs you fight
and need to spend to run vehicles, use the
good weapons, and, you know, just stay alive.
It’s not that hard to keep on top of it,
but it’s at least a novel idea that keeps
you constantly on the lookout for more sources
of energy.
So what about RPGs?
They aren’t about precision platforming
or reacting instantly to changing information
at a high level.
Movement is just going place to place, usually.
Fighting is done through menus or through
button combos.
There’s a lot of talking.
Winter areas in RPGs often take another path.
People come to RPGs to be taken to a strange
world.
To see fun interactions between memorable
characters.
To hear a story.
Winter has been used symbolically in literature
forever, and snow levels in RPGs can do the
same.
An RPG that makes you fight through a snowy
wilderness might make the game emphasize the
conditions of the season.
The desolation of the frozen land.
The hostility to life.
The isolation.
Mario 64 doesn’t really get into the philosophical
implications of Cool, Cool Mountain, but Skyrim
does, for Cool, Cool The Throat of the World.
Skyrim isn’t lacking for ice areas, but
the Throat of the World is more important
than most.
There’s an impassable blizzard guarding
the mountaintop from the non-chosen-ones.
But once you’ve learned how to yell politely,
you can clear the skies.
Paarthurnax is meditating at the top, and
wants to talk to you.
He’s gonna teach you some stuff you’ll
need later.
The blizzard on the Throat of the World is
just a fancy invisible wall, but at least
it makes narrative sense.
If you want winter to be less of a complete
barrier and more of a nagging enemy to deal
with, look at Breath of the Wild.
It’s a game that makes use of a temperature
mechanic pretty often, and harsh winter conditions
will affect every part of the game.
Your movement is slower.
Icy enemies freeze you on touch.
Falling into water is a fast track to hypothermia.
If you’re not equipped to deal with it,
you just gradually take damage over time.
It’s very dangerous in the early game.
One of the most difficult parts of the tutorial
on the Great Plateau is finding a way to reach
the shrine at the top, whose only trick is
that it’s located in the cold.
You can’t just brave the cold and tank your
way through without doing some prep work.
Like the rest of the challenges the game throws
at you, there are multiple solutions.
You could brute force it and eat something
every 30 seconds, but that’s risky if you
don’t know what you’re doing.
You could find a heat source to carry, like
a torch.
Though that torch takes one of your hands
to hold.
Better not fight anything along the way.
You could cook something with a spicy pepper
and get a temporary cold resistance buff.
If you look in the old man’s diary in his
cabin, you’ll get some helpful recipes you
can make.
Or if you show him how well you can cook,
he might give you a more long-term solution.
The temperature mechanics in Breath of the
Wild present a significant early challenge
that pushes the player to do some creative
puzzle-solving, which sets them up early for
the open-ended nature of the rest of the game.
Winter doesn’t have to be so bleak, though.
For a lot of people, winter is a season of
holidays.
About surrounding yourself with family and
friends.
Coziness.
Sitting next to a warm fire and watching your
neighbors put up Christmas decorations.
Winter towns can represent sanctuaries from
the cold, and the rhythm of most RPGs need
to have sanctuaries anyway.
Why not theme one like this?
Snowdin is a town in Undertale that's kinda
perpetually ready for Christmas.
The whole town is a big long break between
bosses.
The hotel, shop, library, and restaurant are
filled with shop owners ready to toss story
beats at you, and some new people to meet.
Of course, if you so choose, you can decide
to make the town not cozy at all, but that's
on you.
Winter weather can impact gameplay in turn-based
RPGs pretty easily, too.
In Pokemon Platinum, the snowy route 216 can
be a bit of a hassle to deal with.
There are patches of deep snow that make running
not an option, and all battles in this area
will begin with hail weather conditions that
will damage your Pokemon on each turn.
It’s not much different mechanically than
a poison effect, just themed to match the
location.
Ice-themed puzzles fit in everywhere.
Lots of snow dungeons in adventure games and
RPGs use a slidey floor to block off progress
for a bit.
You’ve got two main flavors: one where you’re
pushing a block and one where you’re the
block.
Both involve getting through an area with
a zero-friction floor to push a pressure plate
or something by traveling in straight lines.
The moment you pick a direction, you aren’t
stopping until you hit a wall or a patch of
ground.
It’s a solid puzzle.
There’s not much else to talk about.
It’s just there to make you think a few
steps ahead about your movement.
It’s not a bad design by any stretch, but
it shows up so many times in ice areas that
I have to mention it.
Zelda, Final Fantasy, CrossCode, Pokemon,
Bomberman, Professor Layton, Pokemon No Ice
Edition, Etrian Odyssey, Paper Mario, Chip’s
Challenge, Pokemon AGAIN floor buffer edition,
Okamiden, Golden Sun, Ittle Dew.
It’s everywhere.
You know I left out a couple great winter
levels.
Head to the comments, and let’s talk about
your favorites and some of the more unusual
and inventive ice levels and mechanics that
you can think of.
Winter levels might seem similar on the surface
but drill down to the individual aspects,
and you can mix and match components to create
something unique enough to elevate a game.
*chill vibes outro from Metroid Prime*