Not all bosses are built the same. Yeah, some are 
just a weird monstrosity or your neighbor’s kid,  
but others have layers. Some bosses are more 
persistent, more ruthless, more willing to  
go the extra mile for evil. The most resilient 
might fight you in many phases. The multi-phase  
boss is everywhere in JRPGs, but they’ve made 
themselves at home in almost any kind of game  
you can think of. For game designers, more phases 
can bring more flexibility, more of a payoff,  
and yeah maybe a few new things to watch out 
for. Let’s talk about multi-phase bosses!
If you want to respec into Sys Admin 
or Codemancer, tackle the first phase  
of your Class Admission Test boss with 
some help from today’s sponsor Boot.dev!
Take your first steps to becoming a professional 
programmer with Boot.dev’s full set of Python  
and Go programming language classes. They take 
you by the hand step by step with self-guided,  
bite-sized lessons, perfect for adding 
a new tool to your personal toolkit,  
and great for figuring out if backend development 
is the right career path for you. If you’ve ever  
wondered if you’d like programming, this 
is the perfect way to find out. It’s way  
cheaper than an intro class at college, and way 
more effective than just winging it yourself.
The classes are designed 
so that you’re never bored,  
and you also get access to the Boot.dev 
Discord, where you’ll be learning and  
helping out right alongside a bunch of 
others. Get un-stuck at any time of day.
Boot.dev is available for free in Guest Mode, too,  
so you have nothing to lose. Head over to 
the link in the description and use code  
DESIGNDOC to get 25% off your first payment. 
25% off your first month or year of Boot.dev,  
depending on what you choose. Learn 
to love programming, over at Boot.dev!
Multiple phases are a choice. You 
could’ve just made a boss like normal,  
but a multi-phase boss feels 
a little more special. A more  
complicated fight will take extra 
work, but it can pay off nicely.
There’s some grandiosity you get by default, 
and don’t underestimate what that can do by  
itself. There’s more ceremony in an evolving 
fight, and more emphasis on what a big deal  
the fight is becoming. That makes it fit 
perfectly with what most designers would  
like to see in a final challenge, be it a 
final boss, or even a superboss. So don’t  
be shocked that like half of the examples 
in this video show up at the end of a game.
If you want to make something with a bunch 
of phases, you can start by thinking about  
what’s going to set each phase apart. It’s 
not much of a phase change if nothing about  
the fight changes, now, is it? So 
what types of changes can you make?
When a shift to a new phase happens, it’s a 
perfect opportunity to escalate a fight. A great  
way to do that is through layering. The challenge 
can build by introducing new elements and building  
off of existing ones, which can immediately 
turn up the heat on a player and demand more  
focus. Sephiroth in Kingdom Hearts 1 is the game’s 
premier superboss, and the fight uses phases to  
layer on new elements in the game’s true final 
challenge to create a single iconic sequence.
The first time you fight Sephiroth, you’re 
likely going to be woefully underprepared,  
in both stats and skill. Go on, go get him. Yeah 
that lines up. He’s deliberately an extreme jump  
in challenge, even compared to the game’s 
other optional boss fights. His first phase  
is about him not taking you seriously at 
all. He slowly approaches and either just  
slashes at you from a million miles away, 
or summons fiery pillars to surround him.
There’s even an invisible health bar over the 
real one to trick you into thinking you’re not  
even damaging him for a while. If you’re not 
quite capable of meeting the challenge yet,  
the game makes sure you think you’re not 
even close. And this is just the first phase.  
You’ve gotta prove yourself a worthy challenge 
before Sephiroth takes off the training wheels.
The shifts in phase here are fairly subtle. At 
first, he just gets more aggressive with his basic  
moveset. Once you start to seriously chip his 
health down though, he starts… to run. Now he’s  
movin’. The battle speeds up, as he slashes more 
intensely and brings out more special moves over  
time. He’ll teleport around, sometimes behind 
you. He’ll hit you with big Octoslash combos,  
or try to cast ‘Heartless Angel’ that 
will bring you down to 1 HP and no MP  
if you don’t interrupt it. When you near his 
final health bar, he’ll bring out big meteors,  
some orb projectiles, and he still has 
the rest of his moves from before. The  
whole sequence is a fast and steadily 
escalating fight, where you’re clinging  
to life as he keeps throwing new elements 
at you. It’s an intense ultimate test.
The layers of a great boss fight 
can go way beyond just mechanical  
layers. It can include anything you can think of.
A longer fight allows there 
to be space for twists and  
turns. You can create a narrative through combat.
Final Fantasy VI’s legendary final boss Kefka 
is a multi-stage boss fight full of all the  
baroque grandiosity that the SNES can muster. 
There are four separate phases of the fight,  
with parallels to the progression in Dante’s 
Divine Comedy, as you travel through Hell,  
Purgatory, Heaven, and at the top waits a 
conceited and now all-powerful clown god.  
The Divine Comedy connection is a fan theory, 
but it’s a pretty solid one if you ask me.
8-Bit Music Theory has a whole video breaking 
down the spectacular music score to this fight,  
Dancing Mad. Each fight phase is given its 
own separate movement, and each is chock  
full of musical motifs. Every phase contains 
references and variations that dramatize how  
Kefka sees himself and your party. Each element 
in the fight presentation tells a story through  
implication and allusion - enough to tie it all 
together into a single, absolutely grand finale.
The multi-layered ceremony makes the 
Kefka fight an unforgettable half  
hour - an inner-circle hall of fame member 
of the greatest boss fights of all time.
Phases can make it easier to tell stories within  
a fight that a single phase 
boss might struggle to do.
Shovel Knight’s gonna have to fight this 
guy: Tinker Knight. He’s a tiny engineer,  
not much of a threat. He’s no match for 
a big strong Shovel-related Knight like  
yourself. He’ll flail back and forth, 
tossing puny wrenches your way. The  
music says he’s lame. He’ll even trip over 
himself in a panic. Bounce and hit him a  
few times and you’re done. You could even 
one-shot him with the Mobile Gear if you  
wanted. You’ll make quick work of this fight. 
Heh… 
oh. Alright, maybe I got overconfident.
Tinker Knight emerges with his dignity intact, 
inside his suit of armor, overcompensating with  
weapons. NOW it’s a fight. You’ve gotta avoid his 
tiny missiles, and platform off of his bouncing  
bombs, the BIG missiles and rotating lance drill 
to strike at his weak point, his teeny tiny head.
Well, it’s still not THAT hard, and you could 
probably see this reveal coming a mile away,  
but the two phases combined make the fight 
WAY more memorable than either one of them  
would be on their own. If you fought just 
some dude who doesn’t stand a chance,  
or some random mech robot, it wouldn’t stand out  
nearly as much as the fight does by just 
making them two phases of the same fight.
Tinker Knight splits itself to give 
the game a little more life and charm.
You could argue that the most important 
part of having multiple boss phases isn't  
in the mechanical changes, but instead in the 
aesthetics of the phase shift itself - that  
the feeling of escalation or change in the 
boss' character is the most satisfying part.
Ace Attorney's mechanics don't really change 
much as you plow through the cases. The core  
is always about reading comprehension and 
pointing out contradictions in witness  
testimony. There's no new enemy patterns 
to worry about, just logic puzzles all the  
way down. But that doesn't mean there 
aren't still multi-phase boss fights.
As you break down witness testimony and expose the 
truth bit by bit, the key witnesses and suspects  
have a tendency to shift in character when 
things get serious. They have a 'soft breakdown',  
where they start to show their true colors, 
often with a whole new set of animations and  
poses. A sweet young woman transforms into 
someone more cold and aloof. A frail old  
ambassador drops that facade and stands with his 
head held high, now a smug criminal mastermind.
The shift can be huge, and many of the game's 
best moments are the goofier breakdowns,  
especially in the later games. In 
the first case of Spirit of Justice,  
a calm and collected monk who plays 
a sitar will shift into an angry and  
crass metal singer, Keep going, 
Phoenix! You've almost got him.
I can't go too deeply into these without major 
spoilers, but this pattern shows up all over the  
series. The developers find interesting new ways 
to incorporate these phase shifts game to game.  
Sometimes using multiple characters, sometimes 
using elements outside of the plot itself to  
create them. You don't know what you're going to 
get, you just know that there's something good  
waiting for you if you can just tear down this 
testimony. Even without changing any mechanics,  
the effort put into the presentation of these 
phase shifts creates the game's memorable  
character moments, and helps make players 
really want to get to that final breakdown.
Long, drawn out bosses with multiple phases can 
have a big downside. Failing to beat the boss  
at the last moment is devastating, to the point 
where there’s a not-small chunk of players that  
will abandon your game if too much progress 
is lost. Having a multi-phase boss surprise  
you in a difficult final form, take you out, 
and kick you back to the start to do it all  
over again is basically what you would do if 
you WANTED someone to stop playing your game.
Designing phases without checkpoints CAN be done,  
but it CAN also be like playing with fire, 
especially the longer a fight goes on,  
and REALLY especially when a fight has 
a ton of downtime within the phases.
The standard final boss of Sonic Superstars has 
major pacing and difficulty problems that only  
get exacerbated by it being a two-phase fight. In 
the first one, you have to hit Robotnik 6 times,  
but he’s out of reach in the background. 
The only way to damage him is by reflecting  
these blue missiles back at him. There’s 
a little RNG with where they’ll appear,  
and it’s a frustrating process to line 
things up. It’s not that difficult,  
but it’s easy to fall to your death or lose 
all your rings in the process. Between each  
hit is a chunk of downtime, and 6 hits plus 
downtime plus having to reset to the start if  
you lose is not great. You might also phase 
through the floor for no reason sometimes. Cool!
When you finally get out of the first phase, 
the second one starts with Robotnik chasing  
you. There aren’t any rings to grab, so if you 
lost them in the phase before, you’re going to  
be vulnerable the whole time. Don’t fall, or 
you’ll be doing the whole fight over again,  
including all the waiting around. You have a 
bit more control in how to take the boss out,  
and you can use your powerups 
to speed things along a little,  
but you don’t have much room for error. 
A successful run can take 7 to 9 minutes,  
which doesn’t sound like a ton, but in a 
platformer like this, you’ll definitely feel it.
This isn’t the only pacing 
problem in Sonic Superstars’  
boss fights, but the final 
bosses in each of the game’s campaigns crank  
that up to an unfortunate degree, and the 
multi-phase structure really doesn’t help.
No one likes to lose progress, 
but that doesn’t mean you can’t  
be punishing in how you deal with 
a player failing to beat a boss.  
But you do have to think even more about 
how to encourage players to keep going.
Cuphead can feel unforgiving with 
its bosses. They’re very tough,  
and the game expects you to complete them from 
start to finish in one run. You die? Start over.  
It could be demoralizing to lose that much 
progress, so to counteract that feeling,  
the reward for getting just a little 
bit further has to be pretty good.
Defeating each boss in Cuphead is about 
slowly but surely learning a fight over  
many failed attempts. Learn each attack pattern,  
recognize the tells, and navigate around all 
of them with precision. Oh, and keep firing.
The game has a minimal UI to keep the focus on 
the beautiful animation as much as possible,  
and as part of that, you don’t 
get a boss HP bar. Instead,  
the boss fights are broken up into phases, 
with each phase punctuated by more custom  
animation and sometimes a little storytelling 
bit. The new animations are both the signifier  
that you’re getting further in the fight, 
as well as your reward for sticking with it,  
and with animations as high quality as 
this, they’re a worthy prize to work toward.
Without the phases, the bosses could feel more 
monotonous and way more like bullet sponges,  
where the only guide that you’re winning would 
be after you’ve already won. Cuphead’s use of  
boss phases and animation is a wonderful 
way to add seamless rewards and encourage  
players to overcome an otherwise 
ambiguous and demanding challenge.
A long boss fight can be thrilling, but not 
automatically. It’s very easy to stretch  
out a fight to make it longer, and much harder 
to keep it interesting the whole way through.  
Phase changes can work as natural break points 
to keep a long boss from getting too monotonous,  
and phases themselves can make a fight 
more digestible, like chapters in a book.
When you get extreme with the number 
of phases in a good boss fight,  
each phase can tend to be simpler 
in design. Simpler isn’t worse,  
though. The sheer quantity of phases 
can become a part of the quality.
Seven Force in Gunstar Heroes shifts between, 
well, seven unique forms… uh, forces in this  
one. A few less on the easier modes. Each force 
only has the complexity of maybe a mini-boss,  
but it makes up for it with rapid fire shifting 
between forces. The order is semi-random,  
going back and forth between horizontal and 
vertical tunnels. Each force is visually distinct,  
flipping between a running man, 
eagle, tiger, crab, tails, urchin,  
and GUN. They’re all actually made from the 
same set of sprites, just rearranged into shape.
Each only has a couple of attack patterns, 
and no form will stay on for much more than  
a minute. Take one out, and the arena shifts 
to the next, and you’ve got a whole new pattern  
to learn and dodge. It’s a fight that knows its 
strength is in its variety and first impressions,  
so it makes sure that no form overstays its 
welcome. Too much more complexity in each  
phase might also be too much to absorb 
before it’s time to shift to the next.
If you want to go nuts with the 
number of phases your boss has,  
you’d do well to take some cues from Seven Force.
Breaking up a fight into tiny 
pieces doesn’t solve every problem,  
of course. There’s some diminishing returns 
with how many phases you shove into a fight.
Nyx in Persona 3 has a whopping 14 phases, 
each representing one of the arcana. It’s  
great conceptually, though each individual 
phase is a little underbaked. Each phase is  
visually the same, and mechanically most don’t 
present much of a unique challenge. They’re  
almost like phases for their own sake. 
They pad out the runtime of the fight,  
making a long and pretty easy battle until 
there’s a sudden difficulty jump at the  
very VERY end. It’s got all the time-wastey 
parts of Sonic Superstars, only much longer,  
and with a much bigger difficulty spike! Good 
thing it’s a good story fight, because… man.
Multi-phase bosses can feel very grand and very 
special, but they aren’t just free passes to  
do whatever you want. You can get in a little 
trouble if you swerve too hard away from what  
the game’s basic philosophy is, even if you do 
it in the name of having a big cool final fight.
FTL’s last boss is the rebel flagship, the 
leader of the group that’s been chasing you  
sector to sector all game, and it’s been itching 
to unload its full arsenal right up your nose.  
It’s far stronger than the other ships you’ve 
fought so far. Drones everywhere. Lasers and  
missiles and weapons of all kinds. Four layers 
of shields, a full crew complement, even a cloak  
for good measure. And it hates you specifically! 
This is a real crucible. You can’t limp your way  
through the game and have much of a chance at the 
end. This ship will slice you open. Even on easy.
The bulk of FTL is about giving you multiple 
paths to take out your enemies. You could  
shoot ‘em down, disable key systems, kill 
the crew, deprive them of oxygen - any way  
you can get them to stop shooting at you 
will do just fine. The rebel flagship… not  
quite the same. It’s a multi-phase fight 
that breaks some of those conventions.
Did you think you could board the ship, 
take out the crew, and win like any other  
ship in the game? Nope, the ship will 
just warp away at the end of a phase,  
with your crew on board. They’re captured now! 
They’re not dead, because you can’t revive them.  
No more crew. Even if you took out the crew in 
the last phase, you don’t get anything useful,  
really. The ship’s computer just takes over 
and keeps fighting at full capacity anyway,  
so don’t even bother. The whole thing is 
philosophically at odds with the rest of the game.
Creating a successful build for 99% of the 
game, just to have it surprise hard-countered  
at the very end with no warning or recourse 
isn’t very satisfying. Use a very light touch  
with bosses that use these sorts of gotchas 
and trump cards, especially when a player  
can’t even attempt to counter them when 
they’re deployed. Looking back on a fight  
and recognizing that you never had a chance in 
retrospect can easily rub people the wrong way.
If you’re looking for one more substantial 
thing to do with your boss phases, tie them to  
a difficulty system. Adding and changing boss 
phases on harder modes can provide a bit more  
challenge without having to change all that much 
of the rest of the game. Plus, it can make each  
difficulty instantly feel more unique - way 
more than a tweak to damage rates would do.
Star Fox 64 travels through the Lylat system 
in a bunch of separate paths, but they all lead  
to Venom - one easy, and one way harder. If you 
fight Andross’ floating head in the easier path,  
you might recognize the first part of the harder 
one. You should be able to handle it by now.
Take care of it, and you get one bonus extra phase 
as your prize. Instead of a very quick Andross  
robot to defeat, Andross reveals… his true form 
- he was obviously a floating brain all along,  
you see. Get ready for a much more involved 
phase 2. Switch over to all-range mode and  
get your U-turns ready. Andross’s brain form is 
harder to square up and target his weak points,  
and will teleport around a little 
as you’re getting some good hits in,  
but with a little persistence, you’ll get it done.
Now with him out of the way, fly 
through a maze and hallucinate  
your dad right at the end here, and you’re done!
Throughout Star Fox, the game makes sure 
to recognize and reward going above and  
beyond what is necessary, and Andross’ 
different final forms can act like a nice  
cherry on top at the end. A fantastic 
extra incentive for dedicated players.
But you’re not done yet. Head to the comments 
and let’s talk about cool boss phases. Extreme  
numbers of them, extreme tactical shifts, 
extreme-ly cool ones for reasons you  
can’t quite explain - just start shouting 
down there about the cool ones you like.
If you like us and what we’re doing here, head 
to our Patreon where you can get even more  
Design Doc behind the scenes and monthly 
newsletter content, direct to your face.
Multi-phase bosses are big guns, meant 
to make a statement. They’re perfect for  
spectacular finales and extreme challenge, 
but can also be used in more nuanced ways,  
like making a fight more digestible, or 
letting difficulty levels be tuned to  
exactly what you need. It’s a boss design swiss 
army knife, just be careful what you point it at.
*chill vibes from Final Fantasy XIV*