Every game needs structure.
Some connective tissue to bind together a
set of experiences into a cohesive whole.
Some games make a simple menu showing all
the selectable levels.
Some build a seamless flow of levels, where
one leads smoothly into the next.
Some display a world map with nodes to select.
And some build a unique space to hold it all.
A hub world.
Every game takes a different approach that
best fits their design goals, but hub worlds
are very ambitious, versatile, and immersive
approaches to that common design problem.
They’re designed to be a home away from
home.
With high reward, though, comes high stakes.
Hub worlds need a lot of attention to feel
like a part of the rest of the game.
It can be easy to make a hub world feel tacked
on, like a placeholder.
But there’s no single path for a good one
either - good hub worlds can look incredibly
different from one another, and weak ones
can look shockingly similar to good ones on
the surface, just missing a couple of critical
pieces.
Let’s talk about hub worlds, their design,
purpose, and go through examples of games
that nail it, and some cautionary tales.
But first, what if you could create a hub
world, but for your own projects?
Now you can, with today’s episode sponsor:
Milanote!
Game design is messy, especially in the early
stages.
Milanote helps you organize and share your
ideas.
Mood boards, storyboards, notes, game proposals,
Milanote is a super slick tool that lets you
and your team create and collect them all
in one place.
We used it while making this very episode,
and it’s been a breeze to use.
The interface is a drag-and-drop, freeform
canvas that lets your designers, developers,
visual artists, project managers, and everyone
else on your team create boards to help brainstorm
and visualize your game design projects.
They even have some great built-in templates
specifically for game designers.
Milanote makes your notes look excellent,
and it has the flexibility and power you need
to help bring your ideas to life.
Sign up for free, right now, over at https://milanote.com/designdoc
and let Milanote help you organize what you’re
dreaming about.
Thanks, Milanote!
If you want to be really reductionist about
hub worlds, they’re fancy menus.
All of the rest of what you think of as a
hub world - all the NPC dialogue encounters,
all of the tutorial sequences, the hidden
places to find, the worldbuilding, narrative
and presentation - it’s all just window
dressing around a stand-in for a menu.
But hub worlds let developers check off that
basic menu functionality while conveying so
much more.
The best hub worlds tend to contribute to
a game in a handful of categories: Tutorialization,
Story, Style, Exploration, and Secrets.
They don’t have to do all of them, though.
Some types of games don’t lend themselves
to every element, but that usually raises
expectations for the others.
First and foremost, hub worlds tend to be
low-stakes ways to introduce your players
to your world.
They're often the first place a player is
dropped into, and they set the stage for the
game's narrative and themes.
But it also serves as an introduction for
how the game works - mechanically and structurally.
The more complicated the game's inputs and
mechanics are, the more important it becomes
for the hub world to help ease a player into
the rhythm of a game's control, be it platforming,
combat, or just navigation.
And this is where Super Mario 64 shines.
But I’m not talking about Mario 64, at least
not yet.
Everyone’s talked about how great Peach’s
Castle is at introducing you to player control.
I’m saving Mario 64 for another category.
Let’s talk Spyro.
Just like Mario 64, the first Spyro game uses
its hub worlds as a low-stakes teaching tool
to ease newcomers in.
You start right in front of the game’s main
collectible, Dragon Statues, and getting even
close to it will free the dragon inside, who
then provides some gameplay hint or an immediate
goal to accomplish.
The first one tells you to release a total
of 10 dragons to get to the next hub and open
the next handful of stages.
To meet the goal, you’re free to roam around
the Artisan world and get a handle on how
Spyro controls in a … mostly safe environment.
More dragons, lots of gemstones, and cowardly
enemies are spread throughout and are placed
in areas that help cement the game’s fundamentals.
As you collect them, the game sets up micro-challenges
that implicitly teach you nuanced things.
Your jump height.
Gliding.
Canceling the glide.
The range of your flame attack.
How Spyro handles while charging.
It’s all information players will need later,
but delivered in a way that isn’t risky
and isn’t as overbearing as a direct tutorial
sequence.
If you want to see what a hub without that
well-integrated tutorialization looks like,
try Ty the Tasmanian Tiger.
It was a pretty late entry in the 3D platformer
boom of the late 90s and early 2000s.
It wasn’t terrible, but it didn’t quite
have the same impact.
The game’s hub world feels a lot like it’s
there just for the sake of being there, and
it’s pretty derivative of the other popular
games of the era.
The game’s levels are entered through these
portals, kinda like Spyro.
The portals are grouped together three per
zone, kinda like Crash Bandicoot.
Between these zones is a lot of empty space.
The terrain in the hub doesn’t really teach
or emphasize the game’s movement or mechanics.
It’s mostly generic terrain.
Ty’s mechanical, item, and enemy tutorials
are all within the actual levels.
The hub is just somewhere to run from place
to place to start a stage.
The hub in Ty isn’t a disaster.
It’s not unusable, or ugly, or broken, but
it does feel purposeless.
Without that extra purpose, it starts to feel
a lot like an inefficient menu.
But tutorialization isn’t the only thing
hub worlds can do.
Not every hub world is in a controls-heavy
action-y platform-y type game.
For many RPGs, you don’t need an extensive
tutorial about how to select things from a
menu.
RPG hub worlds often focus more on story and
style.
Take Paper Mario.
Each entry in the series has a central town
area that acts as a hub world.
These hubs act as a grounding point for the
entire story.
Between chapters, you travel from place to
place in town to prep for the next expedition
and progress your characters, before using
the town as the jumping-off point for the
next chapter.
But Paper Mario is a largely story-driven
game, and the hub’s most important role
is how it acts as a denouement for each chapter,
resolving what you’ve just done and setting
up the next step.
The hub becomes an important structural element
of the overarching story.
The hub can hold its own narrative arcs, too.
Especially in The Thousand-Year Door, the
NPCs you meet will often have little character
moments that progress as you’re off doing
your own thing in one of the main chapters.
This broken family of Toads has a mother addicted
to gambling and a father who is a struggling
writer.
As the main story progresses, so does the
story of this family.
You don’t really impact it, but just the
act of the world changing without you having
anything to do with that change makes the
world feel so much more alive.
Having it take place in the hub world makes
a more natural place for an ongoing plot thread
to exist, rather than having to stick it in
a chapter or level that players might not
return to.
The hub can also act as a prelude to some
of the game’s chapters.
The Pianta Crime Syndicate starts out as a
goofy side story happening in the background,
but over time develops into the start of a
couple major chapters.
The hub can also go through major changes
and events, like in Super Paper Mario, where
the town of Flipside has an ominous void that
gets bigger with each completed chapter.
By virtue of being something grounded and
repeated, hub worlds can act as a platform
for longer-term narrative arcs that help bind
together the other elements of a game’s
story.
Paper Mario: The Origami King is a good game,
but it does go in the wrong direction with
its hub world.
Toad Town looks like the same sort of hub
town from the other games, but most of its
NPCs say the same lines of dialogue from the
beginning of the game to the end.
Once in a while a new NPC shows up, but just
to throw out a couple one liners.
Toad Town feels way more static and doesn’t
really help support the game’s story.
The game delivers the story in other ways
through cutscenes, but Toad Town is definitely
a missed opportunity.
Roguelites often use hubs as a break between
runs where you can cash in resources for upgrades
and unique features.
But just like RPGs, roguelites can just as
easily use their hubs to help tell their story.
Hades from SuperGiant Games is a very story-driven
roguelite, and its hub, the House of Hades,
is a fantastic pitstop that gives a change
of pace between runs, and that keeps the story
rolling.
Even on a failed run, it’s a place that
feels extremely rewarding.
The story structure in Hades is built entirely
around the game’s roguelite mechanics, where
you’re slowly but surely making more and
more progress as your character gets stronger
and your skills get better.
Each revisit to the House of Hades gives you
a few more breadcrumbs of story, either through
tidbits of lore or from fun interactions with
the game’s various Chthonic Gods, Ancient
Heroes, and even a Shy Gorgon Head.
The NPCs have a ton of unique dialogue that
tie in directly to how well you’ve been
doing and what happened on recent runs.
Characters may comment on how far you got
or the kinds of monsters that took you out.
The hub holds plenty of gameplay rewards too.
You can cash out your gathered resources for
permanent upgrades to your character, add
extra features to the dungeons to help you,
and even a bunch of cool extra decorations
for the hub itself once you’ve gotten all
of the practical upgrades.
You can even unlock new weapons that you can
test out on your little training skeleton
Skelly over here.
Whether it’s from the micro-rewards, story
progress, or characterization, the House of
Hades helps ease the disappointment a player
might feel from losing their last run by offering
something new and worthwhile on every revisit.
But remember, hub worlds aren’t usually
the main focus of the game.
They’re great for flavoring, but Fire Emblem
Three Houses might have leaned too hard on
its hub to tell the story.
The Garreg Mach Monastery is a HUGE military
academy filled with stuff to do and people
to talk to.
Three Houses takes a lot of inspiration from
the Persona games with a calendar structure.
As you play, days will tick away, and you
can only do so many actions per day.
Your time is limited.
If you want to prepare your team most efficiently,
you’ll have to do everything.
Talk to your units, tutor them to improve
their skills, participate in skirmishes and
optional missions, and travel to the many
NPC stations in the academy and pick up items
and materials that will help you out.
The gigantic hub is fun to explore at first,
but once you have a feel for it, it gets tedious
to constantly check in everywhere.
Even with fast travel options, it can easily
take a half hour or more to do all your activities,
which gets exhausting.
Especially on repeat playthroughs with other
story routes.
Much of the charm in Three Houses is getting
to see all of the dialogue for each character,
which makes the slog feel mandatory and drags
down the game a bit.
The Monastery has many of the same types of
story and mechanical ties that the House of
Hades and other RPG hubs have, but its sheer
size and scope bogs down the game’s pace.
What was at first exciting becomes something
of a chore.
Next up, Exploration and Secrets.
The low stakes tutorialization means the hub
world is less dangerous.
This category makes sure it’s no less interesting.
Exploration and secrets are pretty well tied
together.
The secrets are a great reward for exploration,
though exploration for its own sake can be
plenty of fun too.
Now’s the time for Mario 64.
Peach’s Castle isn’t so famous just because
it’s a reliable, low-stakes teaching tool
for how to move Mario around.
It’s memorable because of how it ties the
game together and makes the act of getting
to each of the game’s main and secret levels
fun.
You might just think of Mario 64 as the game
where you jump into paintings to start a level,
but the way you enter a level transforms throughout
the game.
On the first floor, all of the normal levels
are entered by jumping into their respective
paintings.
Quickly, though, empty rooms without paintings
hint at the game’s secret areas.
Very early on, you’ll find a room containing
just three windows.
If you jump into the central stained glass,
you won’t go anywhere, but jump through
the window to the right, and you’ll discover
a totally new type of level.
The Secret Slide cements the idea that there
are plenty of hidden corners to find throughout
the castle.
In Jolly Roger Bay’s room, the right side
has a black square off the ground, but at
jumping height.
Apply the stained glass window logic in here,
and your reward is a secret aquarium level.
By breaking up what you find in each room,
the game keeps the trips from room to room
of the castle from becoming monotonous.
Suddenly, the focus isn't on whether a castle
room has a giant painting in it.
In every room, in every corner, there might
be something hidden.
The basement area only has one traditional
painting to enter.
When you enter, you get one big painting to
signify that yes, there are levels down here
in the basement, too.
After that, the rest of the levels are all
unconventional.
Hazy Maze Cave is a metallic pool to jump
into.
Shifting Sand Land is a dead-end wall.
Dire Dire Docks is a liquid wall.
Big Boo’s Haunt entrance is a cage you have
to punch out of a ghost.
The second and third floors keep playing with
expectations.
Since players are familiar with looking everywhere
by this point, the designers have free reign
to get weird with it.
None of the levels up here are as straightforward
as the levels on the first floor.
Wet-Dry World’s initial water height is
determined by how high Mario enters the painting.
Tall Tall Mountain is a tiny painting.
Snowman’s Land plays with the reflections
in the mirrored room.
Tiny-Huge Island is in a room with two identical
paintings you can jump into, but which one
you enter determines what size you start the
level.
The speed of motion of Tick Tock Clock is
determined by where the clock’s hands are
when you enter.
There are plenty more secret levels and features,
too.
Draining the moat or looking at the sun in
the foyer lets you enter a cap switch level.
Talking to Toads or catching the rabbit gets
you some stars without even leaving the hub.
Even though the castle doesn’t have all
THAT many levels, the variety with which level
entrances are found make the castle feel a
lot more spacious.
Through its many and varied secrets, Peach’s
Castle becomes much more than just a way to
go from level to level.
But as good as Peach’s Castle is to explore,
Mario Sunshine’s Delfino Plaza is even better.
The more powerful Gamecube lets Delfino Plaza
have a much greater sense of place, thanks
to its local resident NPCs and the unobstructed
sightlines letting you see levels off in the
distance.
There aren’t as many main levels in Sunshine
as in Mario 64, but each is so much more intricate.
The buildings, rooftops, graffiti and underground
sewers give a lot of thematically-appropriate
places to hide things.
The more dramatic movement options with the
water pack’s abilities widen the possibilities
even further.
There are more secret levels scattered throughout.
Most of them are hot garbage, but ehhhhhh,
don’t worry about it!
They’re fun to find.
Some of the concepts for entering levels are
directly borrowed from Mario 64, but there
are still plenty of hidden objectives that
reward players with more shines and blue coins.
Delfino Plaza shies away from the more literal
locked-doors of Mario 64 in favor of more
naturally seeming obstacles like these double
doors, tall buildings, a giant pineapple,
and this weird yellow graffiti.
They’re blocked off Metroidvania-style until
you get the right ability, but the better
theming helps liven up the setting.
But then, Nintendo changed the focus of the
Mario hub worlds.
Mario Galaxy takes place in the Comet Observatory.
It's got a fantastic aesthetic and a great
orchestral soundtrack, but underneath that,
this is honestly not a very interesting hub
world to explore.
There's not much to discover.
Stages are placed in 6 domes, a lot like the
worlds in 2D Mario games.
Each dome has a different skin, but they're
functionally all the same.
Go in a room, use a Pulse Star, go to the
world map.
Outside of the domes there are some extra
stages, but they also feel pretty isolated.
Nearly every stage in the game is opened the
same way, by feeding star bits to Lumas, but
that's about it.
The Comet Observatory lacks the sense of adventure
and discovery from Mario 64 and Sunshine.
There's not much to find.
There are a few 1-ups in some easy to spot
corners, and… uh… you can unlock the red
star and fly around the hub.
You… can also… no, that's about it.
There's practically no use of the game's central
mechanic of jumping around small planetoids
with crazy gravity.
It's a hub focused on utility rather than
discovery, but that just highlights how the
hub acts as an inefficient menu.
Mario Galaxy is fantastic, but it's not because
of its hub.
Hub worlds are an anchor.
Functionally, they work as immersive menus.
But the form is capable of shouldering so
much more.
Head down to the comments and tell us some
of your favorite hubs and how they stand out.
Whether it’s safe tutorialization in a complicated
action game, deeper storytelling in an RPG,
fun secrets and hidden areas to explore in
an open-world game, or all of the above, a
well-designed hub world is the central spoke
on which memorable games turn.
*chill vibes outro from Sonic Unleashed*