Luck mechanics are a touchy subject 
in gaming. Sure, there’s a big,  
very loud branch of luck mechanics most 
visible with gacha systems, blind boxes,  
and grinding for loot for 100 hours, but that’s 
not the only branch. Luck in games isn’t limited  
to Skinner boxes and losing all your money. Luck 
in games can open up entirely new playstyles,  
and provide a mechanism to sprinkle in just 
enough randomness to keep a game from getting  
stale too quickly. You can use luck mechanics in 
an amazing variety of ways to fine tune the vibe  
of a game. Be careful though! Playing with luck 
means playing with psychology, and there will be  
pitfalls to watch for. Let’s make our own luck, 
and see how they put the FUN into F-ort-UNNNN-e.
It’s time to craft your future in games with 
today’s sponsor, GDC Showcase! I’m sure you’ve  
heard of GDC, the world’s largest professional 
event for game developers. Whether you’re alumni,  
or thinking about going for the first time, 
get a taste of the experience at GDC’s virtual  
career event, happening September 19th and 20th. 
You can join this one from your living room!
  
Showcase is for game devs 
of all experience levels,  
from students and hobbyists to seasoned veterans, 
all to help you build a career in games. Attend  
talks by developers from several major studios 
and network with your peers through Swapcard  
and a custom virtual platform in Gather.
The games industry is moving at a rapid pace,  
so keep up to date at GDC Showcase. Get $5 
off signup with my link in the description,  
and sign up quick, because like I said, this 
event is happening September 19th and 20th,  
so there’s no time to waste! Click the 
link in the description. Thanks, GDC!
Most games benefit from a dash of 
randomness. Maybe not, like, chess,  
but most games can benefit from luck playing at 
least a little role in how the game plays out.  
We’ll get to some of the more nuanced examples 
later, but a lot of games operate with pretty  
basic luck mechanics. Not much more than a random 
number generator going off in the background.
An attack might hit or miss with a random 
roll of the dice. How much damage you do,  
like if you did a critical hit 
or not, can be rooted in luck. A  
game might randomize whether or not you 
gain an item when you defeat this boss,  
or what type of item you get. Random chance 
might set up story events that happen or don’t.  
Characters that appear or are absent. Where items 
appear. What items even do might be randomized.
These common random chance elements 
aren’t that complicated, but they add  
a little burst of unpredictability. But 
if you keep adding unpredictable effects,  
some can stack on top of each other. They 
might start to amplify player behaviors,  
and before you know it, you might be 
surprised by what new gameplay can emerge.
Bloodstained: Ritual of the Night 
is the Igarashi-directed spiritual  
successor to his own Symphony of the 
Night-era Castlevania games. I mean,  
just look at it. Hell, just look at the title. 
It’s Symphony of the Night: Again. Well, mostly.
As a Metroidvania that leans into the “vania” side 
of the genre, the game’s progression is tied to  
two things: searching for key upgrades to better 
traverse the world, and RPG-style character based  
progression. For the latter, that means there’s 
EXP and stats and whatnot, but the game’s real  
character progression is tied to Shards - random 
drops that enemies give up on defeat. Shards  
unlock new attacks and passive bonuses, so you're 
going to want as many of them as you can find. But  
shards in this game are a little more complicated 
than just EXP or equipment by another name.
Enemies may or may not drop their shard, depending 
on your luck. The luckier you are, the more often  
you’ll get one, and the more duplicates you get, 
the more they level themselves up to a better  
Grade. Higher Grades mean amplified power, through 
new abilities and better stats. You can also  
further upgrade your shards with material drops 
that you can also get from monsters, and that’s  
the core of the game’s character progression. 
Since it’s all built off of how lucky you are  
with item drops, the best way to build is to focus 
on building up your luck stat as fast as you can.
There are over 120 enemies with all 
sorts of unique shards with their  
own attacks and passive bonuses, and the 
game is about mixing and matching these  
abilities to build exactly the kind of 
character you want. The luckier you are,  
the faster you can grind, and the 
more options you’ll have sooner.
Some of the equipment yous with all sorts 
of unique shards with their own attacks and  
passive bonuses, and the can get is also based 
on the craft materials you get from random drops,  
and does factor into your character 
progression, but it’s not nearly as flashy  
as getting some completely broken special 
attacks because you had a zillion shards.
The system is not all that far off from the one 
in Aria of Sorrow and Dawn of Sorrow on paper,  
but in those games, the Luck stat either doesn’t 
work as intended, or its actual impact on drop  
rates is minuscule, so you don’t get nearly 
the same pull to focus on Luck in those games.  
The grind is much longer on average compared to 
Bloodstained. If you’re into that, maybe that’s  
fine, but I’m not. I like the game changing 
faster thanks to a faster progression curve.
A small difference in how 
Luck operates can make two  
very similar games have players 
behave completely differently.
Luck is unpredictable, but that doesn’t have 
to be a negative. You can choose to work  
WITH the unpredictability to a 
game’s benefit. For some games,  
you can use it to force players to 
get outside of their comfort zone.
It happens all the time in action games with a lot 
of combat options. One weapon, or one technique  
might be a little more effective than the rest, 
or easier to perform, or there’s some other reason  
that a player might choose to stick with a single 
play style. Players who do that might be leaving  
a lot of good content undiscovered, and luck 
mechanics can help players break out of a rut.
Hades leaves it up to random chance what boons you 
get on each run. It’s a pretty common pattern in  
roguelikes. You might start off with something 
really powerful when you fight at a distance.  
Or something that’s great for crowd control. 
Every new run might have a completely different  
killer element to add to your attack arsenal 
early, and if you’re used to playing one way,  
you might be forced to switch up your tactics 
to take advantage of your good fortune.
If you weren’t using Casts very often, an Electric 
Shot with chain lightning might nudge you towards  
using it more. Maybe you happen to keep getting 
modifiers for your gauntlet’s special uppercut,  
ramping up the damage and even healing you a 
bit, so you turn it into your main game plan.  
One of these branches a player never thought 
to try might even become their NEW favorite.
Hades is a game where you work with what you 
got. Maybe you won’t always get a viable build,  
but the way the game progresses its story and 
how you can improve your character run to run  
make it so even a bizarre run isn’t a lost run. If 
nothing else, you at least learned something new.
Using randomness to encourage players 
to see distant corners of a game can  
make the whole experience feel fresher for longer.
The right luck mechanics in the right 
context can even re-flavor a well-worn  
archetype. Like with Tanks in RPGs. The default 
tank archetype can get a little dull  
to watch. Absorbing hits isn’t all that 
exciting. If you’re doing well,  
the numbers go down at a slightly slower rate. 
Now, if you could dodge the hit entirely?
Unicorn Overlord doesn’t have 
a stat called ‘luck’ exactly,  
but luck works its way into crit rates, 
dodge chances, and hit accuracy like lots  
of other RPGs, and the game lets you 
really take control of those last two.
A number of equipable items, like scarves,  
some weapons, and the Lucky Coin, 
can give you big evasion boosts.
For many characters, it’s not all that 
noticeable. For thieves, it’s super  
useful. Thieves in Unicorn Overlord 
can work like a Dodge Tank archetype,  
where you mitigate your party’s damage by 
drawing attacks toward a character who is  
very good at getting out of the way. Dodging the 
damage makes it as if your opponent’s attack never  
even happened - super useful in any game where 
a wasted turn is a major combat disadvantage.
Dodge Tanks are incredibly powerful. Well, until 
you get hard countered at least. Unicorn Overlord  
has about ten zillion classes, and a few of them 
specialize in breaking through your dodge tank  
with guaranteed hit attacks. A few items, too, 
can dramatically increase your odds of hitting.
The ability to manipulate luck mechanics 
results in an entirely different viable  
archetype, with unique aesthetics to draw from 
compared to the usual set of armor-clad tanks.
The game is a big tangle of 
rock-paper-scissors mechanics.  
Archetypes and counter-archetypes. The dodge 
tank just adds one more yarn to the weave.
There’s plenty of different ways 
that a random number generator can  
influence the direction of a game. But 
using randomness isn’t without risk.  
Blindly sticking random elements 
in your mechanics can backfire.
Anyone dealing with luck mechanics will 
have to grapple with not just the raw  
numbers of probability, but also how a player 
perceives their chances. The Psychology of Luck.
The average person’s expectations of 
probability can be very different from  
reality. That difference can lead to strange 
player behavior and some angry comments.
The number you see for hit rates in most 
Fire Emblem games is not the actual chance  
that you’ll hit your target. It used to be, 
though! Before the first GBA Fire Emblem,  
the first 5 games in the series 
gave you the real hit percentage  
on attacks. If the game said you’d hit at 
78%, you really did miss 22% of the time.
People have a weird understanding of probability, 
though. Turns out that most people interpret very  
high chances as practically guaranteed 
to hit, and will get really mad at the  
developers when the game actually does 
miss as often as probability dictates.
To stop the complaints, the series now uses a 
thing called the True Hit system. Two numbers are  
generated, then averaged together, THEN compared 
to the hit percent. In effect, players are a lot  
luckier than they should be. It’s much, much 
harder to actually miss a 90% hit chance now,  
since BOTH numbers now have to be at least close 
to missing for an attack to miss. The math also  
makes it harder to connect on attacks with very 
long odds, but people aren’t usually trying  
to land a lot of 4% long-shot attacks anyway, so 
that doesn’t have nearly the same visceral impact.
Fire Emblem Fates and beyond have a slightly 
more complicated version of the system,  
but it mostly just mutes the effect a little. 
Of course, you can go too far with 
handing out lucky bonuses. Fire  
Emblem was discreet about tampering with the 
odds. Crisis Core is a broken slot machine.
Crisis Core, the Final Fantasy VII spinoff game,  
is a decent Action RPG from before the 
other, later, way bigger FF7 action RPG.  
You play as Normal Man Zack trapped in a 
world of a bunch of weird theater kids.
Battles involve a slot reels mechanic, DMW 
- the Digital Mind Wave system. The DMW  
consists of images of major characters in 
the game, representing Zack’s emotions and  
memories. Really, it’s here so you get all 
kinds of bonuses, if you’re lucky enough.
But you don’t have to be THAT lucky. You’ll get 
bonuses at a pretty constant rate. Maybe that  
would be fine for little bonuses, but these aren’t 
little bonuses. Low on MP or AP? Don’t worry, you  
can win a 0 MP or 0 AP Cost bonus that lasts for 
like 15 seconds. Often you’ll get both at once!  
Low on health? Don’t worry, you’re invincible to 
physical attacks now! Or immune to knockdown! Or  
maybe straight up completely invincible. There 
aren’t any debuffs to avoid, and you don’t even  
have to time the reel or anything, you just 
get the bonuses. They just happen mid-combat.
  
The devs said in interviews that 
they borrowed from pachinko design,  
and built luck into the system to keep 
battles from becoming repetitive, but the  
system undercuts a ton of fights. You’re flooded 
with ‘lucky’ events, and the more they appear,  
the more they lose their luster. The system winds 
up sucking the tension out of a fight, as you’re  
one dice roll away from a bonus that completely 
removes any stakes or the need to strategize.
Very quickly, these amazing bonuses lose their 
impact because of how often they trigger.
It may feel generous for a game 
to give out bonuses to players,  
but without a little restraint, good 
fortune can quickly lose its fun factor.
Some mechanics let players control 
how lucky they’re going to be,  
and can result in some very 
subtle but deep gameplay.
Deckbuilders live and die by these mechanics. 
Adding and removing cards to a deck changes  
your odds, not from an explicit mechanic coded 
in, like a 5% bonus when you equip an item,  
but implicitly through the way the natural card 
probabilities shift. Building  
a deck stacked in your favor can give the 
same satisfaction as solving a tough puzzle. 
Every deckbuilding game does it, but Balatro 
is an especially pure and understandable case.
Your starting deck in Balatro is 
just a normal deck of playing cards,  
but you can’t get very far if you 
just let the cards play themselves  
and hope you draw enough flushes and 
full houses to survive. You’re going  
to have to stack the deck in your favor, 
but it’ll have to be done card-by-card.
Slowly, you gain the power to add or remove 
a card from your deck, or change one into  
another. Maybe you get a joker that gives you more 
points for Hearts, or for playing Kings a lot,  
so you start changing the suits and ranks 
of cards that don’t fit into that gameplan.  
Maybe you don’t need this 2, so you change it into 
another copy of something you want. Hand by hand,  
you whittle down what you don’t want, and 
your deck transforms into some abomination  
of glass polychrome face cards, variable 
suits, a bunch of steel, and like 12 aces.
You’ve taken a block of raw marble and 
chiseled it down into a points engine,  
where you might not have to rely on the luck 
of the draw anymore at all. Every card you  
CAN draw has its purpose, and nothing in this 
machine is out of place. The better the machine,  
the deeper you’ll be able to get, and the greater 
performance the game will demand of you. The  
ability to manipulate your fortune in Balatro IS 
the game. Without that, it’s just video poker.
Tying luck to a pure random number generator, 
like a dice roll, is easy to do, but maybe  
not the most fun way to add randomness. 
How can you spice up a dice roll? Well,  
maybe let the player influence it a little.
I can’t think of a series more tied 
to random luck than Mario Party. The  
first game introduced the dice block for 
determining how many spaces you’d move,  
but it was just a random number generator. 
There’s no drama in it. You roll, and you get  
what you get. Maybe you get a weird dice block 
to pop up in addition, but that was random too.
After the first game, the series would add new 
dice blocks and more mechanics. Instead of just  
letting fate take over, you could use an item 
that replaced your dice with different dice with  
different odds. Each game had a wide variety 
of items but let’s just look at Mario Party  
Superstars as an example. You could get double or 
triple dice to bump up how many you roll at once,  
a mushroom that added 5 spaces to your roll, 
cursed dice that limits a target to a max roll  
of 3 spaces, or even a custom block that would 
let you choose your roll. You had plenty of other  
options to manipulate the game, like the golden 
pipe that brings you to the star, warp blocks that  
swapped places with a random player, or a chomp 
call that just moved the star itself. With just  
these items, the game now lets players choose 
to nudge their fate at just the right moment.  
Giving players some option - ANY option, even 
not that MANY options - can completely change  
the feeling of a game from being out of your 
control, to something you have agency over.
Every roll is a decision when you have these 
items at your disposal. Even choosing to NOT  
use an item and save it for later 
can have big impacts. The dice roll  
still is random within a range, so players are 
still risking something when they use an item,  
but it feels far less like the 
outcome is out of their hands.
Maybe the biggest downside of luck mechanics 
is that they need to include a risk of failure.  
Without the risk, there’s no tension, and no 
fun. But it’s tough to not alienate people  
when you break the bad news. Telling a 
player they didn’t get what they wanted  
can be very frustrating, especially if 
a game has to do it over and over again.
But if you can’t eliminate failure, can 
you instead make it a lot less painful?
Harry Du Bois is a complete mess in Disco 
Elysium. You can make him almost any character  
trait you want, but there’s going to be a lot 
of negatives mixed in there. You don’t have to  
be a drunk or an addict, but you might be. You 
don’t have to be a pushover, or a psychopath,  
but you’ll probably be one of those. Getting 
through the day alive is a major accomplishment,  
let alone solving the murder case you’re 
ostensibly there to do. Thank god for Kim.
The way you interact with the world in Disco 
Elysium is through dice rolls. As you talk  
with NPCs, all kinds of situations play out, 
and your particular version of Harry will  
have to improvise on the fly, however 
he can. Elements of your personality,  
your strengths and weaknesses - they 
gain the spotlight at different times,  
depending on the situation. You might have to get 
a read on someone to see if they’re lying, consult  
whether or not you know about a place or a person, 
gauge a situation to see if you’re walking into  
something dangerous, or just fight your ego while 
trying to start a car. Tasks often involve random  
rolls of the dice to see whether you happened to 
have the right stuff to accomplish what you set  
out to do. But of course, success can’t exist 
without failure. And you’ll be failing a lot.
If you fail a dice roll in Disco Elysium,  
you won’t succeed, but the HOW of 
WHY you don’t succeed is where the  
game’s extreme amounts of worldbuilding and 
storytelling come into play. Roll with it!
Your psyche might start fighting with 
itself. Harry’s insecurities, pride,  
and his unstable nature are all fleshed 
out through these tiny everyday defeats.  
The game wouldn’t be NEARLY as interesting 
if failure meant failure and nothing more.
A bad dice roll in this game still gets you a 
prize, it’s just not what you were expecting.  
The writing is the star, and any unlucky 
streak can get you into some unbelievable  
situations. That’s what you came for, right? 
You’re not really here to solve a crime,  
you’re here to be entertained! If it 
has to be at Harry’s expense, so be it.
The game is full of random dice rolls 
that are certain to not go your way,  
but in Disco Elysium, failure 
is just success by other means.
With any luck, you’ll join us in the 
comments section. I’m looking for you  
all to fill me in on luck mechanics 
that affected very weird parts of a  
game. Final Fantasy 8’s luck stat impacted 
crit rate, but NOT for Squall or Seifer,  
Evasion from hits but NOT the chance to run 
from a battle, and NOT the chance of successful  
mugging because that was the Speed stat instead. 
Your comments have to be at least that weird.
We’ve got more content over on our Patreon, where 
for a dollar a month you can get early previews of  
new episodes, our whole back catalog of podcasts, 
and our monthly newsletter. Check that out!
Luck mechanics in games don’t have to be elements 
out of a player’s hands. By mixing a touch of  
control with the inherent randomness of luck, you 
can nudge player behavior to do things you might  
not be able to do otherwise. Luck is a flexible 
tool. How you choose to include it is up to you.
*chill vibes from Sonic Frontiers*