You know what?
I don’t feel like saving the world today.
I’m ghosting on the Reapers, Dr. Nefarious
is going directly to voicemail, and Xehanort
can go do… whatever it was he was doing.
I’m taking some Me Time.
I need something… cozy.
Ah, I think I’ve got just the thing.
Let’s talk about some cozy games, what makes
them cozier than average, and I’ll let you
in on one S-tier, extreme-pro-level cozy game
that I’ve just finished playing.
But first, if you want to multiply your coziness,
try starting a new hobby with help from today’s
episode sponsor, Skillshare!
I recommend ‘Animation for Graphic Designers:
How to Animate a Logo.’
If you’ve watched this channel for long,
you know I love animation.
I love how just a few very simple techniques
can bring something static to life.
William Kesling has a step-by-step guide for
how to design, set up, and work through a
logo in After Effects to get something really
eye-catching.
I use many of these techniques all the time
in my videos.
They’re super handy.
But that’s not the only thing you could
learn.
Skillshare helps you get started in animation,
photography, graphic design, creative writing,
arts and crafts; if you’ve got a hobby or
if you’re just looking to start a new one,
Skillshare can help you explore it deeper.
Skillshare is an online learning community
with thousands of inspiring classes for creators,
curated and ad-free.
They’ve got a new summer promo going now,
too.
The first 1000 people to click the link in
the description will get a 1 month free trial
of Skillshare, so you can start exploring
your creativity today!
Thanks, Skillshare.
What makes a game cozy anyway?
If we set out to make a game cozier, what
would we do?
It’s kinda hard to pin down.
I think there are things that contribute to
coziness, and other factors that a lot of
people THINK are necessary for a game to be
cozy but are just traditions and tropes that
a lot of them use, but you could still make
a game cozy without them.
I think the keys to coziness are low-pressure
gameplay, without a lot of consequences for
failing at a task or difficult survival elements,
simple, stylistic visuals, fun characters,
and a light story tone.
You could even get away with basically no
story if you want.
There’s one game I’ve played recently
that does all of these things, and is my cozy
pick of the summer.
It’s A Short Hike.
This episode is half an excuse for me to gush
about A Short Hike.
It’s great.
You play as a bird, and you’re going with
your aunt on a quick getaway drive up to this
nature park she works at to de-stress for
a bit.
The park surrounds Hawk’s Peak.
Perhaps you’d like to climb it?
It’s a short hike.
The game has barely any setup and throws you
right into things with a loose goal and an
entire park to explore.
The park is a popular tourist spot and full
of characters to talk to and help out.
They’re all quirky and are written with
that sort of natural, endearing dialogue that
you might find in something like Later Alligator
or Undertale.
Hawk’s Peak is incredibly dense with things
to do.
As you go from place to place in the park,
you’ll stumble into something new around
almost every corner.
You’ll find key items scattered throughout,
unlocking new mechanics to use, but the game
doesn’t limit you to only one place to find
the items.
These buds bloom and act as a trampoline to
let you glide around easier, but the bucket
you need to activate them can be found in
a bunch of places throughout the mountain. Not just one.
There’s a kid that needs a shovel to finish
his sandcastle, but there are 5 different
places where the game will let you find one.
Scattering key items like that helps you complete
tasks in the middle of doing whatever exploring
you found most interesting.
There is no set path up the hill and no set
order in which you’ll meet people or complete
tasks.
It’s entirely at your own pace, and you
can take or leave the elements that most interest
you.
You don’t have to complete everything either,
there’s nothing really to gate you off from
achieving your goals, save for one clearly
marked place, and you just collect what you
want to in whatever order feels right.
Whatever you want to do is totally fine with
the game.
Aw, you fell off a cliff while exploring?
Well, that’s very good… for… a first…
try.
You keep at it!
There’s no real penalty for missing a jump
or gliding too far or falling off a cliff.
You’re a bird, after all, so you can glide
your way out of most things anyway.
The game is not only mechanically satisfying
but graphically impressive for something that
only took 3 months to make from start to finish.
The sense of depth that the game plays with
is outstanding.
From the game’s usual isometric angle, you
don’t get a sense of it.
You’re focused on the local area and what
you can do, and where you can go.
But every so often, you’ll reach one of
these lookout points, and you can see just
how far you’ve come.
There’s a haze effect at medium range and
a really smart desaturation and outline technique
the game uses for things far off in the distance,
hinting at something that might pique your
interest.
Maybe you should go over there, too?
There are secrets in these hills, and you
can spend the time seeking them out.
Or not, whatever you’re feeling.
The whole game might only take you an hour
or two to complete, but that’s really up
to you.
If you want to linger around talking to everyone
you find and helping them with their problems,
be my guest.
If you want to blitz up the mountain, have
at it.
It’s your getaway.
Do whatever feels right to you.
A Short Hike is a classically cozy game, but
there are elements in it that you can easily
change without losing that cozy charm.
Games tend to feel cozier when they have low
consequences, but that doesn’t mean they
have to be these squishy, aimless things.
They can still feel cozy while being focused
and having clear goals.
Grow Home is a very simple physics-based platformer.
You’re a clumsy little robot named BUD who
has to jump, climb, and glide his way around
a huge plant to get back to his mothership
floating high above the planet.
The plant is filled with these branching buds.
If you grab one, you’ll ride it as it grows
and you can sort of steer the plant towards
other things, like these glowing landmasses
that give energy to the plant.
Along the way you’ll find and collect some
crystals that give BUD upgrades that help
you traverse the world easier.
That’s about it.
Grow Home has a very single-minded overarching
goal, but stays cozy with its relaxing cycle
of jumping, climbing, growing plants, and
collecting as you get closer and closer to
the mothership.
It’s more single-minded than A Short Hike,
but it’s still very relaxed and lets you
go about that goal at your own pace.
The game uses a calm, ambient soundtrack,
a low-poly art style, the occasional soothing
song, and the mothership’s computer cheering
you on to keep it’s relaxed vibe.
There’s no time pressure, no combat, and
hardly any enemies to get in your way, save
for the occasional creature.
Even if you died to it, though, there’s
not much consequence, or much consequence
from falling off of the plant for that matter.
You’ll just get teleported back to the nearest
beacon.
It’s just you, the plant, and a ton of crystals
to collect as you climb your way back home.
But as you go up, pause for a second every
once in a while and take in a vista.
You’ve earned it.
A cozy game doesn’t have to be sugary sweet,
either.
A Short Hike and Animal Crossing are known
for being as pleasant as possible all the
way through, but you can still have a nice,
low-key time being an absolute jerk.
It worked for Dennis the Menace, why can’t
it work for a goose?
Untitled Goose Game is a cozy game where you
play as the villain.
You’re a goose working your way through
a small neighborhood and going through a literal
checklist of mayhem, ruining the day of everyone
in your path.
It sounds mean-spirited, and it is, but it’s
still so cozy and endearing.
The presentation and scope of the game do
a lot of work here.
It’s a puzzle-focused adventure game where
you operate on the world by manipulating NPCs
to complete tasks.
It’s all about exploring the different ways
you can affect the environment and mess around
with the townsfolk in specific ways.
Actually, it’s kinda like a cozy version
of Hitman if you think about it.
Honk at this kid over and over and you’ll
scare him.
Chase him around and you might trap him in
the phonebooth.
Or you could steal this gardener’s prized
rose and while he’s distracted, you can
snatch his hat and force him to wear THIS.
There’s plenty to poke at in the environment
and lots of things to experiment on to see
what different behaviors everyone will have
in different scenarios.
Like A Short Hike, there’s basically no
chance to fail and it’s easy to get right
back to where you were if something goes weird.
The minimalist piano soundtrack, flat colored
art style and the premise all lend themselves
to a delightful low-key experience of being
an absolute nuisance.
You might think you see a pattern here.
Lots of cozy games seem to have fairly similar
aesthetics, but be careful.
Focusing on aesthetics to determine whether
or not a game is cozy can trip you up.
On the surface, Night in the Woods looks extremely
cozy.
Look at that art style.
Animal characters.
The dialogue is super casual and relatable.
The music’s great.
It’s not mechanically demanding.
It’s just this cozy little adventure game
where you go around your small town and do
stuff, right?
Oh.
Oh no.
Well yeah sort of.
But no.
Night in the Woods’ story I’d say takes
it firmly out of the ‘cozy’ camp.
You play as Mae, who’s coming home from
college under… mixed circumstances.
Your hometown is there, but nothing’s quite
how you left it.
There’s the natural change over time, especially
in that post-high school way where all your
friends drift apart a little bit to do their
own thing.
But the town’s not doing so hot, either.
Work is hard to come by and the town is in
this slow decay cycle.
The people in it are a little more standoffish
than you remember.
It’s all sorta the same, but not… quite.
You’re gonna meet back up with your best
friends, catch up, and see if there’s something
else going on.
The game explores personal growth and change,
urban decay, social and psychological trauma,
and whether or not you CAN go home again.
It’s not a HUGE downer, but these are some
heavy themes that the game plays up.
It’s a great game, yes.
But cozy?
Not really.
It’s pretty funny though.
You wouldn’t expect a game like THIS to
be anything but cozy, and yet here it is.
Ahh, OK, now I’m ready to save the world
again.
Thanks, cozy games!
Head down to the comments where we’ll be
talking about more cozy games that I didn’t
mention.
Leave your recommendations.
Cozy games aren’t just about an aesthetic,
they’re the product of lots of factors working
together to help you relax.
*chill vibes outro from A Short Hike*