A boss rush seems like a placeholder idea.
Redoing all the bosses you did before feels
like the game is trying to stretch for time.
But people love boss rushes.
Well, people love SOME boss rushes.
There’s technique and nuance to designing
a great boss rush, and jamming together a
whole bunch of bosses mindlessly is not going
to hit those same highs as a well-crafted
one.
Let’s talk about getting the band back together,
and what goes into creating a top-tier boss
rush.
Skillshare’s back, baby!
And they’re sponsoring this episode.
Mike bought a synth a few months ago to start
a new hobby for fun.
He’s been learning how to set up the hardware
with help from Skillshare, through Dom McLennon's
class called Digital Music Production: DAW
Fundamentals.
Dom takes you on a quick tour of the software
and helps you get to know how to set up a
digital music creation space from scratch.
We got some custom sound effects in the Mario
Kart Items episode thanks to that synth, and
thanks to Dom’s class.
You can develop a skill you never thought
you’d have with Skillshare’s thousands
of classes on basically every creative topic.
Illustration, creative writing, music, animation,
and now you can build your career skills too,
with classes on productivity, marketing, and
entrepreneurship.
Skillshare’s classes are high quality and
condensed and can get you to where you want
to be as fast as possible.
Skillshare lets you try out their whole catalog
for free for 1 month.
Any topics you want.
You’ll be amazed at what you will learn
over at Skillshare if you use the link in
the description.
The first 1000 people to use the link will
get a 1 month free trial of Skillshare.
Go learn a new hobby this summer!
Thanks, Skillshare!
Let’s get the easy stuff out of the way
first.
What is a boss rush?
A boss rush is a sequence where you fight
a bunch of bosses in a row.
More than two of them, most likely.
There we go, that wasn’t so bad.
Uh… oh, it’s that too, isn’t it?
So a boss rush is ALSO a style of game where
the game is about fighting bosses.
Maybe exclusively, maybe like 95% of it, but
you’re there for the boss fights.
Boss Rushes are two distinct things.
And it’s about 50/50 as to which side someone
is talking about when they bring it up.
OK, don’t panic, we can still do this in
one video.
Turns out that a lot of tips for one type overlap with the other. 
Alright, so what’s the ultimate basic simple
Basic Bob’s basic boss rush?
If we’ve got a game with bosses in it, let’s
just take all of them in the game and make
you fight them back to back.
Done, basic.
That IS a boss rush!
Is it a GOOD boss rush, though?
Well, maybe.
Let’s see.
A parade of bosses in the same arena is about
as simple a setup as you can get.
That’s what Wo Long does.
Wo Long is a Soulslike loosely set in Three
Kingdoms era China, made by - you’re not
gonna believe this - Koei Tecmo and Team Ninja,
and they’ve added a boss rush mode in a
recent patch.
Beat Dong Zhuo, wait a couple of seconds,
and now there’s Sun Jian.
Beat him, now there’s Yu Ji.
Back to back, one after another, until you’re
done.
It’s fine!
It’s a pretty good boss rush and it’s
optional.
Wo Long is a modern example, but Mega Man
is the classic example of almost the same
thing and seemed to make Capcom fall deeply
in love with the Boss Rush.
Whether it's the classic series, the X series,
the Zero series, or Battle Network, you can't
have a Mega Man without one.
Typically, the Mega Man platformers play it
straight, with all of the 8 main bosses waiting
for you either in portals or in between ministages.
Megaman bosses are designed around being weak
against specific weapons, but you're not guaranteed
to have unlocked that weapon on your first
encounter with a given boss.
This time, though, you're fully kitted out,
so it's just a matter of using your resources
correctly to burn right through each of the
Robot Masters or Mavericks or another existential
anime robot you’re fighting.
It's not quite the same encounter the second
time around, thanks to the upgrades, or at
least it won't be for every single boss.
The sequence reinforces the progress you've
made in character power and skill and keeps
the pace from dragging.
Though that doesn’t mean that jamming bosses
back-to-back works in every game.
One problem can be just the sheer length of
it all.
Okami is an incredible Zelda-style game with
a super strong final boss and ending, and
a horribly long boss rush right before it.
Okami is sometimes called a trilogy in one
game.
Every piece of it is very substantial.
Towards the end, right after a lengthy dungeon
with its own climactic boss fight, the story
seems to be gearing up for the grand finale.
We’re headed to the Ark of Yamato for one
last section.
Step into the Ark and see what awaits you.
Odd.
Instead of a final dungeon, you get a hub
room with 5 doors, each with a painting of
an old boss.
Oh, I see where this is going…
Okami’s bosses are not quick things.
They each follow a similar design approach,
where they’re big spectacle puzzle bosses
where you have to methodically use a specific
ability to expose a weakness, wail on what
you’ve exposed, then repeat.
There’s a grandiosity to each one that’s
nice, and the style works great as an endcap
to a big dungeon.
However, length and grandiosity are not friends
of the boss rush format.
And repeating puzzles with the same solution
is not the friend of really any format.
The Ark of Yamato has you replay 5 of those
bosses before you can reach the end.
None of the bosses are different at all.
At ALL.
Each boss’s length is partially carried
by the novelty of figuring out how to damage
these things in the first place, and without
that, each fight isn’t challenging or interesting
enough anymore to hold your attention in a
repeat playthrough, even in isolation.
These bosses are much better on your first
run of the game.
By far the worst one of the set is Orochi,
who I’ve griped about in other videos.
You’ve already fought Orochi twice by this
point, and the second one wasn’t that long
ago.
Fighting Orochi for a third time, again with
zero changes, is one of the least rewarding
boss fights I’ve ever seen - blatant padding
in a game that was already pushing it.
Okami’s boss rush does a disservice to its
players, showcasing nothing new, and sapping
your interest in the leadup to what really
is a fantastic final boss that happens right
after.
A few years later, Okami got a sequel on the
DS called Okamiden, and it learned nothing!
They did the exact same thing in its finale.
Don’t do that!
The basic idea of a boss rush works in just
about any genre.
Not just action, not just RPGs - even something
completely different like rhythm games can
make a boss rush out of stacking big challenges
one after another.
In DDR, there are challenge modes and courses
- playlists of songs thrown in front of players
back to back without breaks.
The most difficult courses are made up of
the hardest songs in the game.
A challenge in normal circumstances, and more
so when you have to do them all in a row.
There’s even the extra factor in dance games
where, since you’re physically moving around,
stacking the challenges back to back with
no rest is literally harder to do as you get
more and more tired.
The challenge compounds on itself and becomes
a literal test of endurance.
Even if you pick only a few bosses to use,
a boss rush can still be kind of long.
What if instead we shortened up the fights
a little?
It’s more work than just leaving a fight
as-is, but you can edit down a boss rematch
to be more of a sampling than the full thing.
Like in Pizza Tower.
Pizza Tower has you playing as Peppino, an
exhausted and very anxious pizza chef whose
sanity is hanging on by a thread.
For no reason besides spite, a malevolent
Pizza Head has decided to destroy your pizzeria,
and you have to climb the Pizza Tower to stop
him.
Each of the 5 floors of the tower takes you
through a handful of levels capped off by
a pizza-themed weirdo for a boss - a pepper
artist, a cowboy blob of cheese, a literal
parody of the Noid called the Noise and a
creepypasta.
Every boss is super cartoonish and kinetic
in both mechanics and presentation, complete
with multiple phases, bizarre but not too
complicated attack patterns, and catchy music.
These aren't easy fights, but you should get
through them after a few tries.
Very solid.
The 5th and final boss fight against Pizza
Face is a big ramp-up in challenge.
After you get through his first phase, he
reveals that he's not an evil floating pizza,
but instead, an even more bizarre washed-up
ol' timey cartoon pizza mascot named Pizza...
Head.
Aight.
Finally get through him, and it's all over,
right?
Right?
Of course not!
Pizza Head brings back ALL of the old bosses
you already fought for a good old boss rush.
Get ready for 5 more bosses, Peppino!
Peppino: *mental snapping noises*
Peppino unleashes a rapid-fire beatdown of
the first boss, taking half his health bar
and setting up the rest of the sequence.
Peppino runs this gauntlet in a powered-up
fever state and he can melt through each of
the bosses much faster than before.
That alone keeps this segment from being an
utter slog like it could have been.
Each fight takes a quarter of the time of
the original, which turns it into more of
a medley or a supercut - rapidly moving from
boss to boss.
The song sets the mood and a few more minor
tweaks make it not feel exactly the same to
fight everyone.
The whole sequence is catharsis for Peppino,
and the game adds in more health pickups to
help you get through it.
At the end you get your reward - a third and
final phase of Pizza Face, then a grand escape
from the crumbling tower of Pizza…Tower.
The boss rush here is mandatory, but it's
woven into the story in a way that gives it
a real reason to exist and creates its own
memorable moment to cap off a great game.
One of the biggest stumbling blocks with a
boss rush tends to be whether or not people
see it as forcing them to redo content they’ve
already done.
It’s a divisive topic, and different people
can see things differently.
Some people like to revisit the old fight
in the new powered-up context, where they’re
better either extrinsically by stat boosts,
better moves, some new game mechanic, or intrinsically
by becoming better at the game over time.
A boss rush can be proof of just how far you’ve
come.
Other people just won’t care, though.
No matter the power or skill difference, these
are still the same old fights.
To them, taking the time to do them again
is annoying and keeps them from seeing the
new stuff just behind the velvet rope.
Some series have given credence to both sides
of the argument, depending on the game.
The Devil May Cry series has had a few approaches
to a boss rush sequence.
These games are built to be replayable, with
a deep combat system that reveals more and
more layers as you master it.
Refighting bosses doesn’t mean you’re
fighting them in the same way as the last
time.
New upgrades, new moves, new weapons, and
new tactics can change how it plays out completely,
and the scoring system lets you squeeze out
even more reasons to keep trying.
Devil May Cry 3 adds even more to its boss
rush.
Near the end of the game, there’s a neat
little boss rush puzzle.
You’re thrown into an MC Escher realm, filled
with nine murals depicting bosses and colored
jewels.
The murals are portals, taking you right to
a previous boss fight.
The center of the hub is a special monolith
where the 9 colored jewels link together.
Defeating one of the bosses lights up its
jewel, and if you link up enough of them to
form a ring, you can go through and end the
mission.
This boss rush gives you full control over
how you want to tackle it.
If you didn’t like a fight, you might not
have to do it!
Since many combinations will form a ring,
you can choose your own path to fight through.
And if you do want to go all out, you even
get a nice health upgrade if you take care
of all of the bosses before leaving.
There’s an optimal path, of course.
One of the rings only takes 3 fights to complete,
but you do have to piece together that the
game wants you to make a ring first.
Devil May Cry 5 has a mini boss rush, too,
but it’s not as puzzling.
This is the final mission in the main story
where you play as V, who fights using 3 different
familiars.
Until now.
At the start of the mission, they’re taken
away and you’re extremely vulnerable now
that you’ve lost most of your combat options.
Hey look it’s 3 portals, I wonder what they’re
for.
Each one takes you to a boss you’ve fought
before as a different character, and before
each fight, you get to pick a familiar to
regain.
The boss fights are slightly redesigned and
balanced around these new circumstances.
Having this different gameplay style on top
of only having access to part of your moveset
changes the feel of each encounter completely.
It’s the inverse of the usual boss rush
approach where the second encounter is where
you’re more powerful.
It shows that it doesn’t matter as much
in which direction your character’s power
has changed between fights, it mostly just
matters that it HAS changed.
You might have noticed that I skipped over
4!
There’s a reason!
The reason is it’s bad!
The boss rush part is bad, the game’s not
bad.
Devil May Cry 4’s boss rush is extremely
filler content.
DMC4 is already infamous for stretching itself
very thin thanks to a rushed development cycle.
The campaign has you playing as Nero traveling
across a few regions.
Each region culminates in a major boss fight,
with some minor bosses here and there in the
middle.
After battling your way through, the game
seems like it’s entering the endgame, and
it pits you against a chain of finale-looking
bosses.
But after that, you shift away from Nero and
into Dante, where you get to go through the
whole game again BACKWARDS, fighting the same
major bosses in reverse order.
The ONLY difference is that you’re Dante
now.
The re-fights in DMC5 work fine enough thanks
to how drastically each one changes, but Dante
doesn’t play very far off from Nero in 4.
Fine, slog through it and get to the end.
Once we get to the real final section, the
game switches you back to Nero.
If you thought the Dante section didn’t
really count as a boss rush, you’re right.
NOW is the boss rush.
Right before the final boss, you have to fight
the SAME bosses AGAIN as Nero AGAIN.
Terrible.
OH NO, IT GETS WORSE.
In between each of this third set of fights,
you’re treated to a dice-rolling minigame!
The dice-rolling mini-game is ALSO reused
content!
It was earlier in the game!
It sucked then too!
Can you control the dice?
Noooo!
Well, yes, sort of.
Does this Mario Party minigame feel like it
belongs in Devil May Cry?
Turns out no!
What happens if you roll wrong?
You have to fight another mini-gauntlet inside
this already terrible boss gauntlet!
…it’s great!
This boss rush is blatant, unrepentant filler
- pace-breaking at the worst possible time,
padding the campaign that has already been
stretched beyond its limits to rope you into
repeating content you’d like to have put
behind you.
This is textbook what-not-to-do.
Now if you really, really, and I mean REALLY
want a dice game in the middle of a boss rush,
look at Cuphead.
Cuphead itself could maybe be called a Boss
Rush game, since 90% of it is the boss fights
and the platforming in between doesn’t amount
to much, but its final world is undoubtedly
a boss rush by itself.
The semi-final fight pits you against King
Dice.
Before you can fight him yourself, you have
to dice it up to get there.
Roll from a 1 to a 3 and move that many spaces
along a board, where 9 spaces will trigger
a unique mini-boss you have to fight.
Damage transfers between rounds, and there
are no checkpoints, so best be ready.
Ironically, luck isn’t too much of a factor
here.
There are free spaces placed between every
3 boss spaces and the dice itself is timable.
You can consistently land where you choose
to, so if you do it right, you only have to
fight 3 mini bosses before getting to King
Dice himself.
The spaces aren’t randomized, so you can
even pave a fight path of your own choosing
if you have some favorites in mind.
Some spaces do randomly have a health pick-up,
so you can choose to risk a specific fight
to regain some health, but that’s up to
you.
The major difference between this and DMC4
is that the bosses on this are all new.
Turns out a boss rush can’t feel like reused
content if it’s new content.
Each boss isn’t quite as complicated, but
the endurance factor can make this whole sequence
pretty tense.
Cuphead underscores how the same format can
feel so different if you just take the time
to provide new content.
OK, we’ve gone over some of the ‘what’
and ‘how’ of a boss rush, but what about
the ‘why’?
Boss rushes can be tough to contrive a reason
for them to happen, especially if you’re
trying to fold it into an existing narrative.
You can sidestep it by putting it in an entirely
separate mode in a menu outside of the game,
but that’s taking the easy way out.
You can still make one make sense within the
story you’re telling.
Maybe the boss rush can be a punishment for
not taking care of business before.
Breath of the Wild has no problem with you
making a beeline toward the endgame from the
very beginning.
See that castle?
You can go there.
Buuuut, your chance of success is pretty low
if you’re new to this thing.
The game’s structure involves you weakening
the final boss by defeating some of Ganon’s
lackeys elsewhere in the world beforehand.
Each Ganon Blight isn’t that tough in isolation,
but if you choose to head for the castle at
the beginning anyway, you’re going to have
to face off against whichever of the Blights
you hadn’t defeated yet.
It’s a rush that by definition won’t be
repeated content, and you can dial back the
challenge if you want by going out and playing
the game as it was designed, but if you’re
looking for extra challenge on a repeat playthrough,
this structure will give that to you in bunches.
OK, so coming up with a reason to fight is
very useful, but what goes on BETWEEN the
fights is important, too.
What do players get to do in the liminal space?
If the answer is ‘nothing', well, we’ve
already talked about what happens there.
But lots of games give at least a little break
between encounters.
The liminal space of a boss rush can be a
time to rest, recharge, and strategize.
The Kirby games are full of fantastic boss
rushes.
It’s become a fan favorite mode for over
half of the series’ history.
Within the Kirbyverse they’re usually called
the ‘Arena’ or ‘True Arena’ modes,
though some games name the same thing a little
differently.
Traditionally, the basic Arena modes are a
straightforward boss endurance test.
You’ll fight through most of, if not every
boss and mini-boss the game has in a row in
a mostly random order.
The final bosses are saved for the end still.
You get free reign to choose a copy ability
at the start.
Damage and status carries over between fights,
but every time you beat something you’re
taken to a resting hub.
The hub has a handful of random abilities
you can copy if you want to switch powers
or lose what you went in with before, and
there’s some healing items, but the healing
items are all one-time-use only.
No healing restocks.
It’s a decent little challenge, but the
bosses are as they were in the main game.
It’s Kirby.
These are the bosses meant to be beatable
by little kids.
This isn’t a crazy hard challenge.
If you’ve beaten the base arena mode and
the game’s ‘extra’ campaign mode, though,
there’s something else you might be interested
in around back.
Shhh.
Don’t tell nobody.
Especially the kids.
Kirby’s got a True Arena mode.
Kirby for Big Boys.
This is the game’s final challenge: the
arena mode with a few extra hard twists.
Between rounds, the health pickups are often
weaker, and the extra copy ability options
are scarce.
The bosses are all the harder ‘EX’ editions,
where fights ramp up the challenge with new
moves and upgraded old moves with much more
intense attack patterns and aggressive AI.
Get through those, and new, exclusive superbosses
await you at the end of the gauntlet, often
an old boss in a grotesque JRPG third phase
form that extends the series lore.
Some games even make you fight a couple of
them just to really push you to the limit.
It’s the game throwing everything it can
at you, underscoring the depth of what is
designed to be a very accessible combat system.
Kirby’s True Arena boss rush has built a
tradition that fans love and expect, serving
as a superb final challenge to round out the
game’s difficulty, and make the game feel
more complete in an unexpected way.
Lengthening the liminal space between fights
is pretty much what creates the genre version
of the Boss Rush.
If breaks between bosses take up minutes of
time, you can fit in all kinds of stuff.
Shadow of the Colossus is a series of 16 bosses,
and very little else.
Between fights are some story beats and you
traveling to your next destination, to find
and kill each of the world’s colossi so
Wander can definitely save the one he loves.
There’s barely any character stat progression,
skill trees to advance, or points to assign.
It’s not even that complicated to find the
next colossus.
It’s just you in a strange land, alone with
your thoughts and the scenery.
Maybe some climbing.
The game is a boss rush dragged out.
Does it need anything else?
Would the game be better if there were townspeople
sidequests or weapon stance unlocks or something?
It’d be different, but I don’t think it
needs more.
The boss rush format, minus the rush, is a
style all its own.
Did you know that that song for the toad boss
in Devil May Cry 4 uses the same sample as
the song Drop Out from DDR?
That was a wild editing revelation.
Let’s talk in the comments about some more
unusual boss rush formats.
Maybe ones that have more risk and reward
in their design?
Boss rushes are a solid idea that depends
more than most others on great execution.
Avoid the temptation to treat it as filler,
and customize it enough to make it worth doing,
or just make it optional, and you can create
that capstone challenge you dream of.
*chill (?) vibes outro from Devil May Cry
4*