Hey...hero, these 7s and 8s you’re dealing
out are cool and all, but have you ever just
tried to hit… harder? Wow. There you go,
do that more. Critical hits have been a staple
of game design for almost 50 years, deeply
rooted in RPGs, but now right at home in first
person shooters, action, and strategy games.
Fighting games… it’s happened… before.
Couple times. Mixed results. But it’s easy
to sell critical hits short if you think they’re
just about big flashy damage numbers. Critical
hits are a powerful tool to add a dash of
unpredictability to a game, and with some
creativity you can really unlock its true
potential. Let’s start with the basics.
But first…
Today’s episode is sponsored by Skillshare!
I just took a class called ‘Inclusive UX:
Designing Websites for Everyone’ by Regine
Gilbert. It’s a real short-and-sweet intro
to designing with inclusivity, and how to
spot and avoid accessibility problems you
might have never thought about. Starting a
project from the beginning with accessibility
in mind helps make the process much easier,
and helps keep your potential audience as
wide as possible. It’s a great class, and
it gets right to the point with a bunch of
actionable tips for your projects. You can
get access to this and thousands of other
classes for creators over at Skillshare. They
have classes on UI/UX design, photography,
creative writing, music and music production,
productivity, animation, and much more. Whatever
you’re making, Skillshare can help you make
it better. They keep launching new premium
classes all the time, ad-free, for less than
$10 a month with an annual subscription. The
first 1000 people to click the link in the
description will get a free trial of Premium
Membership, so you can explore your creativity.
Critical hits are old. They come from Empire
of the Petal Throne, a tabletop role playing
game written in the mid-70s similar to Dungeons
and Dragons but with a sort of sci-fi Mesoamerica
vibe. The game had the concept of a ‘Lucky
Hit’. If your character attacked someone,
you rolled a 20-sided die to see if you hit.
If you rolled a 20, your character did twice
the normal amount of damage and got another
roll. Get a 20 again and you dealt a killing
blow. The game’s designer, M. A. R. Barker,
wanted the lucky hit to simulate hitting a
vital organ in combat - just that random chance
that your character does way more damage than
usual to your opponent.
The idea spread to other tabletop RPGs as
the ‘critical hit’, and eventually to
video game RPGs. Lots of games that implement
critical hits don’t stray too far from this
original pattern where a critical hit is a
random chance that you’ll do more damage
on an attack.
In the original Dragon Quest, on every attack
you have a set 1 in 64 chance of dealing a
critical hit. If it happens, you’ll do more
damage, and that’s it. It doesn’t seem
like it’s that important strategically,
but there’s two things going on here. First,
Dragon Quest was the first video game to implement
a critical hit system at all, so it still
was groundbreaking on its own. The creativity
came later. Second, there are strategic implications
even in this most vanilla critical hit system.
So what is the point of a critical hit anyway?
Well, what happens if we just take them away?
The most fundamental form of RPG combat is
just a race to see which side gets to zero
HP first. If you just leave it there, it gets
pretty predictable which side is going to
win well before it happens, and predictability
is boring. You’ve gotta embellish it a little.
Status effects are one way to do it, and we’ve
talked about them in another video. They add
in some complexity to disguise the race to
zero by throwing in more to consider and plan
around. Critical hits are the chaotic cousin
of status effects. They add complexity too,
but critical hits add it through surprise
and random chance.
They can throw a wrench in your plans at a
moment’s notice, but what kind of wrench
and how big it is can vary, game to game,
system to system, and that’s where the creativity
comes in.
The simplest critical hit systems are made
up of two parts: the random chance, and the
greater attack power. A Trigger, and a Bonus.
But even with only two parts, there’s still
a lot of leeway here. The bonuses we’ve
talked about so far have been extra damage,
but why does it HAVE to be extra damage? Why
THIS much damage? Why tie it to damage at
all? It COULD be all kinds of effects.
What about the Trigger? They’ve been tied
to a random roll of the dice so far, but how
MUCH of a random chance do you have? Or why
does it have to be a RANDOM chance? All of
a sudden, a simple system can hold complexities.
Let’s start with the most basic tweak of
all: how do you decide how often a critical
hit will trigger? Sometimes, you can leave
it up to the player.
There are lots of games where one viable strategy
is to crank up the amount of critical hits
that you can do. Instead of building a character
to hit harder in a conventional way, start
making your own luck. Create a build where
instead of a rare chance of hitting very hard,
it’s rare that you DON’T get a critical
hit.
In Hades, you build your character each run
with a new set of Boons granted to you by
the gods. Each provides important benefits
on their own, and will often synergize especially
well with other boons. Each boon is granted
by a specific god and those granted by Artemis
often increase your chance of landing a critical
hit. If you focus on getting critical boosts
from her and balance it out smartly with a
couple of other boons, your character can
become a DPS monster. I recently made a crit-focused
run while using the fast-attacking gauntlets.
‘Deadly Strike’ and ‘Deadly Flourish’
increased the base damage and crit chance
of my normal and special attack, ‘Pressure
Points’ added crit chance across the board,
and the ‘Hunter’s Mark’ status effect
added a whopping 65% chance to critically
hit nearby enemies every time I crit anyone.
By the end of it, some of my attacks had an
over 90% chance to trigger a critical hit.
Seeing the flourishes the game puts in fire
off over and over and melting through the
enemies room after room made that run incredibly
satisfying to play through.
Careful, though. Even though they’re the
most common type out there, critical hit systems
based on chance don’t fit every game style.
The luck factor can cut hard against the grain
in some genres. Competitive fighting games
are a great example. Any move that has a dice
roll attached can become very contentious
within its game’s community. There’s a
clear distinction in how it feels to be on
the bad end of luck derived from a player’s
decision, like predicting what your opponent
will do, and luck derived from the computer’s
random number generator.
Smash Bros Ultimate ran into this with the
moveset for the Dragon Quest Hero. In a nod
to the series’ critical hit systems, they
included several luck-based moves that can
single-handedly turn a match around. Landing
a smash attack can sometimes result in a crit,
which boosts knockback and can KO a character
at much lower percentages than usual. The
Hero also has a down special with a random
set of skills to choose from, including an
instant-kill whose success rate increases
with how much damage the Target has. Even
before Ultimate, Mr. Game and Watch had a
random number generator move with his side
special, and it too was likely a one-hit kill
if the computer rolled a 9. It’s tough to
prepare for a random instant-KO like that,
and it’s a system with very very high stakes
where one dice roll in your opponent’s favor
can instantly decide the match. In a style
of game that draws a lot of appeal from reading
your opponent’s mind, it cuts directly against
why many people come to fighting games in
the first place if you lose because of truly
random chance.
So if random crits don’t fit in everywhere
in every game, what other types of critical
hit triggers can we use? You can get a totally
different feel for a critical hit system if
the trigger is less random and more predictable.
Instead of a random dice roll on each attack,
what if you get a critical doled out on a
schedule? It doesn’t show up in all that
many games, but League of Legends has a character
whose skills apply crits periodically. Caitlyn
has a passive Headshot skill that fires a
projectile which deals bonus damage every
few auto attacks. Periodic criticals are an
interesting way to strategize around a crit
system, but having to time it out exactly
can be a little awkward and prone to misclicks.
It might be worthwhile to try it out in a
game that incorporates rhythm elements. Crypt
of the Necrodancer does NOT, but I think it’d
fit. That game goes way too quickly to be
able to react to random critical damage appropriately,
but if you knew every 8th beat was a critical
hit, that might be something you could use
to your advantage.
Shooters have adapted the critical hit, but
instead of triggering it randomly, it happens
when you hit a smaller target. Headshots.
Goldeneye and Team Fortress 1 both did it
at about the same time. Thematically, they're
just like the lucky hits in the original Empire
of the Petal Throne - a bonus reward that
simulates doing damage in a critical organ,
but instead of randomly appearing, the headshot
system rewards skillful aiming at a (sometimes)
moving target. The headshot is a repeatable
skill. You're able to strategize around it
just like a high-crit-chance character build
in an RPG, and there's still a touch of random
chance that you'll land a lucky shot or two.
Sometimes things line up just right.
Gears of War ties a version of critical hits
to a unique shooter genre mechanic with its
Active Reload system. It's a skill-based critical
that you can trigger by timing a reload just
right, but it's a little risky. If you succeed,
you finish the job faster, and you get extra
ammo. If you miss the window, the reload takes
longer than if you didn't try to active reload
at all. No, the system doesn't make much logical
sense but don't let that get in the way of
your creativity—patch over the mystery with
some fun lore. What the system provides the
game's overall mechanics is what's most important.
In action games with a more melee focus, the
critical hit concept works with character
positioning. Think about combat in Dark Souls
or even the Spy class in Team Fortress 2.
If you can manage to sneak behind a character
and stab them in the back, you’ll be handsomely
rewarded. It’s operating on the same satisfactions
as the headshot does. Skillful, repeatable,
rewarded, and maybe a little luck mixed in.
Actually, if you remove that random chance
element, the critical hit concept can work
decently in fighting games. You can’t do
head shots… unless we’re talking Divekick
… but you can adapt the idea into things
like the ‘sweet spot’ mechanic. Smash
Bros uses it for Marth. The tip of Marth’s
sword acts as a guaranteed critical hit, dealing
more damage than the rest of it and knocking
characters further back. The mechanical idea
is integrated into other characters too, like
Captain Falcon’s knee of justice. Sweet
spot mechanics play on rewarding smart positioning
in the same vein as backstab mechanics, just
in a different context.
OK, so we’ve gone over why the Trigger is
adaptable, covering random chance, periodic,
and skill-based ways to cause a critical hit.
But that’s only half of the equation. The
second half of a critical hit system, the
Bonus, is even more adaptable. In most of
the examples so far, the Bonus has been a
big increase in damage. You get exactly what
you were trying to do already, just more.
But there’s no reason you couldn’t get
creative with it. The Bonus for a successful
critical hit could be almost anything positive.
First up, Pokemon. Some moves in the earlier
generations are structurally a self-contained
critical hit system, but with a twist. Moves
like Sheer Cold or Fissure are 1 Hit KO moves,
where you have a roughly 30% chance of hitting,
with some extra caveats that I don’t wanna
go over. There’s a lot. But when that random
roll falls your way, it’s an instant knockout.
The trigger is the same as any other random
chance critical hit, and in return for the
devastating critical success, you do have
to give up your chance to do basic damage.
A bigger reward demands a bigger risk.
Status effects are another great thing to
mix in to reward critical hits. Pokemon also
has several moves that have a second roll
that may apply extra status effects if they
succeed, separate from the normal extra-damage
critical hit system. The critical hit in these
cases isn’t just more of the attack you
were going for, and they’re not guaranteed
to happen, but they’re all a chance for
a welcome bonus in your favor.
The amount of damage you can do on a critical
is a tricky thing to balance, too, especially
if the critical system is being used by players
and computer opponents. Too little of a critical
bonus is uninteresting, but too much can completely
overwhelm the rest of the strategic texture
of the system. Dungeons and Dragons didn't
add a critical hit system to their game for
two decades after Empire of the Petal Throne
for exactly this reason. Fire Emblem for a
very long time had a nasty combination of
permadeath and random critical hits with extremely
high damage relative to character HP. Fire
Emblem critical hits were a looming force
ready to end you at random, and they weren’t
something you could always easily plan your
way around. You must be able to absorb a bad
roll or two, or else the system might feel
too unpredictable. Predictability is boring,
unpredictability is frustrating, and both
are unfun. Successful critical systems land
somewhere between the two extremes, and the
borders for the fun zone are fuzzy and will
depend on the game you're making. Playtesting
will likely help discover if you've gone too
far in either direction, but it's a thing
every game with a critical hit system should
watch out for.
You can also tie in the bonus you get with
other custom systems you might not find in
other games. A critical hit in Darkest Dungeon
not only gives a 150% damage boost and increases
the chance and effectiveness of status effects
that apply on attack, but also plays into
the game’s Stress meter. Critical hits will
raise or lower your stress levels depending
on who lands the crit. Even the characters
that aren’t involved might have their stress
levels change from just watching the crit
happen. Stress is an accumulated stat, and
crossing over stress limits may permanently
change a character in different and impactful
ways with either negative afflictions or beneficial
virtues, with the former being more likely
by default. A really bad round of combat can
alter your character’s basic identity for
the rest of the game. Darkest Dungeon even
has critical heals which give a bonus of reducing
stress and keep you a little further from
that threshold.
You can also try to reward critical hits for
their own sake, like, say, an extra bonus
for hitting the target with multiple criticals.
You’d have something like the Break system
in Octopath Traveler. If you hit an enemy
with enough attacks of types that they’re
weak to, the enemy will ‘Break’ and have
to skip their next turn, which is a pretty
severe punishment in a turn-based RPG. It’s
key that the system works by using weaknesses
and not random criticals, though. It’s far
easier to strategize around the rate of controlled,
skill-based criticals than it would be to
wait for the 5th random critical to happen
and then strike. It’s a different twist
on the system - a little skill-based, a little
periodic, and the reward is tied to the unique
mechanics of the turn-based RPG genre.
Speaking of mechanics, why make crits an offense-only
thing? The systems that govern crits can just
as easily apply to defense. Plenty of RPGs
give a random chance that a character will
dodge or block an attack. The factors that
govern the system might change to ones called
'evasion,' 'accuracy,' or the like, but the
end result is still a random chance trigger
and a welcome bonus if it happens.
Skill-based defensive criticals might be even
more popular in RPGs than their offensive
counterparts. In Paper Mario, most attacks
have a window of time for you to hit a button
and trigger a critical defense, which will
reduce your damage. The Thousand-Year Door
even adds the Super Guard, which eliminates
the damage entirely and starts a counterattack.
The window is much tighter, but the payoff
is much bigger.
If you bend the definition of a Bonus a little,
you can get even more interesting systems.
Instead of all positive all the time, maybe
we mix in some negative consequences with
your crits? Monster Hunter has used this idea
for a long time. Each weapon has an 'Affinity'
stat, which is basically your crit chance.
You can change your affinity with several
equippable skills, which might increase your
chance of a critical hit if you reach certain
conditions during a fight. Nothing too crazy
yet. However, some weapons have negative affinity.
That might sound like you just have a lower
likelihood of success, but actually, it creates
a chance that you'll hit the monster weakly.
If you get unlucky, you'll lose a quarter
of the damage you would've dealt out. Most
of the weapons that use this system have a
deceptively high base damage stat, or other
nice bonuses, but the chance of a negative
critical is something you have to keep in
mind. The game lets you work around negative
affinity with the right equipment skills,
though. There has even been a 'Bitter Critical'
in some games, which turns 1 in 4 negative
crits into a super crit that does double damage.
It's a hit so bad it's good again. Sometimes
new systems can inspire ideas for systems
within systems.
I think that’s enough for now. Hopefully,
this opens your eyes to the enormous range
of things that critical hits can use. Head
down to the comments for more examples of
unique critical systems and leave your own.
With just a touch of creativity, you can turn
a battle system into a critical success.
*chill vibes outro from Star Ocean 3*