I like talking about tutorials, and I like talking 
about mistakes, so guess what we’re doing today!  
I think great tutorials are underappreciated. 
Sure, you can stick a bunch of text boxes over  
your gameplay and it sort of, kind of, probably 
does the minimum job, but that’s not going to  
create a great tutorial experience. Tutorials 
are where games get to make a first impression,  
and screwing one up puts a game at a disadvantage 
immediately. It’s easy enough to identify the big  
mistakes, but a mistake doesn’t have to be big to 
be impactful. Subtle problems are harder to spot,  
harder to talk about, but no less devastating 
to a tutorial’s effectiveness. Let’s talk about  
3 recent games with some tutorials 
that are just a liiiittle bit off.
Except Hypnotorious, that ones’ 
way off, but we’ll get there.
Know what has a good tutorial? Today’s 
sponsor, Surfshark! It makes it super easy  
to secure your internet traffic. Surfshark 
is a VPN, and with one click you can use it  
to keep your browsing and login data away 
from prying eyes. Hackers on public Wi-Fi,  
the King of England - you can keep it private 
from anyone who doesn’t need to see your stuff.
It’s not just for data privacy, though. Did you 
know that browsing from certain countries can get  
you better deals on products? For example, Canva 
is cheaper in Turkey, so just click, and for all  
anyone knows you’re in Turkey now! Save a ton 
of money on a yearly subscription. Easy as that.  
The deals are more common than you think. Globe 
hop from your home and save on a lot of stuff!
And of course Surfshark can get you 
access to region locked content on  
streaming services. I hear Australia’s nice 
this time of year. Oh look at that.
There’s plenty more you can do, but you’ll have to 
sign up first! Secure your privacy with Surfshark!  
Enter the coupon code DOC at checkout for 4 extra 
months at surfshark.deals/DOC. Thanks Surfshark!
Lesson 1: The Tutorial Is Leaking
Tutorials are never easy. Ideally, a 
tutorial would feel like an in-universe  
extension of gameplay, and not as much 
like a boxed-off mode that you have to  
get through before getting to the real game. 
But making a tutorial so that it’s seamless  
is a really tough thing to do, and 
some genres make it even tougher.
When you compare the ‘open air’ Zelda 
duology - Breath of the Wild and Tears  
of the Kingdom - you can see what it 
looks like when that tension isn’t  
resolved quite right. Both Zeldas 
have a lot of tutorial overlap.
Breath of the Wild starts you off on the Great 
Plateau. You’re stuck there until you receive  
your paraglider, and to do that, you have to 
complete 4 shrines located on the plateau.  
Each shrine unlocks a Sheikah Slate ability and 
a spirit orb. The journey to each of the shrines  
is a microcosm of the main game’s structure, 
and forces players to absorb and apply most,  
if not all of the most important ideas they’ll 
need to complete the game, while still mixing  
in some of the less critical, but still helpful 
lessons. Players will get hands-on experience  
with basic combat, weapon durability, 
climbing, archery, gathering materials,  
using the environment, and the chemistry system. 
They’ll learn basic navigation with the Towers,  
the map, fast travel teleporting, and using 
waypoints. They’ll learn how shrines work,  
and how to use their special Sheikah abilities 
to solve puzzles and get around obstacles.
Players will learn how to combine these ideas, 
and that there can be more than one solution  
to a challenge, too. To deal with the extreme 
temperatures, they could either wear a warm  
doublet to keep out of the cold, cook and 
eat meals with peppers to provide a buff,  
brute-force their way with healing items, 
or even just hold up a torch to keep warm.
By the end of the Plateau section, players will 
prove they have the tools they need to complete  
the game. The tutorial’s over. You’re given 
a general hint to head for Kakariko first to  
get some more exposition, but you can sail 
away towards whatever adventure you choose.
Tears of the Kingdom is… well… ALMOST the same.
The Great Sky Island takes a lot of cues from 
its predecessor. Maybe a little more story,  
and maybe a little more linear hands-on direction 
from the game itself. You're stuck on the island  
until you can visit 3 shrines. Each unlocks a 
core ability, not unlike the Sheikah Slate ones,  
then you get one more ability and 
one more shrine to close it out.
The island is much more linear than 
the Plateau, and almost everyone visits  
the shrines in a set order, venturing 
around in a counter clockwise direction
As you go, you're learning, or maybe 
re-learning all the fundamentals you learned 
in Breath of the Wild while getting a lot more hands-on time with the new game's new additions -
 Ultrahand and Fuse.
Glue together a nightmare Rube Goldberg machine,  
wield the blade of destiny, 
and get your shrines done.
These two abilities alone are much more complex 
and versatile than anything in Breath of the Wild,  
so the more hands-on linear design of the 
Sky Island is there partly to keep you on  
stronger rails, just to make sure you get the 
full implications of your expansive toolkit.
There’s still more to learn, though.
There's caves, lighting up dark areas, using some 
of the special Zonai devices, getting across gaps  
and railways with janky vehicles, water landings, 
phasing through ceiling related matter with  
Ascend, and of course all the time magic. It's a 
lot, but this game is a lot. Once you're set with  
all that, you can drop down to the land and 
re-explore the new Hyrule to your heart's content.
… except… There’s still more to learn.
Tears of the Kingdom is more conflicted than 
Breath of the Wild between keeping players on  
a linear path and giving them total freedom. 
Even though the tutorial’s over, the tutorial  
isn’t over. Oh, you could get by I suppose, but 
if you try to venture off on your own right now,  
and you totally could, you might have a bad time. 
You just don't have quite a few key features yet.
You don't even have your paraglider!
The game strongly points you towards Lookout 
Landing, the central hub town. Go there,  
get your paraglider, unlock the towers, 
and there, get the MAIN main questline  
going. Finally, NOW you can re-explore 
the new Hyrule to your heart’s content.
... except… There's STILL more to learn.
What made you think the tutorial 
was over? Was it when you left the  
tutorial zone space? Or when you left 
the second tutorial zone space? Nah,  
we’re not done yet. The whole world’s 
a secret tutorial zone, kinda!
You haven’t seen anything yet about the Geoglyph 
quests, where most of the actual story is told.  
Or the order to best view the geoglyphs 
in, so as to not get the story spoiled,  
though that’s not just the tutorial’s 
fault. The game’s story has one big  
question: What happened to Zelda? You could 
accidentally find out, here! Immediately!
You don’t know about the Depths quest line 
either, which is almost a whole game by  
itself, and holds extremely useful features 
like the Camera and the Shrine Sensor. If you  
go off on your own, you could easily 
skip over either of those for like 20  
hours by accident, a sad, photo-less, 
backstory-less husk of an experience.
There are even still explicit tutorials 
scattered throughout the world in Combat  
Training Shrines. There are 7, all to test you on 
specific combat methods. Beat the robot by only  
using the Mechanic of the Day, and you win! 
There’s extra tutorial stuff when you enter  
one compared to a normal shrine, so it’s still 
clearly part of the tutorial portion of the game.
Maybe you could’ve figured out these mechanics 
on your own, but they’re pretty specific,  
and can be pretty useful. And seeking them out 
can take you pretty far off of the main path,  
if you can find them at all. A couple are right 
around Lookout Landing. That’s fine. A couple are  
just a little off course around there. One’s 
over by Hebra, but you’ll probably head over  
there first after you’re done in the hub, so 
that’s not too bad. But then there’s one in the  
sky. Maybe you’ll hit it up when you unlock 
the nearby tower, but that’s not a guarantee  
at all. The furthest one teaches you about 
Sneakstrike, and it’s way over in Akkala,  
where the game won’t send you for dozens of 
hours. Is Sneakstrike not worth learning about?
There was a little popup for these mechanics, 
but there wasn’t any proof you absorbed the  
info. That’s what the Combat Training 
Shrines are for. They’re clearly thought  
of as important - the style and setup 
suggest that this is still info the devs  
want you to learn - but the placement so far 
afield blurs the line between what should be  
required to learn and what shouldn’t, and 
the result is a lot of missable mechanics.
For whatever reason, Tears of the Kingdom 
drags out giving you all the tools you’ll  
need beyond what’s reasonable, and beyond its 
own teaching boundaries. Extremely useful tools  
can be easily missed for a long time, even 
a majority of a playthrough, if you don’t  
follow the game’s suggested path. For a wide open 
open-world game, that’s a weird stance to take.
Tears of the Kingdom might be unhooking 
the leash just a bit too early.
Lesson 2: … … Timing is Everything
A tutorial presented at the wrong time can’t do 
the job it’s meant to do. The closer a tutorial  
is to players putting it into practice, the 
better. That gets to be even more important  
as the lessons become more complicated, to 
make sure the lessons can actually stick.
Unicorn Overlord is great. The world’s 
best love letter to Ogre Battle. But man,  
it’s dense if you want it to be.
If you’ve never played Ogre Battle before, think 
of it as a tactics game with a couple of layers.  
Instead of individual units you control move 
by move like Final Fantasy Tactics and others,  
you set up a bunch of small squads of up to 
5 characters that will fight alongside each  
other. You tell a squad to deploy to a battle 
map, and tell them where to march to. Eventually  
they’ll bump into an enemy squad, and those 
two will duke it out in an automatic fight,  
going back and forth until everyone’s 
out of moves, and the loser of the fight  
gets knocked around the map, away from what they 
were guarding, or worse yet, disbanded entirely.
Unicorn Overlord has dozens of playable classes, 
and each has little quirks in combat versus many,  
but not all of the others. Think of 
it as halfway between the Fire Emblem  
weapon triangle and the type charts 
in Pokemon. Units are supposed to be  
built so different classes can cover each 
other’s weaknesses, like a very defensive  
Legionnaire might help block incoming fire 
so it doesn’t hit your squishy Warlock.
Basic stuff, but the sheer volume 
of options let the people who want  
to tinker around make some amazing team comps. Oh,  
and that’s not even counting the full-on 
Final Fantasy XII-style Gambit system you  
can adjust for each character individually. 
Combat might be automatic, but you do still  
have complete control over how your characters 
are going to fight if you want to dive into it.
It’s a tough job to teach a system this 
dense to a player. The game does a solid job,  
for the most part, except for some 
of the finer tactical details.
Scattered throughout the overworld 
are little class showcase fights.  
Some NPC will talk to you about how they’re a 
Gryphon Rider and how they beat up on cavalry,  
but don’t use them against archers, or else! 
Everyone gives a short blurb about how to use  
their hot new class. They’ll challenge you to a 
little fight, and if you beat them completely,  
you win some money! That sounds great, except 
these fights might as well be randomly placed  
in the world. It’s not like there’s a 
trillion Gryphon Riders just around the  
corner and this is the prep for that. Sometimes 
you can’t even use the info you’ve learned. If  
a class says they’re weak to mages, you 
might not have a mage in your army yet.
Now that might sound like nitpicking, but 
these battlefield details are one of the  
major things setting this game apart. When 
it’s all clicking like it’s designed to,  
Unicorn Overlord can make you feel like 
a tactical genius, but it’s not always  
clicking. And there’s one more quirk that can 
short-circuit all of the game’s tutorials.
It’d be one thing if the challenge was just 
presented too early, but it’s doubly bad when  
you can get through the test for the tutorial 
without using the lesson. Overleveling is the  
backup plan. If a unit is just a little bit 
higher level, you can win with almost any dumb  
class comp you cooked up. When it’s going wrong, 
it feels more like I’m winning fights by bashing  
units with a rock. It overwhelms any finely-tuned 
strategic balance, and lets you skate by anyway.
No matter how you win, that’s that for the 
lesson. You can quickly forget about what  
was said and move on with the game. 
It won’t be much of a problem until a  
lot later. The difficulty ramps up, and it 
becomes more and more beneficial to employ  
actual class tactics on enemy squads. You 
can still blunt force your way through,  
but enemies become more able to wipe 
out poorly designed units of yours. Sure  
would be nice to have a tactical refresher 
right about now, but the time has passed.
The catch-up encyclopedia that the 
game offers is better than nothing,  
but there’s barely any information in 
there. It’s like 2 sentences long per  
class - not enough to be thorough. It’s not 
that there’s NO information you can use,  
it’s just that you’re much better 
off if you look at a guide online.
The class fights in Unicorn Overlord just 
aren’t presented at the right time to be  
useful and sticky. The lessons are subtle, 
and might not be immediately applicable in  
the way the game wants them to be. Luckily, 
this isn’t a dealbreaker for progressing on  
the normal and hard difficulties, but good luck on 
anything tougher without some external research.
Lesson 3: Don’t Hold Back.
Tutorials aren’t really the right place 
for unreliable narrators. Once in a while  
a game comes up with a great story reason to 
not be up front with players in a tutorial,  
but not very often. More likely, 
a lie of omission will cut against  
a tutorial’s main goals. That’s extra 
important in games of social deception.
Hypnotorious is a game in Jackbox Party 
Pack 10. You and your friends are given  
unique personas to play, and need 
to keep that identity a secret. You  
each answer questions in the style of 
that persona, and then you all have to  
deduce the secret categories that 
connect some of you all together.
So you do that, and start guessing 
what bucket you all belong in,  
while the game’s tutorial 
describes all of this step by step.
Until you’re about two thirds of the 
way through the game. It turns out,  
one of you doesn’t belong in a bucket with ANYONE. 
There’s an odd man out among you, The Outlier,  
and there always has been. If you’re the outlier, 
you’re all alone, though you still don’t know it  
yet. It’s not like in a game of Mafia or Werewolf 
where you know your own role, or you know who else  
is in your group. Outliers aren’t told they’re 
outliers, they’re just as blind as everyone else.
Now the game tells everyone to figure out who 
doesn’t belong. They’ve probably written some  
responses that don’t seem to quite fit with anyone 
else. You go through another round of questions,  
then at the end, you all have to try to 
vote on who the outlier is. If you’re right,  
you win! Probably, it’s a points system. Wait 
a minute, that’s not quite accurate. It’s not  
just that you’re right about the outlier. If 
you all AGREE enough on who the outlier is,  
AND you’re right, all you correctly voting 
people win, including the outlier if they vote  
for themselves. If you vote correctly but can’t 
convince enough other people to vote with you,  
or if you can’t get a majority on any 
one person, you all lose and the outlier  
gets a bunch of points and maybe wins. Which 
might come as a big surprise to the outlier,  
who still doesn’t know any more than anyone 
else until they’re revealed at the end.
The game’s kinda wonkily designed. 
There’s time built in for discussion,  
so everyone can try to coordinate 
and figure out who the outlier is,  
but there’s even more tension around figuring out 
how much to actually say. You’re not supposed to  
reveal your identity straight away, just hint 
at it. How hint-y can you be before you might  
as well just blurt out your role? The tutorial 
doesn’t provide much guidance on how to answer.
What COULD the three categories be? Who knows! 
They could be patterns, like Spotted, Striped,  
and… Masked? Do those all fit together? It 
could be something like ‘Fictional Characters’,  
‘Actors’, and… ‘Music Acts’. Maybe ‘Soft’, 
‘Sharp’, and ‘Shaken’? Maybe it’s extra vague,  
like different colors or starting 
letters. Good luck intuiting a theme,  
especially if someone’s playing a role you aren’t 
familiar with, like a specific actor or character.
The worst part of it all might be 
the revelation of the existence of  
an outlier coming mid-game. No one playing for 
the first time even knows how to approach play,  
and can’t thanks to the info the game is keeping 
from you. Whoever gets assigned the outlier role  
has no idea of the strategy they need to 
be playing until the game’s almost over.
They need to somehow deduce that they don’t 
belong through careful interpretation of answers,  
while at the same time tailoring their answers to 
match others in secret categories that you don’t  
know what they are, and then try to make sure 
that no one else figures out what you figured out,  
even though everyone’s working off 
of basically the same information.
If you’re playing for the first time, there’s 
almost nothing to go off of. Good luck trying  
to make a meaningful game choice when 
no one knows what moves are allowed,  
what other players should be trying to do, 
or even what final goal people are working  
towards. Even after several run-throughs, it’s 
STILL not super clear how you should be playing.
Whenever I’ve played it with people, someone 
always tries to tell new players in the group  
that there’s an outlier before the 
tutorial does, and that crystallizes  
the problem by itself. If your players 
feel compelled to rewrite the tutorial,  
that’s probably a sign that it 
isn’t doing its job quite right.
Look, this game has all kinds 
of issues besides this. There’s  
another video that goes extremely in 
depth about how the scoring system can  
make it basically impossible for the 
outlier to lose in many cases. Maybe  
the tutorial can’t save a game that’s this 
fundamentally flawed, but it’s not helping.
Hypnotorious winds up being a confusing, awkward 
game that makes it practically impossible to  
play a meaningful strategy on the first run 
through, and makes for a rocky first impression.
You can make your own rocky first 
impression by heading to the comments!  
We’re gonna talk about your best examples 
of slightly-off tutorials in games. Or,  
as long as it’s funny enough, some very 
off tutorial comments would be fun too.
Over on Patreon, we’ve got our 
new monthly newsletter, podcast,  
and early release videos for you to grab, 
so sign up over there to help support us and get some extras.
Tutorials are hard. Figuring out how to 
communicate the right info in the right  
way at the right time is extremely game-dependent, 
but it’s not something you can ignore. Even solid  
tutorials can have missteps, so be on the 
lookout for a tutorial’s subtle problems.
*chill vibes from Unicorn Overlord*