FIRE.
Man’s oldest foe.
There are a lot of themes that you can use
to create a unique setting, no matter what
type of game you’re making.
Last time we talked about Winter Levels, so
now let’s swing in the other direction.
Fire levels.
Anything very hot and not a desert counts.
Burning buildings, floors that ARE lava, underground
foundries, star plasma, non-denominational
hellscapes - if you don’t want to touch
it, it’s fair game.
Let’s talk about what goes into making a
great fire level.
Watch out, I’ve unlocked a new ability.
I can see into your mind.
But only the math and science parts, don’t
worry, haha, ahh.
Oh no!
Those STEM classes you took in school look
like faint embers.
Some of them are so old they’re about to
go out.
Don’t let them die!
Reignite your love of universal knowledge
with today’s sponsor Brilliant.org!
Brilliant has put together thousands of amazing,
interactive lessons in math, science, engineering,
and data analysis that take you step by step
through concepts until you get the ideas locked
in.
I’ve gotten a couple of mini-game ideas
from seeing their lessons in action - they’re
useful tools for game designers not only for
the lesson content but for how they put the
overall package together to get the lessons
taught properly.
You’ll get some great tutorial ideas from
these lessons.
They’re super quick, too.
They’re easy to dip into on your schedule
whenever you have a minute free, no matter
how busy you get.
Brilliant can help you keep your grades up
or just learn something useful for your daily
life.
They’re posting new lessons every month.
Try it out for 30 days for free at brilliant.org/DESIGNDOC.
We’ve got a link in the description.
The first 200 to sign up get 20% off Brilliant’s
annual premium plan.
Thanks, Brilliant!
Some stage tropes are friendlier than others.
Candy stages?
Rarely violent.
Except this one.
But fire is not that.
Fire is a hazard, and fire stages most often
set up player vs. environment conflicts.
Wait, not PvE, that’s something else.
Character vs. Nature is what I’m talking
about.
It’s one of the main types of conflict in
fiction, alongside Character versus another
character, versus society, versus technology,
versus fate, versus themselves, and a couple
others, depending on how finely you want to
split hairs here.
Character versus Nature is where fire levels
tend to live.
Scorching flames and searing lava are pretty
much ideally suited as environmental hazards.
There’s a variety, too.
Fireballs, flaming pillars, lava lakes.
Fire areas present a distinct sense of danger
to a game on demand and communicate that danger
almost automatically.
So what do you do if you want to think of
a new fire level?
First things first.
The fire level’s gonna need some fire to
play around with, right?
What would a fire level be without some fun
fire mechanics?
Almost every fire level that isn’t just
an aesthetic, so any fire level that tries
to incorporate fire into the gameplay, revolves
heavily around not touching it.
Fire hurts.
Fire burns.
Fire destroys.
Fire blocks your path.
Fire is a barrier that must be dealt with
before you can do something else.
So if you don’t want to touch the fire,
how do you want to deal with it instead?
Do you run from it?
Torch Man is responsible for burning up this
forest in Megaman 11.
There are a lot of gimmicks here.
Owl Lantern robots that light up the room,
metallic platforms that get super-heated,
and the most deadly of them all - inferno
walls that instantly kill you on contact.
The stage makes you deal with multiple do-or-die
sequences with these walls.
There’s no water around.
You can’t blow it out.
There’s no negotiating with the firewall.
All you can do is run.
Don’t trip over the other hazards along
the way.
Maybe you don’t want to run away, though.
Some games do let you face the fire head-on.
Mighty Switch Force 2 is themed around firefighting,
and your only weapon is a firehose.
Naturally, there are plenty of fires to douse
along the way.
The game is built around the unique interactions
between your hose and the gimmicks in each
stage.
There are fires of different sizes you have
to clear before getting anywhere and blocks
that you can only douse temporarily.
The firehose mechanic is so front-and-center
that half of the game’s mechanics are about
what else you can do when your only weapon
is a firehose.
Melting away mud blocks, pushing enemies into
traps.
Just because they’re firefighting tools,
that doesn’t mean you can’t use them for
other things.
What if you used the fire a little more strategically?
Some games use fire as a general-purpose barrier
to keep areas generally off-limits, either
permanently or for a time.
Fire Emblem: The Binding Blade had lava geysers
that spout off randomly, dealing… actually
not that much damage, all things considered,
to any unit standing on top of the tile.
Fire Emblem Awakening uses a more permanent
style of lava tile on some maps to do roughly
the same thing.
Really?
Only 10 damage for standing on lava?
I mean, it's kind of a lot, but…it’s lava!
Have you ever stood on lava?
Some games deal with what being close to fire
would do to you, or to your inventory.
Breath of the Wild’s chemistry system causes
the extreme heat of Death Mountain to limit
you in a few ways, even after you figure out
how to survive just being in the area with
fireproof armor or elixirs.
Many dropped materials burn up and turn to
ash.
Wooden weapons will instantly catch on fire
and burn away.
Arrows light up, and bomb arrows explode the
second you pull one out, which makes them
very funny to use.
It doesn’t have to be all bad, though.
Fire can be used for good, too.
It’s one of mankind’s oldest tools, and
when fire gets featured in a level AS a tool,
it tends to be less destructive.
You get fire implementations with all upsides
and no downsides.
Like if you have a boomerang transferring
fire from one place to another, it doesn’t
usually then burn up.
All upside!
Depending on your exact use case, you can
pick and choose some of the properties of
fire and ignore others as you see fit.
A fire level can also be the environment against
the fire.
Some fire levels are about you trying to keep
a flame lit at all costs.
Breath of the Wild’s Blue Flame shrine is
a puzzle about transferring a special blue
flame across the shrine by any means necessary.
You can light up torches, wooden weapons,
arrows - any way you can think of moving the
fire around will work.
Avoid all the conveniently placed water spouts
and make sure you get your timing right to
set multiple torches on fire simultaneously,
and you’ll get through it.
The shrine is a test of your knowledge about
the rules of fire in the game and is just
a pleasant mini-dungeon that I honestly wish
the game had more of.
Fire has been used for all time as a great
light source, and that aspect of fire can
work its way into games, too.
Some stages feature fire as the only illumination
in a pitch-black environment, and you have
to carry torches or light fires to progress.
World 2-3 in New Super Mario Bros Wii is an
underground stage where you have to navigate
by the light around you.
Your character emits a little light naturally,
but you’ll have to use whatever fire sources
you find lying around to get further, whether
it’s lanterns, fireballs launched from piranha
plants, or hopping podoboos.
Incorporating the light source properties
of fire into the game mechanics leads to being
able to change other fundamental properties
of the game, like how much you can see or
how much you can plan.
Taking out the enemies also takes out their
light, so you now have to plan ahead to let
the enemies do a job FOR you.
Work around the limitations, and if you can
find a fire flower, you can even create your
own source of light.
The one change opens up a unique set of rule
tweaks that makes an otherwise basic stage
much more memorable.
Removing the light is not everyone’s favorite
type of stage gimmick, but it’s just one
possibility.
Fire has also been used in the past as a source
of safety.
You can sometimes ward off danger by just
being close to a flame.
Nasty things spawn in the darkness, so it’s
up to you to make sure there isn’t any of
that around your campsite.
Tons of survival games like Minecraft, Don’t
Starve, and Terraria make light from torches
the primary way to keep the enemies that lurk
in the shadows at bay.
Do it right, and you’ll have a much easier
time keeping your stronghold safe and surviving
the night.
So those are some fun fire mechanics, but
a fire level needs to feel like the heat is…
baked in, so to speak.
How can you make a stage feel like it’s
fundamentally about fire?
If you’re designing a fire stage, you probably
want it to be more than just set dressing.
The fiery nature of where you are should affect
how you move through and think about the level.
But what options do we have to make a fire
theme affect how a level plays?
Often, fire is used to bar access to some
parts of a stage.
Flame walls and hot floors could do that,
but sometimes it’s not so much the fire
itself but the heat that blocks your way through
an area.
Heat and temperature management can be used
as mechanics in fire and volcanic landscapes
to do a lot of things.
Going into superheated areas can immediately
do damage, like draining your health.
You could have a temperature gauge, and getting
too hot can cause you to pass out or burst
into flames.
The heated room is often used as a major barrier.
The way around it is often some kind of heat
shield, either an item that blocks it or a
passive ability that keeps you cool.
Varia suits, Goron tunics, Flame earrings,
and fireproof elixirs.
Now with your fantasy air conditioner, you
can treat the room just like all the other
ones.
That works.
Maybe it’s a little bland, though.
It’s like an abstracted lock-and-key puzzle.
If you just get an ability or item that makes
you immune to the heat, you stop having to
deal with it, so that mechanic tends to become
forgettable.
But there are other ways to use fire and heat
to reshape how you move through a level.
The Luncheon Kingdom in Mario Odyssey is a
totally unique spin on the traditional lava
level, entirely themed around low poly-looking
food.
The ‘lava’ here is the broth of a gigantic
stew.
It’s still a lava level.
The broth burns all the same, and there are
plenty of fire-based enemies and torch puzzles
to be found like any other.
The game’s capture mechanic comes into play
as you take over enemies immune to the heat,
like the Lava Bubble, which can swim in it
no problem.
It becomes a give-and-take version of the
usual Mario traversal puzzles, where capturing
flips you between traveling in and out of
the lava.
There are even sections where you want to
spread out the broth with these little tomato
guys so the Lava Bubbles can get to more places.
The whole package winds up being more interesting
than if you were just given an item to walk
and swim anywhere you wanted.
The indie Metroidvania Haiku the Robot uses
heated rooms to change how your moveset works.
Normally, your special moves are tied to an
Overheat gauge to give a natural cap to how
many times you get to use them in a row.
If you go past the end of the gauge, you’ll
set yourself on fire and are locked out of
your moves.
Some rooms in the game are superheated.
After you get a heat shield upgrade, you can
enter them and walk around just like normal,
but your overheat gauge is maxed out all the
time while you’re inside.
You can’t use specials until you leave,
which changes how you move around and how
precise you have to be with your platforming.
Other games just don’t have a good way for
you to deal with the heat.
Instead, you’re supposed to get out of there.
In stages like Freedom Planet 2’s Magma
Starscape, you’ll be zooming around both
inside and outside an active volcano.
The interior areas are superheated, and you
won’t be barred from entering them, but
you’re going to have to think harder about
navigating while you’re inside.
With the heat mechanic, the stage becomes
more about being quick and efficient with
your movement in order to find cover in cooler
areas quickly before you overheat and take
damage.
Or maybe you use radiating heat.
Just don’t get too close to the stove.
In Star Fox 64, you can run a course through
Solar, the sun of the Lylat system.
Somehow, there's a good amount of life living
in the molten surface, including the Enemy's
Bioweapon, which you have to deal with for
some reason.
OK, the justification for Solar doesn't make
a ton of sense, but you're here.
Luckily, the Arwing can take temperatures
up to 9000 degrees, so you're fine.
As long as you don't hover too close to the
surface.
Flying through Solar is an exercise in staying
as far away from the 'ground' as you can,
as the heat of the sun will constantly tick
down your ship's health, and much faster if
you fly too low.
Your teammates aren’t immune either, which
can be a problem pretty quick if they come
into the stage with low health.
But they’re only actually getting hurt if
they’re talking to you.
Weird.
Solar is actually a kind of rare example of
the heat of a location doing damage without
you physically touching what's emanating the
heat.
OK, we need some good gimmicks.
What can we use for inspiration?
Some fire stages are hiding a secret.
If you scratch at the surface…
they’re actually water levels.
Well, except if you try to touch the water,
you’ll get hurt, but otherwise, a lot of
the same types of mechanics will show up in
both fire and water stages.
Rivers you have to redirect, levels to raise
and drop, finding a safe platform to get across
a flow, elemental puzzles, but they’re hot
instead of wet - you can borrow a whole lot
of mechanics from a water stage, tint them
red and yellow, and paste them in there.
Though lava isn’t EXACTLY like water, of
course, and if you mix fake water with real
water, you can get some interesting results.
Cooled magma acts as a platform a lot.
We’ve already talked about Breath of the
Wild’s chemistry system modeling how items
react in hot places, but Tears of the Kingdom
added a few new rules to the mix.
You can now create planks of cooled magma
wherever you apply water, whether it’s from
a magic opal gem or from an ancient Zonai
fire hydrant.
Lava plus water equals platform isn’t new,
but now with the Ultrahand mechanic, we can
use that plank for evil.
Glue them together to make hell bridges, hell
cars, hell boats, or the world’s worst s’more.
Tears of the Kingdom is full of goofy puzzle
solutions, and the lava in the game isn’t
left out of the party.
So we’ve got fire mechanics, and we’ve
got fire levels, but fire isn’t just about
physical burning plasma.
It’s also about burning things metaphorically.
It’s a symbol.
It’s power, loss, and destruction.
It’s passion, rigor, and inspiration.
Fire has been used in a narrative context
roughly forever, and video games can do that
too.
Fire levels are, of course, often demon-filled
hellscapes.
The trope of a hellscape borrows a lot from
Western religious symbolism involving eternal
punishment, ultimate evil, and good old-fashioned
Satan.
It’s not really how hell is actually described
by those religions, but thanks to a wonky
translation or two, fire has been used so
often as the theme that it’s cemented itself
in the popular consciousness as the media’s
canonical hell.
Many games are made by people who share that
storytelling background and heritage, so it
makes sense for those tropes to bleed into
gaming just as they have for literature and
film.
Your game doesn’t have to have a religious
antagonist - any embodiment of the evil you’re
struggling against in the game can be depicted
as living, thriving, or originating from there.
Your job was always to defeat evil at its
source, and what’s a better place to show
off that this area is only bad than for it
to be a hellscape?
The way that fire can embody an active danger
makes it well suited for changing the tone
of a situation.
It’s great at creating a sense of crisis
if it’s used to change an area you’re
already familiar with.
Donkey Kong Country Tropical Freeze’s third
world, Bright Savannah, starts as a charming
and uplifting music-based stage with some
very blatant Lion King inspirations.
The place is a grassland, full of life.
Now add fire.
A few stages later, you reach 3-4: Scorch
and Torch.
A massive wildfire has broken out, and you’re
traversing a savannah of singed plants and
actively-on-fire porcupines.
You use water fruits to extinguish flames
in your way.
The music also changes to reflect the desperation
of the situation.
Now, there’s not really a narrative throughline
here.
Donkey Kong’s not much for allegories or
whatever.
But the level’s change is pretty striking.
If you're looking for that narrative throughline,
though, classic RPGs love to use fire as a
destructive change of the narrative status
quo, especially at the beginning.
There's a big bag full of games where the
starting hometown or other early, meaningful
location comes under attack and is set ablaze.
It's a shove in the back of the heroes to
get going out on their journey and establishes
both the big threat and the personal stakes
for your player characters by just adding
fire to one of the only places you've gotten
to know so far.
Sometimes this can show up a little later
in a Darkest Hour-type moment for the party,
but the function is more or less the same.
Mechanically, this doesn't have to do much.
Maybe some light navigating around burning
debris, but this fire level is all about the
destructive potential for change that fire
symbolizes.
If you’ve got a burning question, let’s
talk in the comments.
What are some of your favorite fire levels,
and what mechanics and symbols do they use
to really drive home the theme?
You have no idea how much I had to fight to
keep myself from mentioning every single Zelda
game in this.
Fire levels have no shortage of different
aspects to theme themselves with, from fire
as a primal force of nature, altering the
landscape and destroying everything in its
path, to fire as humanity's most fundamental
tool, bringer of light and warmth to where
there is none, to fire as a symbol of purity,
energy, passion, and progress.
Fire levels are an incredibly flexible trope
and can forge exactly what a game needs.
*chill vibes outro from Sonic 06*