Status effects are a staple of game design,
but they’re easy to overlook.
Status effects work to make a battle system
more interesting, no matter the genre.
They’re at home in classic JRPGs, western
RPGs, and MMOs of course, but status effects
have branched out.
You can find them in all kinds of genres.
Action, strategy, stealth, puzzle games - all
kinds of games have adopted status effect
mechanics in one form or another.
Today we’re taking a trip through the world
of status effects.
We’ll talk about the broad categories a
lot of traditional status effects fall into,
some common mistakes these systems make, and
we’ll go over some tips and tricks to help
make status effect systems shine.
*status effect noise*
The hell was that?
What’s that icon mean?
*rustle paper sound*
Says here we got hit by…
Money Down?
And the cure is… get a sponsor.
I guess that’s not so bad.
I got one right here.
Today’s episode is sponsored by Skillshare!
If you’re looking to learn something new
while you’re stuck inside, you need to sign
up for Skillshare.
I’ve been brushing up on some animation
skills using a bunch of their lessons, like
this one.
Fraser Davidson is an incredibly talented
animator who I’ve been following for a while,
and his class ‘Simple Character Animation’
is a fantastic and easy to follow intro to
working with After Effects to rig and animate
a character with a ton of life, in a very
easy way.
Skillshare is an online learning community
with thousands of classes on animation, illustration,
music, creative writing, and tons of other
topics for you to explore, and with Premium
Membership you get to take all of them for
less than $10 a month.
But hold on, today you can get a free trial
of Skillshare.
The first 1000 people to click the link in
the description will get a 2 month free trial
of Premium Membership, so you can explore
your creativity.
Thanks, Skillshare!
*status effect dissolves* Nice.
So what’s the point of having a status effect
system?
Well, it’s a tool.
It helps keep a combat system from becoming
stale.
To see why, let’s imagine a super basic
combat system in a traditional JRPG.
Think the original Dragon Quest or Final Fantasy,
but take away all the status effects.
No poison, no silence, no sleep.
No haste or slow.
No attack ups or defense downs.
Not even passive status effects like elemental
strengths and weaknesses.
What are your options in combat?
Attack, defend, maybe some magic attacks and
heals, use an item, or run away.
Combat is just a race for who can drain the
other’s HP bar first.
Can you do enough damage to take them down
before they can do the same to you?
Well, even with status effects that’s still
the goal.
But in this system with so few options, the
calculations are REALLY simple.
Too simple.
After a few rounds of combat, you can pretty
well figure out if you’re going to win or
not.
Then it’s just up to you to grind out that
result.
Now rinse and repeat a version of that combat
until the game is done.
That’s not very interesting.
What this needs is something to spice up the
moment-to-moment decision making, and that’s
where status effects can help.
But let’s step back.
First, what are status effects?
They’re a variety of positive and negative
conditions and special states that affect
the course of a battle.
They can be applied to enemies and allies
alike, and can stack together in interesting
ways.
Positive status effects are empowering.
They give you the advantage in combat.
Negative status effects are disruptors, they’re
a wrench meant to jam your well oiled machine.
Together, they can shake up the rules of the
core combat system, change the move to move
calculations you’re doing, and make fights
more interesting than a simple DPS race.
If you put together a list of all the different
status effects from a lot of different games,
you’ll see some patterns.
Most status effects operate on a similar set
of properties and tend to bunch up into some
traditional groups:
Damage Over Time - These are effects that,
well, do damage over time whether it’s on
a per turn basis, over set time intervals
or after performing an action.
Think Poison in Pokemon, Bleed in Monster
Hunter World, or even Burn in Team Fortress
2.
Status effects that heal over time fit in
here too, like Regen in like a hundred games.
Stat Buffs and Debuffs - Pick any numerical
character stat and directly change it.
This is the category for Attack Ups and Attack
Downs, defensive stances, Protect and Shell
from Final Fantasy, some implementations of
Blind, like Dazzle in Dragon Quest, or status
effects that change your max HP like the Soul
Form in Dark Souls.
The wide variety of stats that can be adjusted
makes these some of the most common effect
types that you’ll see.
Turn and Action Economy - These effects change
how often characters will act.
For turn-based RPGs it might mean losing an
opportunity to act with the character, or
it might change the order actions will take
place.
Haste, Slow and Stop.
Break in Octopath Traveler.
Stun in Monster Hunter World, or Stun in Street
Fighter 2.
This can also include statuses that have a
chance of skipping a turn.
Paralysis in Pokemon.
Fear in Persona 5.
In real-time games, it might make your character
move twice as fast, or have less cooldown
on moves, which in effect does the same thing
as increasing your number of turns in a turn-based
RPG.
Debilitators - These are the effects that
disable some of your possible actions.
Silence locks out magic actions in a bunch
of games.
Curse from Final Fantasy X prevents using
Overdrives.
Numb in Earthbound prevents physical attacks.
In Overwatch, Sombra’s Hack, at least from
the last time I played Overwatch, disables
abilities for 5 seconds.
Loss of Control - Some status effects make
characters automatically perform actions on
their own, outside of the player’s control.
Sometimes they’ll be actions that can still
help you out, like Berserk in Final Fantasy.
Sometimes the actions will help your opponent,
like Charm in Persona 3 and 4, or Confusion
in Skies of Arcadia, among a zillion others.
Shields - Here are status effects that nullify
or shield characters from certain attacks.
Look at the Nul-spells in Final Fantasy X.
Statuses that make you invulnerable, like
Super Armor in fighting games or I-frames
in action games can also fit here.
Setups - Effects that can make a character
susceptible to other effects, like different
attack types.
Final Fantasy XIII and the Remake of 7 both
have a Stagger system, where Staggered opponents
are vulnerable to serious damage.
Xenoblade Chronicles has the break and topple
system which is the first step to taking down
some enemies.
Transformations - These are effects that change
your character into a totally different type
of character.
It’s a bit of a wildcard, as the transformation
can cause almost anything you can think of,
and they’re often, in effect, a combination
of other status effects that can fall in many
of the other categories.
Toad in Final Fantasy, Kelolon in Lost Odyssey,
or the Scarecrow and Mushroom forms in Super
Mario RPG.
K.O.s and Insta-Kills - These are effects
that incapacitate or remove a character from
a battle and can often count towards a fail-state.
Death in everything, Eject in Final Fantasy,
and lots of Petrification effects all fit
here.
From these components you can make an infinite
number of unique spells and power ups that
dramatically affect combat.
Some spells might do just one thing - reflect
an attack, buff your defense, regen your health.
Some might combine a couple - Berserk in Final
Fantasy makes you lose control of your character
AND it boosts the character’s attack stat.
And some spells can really go crazy with it.
Lots of Persona 5 spells affect stat boosts,
elemental susceptibility, and reduce the types
of actions a character can do.
Status effects immediately give more strategic
texture to a fight.
Instead of just a race to 0, a character who
is built to dish out status effects will let
the player consider a lot of different factors,
and manage, predict, and act on each one.
All of a sudden, a lot of new questions appear.
If you spend your turn now to inflict Poison,
is that better over time than just attacking
them?
Will the fight even last long enough for it
to matter?
If you cast Slow on the target, will that
let you get enough hits in to take them out
before they unleash their big attack on their
next turn?
Will there be enough turns to get the benefits
out of this strength-boosting effect to make
IT worth doing, or should I just heal up instead?
The game never directly asks you any of these
questions, of course.
The player constructs them in their own mind
and then acts on their answer.
A well-designed set of status effects can
turn a fight from a mindless thing into a
thinking sport.
But you could screw it up, too.
Status effects are tricky systems to balance,
and a lot of games don’t use these mechanics
to their full potential.
There are a lot of pitfalls a game can fall
into that might undermine their status effects,
and some can even make their game’s entire
status effect system borderline irrelevant.
The easiest pit to fall into is making the
mechanics too weak or situational.
There are a lot of effects that are more of
a long-term investment.
You pay a little upfront by using your turn
to cause the effect, and you hope for a bigger
payoff over time.
But for a lot of games, JRPGs especially,
combat is over in just a handful of turns.
A long, drawn-out combat sequence can get
dull, so that gets saved for boss fights.
But for normal enemies, why would you waste
a turn to inflict poison or sleep when they
would just fall from basic brute force?
If you’re fighting a big group, but each
enemy is individually weak, you might be able
to make combat more interesting if the status
effects can hit all enemies, and not just
one.
A fast way to make your status effects irrelevant
is to make bosses, or other major encounters,
fully immune to a huge range of status effects.
Lots of Final Fantasy games fall into this
trap, where almost no effect works on a boss.
One of my favorite memories of Final Fantasy
IX is using a Phoenix Down on the Soulcage
boss inside the Iifa Tree.
The boss is essentially a zombie, and that
basic item is an instant one-hit KO if you
think of using it.
That fight, even though it’s technically
very easy to beat, is far more memorable because
of its use of status effects, versus if it
was a standard boss.
Difficulty can be another factor.
The easier the game’s combat, the bigger
the risk that status effects won’t matter.
Many of the main campaigns in Pokemon have
this problem.
For the standard game, the majority of CPU
trainers are pretty easy to defeat.
Just using type advantages will be more than
enough to get you through the game, no problem.
If the easy path gets you to where you want
to be, players probably won’t try to seek
out alternate routes.
If you test your game and find players ignoring
status effects in your game design, you might
consider increasing the difficulty.
The longer the fight lasts, and the more challenging
that fight is, the more likely a player will
try to use all of the strategic tools in their
toolbox.
Pokemon competitive play and speedruns are
a completely different story than the combat
of the main game.
The added difficulty means status effects
can play a big role in how the game plays
out, and adds a ton of strategy.
A lot of Dragon Quest games do a solid job
here, particularly with their boss fights.
Status effects play a major role in letting
your party survive against powerful enemies.
Spellcasters and healers are very vulnerable
without applying defensive stat boosts and
keeping them active, and in turn they can
cast the effects that keep the rest of your
party alive and buffed.
Negative status effects affect bosses in most
Dragon Quest games, too, and the lengthier
fights give spells that damage over time the
long runway they need to pay off.
Later Dragon Quest games added moves that
made statuses even more valuable.
There are moves, like ‘Persecutter’ and
‘Victimizer’ that do way more damage if
the target is already affected by certain
status ailments.
The bonus damage is huge, and pulling off
the right combo to get maximum damage is really
satisfying.
The next problem can happen when status effects
are too unreliable or too inconvenient to
use.
Some games try to balance powerful status
effects by lowering the chance they actually
happen.
It works, but it’s pretty easy to take it
too far.
After a certain point, if a move is so unlikely
to do the thing a player wants it to do, they
won’t bother taking the chance.
Instead they’ll choose a weaker, but more
reliable strategy.
And if a technique doesn’t make sense to
use, it’s not much different than if the
technique doesn’t exist at all.
A good way to use powerful status effects
with low chances of taking effect is to combine
them with moves that do other things.
Maybe it’s a secondary, more reliable status
effect.
Maybe it’s just standard damage.
Either way, if a player can still get SOMETHING
out of trying to use the effect, even if it
doesn’t do exactly what they wanted, they
will be more willing to roll the dice.
Final Fantasy X’s synthesis of status effects
and weapon slots is a great system to get
around this problem.
You can customize your armor to have passive
resistances to certain effects, or customize
your weapons to have a chance to inflict a
negative status effect each time you use them
normally.
Without having to dedicate an entire turn
to just inflicting something, the effects
can happen during the normal course of a fight.
And if your opponent is resistant or immune
to the effect, no big deal, just keep the
fight going.
Monster Hunter takes a different approach
that makes applying major status effects more
reliable.
It’s not a binary success or fail to see
whether an effect has been inflicted.
Instead, you build up status effect “damage”.
A poison weapon might fill up a poison status
meter.
Striking the monster’s head with a blunt
weapon builds a stun meter.
Every monster has a threshold for each status
effect, which neatly incorporates status resistances
in a way that’s more fun than a straight-up
immunity.
Each time the effect takes place and wears
off, the threshold to re-apply that status
becomes higher, and the effect might last
for much less time.
In a game like Monster Hunter, which is entirely
built around boss fights, allowing status
effects to be an ever-changing target to strategize
around rather than a simple binary system
like in a lot of JRPGs adds a ton of depth
to the game.
Also, it has Blast Blight.
It just makes you explode.
Another major pitfall is overpowered status
effects.
Just as it’s easy to make an effect too
underpowered to use, it’s easy to make a
status effect overwhelm the strategy of an
encounter.
Moves in ‘Loss of Control’, and obviously
‘KOs and Insta-Kills’ are especially prone
to this problem, and they tend to make the
game a lot less fun in a hurry if things go
wrong.
‘Loss of Control’ effects have an interesting
imbalance.
When applied to opponents, they can be pretty
fun and strategic.
Causing a bunch of CPU-controlled enemies
to work for YOU is a good time.
But the same move applied to players can cause
a ton of frustration.
Think about it like this: when players aren’t
able to affect the outcome of an encounter,
for any reason, they’re not really ‘playing
the game’ at that point, are they?
A move that takes complete control away from
your party in a JRPG, something like a ‘Confuse-all’,
might cause the player to just watch themselves
lose, but slowly.
Where’s the fun in that?
A move that affects the entire party with
a status like ‘Berserk’ is a little more
interesting.
If the party still operates sorta how the
player might want them to, the outcome could
still wind up in the player’s favor, even
if the player isn’t actually controlling
anyone.
In general, be on the lookout for combinations
that can cause the player to lose all agency.
Instant KO effects can be just as much of
a problem.
There’s a trope where bosses might cast
some powerful, instant KO effect in desperation.
If there’s no reasonable way to foresee
or prepare for that effect, you might lose
all progress in a long fight on a roll of
the dice.
Not fun.
Final Fantasy X has a fight where this can
happen, but there’s a big, bold countdown
to warn you before it hits.
Moves that make the party use inventory items
and healing spells on bosses might sound like
an interesting idea on paper.
But in practice, using strong items and effects
on bosses that have been tuned for player
use can, in effect, make the player lose as
much time as something like an insta-death.
You’ve spent a half hour doing something
and you lose all progress.
If it’s from a death or from a charm spell
that can cause your party to fully heal a
boss BACK TO FULL LIFE PERSONA 3… not really
much of a practical difference.
There are so many more games that have unconventional
approaches to status effects, and I just want
to highlight some of them real quick, kinda
like a take-home study guide.
Chrono Cross’ status effects can cause problems
outside of battle.
You can sprain an ankle, and stop being able
to run.
Or, you could get a burn, which makes you
take twice as much damage from the out-of-battle
environment.
Slay the Spire’s confusion randomizes card
costs.
You can build an entire deck around getting
confused so you get to use a bunch of powerful
cards for much less cost than normal.
Ring Fit Adventure uses attack modifiers and
defensive resistances to help you cycle through
different types of exercises, so you don’t
get stuck working out with just your arms
all day.
Darkest Dungeon makes status effects a more
permanent fixture of a character, and the
Stress system is built around the lengths
you’ll go to avoid getting an extra status
inflicted.
Left 4 Dead 2’s Bile is used against players
to make them more attractive to the zombie
hordes, and it can be used by players for
crowd control.
Earthbound’s mushrooms mess with your controls
while moving around out of battle.
It’ll even change them periodically so you
can’t get used to them.
Skullgirls plays around with factors that
are especially important in the context of
a fighting game.
Valentine has a syringe attack that could
cause a target to take more hitstun, or you
could even cause their attacks to have worse
frame data.
Check out the comments for more good examples,
and post a comment yourself with some of your
favorite games with interesting status effect
systems.
There are so many good ones that we’ve definitely
missed a few.
Status effects are a versatile tool.
They can help deepen gameplay systems, and
make players think longer about what they
can do and what they need to guard against.
But like any other powerful tool, status effects
can break things easily if the balance isn’t
right.
Even so, with all of their mix and match options
and with so many contexts they can be applied
to, status effects are a fantastic way to
infuse a gameplay system with creativity.
*chill vibes outro from Persona 5*