Have you played Hades yet?
It’s finally out of early access, and it’s
a total winner.
I think it’s my game of the year.
The characters, the feel of the combat, the
boon system, the different weapons, the avalanche
of great dialogue - it’s all wonderful.
But Hades didn’t spring fully formed from
the head of Greg Kasavin.
Supergiant is no stranger to fantastic action
games, but Hades is the endpoint in a long
line: Pyre.
Transistor.
And Bastion.
Hades is an amalgamation of everything the
people at Supergiant games have accomplished
- laser-focused and polished to a mirror shine.
The 11-year path they took to get to Hades
was full of fascinating design choices, false
starts, fixes, feedback, tweaks, and iterations.
Let’s talk about the road to Hades, how
to refine a game, and how Supergiant turned
something good into something great.
You know what else is something good?
You.
You know what’s something great?
You with today’s episode sponsor, Skillshare!
I’m taking a class from Jake Bartlett called
Animating with Ease in After Effects.
It’s a real nuts-and-bolts guide to the
Graph Editor, one of the most important tools
you can use to make animations feel livelier.
I’m using After Effects as we speak to make
this video, and Jake made a great, well-written
guide to mastering one of the most powerful
tools it has.
Skillshare is an amazing resource for high-quality
educational classes on all kinds of topics.
Animation, UI and UX design, creative writing,
marketing, music - any creative endeavor you’re
into, Skillshare can help you get way better
at it, in a much faster way than trying to
piece together mediocre YouTube tutorials.
It’s all at your fingertips if you sign
up for their free trial.
The first 1000 people to click the link in
the description will get a free trial of Skillshare
Premium, so you can explore your creativity.
Skillshare!
I wouldn’t keep talking about it if it wasn’t
good.
Go try it out!
Supergiant is not a big studio.
From the start, they've made their games with
a small team.
Bastion was the work of just seven core members,
plus a small number of support people, and
even Hades was made with under 20.
One benefit of having such a small team is
that Supergiant has a very distinct brand.
Supergiant games feel cut from the same cloth,
and that sense of auteurship comes through
with each new game, advanced one step further,
one step at a time.
Hades might be the ultimate expression of
that expertise.
But to get a sense of just what they've done,
we can't start at the end.
We have to start at the beginning, with Bastion.
Bastion Narrator: 'Proper stories are supposed to start at the beginning.
Ain't so simple with this one.'
Supergiant began life in 2009 with 3 main
members: Amir Rao, Gavin Simon, and Greg Kasavin,
all former EA employees who worked together
on the Command and Conquer series.
They were inspired by the wave of smaller-scale
indie titles like Braid and Plants vs. Zombies
and decided to break off and take their own
shot at making something along those lines.
Bastion's gameplay focuses on real-time third-person
action in discrete encounters that pop up
as you travel through the world, plus some
light RPG management mechanics.
The game's path is fixed, with the world literally
building the route in front of you as you
go from fight to fight, plus some other action
sequences sprinkled in, with a central hub
tying the stages together.
You choose your weapons and special move loadout,
and off you go.
There's a healthy amount of choice and customization
in the combat, and the actions feel very satisfying
to play.
Bastion's combat was top class, but its original
show-stopping feature was just how it told
its story.
Bastion drew inspiration from the works of
novelist Cormac McCarthy, known for his post-apocalyptic
and Western stories.
The idea was to combine McCarthy with a fantasy
world like you'd see in a JRPG, and that general
tone and aesthetic developed into the final
game.
The story is centered around the theme of
rebuilding a world shattered in a cataclysmic
event, and as your character walks through
the landscape, it rebuilds itself piece by
piece.
The theme of rebuilding was originally more
prominent, but as the game continued development
and more people like Jen Zee and Logan Cunningham
joined the team, the vision started to focus
more on the presentation and atmospheric storytelling.
Jen's artwork was striking, but Logan's voiceover
work was 
a game-changer.
Bastion narrator: 
As you fight through the ruined lands of Caelondia,
there's an ever-present Narrator painting
a delightful picture of the world and its
story.
Voiced by Cunningham, the Narrator comments
on everything as it happens, including the
player's actions in combat.
Bastion narrator: 'And then, he falls to his death.
I'm just foolin'.'
With a distinct style, he weaves together
the story of Caelondia and the calamity, and
your place in it all.
By seamlessly mixing the lore with the player's
own actions, they interweave the game's narrative
and gameplay without disrupting either one.
Both reinforce each other and are equal parts
of the whole.
The distinct narration brings to life the
game's world without creating it all visually
- a real boon for a team with limited development
resources.
Through the heavily stylized but fresh and
exciting narration, Bastion's narrator added
a ton of life, atmosphere, and charm to the
story and let the game punch way above its
weight.
Bastion was every bit the indie darling they
were hoping to build from the start, but now
they were a successful indie studio.
With success comes expectations.
According to Rao and Kasavin, there was a
lot of pressure to make the follow-up to Bastion
just as good, and they didn’t want to disappoint
their newfound fans with their next game.
While planning out their follow-up, the team
initially wanted to throw out most of the
same design solutions they had used for Bastion.
They wanted to start over, find new solutions
to their problems, and let the next game carve
its own path.
That next game would become Transistor.
Transistor’s pre-production phase took a
fairly long time to finish because of that
initial decision.
It turns out that starting over on the same
problem sometimes leads you back to the same
solution.
The camera angle, for instance, took a long
time to settle.
After trying a lot of different approaches,
they landed back on practically the same isometric
orientation that had been in Bastion.
The basis of Transistor’s story took a long
time to figure out as well.
They started with a young badass boxer as
the lead character, pairing with a spiritual
companion as he went along his quest.
But the team never really fell in love with
the concept.
In one meeting, Kasavin asked Jen Zee, ‘Do
you wanna try something else?’ and within
an hour, she landed on an idea for what became
Transistor’s final protagonist - the voiceless
singer, Red.
The boxer switched roles, with his voice becoming
the voice inside the Transistor.
That initial quick concept was pretty close
to the final design.
Transistor wound up with a structure not unlike
Bastion’s.
It’s another game of wandering around an
environment, getting into combat encounters,
with an unfolding narrative told through environmental
storytelling, data logs, chat rooms, and more
Logan Cunningham voice overs.
The Voice:
The setting shifts to a cyberpunk noir story
and is a lot more abstract than the first
game.
There is no narrator directly talking to you
as an omnipresent force.
Instead, your sword is your partner, reacting
to what’s ahead of you rather than telling
a tale.
The story itself is more open to interpretation
than Bastion and asks the player to connect
the dots more so than Bastion did.
The environments, music, atmosphere, and tone
are what the story leans on, rather than just
the narration element in Bastion.
Though the narration still is an important
part of the game.
The game’s setting and narrative are solid,
but Transistor’s biggest changes appear
in its combat mechanics.
The combat is still similar to Bastion on
the surface, but it goes so much deeper.
In keeping with the cyberpunk setting, the
combat is themed around computer programming.
Yes it works.
Hang with me here.
Instead of the weapon loadout from Bastion,
Transistor lets you customize your abilities,
called Functions.
You can equip up to 4 unique functions at
a time out of a total of 16.
Also, combat in Transistor can be paused.
To get the most out of the functions you bring
with you, you will have to plan out a sequence
of actions to take, which will then be performed
automatically, kinda similar to an ATB 
system in some Final Fantasy games.
But Transistor’s killer feature was in how
the Functions interacted with each other.
You can attach your unused Functions to your
equipped ones to create a huge array of customized
effects and properties for your base move
set.
For example, there’s a function called Jaunt.
By itself, it lets you dash across the field.
There’s another called Friend, which summons
a robot dog companion to fight with you.
If you attach Friend to Jaunt, every time
you dash you leave behind a decoy that draws
enemy aggro.
Every one of the functions can combo in unique
ways like this.
You can also put them into some additional
passive slots for exponentially more customization
options.
This system opened up a TON of creativity
and experimentation into the combat system,
to a degree few games have ever truly had.
You could really put your own signature into
your character’s loadout and make the game
suit your preferences top to bottom.
Transistor was released to solid reviews and
decent financial success, which gave Supergiant
a little more freedom to get weird with their
third game: Pyre.
It’s easily the most unique game in Supergiant’s
library, with drastically different gameplay
and story structure.
The game isn’t a string of action-based
combat encounters.
You’re playing as a merry band of travelers
going from place to place to compete in mystic
sports matches-slash-rituals for the right
for your characters to rejoin the society
they’ve been exiled from.
Pyre is set in a high fantasy world with a
larger cast of characters than the last two
games.
The world is more varied, with a large variety
of biomes, fantasy races, and opposing factions
all vying for the same prize you’re fighting
for.
Instead of weapons loadouts in Bastion or
the functions from Transistor, Pyre’s gameplay
choice mainly derives from party compositions.
Each character has their own unique move set,
and the combinations that make up your team
naturally change how you approach each match.
During the rites, your goal is to dunk an
orb into your opponent’s fire until its
HP drains to zero.
To mix things up, the game uses an aura system
for attacking and disabling your competition.
If a character touches an opponent’s aura,
they’ll be knocked out temporarily, making
it easier to score.
You can literally throw your aura as an attack
and every character has their own take on
these special moves.
While you hold on to the orb, your aura is
unavailable, making you extremely vulnerable
so careful movement and passing becomes important,
just like real fake basketball.
Dunking the orb does more damage, but the
player who dunked it will have to sit out
an entire round.
Between the different ways to score, attack,
and defend, the system is surprisingly deep,
with tons of risk and reward elements to consider
throughout.
Pyre’s quirky, unique combat is fun, but
its biggest step forward for the studio came
in how it played with story structure.
It’s not a straightforward start-to-finish
narrative like Bastion and Transistor.
The narration takes a bit of a backseat, but
Logan Cunningham is still around as the Arch
Justice, a pompous and antagonistic voice
who oversees the rituals.
Arch Justice:
Most of the story is delivered in visual novel
segments as you go from match to match.
The story is driven more directly by the player’s
success and failure, which lets the story
branch more deeply rather than just a few
lines of dialogue responding to weapon choices
or the like.
The narrative focus is on your individual
team members' character arcs and how they
progress through the ritual system.
There’s no fail state in Pyre, either.
No matter how many matches you lose, even
in the big deal liberation rites, the story
just keeps going.
It has something written about every scenario
- including if you fail to win any of the
rites and your characters all remain as they
were in exile.
Characters change their personal arcs depending
on the choices you make while preparing for
each of the rites.
The gameplay segments and the narrative make
a feedback loop.
Success in the gameplay segments changes the
story.
Investment in the story changes the choices
you'll want to make for the gameplay segments.
It interweaves the two to a much greater extent
than they first achieved in Bastion and makes
the story's progress feel much more personal.
Pyre received critical acclaim and sold well
enough for a more niche title, but their attention
turned to their next project.
It was time to put it all together.
The team wanted to make a game that was playable
in short bursts, and release it to the public
as early as possible so their development
process could be seen by their fanbase and
they could respond to feedback - a return
to the openness they had first tried in a
series of videos done in a collaboration with
Giant Bomb while creating Bastion.
They settled on making a Roguelike and teamed
up with the Epic Games Store to release the
game in early access in December of 2018.
The game heavily draws from Greek mythology,
with all of the game’s major characters
and backstories derived from stories the team
and the audience were familiar with.
You play as Zagreus, the Prince of the Underworld,
trying to fight his way to the surface to
escape his father, Hades.
The Olympic gods help you on your way, giving
blessings in the form of direct upgrades to
your weapons and other stats.
You run from room to room in the underworld,
fighting monsters as you go like other action-oriented
dungeon crawlers and getting a reward at the
end of them: coins for Charon’s shop, more
boons from the Olympic gods, pomegranates
to improve your boons, darkness and gems to
permanently upgrade Zagreus and the House
of Hades, and many many more.
It’s very much a roguelike at heart - you’re
not likely to beat it on your first, or even
your first couple dozen runs.
But slowly, your permanent upgrades and your
personal skill at combat will improve and
get you ever closer to your end goal.
Along the way, you'll hear tons of dialogue
between you, the residents of the House of
Hades, and the Olympic gods.
Every run will have characters commenting
on the last runs you’ve done or gods commenting
on the interactions you’ve had with other
gods already in this run.
Each of the characters is teeming with personality,
and it all shines through wonderfully in the
script.
Hades fuses everything Supergiant has learned.
Using what they’ve learned from the strongest
elements of each of their previous games - the
core combat and Narration of Bastion, the
customization of Transistor, and the interweaving
story and gameplay structure of Pyre - Hades
fuses them all and takes each element even
further, combining them 
with an overarching Roguelike framing to make
by far my favorite of their games.
Hades returns to Bastion’s style of action
RPG combat.
You have a variety of weapons to choose from
for each run, and each has unique basic and
special attacks to make every weapon a significant
departure from the others.
But Supergiant has come a long way since Bastion.
Bastion's combat never felt bad, but in comparison,
Hades' combat is much faster, smoother and
feels more responsive.
The combat animations are super fluid, and
the effects and hit sparks are flashier, which
make the moment to moment combat feel more
visceral and satisfying.
The structure of the game has been overhauled
from Bastion and feels more lively and impactful.
The room-to-room dungeon crawler format with
discrete rewards make each combat encounter
feel more purposeful than Bastion's more arbitrary
encounters between story beats.
Hades' gameplay structure offers a clear set
of micro-goals and immediate rewards to keep
you motivated at every step while climbing
the path up out of the underworld.
Hades builds on Transistor's penchant for
choice and customization thanks to its reward
previews.
Each door to a new chamber shows you the category
of reward you're going to get at the end of
the next encounter.
Some of the specific reward types are randomized,
but you'll at least know which god's boons
you'll get or that you'll receive money, darkness,
a Daedalus hammer, max health boosts, or others.
Like the Functions in Transistor, this system
lets you build your character in the way you
want, with a wide variety of build styles
and combinations between the different boons
and upgrades.
The loadout system is a little more gamified
than in Transistor, too.
Instead of totally freeform loadouts, you'll
have to adapt to the boons' random nature,
bit by bit.
You might get a powerful boon of a specific
style early.
Then you might choose to build your character
entirely around a super-powered special attack,
or built around dealing damage over time,
or dozens of other unique builds.
The randomized nature makes the concept of
a 'best build' not really something you can
plan around, which prevents the system from
feeling stagnant over time.
Sometimes you’ll get upgrades that synergize
extremely well, and sometimes your build will
turn into an unfocused mess that you have
to fight tooth and nail to make work.
Each run becomes genuinely unique, which also
makes each run much more dramatic.
The cherry on top of it all is Hades' story
structure.
It's tied just as deeply into the game's roguelike
run-based structure as the combat.
Zagreus' relation to each of the members of
the House of Hades and the Olympians is doled
out a little at a time on each run.
Plotlines are weaved throughout, advancing
little by little as you go out, get defeated,
and come back.
If not the next step in a plot, you'll get
bits of lore on enemies and places you've
found or quips on how or to whom you got killed
by the last run.
The script has so much unique dialogue to
see, too.
Beyond just the plot-relevant stuff, there
are running jokes Zagreus will have with the
bosses.
Gameplay rewards like the Nectars tie into
advancing the relationship between characters
little by little.
Nectars even reward you with accessories that,
in turn, affect the strategy of your next
runs.
Every time through the underworld, a little
more of the story falls into place, and even
the gameplay elements you see are a meaningful
expression of the world being woven in front
of you.
Just like how the run-based gameplay structure
and randomized elements keep the combat feeling
fresh, the way that Hades has written its
story to react to and be part of the nature
of the Roguelike is masterful and keeps the
narrative just as fresh.
The step by step progress that Supergiant
has made in their games is a testament to
their skill as developers and is a great thing
to study.
Head down to the comments and tell us about
your favorite studio and how they've progressed
and improved their games over the years.
Supergiant Games have never been a stranger to smooth combat, but Hades is smoother.
They've always brought compelling narration
and story structure to their games, but here
it’s even more impressive.
Hades is a blend of all the things Supergiant
was already good at, made into a complete
package, and is a game that will stick with
me for a long time.
*chill vibes outro from Transistor*