Hey… hero!
Would you like to take a break?
Get some shopping done?
Try your hand in some underground fighting,
or play with one of TWO slot machines?
I think I’ve got the perfect place for you.
Towns have been fixtures in the design of
RPGs basically forever, but they’re so universal
that it can be easy to take them for granted
and forget what they’re there to do.
You don’t make a great town by just slapping
some cottages and a store in a field.
The designers of the best RPG towns understand
the town’s role as a sanctuary and space
for worldbuilding and use that to tie together
place, story, and mechanics into one entity.
Let’s unpack some great RPG towns and see
how they make something functional yet memorable.
Today’s episode sponsor is the Dot Design
top-level domain!
Yeah!
The domain name registrar Porkbun is the place
to go for professional and aspiring designers
to turn something like ‘princevegetadesign.com’
to the more elegant ‘princevegeta.design’.
Nice.
Very classy.
Dot Design works great for web and UX designers,
interior design, or other design disciplines
*cough* game design *cough*.
Whether you’re just starting out as a designer
or looking for a way to improve your online
presence, a Dot Design domain name tells the
world who you are and what you do, right from
the start.
You can also easily hook your new domain into
completely free WordPress hosting, Squarespace,
Wix, or fully custom websites.
Major brands like Spotify, Slack, Airbnb,
Adobe, and Amazon are already using Dot Design.
Dot Design reflects what you do as a designer,
improves your branding, looks great on a business
card, and you can get your domain by clicking
the link in the description.
Alright, so how do you whip up an excellent
RPG town?
It helps to look at what great towns are doing
to a game’s design.
The first thing is the most basic: towns are
a sanctuary - a place to recover from the
previous battles and prepare for those to
come.
A town provides a place to resupply and take
a breather.
They stand as a breakpoint from the period
of resource depletion that makes up the gameplay
loop of many RPGs.
Take Pokemon.
Just about any town in Pokemon functions as
an oasis to heal your Pokemon and restock
your supplies before heading out again to
train.
The trek from town to town is treated as a
test of endurance and resource management,
where you manage your items and the fighting
ability of your Pokemon.
The better you prepare in town, the easier
of a time you’ll have out on the road, and
the longer you’ll be able to train up.
Healing at the Pokecenter also sets that town
as the place where you’ll appear again if
you run out of luck in the wilderness, which
reinforces the idea of the town as a checkpoint.
But that would be pretty boring if a town
was just a glorified gas station.
A town’s role as a sanctuary isn’t limited
to how it replenishes your resources lost
during combat.
It can also be a break from the combat-focused
gameplay loop itself.
The standard gameplay in an RPG is tense,
risky, combative and stressful, and if that’s
all there was in the world, the game could
become too one-note to stay interesting.
The town can be less scary in contrast by
focusing on other types of gameplay.
It might involve hunting for secrets hidden
in corners, going down dialogue trees with
NPCs, playing minigames you can try and retry,
or other things that don’t usually have
failure states like combat does.
Like in Dragon Quest.
Towns in Dragon Quest are about talking with
NPCs and finding secrets.
The town’s gameplay loop puts combat aside
and focuses on the role-playing part of the
role-playing game.
You can learn about the world, read only the
red books for recipes and lore, break pots
for items, rummage around in random closets,
and tackle town-focused side quests.
You’re committing home invasions, but it’s
fiiiine.
It’s fine.
There’s no consequence or risk that you’ll
hit a game over.
You can explore the city’s nooks and crannies
to help immerse yourself in the town and bring
the game to life while you’re taking a breather.
Focusing on different types of gameplay also
helps give a town a purpose when the combat
doesn’t revolve around depleting your resources.
Xenoblade Chronicles refills your health automatically,
and your abilities work on cooldown timers.
Once combat is over, you’re pretty much
ready to go again, forever.
The game’s towns aren’t there so much
to restock, but instead, they’re built with
their own progression and reward systems.
Each city has a large number of NPCs with
generic merchants, named characters, and quest
givers.
Towns have a whole unique economy where you
barter collectible items and materials for
unique items you can’t find in shops.
Each town is a part of a citywide reputation
system called the Affinity Chart.
As you meet named NPCs and complete quests,
you’ll fill out the chart and you’ll gain
affinity points for that city that accumulate
and show as a 5-star rating.
As your bond with the city increases, you’ll
get access to more quests and better items
to trade.
You’ll also get to influence the relationships
that the NPCs have with each other.
You might bring together a couple by helping
them create a storybook for an orphaned child,
or you might help a man stop a loan shark
from ruining his life.
It’s a dialogue-focused mode of gameplay
that rewards you with experience and items
and helps bring your party members closer
and gain new passive abilities and optional
heart-to-heart conversations.
It’s a great system to focus on when you’re
feeling like doing something other than combat
for a bit and still gives players a ton of
useful rewards along the way.
It’s starting to sound like the town and
the dungeon are basically two separate games
you switch between, but that doesn’t have
to be the case.
Even though they often focus on different
styles of gameplay, one can still impact the
other.
Dungeons are more fun if they’re full of
hidden secrets to uncover, but how do you
split the difference between secrets that
are too hidden to be found reliably and ones
that are too obvious to be fun to find?
You need some subtle hints, and towns can
play a role here too.
Town dialogue doesn’t have to have an immediate
impact.
Townspeople live, work, and play in the surrounding
area, so it makes sense for town conversations
to be laced with rumors and tips about where
you could be heading next and what you might
want to watch out for.
Things you might want to store in the back
of your mind to look into later.
Town dialogue can work as a sort of diegetic
hint system.
Final Fantasy V is very good at leading players
towards cool stuff if they take a moment to
really listen to the randos about town.
You can overhear the guards of Castle Walse
talking about ‘rumors’ of the summon Shiva
inside the waterfall behind the grounds or
about the tantalizing treasures guarded by
high-level enemies in the depths of the castle.
You don’t HAVE to pursue the rumors.
They’re just optional things you can do
when you feel you’re ready.
If you stumble into Istory in the northwestern
region of the world, you can find a TON of
cool things through villager hints.
Ramuh is hanging out in the nearby forest,
striking at anyone who wanders in.
Some kid is babbling on about taking a spin
around a flower bed, whatever that means.
Huh.
Oh.
OHHHHH.
There’s a farmhand who will mention how
the sheep have a bad attitude and will kick
you if you get too close.
Figure out that one, and you’ll get to talk
to a bard nearby who’ll teach you a song.
Every village or safe haven in Final Fantasy
V has some sort of optional hint or clue for
you to pursue, so reaching a new place can
be a fun way of finding out useful optional
bonuses nearby.
It’s a great way to make secrets feel less
arbitrary, boost the exploration side of the
game, and to make the townspeople feel like
they’re actually living in the area.
So far, this has been a very mechanics-focused
look into the RPG town, but the best of them
are more than just shops and minigames.
Towns are places where people congregate.
A town is the center of life for the people
that live in them, and the most believable
and interesting towns in fiction can reflect
that for their fictional residents.
RPG towns should be crafted to reflect the
humanity of the people that live there, their
hopes and dreams, their jobs and hobbies,
and showcase a history and culture of their
own.
That might sound like you should foist an
info dump onto players, but there are more
subtle ways to allude to this sort of depth.
Towns can be great tools to help drive home
a story with an abstract high concept in a
more concrete way.
Chrono Cross’ Arni Village is the hometown
of our protagonist, Serge.
The story of Chrono Cross is about traveling
between two timelines that diverge around
an event in Serge’s past.
Serge grew up in Arni Village, and the first
version of it you see is a SUPER standard
sleepy JRPG home village.
The most unique thing about it is it does
not get blown up by anyone.
Early in the game, SOMETHING happens, and
you first head back to this other world version
of Arni.
Something’s wrong, though.
You know everyone there, but no one knows
who you are anymore.
The village itself is humming along just as
it always had.
It’s not burnt to the ground or taken over
by a tyrant king or anything, it’s just
the village as it would be if you weren’t
a part of it.
Another Arni is familiar as a place, but the
connections between the people of the town
are just a little off.
Even the town’s music theme is changed in
a way that reflects the new reality.
The upbeat, livelier tone of Home Arni’s
theme is replaced with a more cautious and
subdued one.
The melody matches, but the music reflects
the way Serge feels in this new world’s
version of Arni.
It’s the same, but slightly different.
Not in a menacing way, just more melancholy
at seeing the familiar change to something
you don’t quite recognize anymore.
The new version of Arni is great as the first
visceral window into the game’s high concept
of alternate timelines by putting you right
away into a place that you as the main character
have the deepest connection to, and how that
place completely changes based on one difference.
RPG towns can be amazing vehicles for environmental
storytelling.
The story isn’t just about dialogue from
character to character.
The environmental design of a town can be
itself a storytelling device.
As places your characters travel in and around,
towns are full of potential to imply setting
details through distinct architecture and
setpieces.
Character motivations can build up from what
you can see about the circumstances surrounding
them.
Final Fantasy XIV relies heavily on environmental
storytelling in its cities to help make the
world feel lived-in.
The cities' design paints a vivid picture
of what everyday life is like in them, even
if the player doesn't get much to interact
with beyond major story quests.
The City of Eulmore, from the game's Shadowbringers
expansion, is a great example.
Eulmore is a tiny island off the coast, blatantly
divided between rich and poor residents.
The wealthy live in the Canopy, where they
live lives of hedonistic pleasure and bonded
servants in the lavish upper levels of the
city.
You only go into two parts - a parlor and
a… 'gentleman's club,' but the environments
make it easy to get a sense of this area.
Below the Canopy is the Understory which houses
the Eulmoran Military facilities and the city
jail, free from the gaudy decor above.
Below, by the city's entrance, are customs
offices and bureaucratic facilities, separating
the interior from the shanty towns all around.
The Derelicts and the Gatetown are filled
with rickety shacks built with wood gathered
from a ship graveyard surrounding the island.
Here and there, you'll spot details that hint
at the city's society, like a resident hoarding
a piece of fancy furniture or a rug.
The social dynamics underpinning the story
are made clear by the environmental details.
They paint the residents as literal bottom-feeders
waiting for scraps from those living above
and create a platform from which other characters
can branch out.
They can tell their own stories that feel
more compelling when put into this environmental
context.
The careful attention to detail in every section
of the town turns Eulmore into a twisted character
in itself.
It's a much more evocative piece of storytelling
than if the same details were just spelled
out in dialogue.
Not that they aren’t, but the environment
greatly supports it.
It’s important to remember that towns should
be made up of a lot of people that have their
own lives that don’t involve the main characters.
You probably can’t actually make thousands
of people with fleshed-out backstories, but
you can do things that at least hint at a
world beyond the party, and even little nods
can make the town seem much more alive.
Towns that seem to exist just to interact
with player characters don’t feel like real
places, more like a theme park facade or a
Potemkin village.
If everyone’s standing around with the same
basic dialogue in hour 2 and hour 30, that
place feels like a cheap imitation of a town,
not a real one.
An easy way to fix it is to have the town
change over the course of the game.
This shows up a lot in central hub towns,
like Rogueport in Paper Mario: The Thousand
Year Door or Toad Town in Paper Mario 64.
Since you revisit these places over and over,
the towns HAVE to change anyway to stay interesting.
Chapter to chapter, different town features
are added, NPCs change and are swapped out,
special events are updated, and new areas
open up as you gain new key abilities in a
Metroidvania-esque way.
Each new area breathes extra life into the
world, and seeing new facets of an area can
provide interesting details to a familiar
place.
Trails in the Sky does it just with dialogue,
where most NPCs seem to have their own personal
storyline that progresses throughout the game.
You’re not involved directly - mostly - but
their lives are changing while you’re away.
Completionists might not like this very much
though, as because the storylines don’t
revolve around you, you don’t need to be
there to advance them.
If you miss a line or two, you might miss
out on fun details, or even an entire sidequest
if there was a tie-in there.
We’re just scratching the surface of what
roles towns can play in RPGs.
There’s more to talk about with mini games,
trope subversions, what happens if you start
breaking the rules, non-traditional towns,
and more, but I think we’ll leave that for
another episode.
Now that you know a little more about what
they’re made of, head down to the comments
and let us know your favorite RPG towns.
Great storylines and interesting environmental
storytelling are especially welcome.
Bonus points for ones that aren’t strictly
towns.
Towns are an enduring fixture in RPGs, and
the best of them can hold the heart and soul
of a fantastic game.
Understand what the best towns do, and you
can make a home away from home.
*chill vibes outro from Kingdom Hearts*