If you were to pick one phrase that belongs
to gaming the most, I don’t think you could
find one better than ‘Level Up’.
For a term that video game RPGs borrowed from
their tabletop counterparts, the idea of leveling
up has quickly found a home in so many other
genres.
Action, puzzle, open-world, first person shooters,
the occasional platformer, lots of genres
have adapted leveling systems in one form
or another.
But for an idea so broadly applicable, leveling
up is a weird construct.
A discrete, noticeable, sudden improvement
in your character’s ability isn’t a very
realistic way to think about personal progress,
and yet it’s such a useful abstraction.
It’s a great way to streamline the concept
of growth, and it fits perfectly in so many
video games.
It’s a fantastic tool, but like any other
tool, it can be used for good, and it can
be dangerous in the wrong hands.
Or just not be as effective as it could be.
Let’s talk about leveling systems, how to
design effective ones, and how different games
spin them to keep players hooked and make
games fun and fresh.
But first, get ready to level yourself up,
for real, with today’s sponsor Skillshare!
No joke, Skillshare’s really good.
I’m taking a class called the Productivity
Masterclass - Principles and Tools to Boost
your Productivity.
Ali Abdaal guides you through years of proven
research about the principles, strategies,
and tools that actually work to help you be
more productive, regardless of what you want
to do.
I’ve been using this class to think about
how I create these videos, and it’s been
useful info!
It’s helped me procrastinate a little less
and save time, and I think it’s totally
worth it.
Skillshare has thousands of other inspiring
classes on topics like UI/UX design, animation,
creative writing, illustration - practically
anything you’re into, Skillshare can help
you explore it deeper, and learn amazing things.
And today, you can get a free trial!
For a limited time, use the link in the description
to get a free trial of Skillshare Premium
Membership.
Try it out!
Skillshare!
I do it!
You can too!
I like it!
So what is it about leveling systems that
makes them so useful and popular?
It’s all about progression.
Progression sustains the life of games, and
KEEPS them interesting.
But progression is such a broad concept.
There are tons of different ways it can show
itself.
The way the narrative unfolds in a game like
Undertale is a kind of progression.
So is going place to place through new areas
in Hollow Knight.
Fighting through a ramping difficulty curve
in a game like Geometry Wars is yet another
one.
All progression is a way to structure a game
and give players a reason to keep moving forward.
See the next story beat.
See what’s around the next corner.
See if you can meet the next challenge.
Without it, games can quickly get static and
dull.
But, since ‘progression’ is such a broad
and abstract concept, you can do an infinite
number of things to scratch that progressive
itch.
Leveling systems are just a tested and reliable
way to do it.
To understand how leveling systems provide
progression, I like to think about two big
categories: Intrinsic and Extrinsic progression.
Intrinsic progression involves a player’s
self-driven improvements.
Games that rely on it can be a slow burn.
Chess is a good example.
Every game of chess starts with the same board,
but each new match doesn’t start from the
same place.
Players bring with them their accumulated
experience.
A deeper knowledge of the rules to better
take advantage of opportunities.
A better recognition of strategic patterns
that they’ve run into before.
An ability to predict and counter the moves
your opponents might make.
Intrinsic progression develops from your experience, built over time.
Chess doesn’t give you an explicit bonus
for how many games of chess you’ve played.
There’s no XP bar for this pawn.
Intrinsic progression develops out of your
personal experience.
Many of the world’s most timeless and enduring
games let players build on their experience
forever, bit by bit, and draw people back
to them with the promise of getting a little
better all the time.
In video games, Rocket League, StarCraft, and a lot of fighting games
rely on this kind of progression.
There’s always something new to learn, or
a skill to sharpen, provided just by the game's
rules and the dynamics of the head to head
matches between players.
Intrinsic progression is a deep well to draw
from, and games that rely on it can 
stick with players for their entire lives.
But intrinsic progression has some inherent
issues, too.
Not every game needs to be a lifelong hobby
or even wants to be.
Some are meant to be consumed in 50 hours,
not 50 years.
That’s a stylistic choice, but there can
also be a structural problem with intrinsic
progression.
Left to their own devices, games that rely
on building up a lot of skill over time can
be brutal on beginners.
Fighting games, especially, run into this
snag a lot.
The depth of fighting games comes from a profound
familiarity with the game’s mechanics.
Matchups, frame data, instant reactions, mixups,
game-specific techniques like wave-dashing,
there are lots of things to know if you want
to do well.
For a veteran player, they might become second
nature.
Some skills might even partially transfer
from another fighting game if they’ve already
had experience over there.
For beginners, though, there’s a dizzying
amount of things to learn to even start improving.
Even if the beginner is spending time to improve,
it might be a while before that improvement
gains tangible results.
If the online matchmaking is still pitting
you against better players, or if you're getting
destroyed over and over by a veteran playing
in a local scene, it's hard to feel like you're
improving.
If the result is always a loss, the experience
feels static for a long time.
The game’s novelty might wear off quickly,
and without any visible progression leading
a new player up the skill ramp like a trail
of breadcrumbs, new players can bounce off
a game.
What would help is a way to guarantee that
feeling of progression for everyone, and that’s
what extrinsic progression is great at.
Extrinsic progression covers the structures
that encourage a player to keep playing not
because they just want to, but because the
goal was put there.
Extrinsic progression is easier to create,
too.
You don’t have to come up with a great reason
for a player to want to get to the end.
Just set a goal in front of people, and many
will want to complete it just because it’s
there.
It’s not as deep, but it’s much easier
to implement, and it works well enough.
Cosmetic items are effective extrinsic progression
tools.
Think about how often you’ve kept playing
a game for the chance to get a cosmetic item
you wanted.
But this episode is about another fantastic
external progression tool: level up systems.
They’re great at guaranteeing that a player
will get that feeling of progress.
No matter your skill level or how well you
grasp the game mechanics, if you put your
time in, you’ll get better.
Noticeably better.
Sure, some people might go down the path faster
or slower, but you’ll all eventually get
to the end.
It can’t really fall into the problem where
the game feels static for too long.
Now, there are a zillion different ways to
implement a level up system, but let’s start
with a real basic one: Pokemon.
It’s a real plain vanilla leveling system.
Fight a wild Pokemon or a trainer, gain experience,
level up, get a little stronger.
Rinse and repeat.
To spice things up, every few levels, an event
suddenly happens.
Your Pokemon will gain a new move or ability,
or once in a while, it will evolve into something
a little cooler.
Usually.
Under the hood, there are mechanics that power
players can factor in, like natures, IVs,
EVs, and special evolutions, but none of that
is necessary for casual play.
The game’s campaign is built to smoothly
guide you towards the end even if you only
interact with the basic leveling system.
Kids playing the game don’t have to know
anything special to see benefits from their
time spent, and can totally ignore the more
advanced systems underneath.
It’s not the most exciting system, though.
It’s a grind.
This kind of EXP threshold-based system is
prone to feeling like a treadmill if it’s
not carefully dotted with enough interesting
new things along the way, like the new moves
or evolutions in Pokemon.
Tying progress to a concrete number of EXP
gained makes the pace of progress pretty set
in stone, and players who have played a few
of these sorts of progression systems might
recognize the treadmill for what it is early.
That can defeat the feeling of accomplishment
that the level up system is trying to add
to the game.
That stripped-down version of the treadmill
shows up in Super Paper Mario.
The game is a mashup of Mario platforming
and RPG mechanics, and the mashup feels a
little awkward.
There’s a disconnect in the game’s story
progression and its mechanical progression.
The RPG half levels you up based on your score.
As you defeat enemies, you’ll earn points
like in the original Super Mario Bros.
You’ll level up once you hit a threshold,
and get preset bonuses that alternate between
more attack power or more HP.
The story is completely divorced from this
system, and you can just blaze through it
as fast as you want.
There aren’t the same gates blocking off
your story progress until you get mechanically
strong enough, like there are with the gym
leaders in Pokemon.
There’s not even any fun mystery around
the corner, or agency in determining a character
build when you level up.
The new moves are all unlocked by getting
further in the story.
Without connecting it to the story, Super
Paper Mario’s progression system feels like
it’s there for its own sake, which makes
the treadmill-like qualities of it stand out
even more.
For a different spin on traditional level
up systems, try Final Fantasy IX.
There are different experience systems all
over the place, and they’re all leveling
up simultaneously.
There’s one traditional one that handles
your basic stats, but there are more XP bars
attached to equipment.
By changing equipment, you can choose what
skills you want to learn, and swap equipment
between characters to get everyone built how
you want.
Passive abilities tie to yet another system
of magic stones, which work a lot like Paper
Mario’s badge points.
As characters level up normally, they’ll
also get more Magic Stones so they can equip
more support abilities at once.
Plus, with so many skill bars overlapping,
you’ll level SOMETHING up in almost every
other battle.
The system gives tons of agency to customize
your characters exactly how you want, gives
even low quality pieces of equipment a purpose,
and creates a very smooth ramp, dotted with
lots of new abilities.
The grind feels less grindy when you’re
getting something tangible all the time.
Lost Odyssey is not too different.
Abilities can be used and learned permanently
through your equipment, just like in FF9,
but on top of that there’s the Skill Link
system.
Lost Odyssey divides its characters into two
groups: Mortals and Immortals.
Mortal characters learn new abilities naturally
through a leveling system, but can’t learn
equipment abilities permanently.
The Immortal characters are the opposite,
learning skills not by leveling up but through
either their equipment or by linking to a
mortal character to learn their skills individually.
It’s an interesting way to customize, and
lets multiple characters share new skills.
It even adds another layer to picking your
party compositions and gets you to use everyone
in your team in order to power up your characters
evenly.
Seriously, check Lost Odyssey out.
It’s a real hidden gem that doesn’t get
the recognition it deserves.
Ok, so basic level up systems can help progression,
but they can become very predictable and disengaging.
So how do you fix that?
You could give players more agency in HOW
they build their character, for one.
And you could do that through point allocation
systems.
Instead of just increasing stats randomly
or based on a predetermined path, let the
player allocate increases as they see fit.
Castle Crashers does a straightforward version
of this.
Castle Crashers is a side-scrolling beat-em-up
with some light RPG elements.
As you level up, you gain new combat options
and also get to allocate some points to physical
strength, magic, defense, and speed.
No big twists here, just a level up system
where the player picks the stats that are
most important to them.
It gives them a long-term goal, and even adds
some replayability if you want to try out
different builds.
This system takes what would otherwise be
kind of a boring treadmill into one with a
little more strategy baked in, and one that
can veer characters towards a particular playstyle.
You can find deeper point allocation systems
in games with skill trees and perks.
Remember how the more interesting parts of
Pokemon were the new moves and evolutions
dotting the path from level 1 to 100?
What if we made a system that focused on that,
but for every level?
Instead of basing most of the progression
on numerical stats, skill trees hand out new
abilities for each step on the progression
ladder.
Or yeah, sometimes some new stat buffs, but
you get to pick this time!
For action games like Spider-Man and God of
War 4, the system creates a steady flow of
new combat abilities that accomplishes a few
things.
It periodically adds something new for players
to play around with, which keeps adjusting
the game’s combat options, which prevents
one strategy from dominating from start to
finish.
It also helps take what would be a dizzying
array of moves and parcels them out slowly,
so players don’t get overwhelmed by having
to learn everything at once.
For developers, this also helps prevent a
case where you spent a lot of effort to create
the animation and mechanical behaviors on
a move that gets forgotten about in a flood
of other moves.
The slow, steady progress of reveals helps
give each move its time in the spotlight,
right after you unlock it, so each move can
be tested out in turn.
Spider-Man uses a traditional XP leveling
system to gain points to spend on its skill
tree, but also combines it with other progression
systems to hide the grind.
The system also makes new cosmetic costumes
available for purchase.
Story progression provides new gadgets.
There are 6 different token types to gather
from side missions that let you upgrade gadgets,
costumes, moves, and more, which gives a good
reward for players that engage with all the
different activities in the game world.
But 6 different kinds of tokens, plus an XP
system, plus story progress is just a lot
of things to track.
It’ll start to get unwieldy.
Devil May Cry simplifies all of that down
to just one currency: Currency.
In Devil May Cry, the weapon move purchase
system does the same thing, just with a different
currency: Currency.
Devil May Cry doesn’t have what, at first
glance, looks like a ‘Skill Tree,’ but
the progression lies in how you spend your
money to buy new moves.
The money is still metered out slowly, just
like an EXP system.
The way you purchase the moves still gives
each one some time in the spotlight, like
the systems in Spider-Man and God of War.
The progression is more open than a traditional
skill tree.
A big downside to these trees in action games
is they can make things weird for repeat playthroughs.
The loss of most of your cool moves makes
the built up muscle memory from your last
playthrough kind of useless.
But that’s where a New Game Plus mode can
come in.
Oh, hey, look at that, Devil May Cry made
a good one of those too.
Wonder why.
The Souls games also combine experience and
currency into one thing.
Buying equipment and spells from shops is
all done through Souls.
That’s not that unique, but the way they’re
built into the world is.
When you die, your accumulated souls are left
at the spot you died in.
To get them back, you have to run back to
your body.
If you die trying, all those souls and all
that progress is gone for good.
Because souls are the main driving force behind
character progression, the possibility of
losing them permanently adds a lot of risk
and reward to the game’s leveling system.
The one-chance-to-save-it aspect helps keep
the system from feeling more punishing than
it had to be.
Building up experience and later cashing it
out is an idea that Final Fantasy XV has tried
with mixed results.
As you battle, the experience that you earn
isn’t actually put into your characters
right away.
It only applies when you rest at either a
campsite or at a hotel.
Staying at a campsite will also let you cook
stat-boosting meals and sometimes trigger
rare optional story sequences that add some
light content and character development.
Problem is, there’s a dominant strategy
problem in the system.
Not all rest stops are the same.
Better hotels give you XP multiplier bonuses,
which make traveling a ways to stay at THIS
hotel the objectively best option to level
your characters.
The system actually makes it less likely that
a player will stay at campsites, which causes
them to miss those pieces of side content
unless they’re already aware of them.
Be careful when adding in bonus systems.
Many players can and will optimize the fun
out of a game if that makes the numbers go
up faster.
So that’s some basics on how to polish a
level up system.
Let us know in the comments some of the ones
we didn’t mention.
There are a lot of good, fun, weird systems
out there.
We might make a follow up video about some
of them.
Level up systems operate with extrinsic progression
to inject novelty into a game.
At their most basic, they can be a grind,
but if you dot a level up system with a lot
of new features, make your players feel like
they have tons of options, and show them tangible
benefits for the time they’ve put into your
game, you can make your level up system a
mountain worth climbing.
*chill vibes outro from Lost Odyssey*