Poison, sleep, charm, berserk - you’ve heard of 
‘em. You all haven’t played the same games as each  
other, but you all know the vocabulary. And plus 
or minus a few effects, you can give a pretty good  
guess as to what these statuses will do in a game 
you’ve never played. A handful of common statuses  
show up in games over and over. But is that it? Is 
that all a status effect could be? Of course not!
We’ve made a video before about WHY statuses 
are important to combat systems. They’re  
built to create variety. To spice it 
up into something beyond a race to 0.
But today, we’re going beyond the basics. 
These are… ADVANCED status effects.
Every game is a unique reality, built out of 
thin air. The developer creates ALL the rules.  
There are no limits to what a status effect 
could be. You have total creative freedom,  
and you’d be surprised how much a unique 
status effect can do structurally for a game.
Let’s get weird with it, and talk 
about some weird status effects!
Hey, can you go pull up your character 
screen and look at your career status? Damn,  
that’s rough. Well, time to fix 
that with today’s sponsor, Boot.dev!
Back in college, Mike switched majors from 
Chemistry to Computer Science a couple  
years in. He wasn’t sure whether he’d 
enjoy a career in software engineering,  
but he took the leap, and it worked out great. 
Software development can be an amazing career,  
but it’s tough to get a sense of whether you’d 
enjoy the work. What if there was a cheap,  
easy, and fun way to try it out? 
Guess what, that’s Boot.dev.
They’ve created a backend development 
curriculum with bite-sized lessons  
that teach you modern languages and 
techniques. You’ll earn experience,  
unlock achievements, and complete quests 
as you compete on a global leaderboard,  
while learning the fundamentals 
of programming with Go and Python.
You can’t learn to code without building 
real projects, and Boot.dev has the  
tools for you to learn how. If you get 
stuck, their Discord community is full  
of thousands learning and helping 
people just like you get unstuck,  
and back on the right path. They offer a 
30-day, no questions asked refund policy,  
and even a free demo mode for every 
course. You really have nothing to lose!
Try Boot.dev! Use my code ‘DESIGNDOC’ to get  
25% off your entire first year, 
if you pick the annual plan.
Thanks to Boot.dev
So you have total creative control. What kinds 
of status effects could you come up with?
What story do you want to write with that power?
Let’s start slow. You don’t have to 
do all that much to make a new custom  
status. You could take a proven one, 
and just give it a new coat of paint.
Chapter 1: Debauchery
Poison that’s called Poison isn’t exciting. 
But what if you call it something else?
Hades’ combat revolves around boons - 
abilities granted through favors of the gods,  
which modify status effects to be deadlier 
and more complicated over the course of a run.
Hades calls its poison ‘Hangover’, and 
it’s the status of choice for Dionysus.  
The Party God grants you tons of boons 
that relate to inflicting damage over time.
It’s a lot like poison. Every half-second, 
enemies with a Hangover take damage,  
and the effect can stack for more damage 
per tick. But unlike just ‘poison’,  
the new label gives more latitude to add 
bonus effects that play with the theme.
The party-and-alcohol connotations of 
an effect like Hangover can be played  
up in boons like ‘Splitting Headache’, 
which increases critical hit rates on  
anyone afflicted with it. ‘Peer Pressure’, 
where the Hangover spreads from enemy to  
enemy. ‘Bad Influence’, where you 
get a buff when 3 or more enemies  
have hangovers. Or ‘Numbing Sensation,’ 
which makes those affected move slower.
The creative reskin of something common like 
Poison into something unique like Hangover  
makes it easier for players to accept and 
remember new elements of a status effect,  
which is especially important in 
a game like Hades where modifying  
statuses is core to the game’s combat 
depth. The new label helps shake loose  
the player’s preconceived notions of what 
the status is, and what it could become.
But what could YOU become?
Chapter 2: Lycanthropy And Friends
One of the most straightforward things 
a custom status effect could do,  
is disable a game action. Easy. 
Maybe a little dull by itself,  
though. How can you spice it up? Lots 
of games do it with a transformation.
The first Kid Icarus had an enemy called the 
Eggplant Wizard. Guess what he turns you into.
Have you ever seen an eggplant punch a man to 
death? No? Exactly. You don’t even have arms!  
Pit can’t fight as an eggplant. So all you can 
do is retreat to a hospital and cure the status.
  
Kid Icarus Uprising kept that effect around, 
and added a new one with a more dangerous  
angle. I guess it could’ve been any food, 
but they made a Tempura Wizard. Guess what  
HE turns you into. Once you’re tempura, 
the wizard will chase and try to eat you.
It’s an immediate 1-hit KO if you’re 
caught. Players have to run for their  
lives until the effect wears off. 
It’s silly, but it’s memorable,  
and the extra mechanical twist 
will change how you play the game.
A disabling transformation is a good opportunity  
to bring in elements of the game’s 
characters or setting to a fight.
Luxord in Kingdom Hearts 2 is obsessed with 
gambling and chance, and his fight’s custom  
transformation effect turns you into a die. When 
you’re crushed into a cube, you can’t do all the  
actions you normally could. You’re slower, 
you can’t use basically any of your skills,  
and your movement is… well, they tried 
to make the animation look good, I guess.
Super Mario RPG turns you into - what 
else? - a Mushroom, where you can only  
regen and defend until it wears off. Also 
Scarecrow, which doesn’t take away quite  
as many powers. You can still fire special 
attacks, but you can’t walk up and punch ‘em.
These effects don’t have to be novelties,  
either. You could make them THE 
element that gameplay revolves around.
Wario Land has about a 
billion goofy transformations  
that change how you move in the 
world. Get flattened, zombied,  
vampire’d, on fire’d, drunk, but not exactly, 
sprung, or turned into a ball of string,  
and figure out how to navigate a world 
that’s all of a sudden not so Wario-friendly.
A disabling status by itself can be 
underwhelming, but dress it up a little  
as a transformation effect, and you can make it 
one of the most memorable parts of your game.
Chapter 3: Melancholy
You can make a weird status 
effect anything you want,  
and that flexibility means you can make 
it fit into very specific elements of your  
game. Like making one play up your game’s 
unique story themes. Earthbound does that.
You’re Ness, a 10 year old kid, 
ripped from his life in suburbia,  
to take on a quest to fulfill your grand destiny. 
It’s a typical JRPG, but the game's setting made  
it stand out in 1995, and helped inspire 
I-couldn’t-even-tell-you-how-many modern  
games. The whole thing is in a contemporary 
90s setting, with funny, irreverent monsters,  
moves, and locations, and the game's 
status effects also lean into that vibe.
Some are creative reskins of the 
typical statuses. Instead of poison,  
you get a cold and nausea. Instead of blindness, 
your characters get teary-eyed. There’s some fun  
ones with unusual mechanics like ‘Mushrooomized,’ 
which messes with your controls, and ‘Possessed,’  
which makes a tiny ghost attack you every turn,  
but I think the game’s most memorable 
status is a simple one: ‘Homesickness.’
A while after you start your journey, 
level 16 or so, you might notice Ness  
wasting some turns. The box starts talking 
about how Ness is thinking about his mom,  
how he craves his favorite food, or 
how he’s just lost the will to fight.
Under the hood, it’s a paralysis effect 
- a 1 in 8 chance of Ness losing a turn.  
You can catch Homesickness at 
the end of any battle at random,  
and it’s a real problem if you get it in 
the middle of a dungeon or right before a  
boss. But the cure is simple enough - just 
pick up the phone and call your mom. Or  
visit somewhere that reminds you of home. Or 
talk to this weirdo. You allllllll fixed up.
It’s a simple effect, but 
the flavor text in fights,  
and the unusual way to cure it help reinforce 
that you’re not playing as some nameless avatar,  
or a battle-hardened chosen one. You ARE 
just a kid, dealing with fear and anxiety,  
out on the greatest adventure of your 
life. That small bit of flavoring in  
a one-off status effect helps make the world 
of Earthbound feel just that much more real.
Earthbound’s weird statuses have 
a tasteful allusion to some of  
the game’s themes. But why be subtle when 
you could be really, really on the nose?
Chapter 4: Isolation
Mario and Luigi Brothership is all about 
the importance of bonds and connectivity.  
The plot has Mario and Luigi sailing around the 
land of Concordia - a set of isolated islands  
that were once a great continent. You two go 
around working to reunite the world through  
the power of connections. Both spiritual… and… 
electrical. The devs are not shy about really  
hammering home the theme - most of the NPCs 
even take after electrical plugs and outlets.
Even moreso than the rest of the 
series, in this game, Mario and Luigi’s  
combat abilities rely on the two to pair up. 
Even your basic attacks have both brothers  
working together to deal more damage. And of 
course, the series staple Bros moves return.
The theme of bonds and cooperation even extends 
to enemies - they often have their own co-op  
attacks. They’re not even Bros and they’ll 
mess you up. That’s the power of teamwork.
Eventually, you’ll run into 
Glohm. It’s a corrupting energy,  
infecting anyone it touches, forcing them 
to want to isolate themselves from others.  
In gameplay, Glohm works as both an enemy 
modifier and as a negative status if it  
gets on the Bros. As the game progresses, 
more and more enemies infected with Glohm  
appear. They’ll get a wide range of buffs. 
Attacks become faster. They might make a  
spiked shield to defend with. Some gain temporary 
stat boosts. Some might start counterattacking,  
or explode on defeat. But when they’re all Glohmed 
up, enemies act in their own self-interest. They  
won’t work together to perform cooperative 
attacks, and some might even skip their turn.
Since Glohm spreads on contact, you’re at risk 
of catching it all the time. If it latches on,  
it severs the bond between brothers. Neither 
can work together. No Bros attacks. No Luigi  
Logic. You can still hit back, but it’ll be the 
weaker solo attack. Glohm severely hurts your  
damage output, and unlike other status effects, it 
doesn’t wear off on its own. Normal recovery items  
only give a 50/50 shot of healing it, too. You 
might have to go find the really good antidote.
Glohm is a great example of an effect that makes 
gameplay and narrative work together. The buffs  
it gives enemies, and the severe debuffs it gives 
you makes the narrative threat real, and not just  
a thing for characters to wax poetically about. It 
drives home the game’s premise in a tangible way.
So far, we’ve talked about a lot of 
things around the edges of a game.  
Small mechanical bits here and there for flavor. 
But you could make a weird status effect more  
important. If you wanted to, you could make 
it the backbone for ALL of a game’s combat.
Chapter 5: Animal Fights For Money
Cassette Beasts has a type chart of 
14 elements. You know how people want  
more complexity in the Pokemon 
type chart? Well, here you go.
All the types interact with each other to 
create status effects depending on what  
hits what. Each of these statuses are named, and 
there are dozens of them. The combo might buff,  
debuff, or even change the type of the 
monster to something else. A plastic type  
gets hit by a fire attack? Well, the plastic 
will melt, and create a coating that changes  
the type of the defender to Poison. Water 
hits Earth? You’ve Eroded the Earth type,  
and they get a defensive penalty. Poison hits 
Metal? Well, now you’ve made your opponent a  
poison-tipped weapon, and the Metal type will 
deal extra Poison damage on its future attacks.
The chart of unique combos 
can be a lot to remember,  
but the game does give you a heads-up as 
to what the attack you’re about to do will  
result in. This complexity is the backbone 
of Cassette Beast’s combat system, and the  
way each monster can morph and change mid-battle 
helps make the combat more complex and strategic  
than the more straightforward overpowering 
approach that Pokemon’s combat can often be.
There’s one special element, though, dedicated 
to transmuting monsters into other types. It’s  
Glitter! There are no natural Glitter-type 
monsters in the game, but a Glitter-type move  
will do the job. Use a Glitter move on anything, 
and it immediately becomes a Glitter-type monster.  
Attacking a Glitter-type with any move will 
then coat the monster, and turn it into that  
attack’s type for a few turns. You can make 
some crazy setups by strategically changing  
types mid-battle, and you have to be on your 
toes to defend against those combos as well.
I haven’t seen many RPGs with this 
wide a range of status effects,  
with this much emphasis on them for creating 
the complexity of the game’s combat system.  
It moves Cassette Beast’s combat beyond the usual 
rock-paper-scissors style that so many RPG combat  
systems default to. It’s what I think makes 
the game stand out in a sea of Pokemon clones.
A weird status could be absolutely anything 
you can dream up. Nothing is too intricate  
or too grand. Nothing is too custom. If you 
can come up with an effect that could only  
ever exist in your game, that status could become 
one of a game’s signature elements by itself.
Chapter 6: A Reckless 
Disregard of Workplace Health
Dragon’s Dogma 2 is an action RPG. The game’s 
sorta kinda almost like if you mixed a Kingdom  
Heart into Elden Ring, where you travel 
around with computer-controlled companions  
called Pawns. You, the Arisen, rely on 
your Pawns to watch your back. Though,  
not really any individual Pawn. If one falls, it’s 
too bad, but there’s more where that came from.  
You’ve got a squad of replacements waiting in the 
Rift, pulled in from a pool of create-a-characters  
in other people’s playthroughs. Summon 
A Gandalf, or that lady from Elden Ring,  
and be on your way. The pawns are interchangeable, 
not really worth paying attention to.
Oh. Oh no.
Welp, turns out that not paying attention to your  
new Pawn’s health has killed an entire 
village and possibly bricked your save.
One of your new recruits brought Dragonsplague 
with them, and I don’t blame you if you didn’t  
notice. The game’s UI doesn’t give you a 
direct heads-up. If you want to be safe,  
you’ll have to moonlight as a 
physician and spot the symptoms  
in any Pawn you bring in. Good luck, 
the symptoms are pretty low-key.
Your Pawns are normally very deferential to 
you, especially ones with the more timid or  
kind temperaments. Pawns who catch Dragonsplague 
become a lot more assertive than their normal  
selves. But all that might mean is a Kindhearted 
Pawn says a line that only the Straightforward  
Pawns would say. Maybe a pawn stops listening 
to your orders, that might raise some eyebrows.
In combat, they’re stronger, too. Not a bad 
perk to have, except for that other part.
The one unmistakable sign of 
Dragonsplague is the glowing red eyes,  
but you have to look for it. You’ll have 
to get all up in there to see it, too,  
and remember to take any Pawn’s mask off 
to check - they block your Pawn’s eyes.
Dragonsplague is a constant threat. Anyone 
you bring in might have it. Even Pawns that  
get rented out to other people’s games might 
come BACK with the plague. Better check again.
If you don’t, and you go to sleep sick, that pawn 
will kill EVERYONE in town. Including story NPCs.
Then the game will auto-save, and force 
you to deal with the aftermath. You can  
un-brick your save file with Wakestones 
if you need to, but it’s not cheap.
To cure it, you’ve gotta just kill the 
pawn yourself. A cliff’ll do. Once dead,  
you can bring your Pawn back from 
the Rift, and go on like normal.
Dragonsplague is a totally original status 
effect, playing off of unique game mechanics,  
and half of its…’charm’ comes from how hard it 
is to detect with the tools you have. A little  
bit of intentional UI obtuseness results 
in one of the most surprising, impactful,  
and memorable status effects in recent memory.
If you’re making a custom status, 
absolutely nothing has to be off the table.
Chapter 7: Atheism
That’s right, we’re getting real.
In Final Fantasy Tactics, You Can Inflict Atheism. 
Alright, it’s called ‘Innocent’ in some versions,  
but You Can Attack People With 
Atheism. Cast Doubt or Disbelief,  
or hit ‘em with the Gokku Pole, and 
your target gains the status effect:  
Atheist. All atheists in the game have their 
Faith, which is a numerical stat, set to 0.
Faith in Final Fantasy Tactics 
impacts how magically receptive  
you are in totality. There’s no separate 
magic attack and defense stat in this  
game - it’s all one thing. The more Faith 
you have, the more magic will affect you,  
positive and negative. High Faith characters 
get healed more, and deal more damage.  
A character inflicted with Atheist effectively 
DENIES magic in its entirety. 0 Faith means 0  
interactions with magic. Players can’t heal 
or be healed. They can’t attack with magic,  
but they also can’t BE attacked. They’re immune to 
taking magic damage, as long as the effect lasts.
The quirky way that Faith factors 
into both offense and defense lets  
you build some crazy strategies around the effect.
If you’re facing powerful spellcasters, 
you can simply Renounce Your Faith,  
and take away a ton of their danger. 
As long as you don’t need to heal.
Atheist fits the core themes of the 
game’s story - a struggle against a  
corrupt and power-hungry church, and a crisis 
of faith. It takes advantage of the original  
elements of the game’s combat to spin up fresh 
mechanical ideas - where magic is a tool that,  
the more you can wield it, the more it 
can be wielded against you. I love it.
It’s a beautiful design, delivering a level of 
theming, balance, and care that fits perfectly  
into THIS world, and it’s hard to think of 
a game that could do all of that any better.
And it’s still a weird status effect.
Checkmate, Atheist.
Do you know how many weird contenders I had to 
cut for this episode? There’s so many. Enough  
for a part 2 for sure. Head to the comments and 
let’s talk about your favorite unusual status  
effects. You could also join our Patreon, where 
Patrons get a sneak peek of what we’re making,  
and a chance to shape the episodes of the future.
Status effects could be almost anything. 
Reskin a proven one, combine elements,  
or come up with something completely 
original, and it’ll help spice up any game.
*chill vibes from Cassette Beasts*