It’s not working anymore, Jim.
The kids just don’t know about the Bomberman.
We need a Bomberman for a new generation.
Angrier.
No, EVEN ANGRIER.
Yessss.
SHIP THE GAME.
A HAHA HAHA.
WHUH- MY CAREER!
THOSE DAMN KIDS RUINED MY CAREER.
Game series are usually pretty static.
Madden is roughly the same game it’s been
for decades.
Uncharted is Uncharted.
Kirby’s Kirby.
But every once in a while, a game series takes
a hard turn.
Suddenly your happy, cheery Kirby is angry
eyebrows Kirby.
Game designers don’t make those changes
by accident.
SOMETHING causes them.
Maybe a big problem popped up.
Maybe the series audience is changing.
Maybe the game format is getting a little
stale.
Or maybe the designers just think that’s
the case.
Whatever it is, something inside a game studio
signals to the devs that the game has to change
and go in a bold new direction.
But what sorts of signals could those be,
and more importantly, does a tone shift lead
to success, whatever success looks like?
Let’s look back at a bunch of game series
that decided enough was enough, made a drastic
change, and had to live with the consequences.
This episode is sponsored by War Thunder!
War Thunder is a free-to-play military vehicle
combat game on PC, Xbox Series X and S, PS5,
and the previous generation.
And it’s fully cross-platform.
I’ve been hearing about how dedicated War
Thunder’s fanbase is and I tried it out
for myself.
It’s fun!
I’m gravitating towards the aerial dogfighting.
I love seeing dozens of planes in the air
all weaving around each other at once, and
then taking a couple out myself.
But if tank combat is more your thing, they’ve
got like a zillion of those too.
You can play with over 2000 historically accurate
tanks, helicopters, planes, and ships from
every era in the last hundred years.
You might even see me flying overhead in the
same match.
Click the link in the description to play
War Thunder for free.
There’s a free bonus for registering, too.
You’ll get a premium aircraft, tank, and
ship, and a seven-day account boost to get
started in style.
Thanks, War Thunder!
So what are we talking about?
A series only changes what they are because
of a big problem.
Sometimes the mechanics are the focus of the
change, and we’ve talked about some of those
in our Game Design Rebrands video over here.
Other times, though, it’s a problem with
a series’ tone and feel.
But that could be either a real problem or
just a perceived one.
Why does a game series try to reinvent itself?
Well, there are actually a lot of reasons.
Chapter 1: Always listen to the kids
Many tone shifts are business decisions meant
to try to widen the appeal of a series or
to reach a new audience.
In the late 90s, Naughty Dog was looking for
their next big franchise after their success
with Crash Bandicoot, but wanted something
that they could call their own.
They left behind Universal Studios to work
exclusively with Sony, with whom they had
built a strong working relationship during
the PS1 era.
With the more powerful PS2 hardware at their
disposal, they saw new possibilities and set
out to make their next big franchise: Jak
and Daxter.
Now, Naughty Dog isn’t the kind of company
to shy away from doing the trendy thing, especially
in the ‘90s.
Jason Rubin described Crash as following in
the footsteps of giants like Mario, Donkey
Kong Country, and Sonic, and the influence
those games had on Crash’s level and character
design is pretty clear.
Jak and Daxter would follow suit.
The game is effectively a fusion and refinement
of two of the most successful and influential
games of the previous generation: Super Mario
64 and The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time.
Jak and Daxter was a 3D collect-a-thon where
players could explore open-world-style sandboxes,
completing objectives and platforming challenges
to collect progression items, like Mario 64.
The game had an immersive story and cinematic
components, with a fully fleshed-out setting
and better cohesion from location to location,
like what Zelda was known for at the time.
The game had no loading screens, seamlessly
loading the world as you walked through it,
which helped contribute to the level of immersion
the game was going for.
Jak and Daxter was released in December 2001
to both critical and commercial success, selling
over a million copies in the US alone, though
it wasn’t nearly as successful as any of
the games in the Crash series.
And it wasn’t for lack of trying.
Sony and Naughty Dog marketed the game hard.
So what happened?
Why didn’t the game make a bigger splash?
In hindsight, it's clear that Naughty Dog
and Sony were aiming for as broad an audience
as possible.
The art style and character designs had creative
input from Sony of America, Japan, and Europe.
Jason Rubin describes it as a designed-by-committee
process that he felt was a mistake in hindsight.
Jak himself lacked direction as a character
and likely lessened the game's impact to some
degree.
He was a silent protagonist, not doing much
more than standing around while Daxter did
all the talking and animating.
The game had some minor but persistent criticism
for lacking personality compared to its series
contemporaries: Ratchet and Clank and Sly
Cooper.
The other thing is the industry was changing
from under them.
Mario 64 and Ocarina of Time were great, but
it’s 2001 baybee.
Tastes were changing, and refining what worked
before isn’t a guarantee that it’ll work
again.
Early on in the development of Jak 2, the
designers were thinking through prototypes
and the world they were trying to make.
Jason Rubin talks of focus groups they ran,
where young kids would say that the game looked
good, but, y’know, good for their little
brother.
When Rubin would ask them what they were most
interested in playing now, the answer would
always come back ‘Grand Theft Auto 3’.
With the mainstream audience gravitating towards
GTA, Naughty Dog took a cue from that and
applied it to the sequel in as many ways as
it could.
Jak 2 was released 2 years later and flipped
the basics of the original game on its head.
The game begins with the main cast getting
flung through a portal to a harsh, war-torn
city, ruled by a tyrannical government and
under constant threat of monsters called Metal
Heads.
Jak is captured and experimented on for two
years, completely changing his character.
Also, he can talk now.
Daxter is still here, still doing Daxter things.
His wisecracks and jokey personality actually
do a better job balancing out the new edgy
Jak than in the original.
The plot casts away the general fantasy setting
for a revenge plot with guns and attitude.
The collect-a-thon structure has been abandoned
in favor of story-based missions and a GTA-style
open-world hub where you can steal cars and
get chased by the authorities in between missions.
The shift in tone was pretty jarring, but
you know what?
Jak 2 did fine.
It was easy to make fun of its newfound attitude,
but it didn’t drive people away.
Under that surface edge, the story was more
engaging.
The characters were more interesting and dynamic.
The fundamental platforming gameplay meshed
well with the new mission-based structure
and weapons.
Jak 2’s tone shift was borne out of trend-chasing,
and even though it might seem bolted on to
a series that wasn’t designed for it, the
developers at Naughty Dog still pulled it
off.
The shift worked.
Chapter 2: Scare the kids
Not all tone shifts follow that same path,
though.
Some series aren’t trying to chase trends.
They’re trying to get ahead of stagnation.
Take Advance Wars.
Advance Wars is a pretty old series, but it
might be older than you think.
People in the West might know it first from
Advance Wars, released in 2001.
But it’s way older than that.
The ‘Advance’ in ‘Advance Wars’ refers
to the Game Boy Advance, but the series goes
back to 1988 with the Japanese-only release
of Famicom Wars.
Released on the Sega Saturn.
I mean the Famicom.
Most Nintendo platforms had their own Japan-exclusive
releases in the series: Game Boy Wars and
its sequels, and Super Famicom Wars, but the
big tentpole release was Advance Wars.
Big enough to cement what would become the
series hallmarks.
A breezy but pretty deep military tactics
game full of bright, colorful scenes, wacky
cartoon characters, and about as cheery a
depiction of war as you’re gonna find.
Advance Wars sold great, even after releasing
on the world’s most unfortunate release
date, and spawned a couple of sequels and
a… real weird spinoff on the Gamecube and Wii.
Battalion Wars is somethin’.
Over the next half-decade, the series had
fallen into a rhythm.
A couple tweaked mechanics, an expanded story
mode, and some extra multiplayer features,
but Advance Wars was Advance Wars.
Until 2008.
Out of nowhere, Intelligent Systems released
Advance Wars: Days of Ruin.
Cheer?
Gone.
World?
Meteor’d.
Cartoony characters?
Nope.
Colors?
Drab.
Music?
Sick as hell.
Days of Ruin places the series’ familiar
tactical gameplay in a self-serious and stark
world devastated by meteor strikes and the
fight for resources in the aftermath.
The game was a reaction to the perceived same-ness
of the series.
The devs believed that the game was changing
and evolving under the hood, but on the surface,
it appeared to be the same game time and time
again, and they felt that fans were starting
to notice.
The easiest change was to reflect the concept
of war onto the rest of the game and unify
the setting more.
The world is wrecked.
Pastel colors turn to browns and greys.
Tsunamis, earthquakes, dust blocking out the
sun.
The COs have serious problems, rather than
not knowing what an airport is for laughs.
The COs aren’t so much cartoon characters
- they’re fighting for their survival in
a way the series never really attempted to
touch on before.
Days of Ruin’s change in direction stemmed
from a desire to stave off player fatigue
in getting the same thing yet again.
And it worked!
Well, critically anyway.
The change in tone was welcomed by reviewers
and well-received by fans.
Days of Ruin sold OK, but not great: about
600,000 units.
Better than Dual Strike.
They didn’t even release Days of Ruin in
Japan until 5 years later as a Club Nintendo
platinum status bonus download.
The series’ tone successfully changed, though
the series has ground to a standstill in the
intervening years.
We haven’t had a new Advance Wars game since
2008 and nothing afterward until ReBoot Camp,
the remake of the first two Advance Wars games,
was announced.
Days of Ruin successfully revamped the series
style, though if they were aiming for lasting
success, it’d be hard to argue that it was
mission accomplished.
Chapter 3: Never show your game to your coworkers.
They will steal your ideas.
Some tone shifts happen even before the first
game comes out.
Conker’s Bad Fur Day was made by the Rareware
team behind Killer Instinct Gold, but it didn’t
start out as a vaguely-South Park-inspired
3D mascot platformer.
First, it was a regular 3D mascot platformer.
The game was announced at E3 1997 as ‘Twelve
Tales’ and followed in the footsteps of
Super Mario 64, like so many other games of
that era.
Their one weird trick was going to be more
expressive characters and animation.
According to software engineer Chris Marlow,
Twelve Tales had a ton of cool ideas, but
they didn’t seem to gel together all that
well.
While in its early development stages, one
of the other teams at Rare looked at Twelve
Tales and took inspiration, which they applied
to their own ‘Project Dream’.
That game went through its own shift, from
an action-adventure RPG to something more
colorful and… platform-y.
‘Project Dream’ would be renamed Banjo-Kazooie.
You might have heard of it.
While Conker’s development slowed to a standstill,
Banjo-Kazooie was released in 1998 to massive
critical and commercial success.
That success would force the Conker team to
do some soul searching.
Banjo made Twelve Tales look redundant - just
another cutesy platformer from Rare.
The project stagnated.
…Until it was taken over by Chris Seavor,
one of the main artists on the team.
The game needed a radical tone shift to make
it stand out in the late N64 marketplace,
so Seavor made it lean into lowbrow, edgy
humor while keeping the outwardly cute art
style.
Mix in some movie parodies because it’s
the late 90s, and hey, you’ve got something.
Something more unique, at least.
Bad Fur Day was a product of its time, but
the bold raunchy tone made it stand out among
its contemporaries and was well-received.
Rare believed in it and thought the game had
the potential to lead to more.
After Microsoft purchased Rare, Bad Fur Day
received a full remake in 2005 on the original
Xbox, with enhanced online multiplayer which
remained fairly active for a couple of years.
Weirdly enough, there was MORE censored content
on the Xbox version compared to the N64 original.
Rare had plans for multiple follow-up projects,
including a full sequel - Conker’s Other
Bad Day - and a multiplayer-focused game called
Conker: Gettin’ Medieval.
Though by this point, the revamp in tone already
seemed a little dated.
The projects never really got off the ground.
So where does that leave Conker’s Bad Fur
Day and its tone shift?
As a long-lasting series, Conker didn’t
make it.
As a cult-classic, it’s still one of the
better remembered games on the platform and
one of the weirder game development stories
of that era.
As a tone shift to save a failing, outmoded
project?
It’s hard to argue it was anything but a
success.
Chapter 4: NEVER listen to the kids
Remember Fuse?
Nah, probably not.
That’s kinda the problem.
Maybe though.
And if you know about Fuse, you might know
about Overstrike.
Overstrike was first shown off at E3 2011.
Insomniac and EA were teaming up to make a
bright shooter where a quirky secret organization
teams up to stop evil robots.
No, not that one.
That one.
At the time, the game struck a chord.
It seemed like it could be something along
the lines of Team Fortress 2 with the added
personality and individual character of something
like The Incredibles.
Jokey, special agent stuff with fun secret
powers and near-future tech.
Right now, that might not sound too unique,
but in 2011 it was fresh.
Back before every second game couldn’t stop
winking at the camera.
Overstrike seemed like a totally solid concept
and a promising title to check back on as
it was developed.
There weren’t any public announcements,
but that’s not unusual.
Everything’s probably fine, right?
One year later, we got a new Overstrike update!
Scratch that, not Overstrike.
The game was rebranded to Fuse.
Get ready for the zany… uh… huh.
Where did all the colors go?
And like… all the secret weapons are less
fun and more disturbing?
Turns out, the year of development kicked
off with some focus testing.
Insomniac was originally going for a fun,
campy style, not far off from Ratchet and
Clank, and appealing to people in their late
teens.
Once it got to the focus groups, the target
demo thought the game was for their younger
brothers.
So, they changed it.
That’s a good call, because no game has
ever been profitable if it appeals to 8-year-olds.
Ever, ever.
Ever ever ever.
Ever.
Ever ever ever ever ever.
The game went through a ground-up reimagining
and sucked the life out of the whole project.
Every character went from quirky to tragic.
Every motivation, from rootable to unsettling.
A game about personalities became about alien
guns and the bad things you can do with them.
From we’re broken and having fun, to we’re
broken… and not having any fun.
Fuse came out in mid-2013 to tepid reviews,
and guess what?
They mostly harp on the game’s lack of distinguishing
personality.
It’s not a technical disaster.
It plays OK.
It’s fine, I guess, but it’s totally unremarkable.
Fuse came and went.
Chapter 5: I dunno, do what you feel like,
man
Tone shifts don’t have to be dark ‘n gritty,
or more epic, or for comedy.
Sometimes it’s about the vibes.
Tetris is a puzzle game.
Abstract.
Blocks.
No story.
No characters.
Just… blocks.
Fill in the lines as much as you can.
Level by level, faster and faster, until you
can't.
It's super simple, but there's one weird thing.
If you play enough Tetris, there's a change
that happens.
You start playing the game by feel.
You know where the pieces have to go without
thinking about it.
You're in that zone.
A trance-like state where the line between
you and the game starts to blur.
You've experienced…
The Tetris Effect
Now that’s by accident.
The meditative qualities of Tetris weren’t
designed into it from the start, but it’s
a nice extra to make the game a little more
compelling than if it weren’t there.
Now that it’s here, though, what if you
leaned into that?
There isn’t much of a theme to speak of
in Tetris, so what if you changed it to explore
how deep the Tetris Effect can go?
Henk Rogers, founder of The Tetris Company,
was a fan of Lumines and Rez and asked Enhance
founder Tetsuya Mizuguchi to do… pretty
much that, but for Tetris.
The game was made with VR as a focus, leaning
in on the experience of being fully immersed
in the platonic ideal of Tetris.
The road wasn’t easy, though.
Tetris Effect took 6 years to create and refine.
Early versions of the game were too overwhelming
and out of balance.
The studio tweaked the game to slow down the
action while the environments were shifting
around, to help give players the capacity
to appreciate the visuals without losing the
game.
The campaign was split to provide more chances
for breaks without forcing marathon sessions.
But it was still just fancy Tetris.
The gameplay needed a tweak to make the game
its own thing.
Every so often, you can enter The Zone, which
lets you drop blocks and fill lines without
them getting removed immediately.
While the Zone is active, you're trying to
fill the screen with lines and then have them
all clear at once at the end.
The more lines you get while in the Zone,
the bigger the bonus.
The structure mimics the buildup and catharsis
you see in music, and it's just as useful
in games to help set the pace and create peak
moments.
And it worked!
The game of Tetris becomes a skeleton on which
the devs could project an ever-changing array
of visual motifs and music that accentuate
the experience without drawing your attention
away.
The set themes, animation, music, and Zone
mechanics let the game play with constantly
shifting moods and create something worth
experiencing.
Now, the stakes for Tetris weren’t that
high.
It wasn’t like a series that could have
been cancelled with a bad sales performance.
Tetris isn’t going anywhere.
But the tone shift that Tetris Effect undertook
created something rooted in Tetris, but miles
past anything the series had done before.
I hope you’ve learned something today.
If not, head down to the comments.
Let’s talk about other series that took
a drastic tone shift, how they got there,
and what changes you’d like to see your
favorite series take.
Changing the fundamental tone of a game doesn’t
guarantee success, but sometimes that roll
of the dice pays big dividends.
*chill vibes outro from Final Fantasy X-2*