[Music Playing]
[Danny off-screen] Cool.
-All right, you good? Sweet. Hello.
Hello.
-For the sake of the lower thirds, what is your name and where do you work?
Uhm.
My name is Grzegorz Brzęczyszczykiewic.
Seriously,  that's from-- That's a joke from a famous polish movie.
My name is Marcin Iwiński. I'm the Co-Founder and joint CEO of, uh, CD Projekt.
How, do you say it?
[Danny attemping to pronounce CDPR in Polish]
-Seh Deh--oh it's--Seh, Seh Deh Proyekto Red?
CD Projekt Red.
-CD Projekt Red.
Ok, you're getting there.
-Is that ok?
Couple more years...
-CD Projekt Red.
-Right. Make us shoot some docs in Poland, and maybe I'll get better at it.
-Uhm...Welcome back to GDC.
-What Is GDC for you this year? It seems like you're kind of-- You've wrapped up on a massive project...
...there's another one coming some way down the pipeline.
-But is there a lot to do here this year?
I think there's, there's always a lot to do at GDC.
And I think it's different over time.
When, when we have something rolling there's probably more interviews and and more media things,
but it's always a great platform to meet people and talk in a more relaxed atmosphere.
Time for lunches, for dinners, for breakfast and just hanging out and catching up. And also some some good business.
Mm-Hmm I really, appreciate this place because everybody's here.
Both from the media side, and uh,
From the-- From the business side. At the same time there is no such pressure like there is at E3.
Which is always about,
"Yeah! The big stall! The big games!" And everyone has got like 30 minutes and they gotta run to another meeting.
So GDC, I think, it's it's a good place to hang out and talk to people.
-So for someone in your position who is, you know, at the top top
-You know, tier of that company--
 
At the top top of the top, of the top
Okay, continue it's actually very Interesting.
At "your position."
[sarcastically] Yeah, my limo driver is waiting for me outside.
I normally they come to my car, we have a drink and then you know, we drive around.
-I know, we had to have like ten bottles of Kombucha for you here when you came in.
Just the one without alcohol because I don't have my ID on me.
Funnily enough, sometimes it's even a place to meet some people from the game-dev scene from Poland.
I just met with Paweł from Techland.
He's in Wrocław, I am in Warsaw, so it's roughly 350 kilometers and we meet annually at GDC for a nice lunch and chat.
But, uhm.
I'm meeting...normally people from companies we're working with.
So, obviously the first parties. We're meeting with certain media.
And and generally our business partners from all around the world.
Mmm...new contacts, uh...
Sometimes certain people are pitching us, I don't know, middleware services and what not.
It really depends at E3. But,
everybody who does games is here.
So, you know, whoever we want to meet are here. Catching up with old friends, as well.
-Did you used to go to GDC Europe? I know they've decided to stop doing it now, sadly. Was there--
I think. I've been. I've been I think once?
-Right.
But it-- It was always all a bit awkward.
It didn't have this, uh...this...
Everyone-is-here kind of, kind of feeling and
Gamescom was always...I don't want to say cannibalizing it, but sort of...
Gamescom was the thing so if you wanted to staff in Europe Business, in Europe, Gamescom was the platform.
And GDC was sort of stick to it, ah, I think it just, just wasn't the right timing or maybe the right match.
-So it actually kind of works better for you coming here, because you know everyone's going to be here.
Before I did D.I.C.E., but funnily enough every single year with our guys
We thought, "Should we go to D.I.C.E.?" And it's always, you what know I mean, flight back and forward and the jetlag.
And it was like, "No, we'll just stick to GDC."
So we've never been to D.I.C.E. actually, it's always GDC.
-Later this year the Witcher will be ten years old. It'll be a decade since you launched the first game.
-You know ten years ago and you were building that franchise could you of imagined the sort of where that ended up going?
No, I actually-- Actually 10 Years Ago when
we were working on it, we are praying to all gods to finish the first one.
That, that's how you normally develop games then...it was, uh...
Maybe not similar, but there was obviously a lot of pressure on the second one.
The third one was even more ambitious so then, you know, that..
I-- I don't think you normally think, like, where you will be in ten years.
You think like where you will be when you finish the game, and how it will work for you.
Then you find out new things, you learn a lot throughout the process
and then you're a different person. So, uh, I think we've never planned that far ahead. I think, uh...
The gaming industry is like it's like an uber fast place so
so you cannot really foresee--
the tech trends you know. "Well, how people play games in 10 years?" I wouldn't be, I wouldn't be brave...
Brave enough to really, to really...
Forecast anything today. Because I don't know.
-A lot of the team that worked on the first game
-Are a lot of them still at CD Projekt?
There's a good question. Definitely part of them. I cannot tell you how many people, but a lot of the core people that are
still in, and then quite a few of them are are around the industry making other games.
-And then from the second game, did you retain a lot of people as well?
Yeah. From the second game, uh...
A big big big part is still in. So,  I think the first game has definitely...
taken its toll.
-Right.
Because it
was five years of blood sweat and tears and I think it's important
just just to [unintelligible]. When we started The Witcher 1 we really had, no clue how to make games, so
probably two years, was just setting up the whole...
production structure and really learning how to deliver milestones. You know how to make things happen
on schedule. Even a moving schedule. But some schedule. Yeah?
While afterwards it was more like structured production so that that was that that
was the the pain of Witcher 1 and, and it was a lot of energy. And a lot of wasted energy and
time. And effort from from the teams and some people you know,
it was hard on them.
-It seems like, with each project you put more on your shoulders actually. I mean, cause like Witcher 2 you
were going for consoles as, well and then obviously Wild Hunt, was such a...
massive game in terms of-- In terms of scope. You always seem to be, you know, probably operating right at your, like, limit as a company.
No, I think above, actually.
But I...
That's what-- That's what's fueling us, you know, and
obviously like with
Witcher 2 and going to the console; the big unknown. Right now it sounds like, hey, like a walk in the park
actually. I don't want to say that Witcher 3 sounds like a walk in the park, because it wasn't one for sure.
But maybe in ten years from now we will think, "Hey that was that was relatively easy." The challenges we face today...
-How many people are working there now?
Right now all together we are...
we're...
slowly...
reaching 600? 550? Something like that?
-And that's not including GOG?
That's including-- That's everything.
So that's the whole group. Uh, GOG out of it, it's uh...
Hundred twenty? Hundred thirty right now?
Together with the tech, with the backbone. So, part of these people that are working on, on Gwent as well.
So we share a lot of resources on the on the server side.
-And how has that growth been? Because obviously, you know, the
cautionary tale of so many companies is that they-- When they grow, it...
creates its own problems. That didn't seem to be the case with Wild Hunt. It's arguably the best game that
you guys have made.
Yeah, I think, you know. We've, uhm...
We've learned a lot throughout the time, and...
Uhm...
When, we...
Tal-- Again, talking a little bit about the history:
We started as a games distribution company. We were growing. First Poland. And games distribution company means retail.
There was no digital back in the day.
And then, uh...we did Czech Republic, Slovakia, Hungary. So it started growing. So international structure.
As...challenging as having an office in L.A. these days.
So like, communication problems and so-on and on.
Then we started, uh-- We had the biggest game mail-order business
in Poland. Biggest site.
We had...
Initial small GOG. We had...
B2B (Business to Business), like porting and QA facility.
So a lot of these things.
And then in 2008~2009 the crisis hit us. We almost collapsed. We almost folded.
And then, we really...
Really got fixed on a, on a concept
That we have to shrink, and we have to manage
limited resources in a way. So I think back in the day from
mostly in the distribution business, 300 people was scaled down to 200. It was really tough time. Almost went bust...
and I still remember
we, we co-wrote with Michał, the Co-Founder, an article for-- for the polish edition of Howard Business Review how "small is beautiful."
-Right.
When I look at it from-- from distance I'm smiling because
that was our, our?
Concept for managing back in the day. It is very different right now. I think one lesson which
which we learned, and and it's still very much up-to-date, is focusing. So we definitely do more--
Less things. So primarily, as you know, games development--
So from from from the stuff we can talk about it, Cyberpunk and Gwent, two separate teams, two separate units.
And GOG. So it's way more structured and focused, but the groups around it are much much bigger.
So I think...
we learned how to manage it more effectively. How to structure it and, and I think the
one important thing which we omitted back in 2007 and before was the role of, uhm...
Of managing people and spending time with them.
Like, for the first probably...
12 years of the company, we didn't have HR.
We were doing everything ourselves.
-Right.
And right now, we realize that, you know, to
to look after people. To look after our team members, we really need people to look after people, to look after people.
You know and this is growing, but it's also empowering us because then if we have
happy
team members they can, do
a better job, there's less stress, and and it goes smoother. Having said that, you know, it...
If you are larger you are slower in a way. I think our benefit here Is that, we are all practically holding one location
Because the office in L.A. is mostly business and marketing. And we have an office in Kraków
which is just two hours by train. So this Is manageable and and and and we are trying as much as
we can to really concentrate all the, all the creative forces in one place because then we can steer the ship--
ship much, much faster.
-You know the Witcher 3, the expansion packs have come out and been very well received, as well,
and has that-- Is that the team that sort of then been focused on the Cyberpunk?
Yes.
Yes, yes, pretty much. Uh, that team--
 There are some people who, who joined the Gwent team. Just a few.
They wanted a different scope of the project. So it's also great to have this this possibility of offering
different things to people. Sometimes they say, "Hey, you know, I'd like to do something smaller now and
something different." So. But primarily--
Vast majority of the team moved on to Cyberpunk.
-Are you sick of people asking you about it? It's been like years since that trailer came out.
About what?
-Cyberpunk.
What?
-You just said it a second ago!
What?
No. You know, I'm I'm I'm not because I have a very short answer: We cannot talk about it.
Because whatever I say will be used against me.
-I know, I mean-- I feel like there are specific--
They'll come with smart question, "I know, I mean, but..."
-What I'm saying is: CD Projekt are one of those companies that like the minute every game journalist get a hand of you guys
all they want is for you to say the words "Cyberpunk" and anything.
-So I totally get what you mean. But, what I'm saying is: Are you sick of people asking you--
No, I'm not. I'm not, you know, um
and and I think, you know...
We were discussing this, uh, today with with Michał actually, and uh
Sometimes when I'm waiting for a certain game...and
there is no information whatsoever. I start doubting that, you know, well maybe it was dissolved, maybe it's not happening. You know, you don't know that.
We're quite secretive about what we're doing. So yes, there is there's
a lot of people, more than on Witcher 1, working on Cyberpunk. But we've already announced the game, we've shown the trailer
a while ago, and right now
we have to show the game. So when we'll be ready, we'll do that and...But, but rest assured
it's in the works and it's...it's it's, you know, a big part of our focus.
Of course we are doing Gwent, but, uh, the whole creative forces behind The Witcher and then some,
because we've grown the team significantly, are, uh, on Cyberpunk.
-Yeah. I mean it's a good problem to have people are interested in the game.
Yeah, of course. Of course.
-I feel like people are probably a lot more Interested in it now since The Witcher 3 came out though, as well.
-Like it was an Interesting concept at the start, but seeing, you know, this team make
one of the, you know, most lauded open-world games in a long time,
most lauded role-playing games in a long time, um it's probably even more so.
I think, uh
It's easier and it's harder. So it's definitely easier because, uh, with Witcher 3 we had a lot to prove.
So Witcher 2: First PC, then a year later consoles.
We can really make it simultaneous, we can make an open world.
Lalalalalalala.
Can it be commercially successful?
Uhhhh...
Why these guys are so crazy? Start giving DLC for free.
Expansions and alt concept. You know I think we've-- I think we've answered all these questions.
Extremely well and we're super proud of it, and the game was really
well received. And the fact that an expansion Is getting the RPG of the Year
at the VGAs. I think, we did some good things there.
So, so this is the good side. The bad side is that there are very high expectations and
and that's
why we'll wait until we're really ready to show something, because we would like people to be, to be...
really-- Really surprised with what we'll see, but in a positive way. They'll say like, "Hey, that's the thing I want to play." And until we'll think that's
the thing they will want to play
We'll be, we'll be just working hard.
-It must be nice to win an award at the VGAs that was actually for you and wasn't for somebody else that they accidentally said the wrong game.
These were the Oscars actually.
-Yeah, actually yeah!
-The VGAs were doing it way before the Oscars.
Yeah, yeah, yeah. They did that before.
Copycat!
-I have to ask you about China again.
-What was that experience like moving to--
-Cause you're already like, I mean, well-versed in other languages, and you're, you're--
Yeah, but I was, I was leaving, uh...
Four years ago we were leaving. Again, whole family. For for half a year in Taiwan.
-Really?
And that was just pure sabbatical. It was between Witcher 2 and Witcher 3.
-Right.
So then I came back, and we did Witcher 3 and everything.
And then after Witcher 3 I decided, like, do that.
Also, on the business side, because we are going to launch Gwent in China. That's a very important market.
But, but when I planned it, the main motivation was just, just to go away. Study the language.
I liked it. I liked it a lot. I liked a lot, it's a different culture. It's, it's very hard language so it's very humbling experience.
It's, you know. You suddenly after a year of studying the language sometimes you cannot order a cup of coffee.
-Right.
Because you mispronounced one word.
-It's like a different way of thinking about language as well, right?
Yeah, it is. It is, it Is.
And then you learn a lot. And you start to understand and at a certain point I realized:
It's the same place. Like everywhere else in the world.
When you get to speak the language. So, uhm, it it it becomes way more simple than
than you initially think it Is.
-And what did you think about the culture, or living there. Because you get a taste of
it when you visit, but like being there for six months--
Yeah, but, also also where it's only six months. So, we are in a service apartment
It's different. We are a little bit in a bubble.
-And it's your family as well.
It was our...
like Warsaw home
transported, in a way, to Shanghai.
Uh. So it's different, but you get the full immersion. I liked it. I enjoyed it. I think that
the cultures really fascinating, and and I'd like to learn more.
It is always hard with kids. Especially my 14 years old daughter.
So I have three kids. And so we sort of
took her away from her friends and that's, you know, there's a super vibrant social life. Like
hanging out with friends. Friends are the center of your life
and she really hated us for it.
-Right. So no more trips to Asia for a couple years maybe?
Yeah.
I mean, I'll go
once in a while on my own. And then, you know, for business I'm going frequently. I'm usually staying a bit longer
having a language course. And for me that that's always the the best way to
experience the culture and learn something new.
-And what about then for you personally I mean you've been in the Industry for a long time
I feel like
You know if you're somebody who is coming in here as an indie on the periphery, right?
Geographically certainly, right? If you had a
you know
a point to prove, I'm sure you've done it with now-- With, with what happened with the Witcher 3, right?
Like, do you have any other...like, is there anything that you want to conquer?
Yeah, for me personally
I'll like our games to be very successful in China. That's-- That's-- That's--
The next, uh, thing.
Actually, for me personally because already a lot of fans for the Witcher but Gwent is the next step.
I definitely would like people to, to play Gwent, enjoy Gwent, and make Gwent big. Because it's a great game.
-So you're only dream is world domination?
Yeah, sort of.
[laughing] -Let's talk next year.
I think-- I think, you know, the
The dream really is, is to keep on having fun.
-Yeah.
Because-- And again, coming back to the, to the crisis times, uh of 2008-2009.
I was working 14, 16 hours a day for, for like two years.
Those were the hardest days of my life. And I was first building things and then
I was restructuring them. What, in other words, means closing and letting people go, and and being just a very miserable person.
Right now I have more time.
I'm doing what I love. And it-- And it goes...well. So what, what could I want more?
-Yeah.
I'm happy.
[Music Playing]