Thank you so much for taking the time to
talk to us today.
No problem. Uh I'm Dave Higwood. I'm the
uh owner and founder of Psionics and the
current CEO.
Awesome. Current CEO makes it sound like
you're lead.
Currently I am the CEO. How about that?
Uh how did you first start programming?
I guess where did you start?
Uh programming. Wow. We're going way
back. Um I think I was like six years
old. My dad brought home a TI 9994A and
a book about how to type in computer
programs and uh I started typing them in
and playing, you know, they would always
have games in the back. So that's what I
wanted to type in. Um I cheated a little
bit. I made my mom type some of it in
because it would took so long. But uh uh
then I started learning how you could
change things and uh it would change the
game and uh I was addicted at that point
pretty early.
What type of games did you change? What
did you do? Uh, like there was one like
these were pretty simple things like it
was there was a little sprite of a guy
who was like dancing back and forth and
I'm printing the code and looking at it
and I could see the array of zeros and
ones that would make up his pixels. So I
remember that like sort of aha moment
when I'm like, "Oh, I could just change
this and I could turn him into a a dog
or another kind of character." It was it
was awesome.
So modification was something you were
doing from a pretty early age.
Yeah. Yeah. Uh, so I guess when you
progressed into your teens, tell us more
like what else what else did you sort of
modify or what else did you code?
Uh, you know, started making simple
games, learned C. Um, you know, I made
some Tetris clones, Tron light cycle, a
bunch of stuff like that. Um, then
getting into college, I I used all those
programs to like opt out of all the
computer science classes, which I kind
of regret because uh those are the
classes I would have made straight A's
in. So
maybe not the best plan, but it did
work.
So when did you start modding UT then?
Was that like within that company?
Uh yes. So I started modding UT at that
time. Um we I did try to use another
engine I guess you could say uh called
Nettose which ended up becoming Gamerio.
Um and uh it was very very Spartan. It
was very basic. Um, and when I started
working with Unreal, I realized, oh,
wow. You know, all the stuff that you
need to make a game is already here. Um,
and they had, you know, what they called
total conversion mods where you, you
know, you didn't leave really anything
existing of the of the current game that
you were modding off of. You just, uh,
uh, you started from scratch basically
and replaced all the characters and all
the weapons and everything. And, uh, it
was a big shortcut. And for a team that
was as small as ours, there's a handful
of people, three to five people
probably. Um, that was uh that was
really the only path.
What's What are some of your favorite
total conversion mods or like mutators
for those those early that early UT?
Oh man, I was really into a lot of the
UT mutators. Um, was one I think I
always get it mixed up with the Quake
version. Um, I think it was called
excessive though and it just made
everything like you fire like 5,000
rounds per second of everything and it
was just chaos and uh you you can
probably tell from our games that I I
like chaos.
Um, so tell was it that company then
that started did the modding on Unreal
Tournament 2003? Like tell talk about
that.
I've always been the same company all
the way all the way through. So, uh,
after having, um, some limited success,
uh, trying some major total conversions
and things like that, um, I'd been
attending some game shows and and
particularly GDC. I knew that Epic was
interested in having vehicles in their
game. I was really a big fan of Halo at
the time. Uh, I thought the the having
mixing vehicles with the first person
shooter was the greatest thing ever. I'm
like, why couldn't I do this to UT? It's
it's a smaller chunk of something. Um as
opposed to us trying to make a whole new
game. So we basically made a game mode.
Um it was code named vehicle mod and we
just put vehicle. We we put we basically
did the same vehicles that Halo had the
the original five vehicles like there
was a tank and there was a a plane and
there was a hovercraft and um showed it
to them like the next GDC and they were
blown away. They were like, "Oh my god,
this is great. we we want you to come
and and work on this with us. And I
said, can I move to North Carolina? I
would like to like would you give me
office space? And they're like,
absolutely. So, um I basically worked
out of Epic and kind of moved the
company there, although it was I think
it was just me and one other guy at the
time. Um and we worked out of their
offices and uh like employees almost.
Um, which was great because I got that
inside scoop on what Epic was doing and
and learned all about how to how the
real game companies do it.
Right. Uh, and then I guess the game
that the mode that you made was was it
Onslaught or
That was Onslaught. Um,
uh, yeah. So, it it ballooned into a
much larger team as I got there. Um, and
a lot of people from Epic, a lot of
people from the community that they had
hired to come in and work on it. And it
was an amazing time because we were we
were kind of siloed off from the rest of
Epic in a lot of ways. Uh we were in a
one great big room. We called it the
UT204 war room. And I still have this
giant banner that we put up on the wall
that says UT204 war room. And um that
way of game development sort of inspired
the entire way that I've been trying to,
you know, um continue since then with
with Psionics as a studio. um that just
kind of open room collaborative creative
environment. Um there wasn't a huge
amount of deadline pressure. We were all
just just coming up with the the coolest
things we could and and throwing them
into the game as fast as we could.
Excellent. So I guess how did you come
up with the mode of Onslaught because
you vehicles in a game you can kind of
go and
uh you know I was inspired by Planet
Side actually. Um, I don't know if you
can see the connection, but uh I I knew
I wanted vehicles in the game, but I
wanted a more interesting game type. And
I like this idea of territory control.
And they had this cool idea that like
you couldn't take over a territory until
you'd taken over the previous territory.
So, you had this kind of moving
battlefront that goes on. And that's
what where I came up with the node
system. So, you take uh you you'd have
to capture one node and destroy its
power core before you could possibly
attack the next one. Um, and yeah, that
was where it came from.
Yeah. And I guess utilizing the link gun
in a way that hadn't been sort of used
before.
Yeah, that I think that was an idea from
uh one of the guys at Epic. It might
have been Steve Pulge uh to to sort of
integrate more of the UT kind of
mechanics into that and use some of
their their weapons. But yeah, that was
a lot of fun.
Uh tell us about some of the vehicles in
that mode because they're super fun. H
uh my favorite was the manta because you
know you could crush people you could
you could fly over them and then like we
we put this force in they would just
smash down and um you know it was very
important to me that all the vehicles
were very physics based like it's there
was no faking of any physics it was just
you know forces and wheel
um wheel physics and tire physics and
things like that. Um, so I really like
the Manda because you could you could
fly off uh cliffs and you just be flying
in the air and just soar down. You could
smack people and then we made them like
jib all out in the fans and uh that was
pretty cool. Um we had the the tank
which you could destroy people from
really long range and that was a
twoerson tank. You could have a guy in a
machine gun. Um, we had uh the uh the
Raptor, which was our sort of uh fly all
over the the field kind of kind of uh uh
vehicle. It was another reason we needed
that territory control system because
you got these vehicles that are so
mobile that you could just go to the
end. So, we had to have this sort of
system where it made no sense to go to
the end. You have to build your way your
build your way to it. Um there was some
really hilarious stuff like the most
famous map on that of course was was ONS
Torland and it had that great big tower
in the middle and um it was amazing when
the game came out to watch uh people
play and figure out somehow how to get
like one of the tanks on top by like
they would drive a tank on top of like
four raptors and somehow slowly and
surely take it all the way to the top.
And that kind of like emergent gameplay
is just what game developers live for.
It was the most amazing thing.
What was the name of the car with the
the blades at the
Oh, the scorpion. Yes.
Yeah. Um I don't remember whose idea it
was to make those blades, but that was
pretty awesome. Just ching and then you
just mow people down. Uh that was really
great. And then we had that weird sticky
gun that it would shoot at the top that
would, you know, little bubbles that
would stick to things and then it would
just go like a chain reaction. Yeah, it
always seemed superfluous that like this
car that can run people over also had
blades.
Yeah, why not? You know,
like when you first when the bots,
especially when they were in that gully
when they were just running down, you
just like drive down, pull out the
blade.
That's one of the things I think I
really enjoyed about UT was like it
really there really weren't any rules.
Like you could do almost anything. Like
I like I like future and I like fantasy
for those reasons because you don't have
to stay within realistic
um constraints. you can kind of just go
where the fun is and that's that's sort
of a theme of of mine at least for the
studio.
Yeah. What's it like now
looking back to 2004 when like
Onslaught's kind of the defining mode of
that game? Like when people think about
U204, they go, "Oh yeah, that was like
big maps and going on Torland and like
you know, yeah, like all these crazy,
you know, vehicles and and whatnot."
What What does that feel like now?
Onslaught was really a proving ground
for me, you It was really what it was
really my big break and my big sort of
like oh I proved that I can do this and
um you know make something really
popular. Um it was a collaboration with
Epic um and and uh you know as such Epic
you know got all the credit for that and
and I you know that makes sense but uh
um for me it was like it was kind of
that moment where uh I created something
really amazing that people liked. I'd
established that and it was something I
could build off of. And uh that's what
really caused us to say, "Okay, I want
to build psionics into into something,
you know, independent. I want to make an
independent studio and uh build on this
success."
So, how did that transition happen then?
Right after 2004.
Yeah, we did the uh there was an
editor's choice edition which was kind
of the expansion pack. We added a few
more vehicles. Um some of my favorite
vehicles actually were in that expansion
pack. They had the uh a vehicle with a
shield on it. A vehicle that lobbed like
from really far distance. Um u artillery
shells and uh another version of the
plane called the mosquito. I I don't
know. It's been so long. Um
did you play Unreal Tournament 3?
Uh yeah.
And yeah,
actually worked on that a little bit
because after we transitioned to our own
studio, uh they kept contracting us back
for vehicle work and so on.
Um, but I didn't have as much to do with
uh the modes anymore. Um,
but uh that that expansion pack was
actually a really important time. So me
and Ben Beckwith, who still works with
me, um we're doing a lot of work on
that. And one of the things that we did
in that mode was we were coming up with
cool mutators. And one of the mutators
was a map called uh ONS Tricky. And uh
it was just a big obstacle course. It it
looked like a one of those uh monster
truck rallies with a big with a stadium
and and just dirt ramps and stuff like
that. And uh he and I were really into
like snowboarding games and skiing games
and stuff where you do flips and things
like that. So we want to do it with
cars, of course. Makes sense. Um and I
I've always been obsessed with cars that
can jump. I don't know. ever since I
played a game called Bump and Jump way
back in the day, like arcade quarter
muncher games. But um I I wanted to make
the car jump. So we did the we did the
typical like snowboarding thing where
you press a button and the car sort of
like leans down in a way and then you
let go and it you know the longer you
held it the higher it flies up in the
air. And then we made this complicated
system for the mouse and keyboard so
that it you could flip and you could
roll and you could try to get trick
points or whatever. Um, and we thought
that was fun. It wasn't super popular in
the game, but um, we had a lot of fun
with it. Uh, it was immediately after
that that I started signing psionics up
sort of proper and started hiring people
from the local colleges. Um, I moved out
of the Epic offices, but we were kind of
right down the street. And, um, I hired
I I couldn't hire people in the industry
because they were like, you know, who's
psionics,
right? Um, I said, "No, I made
Onslaught." They're like, "Oh, well,
that's pretty awesome." But, uh, I'm
going to go work for a really cool
company.
So, uh, yeah. So, I hired interns and
just ran sort of a competitive
internship
and, um, said, "Look, I know everything
about Unreal Engine 3. It's coming out.
It's it's gonna be big. Um big friends
with Epic Games. Uh they're giving me
contract work. We're going to get, you
know, new licences are going to come in
because uh Epic doesn't like outsource
uh expertise
and we do and we're the only ones who
know this. So for for a while we were
basically the only real Unreal Engine 3
um outsourcing studio that you could
find and everybody needed us because
that g that engine was just exploding.
It's the most used engine that whole
generation for like
10 years. It was it was pretty big. And
so I trained them all on sort of my
style. And I the neat part about that
was I didn't get that like sort of jaded
nature some people get from the industry
where they've been crunched to death and
they're just like, "Oh god, what's the
next game I going to have to slog
through?" I know. I said, "Ah, you know,
games can be a lot more fun than that."
And, you know, let's do it this way. Um,
you know, let's let's try to build a
studio where we're not crunching
ourselves to death. And um we did it
based on contract work. Um and and we
made I kind of made two rules. I I I
said well we're always going to keep the
company stable. Um, so you know, we
always need to have work coming in
that's kind of our base, but
we always have to have somebody working
on original content because I knew that
you go one way the other and it it's it
can be pretty dangerous. If you go total
like we want everybody constantly
burning um the candle and making money
come in, you're never going to be able
to make your dream game. And if you just
focus on your dream game, well, you
know, I'd seen so many other studios try
this and you make your dream game, but
you usually need two or three shots at
that and you blow all your money and
then you're out of business. So, I'm
like, let's do a hybrid. You know, we'll
always stay stable, but we always have
somebody working on it. And I'd seen
other studios try this as well and they
it was too tempting and they they pulled
their people off of it and you can't do
that. You have to keep people on that.
And the game that we kept it on was this
trick game that we that you know this
trick mechanics with with the vehicles
that we kind of pulled from uh our work
at Epic. And um we didn't know what the
game was. We just knew it involved cars
that can jump and trick around. So we
were playing around with that. We were
playing around with uh um we cars that
can shoot. So we we tried like a battle
game. We tried uh we tried an obstacle
course that was really difficult to get
through and there was at one point it
had a grappling hook. I mean like some
crazy stuff.
Um we ended up with kind of that zany
you may have seen video footage of it
but it's this zany mode that we called
crash course for a while. Um and then we
used the name supersonic acrobatic
rocket power battle cars because the
game was so crazy. And it's kind of a
lot like uh the rumble mode that you
have today where all these weird weapon.
We even had tornadoes back then. So, and
the idea was you were on these platforms
and you had to ram people and you knock
them off the platform into the water.
Um, and that was fun. Uh, and you know,
one of the guys, it was Adam Beckwith
actually, the brother of Ben Beckwith
who came uh with me from Epic. Uh, he
suggested that we throw a ball in there
because he was a real fan of of another
mod called death ball.
Yeah. And um so we're like, "Oh, we
could try it as it would be a sight cool
side mode." And then I don't think for
the next two weeks we got any work done
because we were just playing this game.
And we were in the middle of Xbox
Greenlight actually and uh they had just
greenlighted the game after much
negotiation and we're like uh we want to
change everything
and it was just kind of like what and
you know PlayStation at the time was
actually being really open with our
platform kind of like you don't even
like you had to have a publisher to go
on Xbox so we were we had that whole um
mountain to climb and the publishers
were looking at our game like what I
don't get it at And we weren't making it
any better by saying, "Okay, now it's
soccer with with cars."
So, we're like, "Well, PlayStation, we
don't have to answer really to anybody.
We can just make our own thing and throw
it on there." So, that's how supersonic
acrobatic rocket powered battle cars
came to be. Um, first first uh
individual title that we had made all on
our own, but at the same time, we were
still working on all of the contract
work and, you know, working a lot for
Epic. We worked on Gears of War. We
worked on UT3. Uh later we worked on
Bullettorm
um and then you know spattering of other
titles Mass Effect and XCOM and um yeah
lots of really cool stuff.
What type were you what type of work
were you doing on those? Was it like
multiplayer modes or like
Oh yeah. So we
there were all kinds of things. Um in
some sense we could be a general we were
mostly doing code. It wasn't a lot of
art, but um in in some sense we were
general purpose uh coding company, but
we did start to specialize in a lot of
things. We were really good at
multiplayer and we were really good at
vehicles. Um so a lot of our work ended
up being around that. And as we grew, we
got a stronger and stronger reputation
on the multiplayer side of things. Um we
definitely became experts in that. So
everybody who was doing a UE3 game that
had a multiplayer side, that's why Mass
Effect 3 came to us actually as a good
good example. Um,
so you didn't you didn't make the Mako
in Mass Effect one.
No. No. No.
You probably should have.
Yeah. Um, and some of it was was simple
stuff like the Mass Effect 3 was mostly
just consulting, a little bit of work,
and then others like Bullet Storm are
like make our multiplayer mode.
So um, uh, it varied a lot. And then
when Nazgoth came along, um, that was a
really big change for the studio because
it was it wasn't so much like another
dev team saying, "Hey, we need some help
with this." It was a publisher saying,
"Hey, we want you to make this game, you
know, from from from scratch, you know,
we have a design, but um, we want you
guys to to basically build it, um, in
your own way." So, um, that was a big
deal for the studio because it allowed
us to expand a lot and, uh, build our
art team in particular and, uh, kind of
become a really fullfeatured studio. And
that was at the same time we decided to
reboot Battle Cars into, uh, into what
became Rocket League. So yeah, speak a
little bit more about that sort of
transition between Supersonic being this
like uh what was it before it was the
the the the soccer element was added?
Yeah. Um
we we tried we tried a lot of different
things because we we were we had this
motto kind of follow the fun. We're like
let's let's not like design this on
paper and just you know make it and then
see if it's fun. Let's just start going
in different directions. Let's have
different people trying different
things. And we know we like the car
mechanics. We know that's fun, but what
what makes a game out of this? Um, so we
tried a lot of different things. Like
Ben's a level designer, so he was making
these crazy levels and and they ended up
becoming obstacle courses where you
drive on the sides and the ceiling and
you jump over things and you're swinging
through with grapple hooks and all kinds
of stuff. Uh around that time we
invented the boost uh which was a huge
deal. Um and it it we we really didn't
know the cars could fly until we put
that on there. Like it wasn't like we
should make cars that fly. Uh we put
that on there and then somebody goes,
"Oh look, because you can move the car
in air. I can jump, move up, and then
shoot upwards." And you know, a lot of
teams would might go, "Oh, well that's a
bug. We got to fix that." But we were
like, "No, that's fun." So it stays. If
it's fun, it stays. You know,
it's
like emergent game design.
Exactly. Emergent game design is a is a
good way to put it. So, you know, we we
like like like I said, we threw in the
vehicles, we threw in weapons, and we
threw in different things, and it was
like a mishmash of stuff. Um, we kind of
liked that. We like the chaos of it. Um,
chaos is a big thing. I tried to put an
onslaught as well. Like, it's really
gratuitous. Like, you know, when a uh a
vehicle blows up, we'd made it explode
multiple times and then when it would
hit the ground, it would explode again
for no reason. But it was amazing cuz
you're running around and suddenly this
vehicle is spinning over you, exploding
like more times than it ought to. And uh
I love that. So, I wanted to have that
kind of craziness in the game because it
these are these are games. They don't
you know, realism is one thing, but it's
a game and I just want to have fun. I
want I want awesome stuff to happen. Um,
so we were trying to figure that out
like a make make awesome stuff happen.
And this was like while you were working
on other projects, right? Are you kind
of just working on this on
So we were working on things like uh the
Gears of War one vehicle for instance.
Um, we were I don't know what else we
were working on exactly at the time, but
yeah, we were doing other project work.
Um, but I had a lot of the interns
working on um the uh battle car stuff uh
because you know the companies we were
working for didn't necessarily want
interns working on their stuff. So I had
them working on our stuff and I sort of
cutting their teeth on that. But that's
great because all of those guys they're
all still here like they're every one of
them and uh they were born in this game
you know basically into the industry.
This is their kind of first game and and
still working on it. So, we know the
hell out of this game. You know, we
we've we've gone through every
iteration. The physics have had so much
detail put on them in the past, you
know, 10 years basically since we've
been working on it.
Yeah. Cuz it's I was playing a bunch of
battle cars last week and in some ways
it's so incredibly familiar, but in
other ways it controls like a different
game. is one of those subtleties that
it's hard to tell how complicated it was
getting in because when it feels so
simple that it feels natural.
Um that there's usually a lot of
complexity behind it,
right? Uh I have to ask about the name.
Yeah.
How do you feel about the name?
We were very uh we were very indie at
the time, feeling very indie. And so we
we were looking for a way to stand out.
And so we're like um
I think I think part of me it was uh
inspired by a Conan O'Brien bit where he
was talking about supersonic polkadotted
rockabilly fighter pilots. I thought
that was hilarious. So it's actually my
fault.
I said, "What about supersonic acrobatic
rocket power
battle cars?" And uh we we are
notoriously bad at picking names because
the the company runs so democratically,
right?
Uh that it was it was just um designed
by committee disaster. Sort of like
everybody had their own idea of what a
good name was and every other name
sucked. So, uh, we had so much trouble.
And I think we almost all settled on
that, not because we all liked it the
most, but because it was it was, um, so
out there that, you know, you couldn't
really dispute it. It was just, well,
okay,
maybe it'll work. Maybe people will will
notice it just because of that game. We
didn't really think about the fact that,
you know, people wouldn't be able to
tell their friends about the game.
They're like, I like this game. It's
called Sup something. battle something
and you'll never find it. It's it's
buried in the PSN store, but it's
somewhere in there. Um yeah, so uh my my
marketing manager that we have now would
would roll over uh if I ever tried to
make a decision like that, but
um yeah, so it was a little trouble and
and the the journalists didn't really
like it either because they had to type
it so much like ah uh so yeah, we we
took some heat on that.
Um what was it like getting that out
there? What was the reception like? Was
there like a community around it?
Yes, there was a very strong community
around it. Um, it was small community,
but um it was it was cool I think for
them and us because we were so
passionate about the game that we wanted
to know everybody playing it. So, you
know, we we built a forum system online
and we were talking to these guys and we
knew them super well. you know, guys
like, you know, Kernovi, who was playing
under his his dad's name at the time,
Steve Bills. Um, we had no idea, but,
uh, Gibbs, all those guys were were
there, um, from the beginning, and we we
knew all of them. And, uh, uh, we we
wanted so bad to keep making the game
because we were like, "Wow, we have a
thousand ideas for how to make this game
better." And we wanted them for
ourselves cuz, you know, we love the
game so much. Um, I I don't think
there's ever been an example, and I've
been to a lot of studios, worked with a
lot of games. I don't think there's ever
been a a situation where I've seen a a
studio so in love with their own game as
this one. And um, you know, we we just
wanted to do right by ourselves, we
wanted to do right by them, but the
money just wasn't coming in,
unfortunately. Uh, we we just didn't it
it was hard to get it out there. We did
a little bit of PR, but we we really
didn't we were 10 guys at the time. we
really didn't know how to do marketing.
Um, and uh, esports hadn't really become
a big thing. YouTube was even new. We
were actually the not the first, but I
think the second almost the first title
to have uh, automatic YouTube dumps of
of uh, clips in games. So, there's like
a zillion clips actually on YouTube of
supersonic acrobatic rocket power battle
cars because of that. It's
just hard to find. Yeah, it's just hard
to find because
because the name. Yeah. Um, but all that
was sort of brand new yet those were the
features that make our game so cool.
And uh, so, you know, Rocket League came
at a time when it was
all that stuff was was just the right
timing.
But definitely we knew how to market
games a lot better as well. So, I could
probably talk forever about like the
reasons why that game, this game
exploded and that game didn't because
they really at the core are the same
game.
Yeah, we'll get to that in a little bit.
I definitely want to ask you about that.
Um, I guess after Battle of Cars came
out, what was what was the state of
Psionics then? You had this game. It had
probably I'm guessing saleswise wasn't a
massive success for you guys. Like, how
It wasn't huge. Uh, it did eventually
make a profit only because we spent so
little on it in the first place, but it
it took like 2 years for it to actually
make all of its money back and um that
doesn't that doesn't pay payroll. So, uh
we had to immediately go back and in
fact it was a little bit of an emergency
mode because I started to break a little
bit of my rule. Um it's very hard to
ship games when it really comes down to
like we got to get this out the door. It
it's almost impossible not to be all
hands on deck. So, we started to just
for a little bit broke my rule of let's
always keep the company stable and we
just put everything into this hoping
maybe there would maybe it'd be this
huge smash hit. Um, and it wasn't it
wasn't awful, but it wasn't it wasn't
immediately like dumps of money coming
in. So, um, we pushed the company to the
brink really at that time and, uh, we
had to take some projects, uh, pretty
quickly afterwards that maybe were not
the most ideal terms and, uh, were
really rough on us. Like, we had we had
to push a lot harder than we normally
did. Um, we had to work a lot harder and
I had to do a lot less on the uh,
original game development side of stuff.
We we did a few updates for Battle Cars.
Um, but I decided to really just
strongly focus on studio building at
that point. I'm like, we need a we need
a bigger studio. We need more expertise
in what we're doing. Um, we're going to
come back to this game. And we always
knew that. We always knew we were coming
back to it at some point.
How did you know that considering you
had just gone through this 2-year like
ordeal with it that didn't,
you know? I Everybody asked me that, but
to us the answer is so obvious. The game
was amazing. It's It was indisputably
amazing. Just people didn't know about
it, you know. Everybody we asked, we'd
ask people on the street, we'd ask
people at game shows like, "Have you
ever played this?" We got two answers.
"I've never heard of it." Or, "It's the
most amazing game." You know, we never
found anyone who like, "Oh, yeah, I
played it." And I like, "Ah," or
whatever. You know, um, so we're like,
"Okay, we really have clearly we have a
just a a exposure problem. you know,
we're not getting it out to enough
people. Um, so we knew that that that
was what we needed to focus on next time
and we we we
spent years just accumulating all the
reasons that we could make this better.
So So what were the things then coming
out of Battle Cars that you guys kind of
knew, okay, this is what we need to sort
of change here?
Um,
we knew that the initial user experience
could be uh a little bit tough. Um,
it was the game was got hardcore too
quickly
and uh one of the problems was the game
was so successful at a cult level that
people would new people would come in
and they would get destroyed online. So
that's a really tough problem when you
have a small community. With Rocket
League, we didn't have to worry about
that because we have so many people that
we can say, "Okay, matchmake all the
noobs with noobs. Matchmake all the good
people with good people." At the time,
we had the technology and the expertise
to do it. We just didn't have enough
people. There literally wasn't enough
people. So, you kind of got to get the
ball rolling. It was another sign of
like why we knew that the game itself
was good. It's just didn't have all the
elements that you need to really make it
take off. So, we're like, let's just
polish this thing out. And and all of
the games that are that we were working
on on the contract work side are Unreal
Engine 3, so they're AAA. So, we built a
AAA team. We were used to not working on
indie games anymore. We were making the
best games in the business. So, we're
like, let's take our indie game and
let's put the best games in the business
side uh of things on it. We need the
polish. We need the user interface that
we have. We need the matchmaking
features that that are up there with
Halo and Call of Duty. Uh we we want
everything in this game and we had made
everything before, especially on the
multiplayer side because that was what
our expertise was. So we're in a way I
think we like you can almost say we
overcompensated, but I I I wouldn't say
that because the game was so successful.
But there was this paranoia that if we
didn't do everything we could possibly
could, put everything into this game we
possibly could, it might have the same
reaction that it did the the first time.
And I think that's why we we we just did
the hell out of it. And people were
surprised. They were like, "This is a
weird game, yet it has this polish that
we haven't seen on a game so zany."
Right. Yeah. Completely. Was there You
sound very confident that you thought
you believed in in the game. you believe
that there was a game there that people
wanted to play, but it must have been
terrifying to basically be walking down
the same road you did before.
Uh, yeah, it was. We were We were afraid
I There was always the question in the
back of my head, maybe I'm wrong.
Maybe maybe I'm wrong. And all of the
original guys that worked on this game
are all simultaneously wrong. But it you
then you like kind of hit yourself a
little bit. You're like 10 people. We're
all hardcore gamers. We're trying to
sell to the same audience that is us.
How can we be so enraptured with this
game? So enraptured with like I I loved
Onslaught and I, you know, other games
that we've worked on, but not like this
game.
Not this like addiction where we just
can't wait to play test it every day.
Um and and then and never went away, you
know, years and years and years and
years. And we look at the guys playing
Battle Cards. They're still playing it.
They're still playing it. They're still
playing it. Obviously, they see what we
see. We know there's something there.
And we're experts at game development at
this point. You know, we've made all
these, we've worked on all these games,
we've seen games fail. We've seen games
be successful. And you start to kind of
get a feel for the ones that really had
something and the ones that don't. And
it just seemed foolish to throw away
something that was clearly, you know,
what everybody's looking for. This is
what everybody's looking for. But it was
hard to explain to people. It was hard
to explain to consumers. It was hard to
explain to journalists. It was hard to
explain to publishers. Um, you have to
play it. So, we focused on figuring out
ways to make it where people had to play
it.
Um, was the community for battle cars
also sort of like saying, "Go for it. Do
it."
Oh, yeah. Oh my gosh. Yeah. If you read
our forum post, you can see like an
archive of like, you know, years of of
us sort of teasing like, "No, we're
going to make Battle Cards 2. We're
going to make Battle Cards 2." Um, and
everybody I think I think they were all
excited about it first and then it kind
of been like, "I don't know. Oh, I think
we're just never going to see it is
vaporware. And uh we we got a little bit
tied up into mobile for a while. Uh we
thought, oh, mobile is here. You know,
we can make games with a smaller budget
and um that's the way of the future, but
um we didn't do well on that because
it's, you know, we make AAA games and we
try to put a AAA game on mobile and it
people are like, it doesn't run on my
phone. So, um, we realized that wasn't
for us pretty quickly on. Um, and but as
soon as we got through that, we're like,
you know what? We have to we have if we
don't do it now, we're never going to do
it. And we know we all want to do it.
So, we're doing it. And we just kind of
had to make that decision.
So, I I heard that Rocket League sort of
went in different directions before it
was Rocket League. I remember hearing on
Gamma Sutra maybe about how it was maybe
an open world kind of thing as well.
Like, tell me the directions that went.
We We questioned ourselves a little bit.
Like I said, we were we were questioning
like what it was that made it not take
off. Was it just marketing or is there
more to it that we need to do, you know,
do we need to really upgrade this game?
I think we always felt that the physics
should stay the same.
Um, but we did think, okay, we've got
this big team, maybe we should do
something more grandiose. So, we had
this idea of like cars this whole this
world uh driving around to different
stadiums and then you play a game and
then you could leave and maybe you play
other games. You know, we thought, well,
maybe maybe we're putting too much focus
on this soccer mode. Maybe we need some
other modes and we tried some different
things or whatever and they were okay
with there was nothing as as amazing as
the uh that original concept. Um, and
Ben Beck with who I've mentioned a few
times, he's he's amazing at building
like terrain and like huge worlds. And
so I think we were really enraptured by
that like ah it's gonna be crazy. But uh
the game was just way out of scope. And
uh we've been around long enough to know
when we're making that mistake. Um and
it's it's a big part of a game
developer's life is figuring out, oh,
you're out of scope,
right?
This is just too big for us to bite off.
Uh, and uh, I think it was some of the
actual original members that had to talk
me out of it in a way. They were like,
"This is too big. Let's just the game
was good. Let's stick to it. Let let's
let's cut all the stuff out of it." Um,
we we also tried to we also thought
maybe we need to make the game more
realistic, like more more to scale. Um,
there's this big question when Rocket
League first came out is like what's the
scale? Are these large cars or small
cars? you know, is this a real world? Is
this a fantasy world? And we decided to
just kind of be like, you know what, it
is what it is.
And uh that was a big part of our
decision to like cut all the stuff out
that we were experimenting with and
trying and stick to what we loved and uh
and just do a better job of it. Let's
just make a better version of that.
Right.
So, there's no re rich deep lore in the
Rocket League universe of these are
autonomous cars with
I I wouldn't say that. Uh but it's
certainly not something we're divulging
at the moment.
Now I'm fascinated.
Yeah. Um
talk I guess the the before we get into
I'm going to get into sort of the launch
stuff in a second. Um we talked about
the name for battle cars, the name for
Rocket League.
Yeah. How did that come about?
Um we got a little bit better at
understanding how difficult it is for us
to come up with names. Uh we had um uh
brilliant marketing mind join the team.
uh Jeremy Dunham uh from IGN and um we
learned how to make really cool branding
and logos around the game and so on and
we knew we need something we need
something catchy. We need something good
word of mouth, something that was
iconic. Uh all the right ways of
thinking about how to name a game. Um
and then we limited the scope of the
people who are involved. We we we took
suggestions from everyone but then we're
like okay phase two less people phase
three less people and finally narrowed
it down and um the process was a very
successful one and it it's funny I if
you've ever had to name something it's
very tricky because the first time you
come up with it it's always sounds
terrible it sounds good to the person
who made it up but it always sounds
terrible to everybody else. Remember the
first time Epic Games came in and told
me we're going to call the game Gears of
War. I mean, just think about that. It
like the first time you hear it and you
don't know Gears of War, you're like,
"That sounds weird, you know?" But then
it takes like two weeks and then you're
like, "Oh, it's Gears of War."
So, the same thing happened with Rocket
League and I had to really push on
people that that was going to happen.
I'm like, you know what? I know not
everybody's satisfied with this, but
trust me, it it it fits all description
of a name that's going to be sound
perfect when you when you when you've
had a little bit of chance to for it to
sink in. And this is exactly what
happened. So, uh that was that was a
much more successful naming process.
Was there any other names that you left
on the coloring room floor?
Uh yeah, some of them I can't repeat
here. Um,
that's the other problem is that uh we
people cannot stop coming up with joke
names and we had to finally start
kicking people out of the room. Like I'm
sorry, no more puns, no more crazy
stuff. Um, I I'm not sure I can even
uh
I remember hearing Sakar was maybe one
of
Sakar. Yeah. So, we used to call the
game Sakar
um as opposed to um before we'd even
come up with supersonic battle cars, we
we called it Sakar just because it was a
silly pun version of the name. Uh we
were worried about how that would play
in Europe,
but uh and also it's just it's a weird
name. Um we were close. We're like, no,
we need something more pro.
That's Yeah, that's very worldly of you
to to pick which is it because one of my
favorite games ever is called Sensible
Soccer. It's a UK develop soccer game.
That's what made me think maybe it might
work cuz I you know they know what
soccer is
and um you know I've read the history
behind that which which is always great
when people do the whole soccer versus
football thing is that soccer actually
came from the UK.
Yeah. ASOC association football.
Association football.
Mhm.
Um out of interest, are any of you
soccer fans? I am.
Oh, you are?
Yeah. You see my World Cup ball is
behind me.
Oh, yeah.
Um, uh, I I'm I'm a huge soccer fan. Uh,
mostly international soccer. I really
love the World Cup. Um, I follow the MLS
a little bit. We don't have a team here.
We might though, pretty soon, hopefully.
But, um, yeah, I was always a player,
right?
Um, and, uh, it was just a sport I loved
growing up. And it was interesting
because the, you know, the, like I said,
the idea to bring the ball in was was
not mine, but I really latched on to it
once it came in. And um hopefully
influenced the design in some ways to
kind of make it a little bit more
soccer-like. What I liked about it was
that it felt more like when I'm playing
soccer than if I play FIFA,
right?
FIFA just is a simulation of something
that you see. Whereas in Rocket League,
you actually had to practice shots. Like
you you don't go in FIFA and just like
practice a shot. Oh, no. I'm gonna get
it right this time. No, I'm going to get
it right this time. That's what I do on
the field, you know? You get in front of
a goal, you get a bunch of balls, and
you try to hit the upper 90. And uh you
do the same thing in uh in in Rocket
League and with our uh with our um
different training modes and so on. We
kind of set that same the drills
basically. And uh that's one of the
things I think that makes the game so
special. Yeah, I remembered I did a
episode of my old show on GameSpot about
that feeling about this game does feel
like playing football or soccer in a way
that those games never did. Um,
I guess could you speak to that a little
bit? Like when you played yourself as a
player, like the idea of like dribbling
the ball with a car and being able to
like do keepyuppies and like even as a
goalkeeper. Yeah.
Like it's so familiar.
There's no Yeah. So, like in a real
sport there's there's no cap, you know,
on like, oh, I figured out all the
controls. No, you're never going to like
you're never going to be messy, you
know. Um, except a few people maybe.
But, uh, realistically, there's this
infinite ceiling and you can always get
better. Doesn't matter how old you are,
doesn't matter how long you play, you
can always get better. And um I love
that about Rocket League immediately is
that the way we designed the physics and
and the way we didn't fake anything. We
didn't make anything just automatically
happen in a certain way. We didn't give
you any help really.
Uh you have to control the ball in a
physical way. It just naturally made it
perform in in the same way that a real
sport does where you have to practice it
and your your ball is just like a
controllable foot, you know, and um
you're moving. Yeah, sorry. your the car
and uh you angle it in different ways
and you've got to angle it just right in
the right situation. You've got to
measure the how far far the ball is
coming in and can you trap it. You know,
it's all sort of the same things. Um and
I think that's what makes the game so uh
have have such a lifespan to it. You
know, you can continue to play it and
you will always get better.
Um let's talk a little bit about launch.
Mhm.
So, I mean, you talked about the
importance of getting, you know, bums on
seats, getting people into the
multiplayer lobbies to play the game.
Um,
was that part of the impetus to go with
the PlayStation Plus thing?
It was. It was. Um, and we questioned
it.
Uh, we only questioned it because we
were doing a beta and we do the beta and
uh sudden and we give it to streamers
and suddenly there's this buzz about the
game that we hadn't seen for the
original game. and we're like, "Wow,
we're already this is already looking
like it's going to be big." So, we're
like, "Do we want to give the game away
for free for for a month?" Um, and I
think it was that it was that exact um
uh impetus that you mentioned that made
me sort of uh come back to reality and
say, you know what, yes, we we told
ourselves that the most important thing
for this game is to get it in people's
hands. If people can play it, it it
doesn't matter what money we lose. If
people put this game in their hands,
they will realize it is the greatest
game. And that's exactly what happened.
What was it like the I guess the days
leading up to launch and launch? Like
how how were you feeling about it?
Uh I was I was super excited leading up
to launch. Um you know, we we were
seeing in the beta we were hitting these
these big numbers and um you know,
joking about how high they could be. Uh,
and it was like a lot of there was a lot
of relief because I knew that the game
was going to make its money back at
least. That was the big thing. Like, can
we hit break even? And I think before
launch, I already knew. I was like,
okay, we're good on that. Just now it's
how far can it go? Uh, leading up to
launch day and then servers melted. Um,
everything was on fire. It was it was
crazy. Uh we were making phone calls and
doing everything we could, but um we
thought maybe
40,000 people at once, maybe 50 if it
was awesome, and we got 150,000 people
playing at once. Um
how soon after the day off?
Uh the fir in the first week I think we
hit that. Um and it just smashed
everything. We're like, "Wow." Um we
didn't like you have to write things at
a certain scale. You have to build
things. You can't just make it
infinitely scalable. You can you can
scale within, you know, 50,000 to
150,000 or 150,000 to a million, but you
can't make something that has scaled to
either zero or infinity, you know, and
we realized we we aimed for this and we
need to aim for this over here. So, that
was a real uh uh tough time because we
we basically had to work 24/7. And I
mean, we were
I I kid you not, like at one point, my
wife uh while I'm sleeping is is in the
style of of the the uh TV series Lost is
literally having to press a button every
15 minutes that like resets something. I
don't even remember what it was, but
like I she would let me sleep while she
pressed this button.
What would happen if she didn't press
the button?
It the servers would go down. They would
literally go down. It was that bad for a
while. Um, we were hiring people like
crazy. I was
press the button.
Well, well, maybe to fix the fact that
we had to press a button, but yeah, I
was bringing people in, interviewing
them, and being like, "Okay, you got
your laptop?
There's your desk,
right?" Uh and so it was simultaneously
like uh frustrating and it's super
exciting time because we knew things
were really taking off and but the big
fear looming over us was could this be
so bad that it all goes away
right
um
fortunately I I think you know we
survived I think most companies do
survive that you usually survive the
popularity
um but uh I'm impressed with what the
guys I I don't take any credit for this
but I'm very impressed with what our uh
online tech team was able to do to
basically rewrite the entire uh uh
scalable backend in about two weeks and
and get everything up and running.
That must have felt like
a decade worth of work. Like when that
game came out, did it
Yeah.
Did it feel like finally people were
playing the game that you've been
working on?
It was indescribable. It was
indescribable. I don't know. I I I'd
have I'd probably have to like win the
Super Bowl or something to feel like
that again. Because if you can imagine
for 10 years trying to explain to people
that your car game with soccer is is the
the best experience that they're
missing. And trying to explain that
whole like it's like playing a real
sport and all of these things. They
don't make any sense until you played
it. They don't make any sense. It's just
you cannot just convince people. You
they have to play it. And because they
hadn't, nobody, you know, would believe
me. And then suddenly all these articles
come out saying the same things I've
been saying. Like it's actually a lot
like if you're playing real real soccer,
you know, and I I can't stop playing
this game and it's actually my favorite
game of all time. I don't know what
happened. Uh it was so vindicating, you
know. Uh it was it was absolutely
amazing. Best time of my life probably.
Right. Do you feel like your your opus
is behind you in a way? Uh,
no. It's just my first opus. No, I I I
like I'm I'm very much like a I did
that. It's amazing. It's awesome. I'm on
to the next thing.
Right. Uh, let's talk about I guess what
you did then to sort of So, you was
there a worry that you would all these
players that you basically hadn't
monetized? Like, yes, it's great that
they were playing the game, but also
like, whoops, did we just throw all this
down the drain, all this cash that you
might have gotten?
I questioned it. It was it was um
I there was a there was a time um for a
while after it had first come out uh
because it was free on PlayStation, but
it we were getting sales from Steam and
they were killing it. I mean, we were
just top of the charts and just looking
at all those PlayStation players going
thinking like it's it's doing too well
on PlayStation. They broke all their
records and then we're like, "Okay,
there's going to be nobody left on
PlaySt." We're literally doing the math
of like how many people have a
PlayStation and how many have have this
game already cuz there's nobody else
left to buy it anymore. Um, and you
know, Sony had always told us like, "No,
that can't happen. It's never going to
be that way." But we're looking at
numbers like I think we we've really hit
a significant portion of the PlayStation
audience. Um, and and to be fair,
afterwards, uh, it sales really did kind
of track with with about the number of
new people who bought new PlayStations.
So, um, but I it kept doing well. It
kept doing better and better and better
as we go on. And now that I look back,
it's very easy for me to say that that
absolutely was the best decision. Um,
that, you know, we we make more we we
make more now than we did at launch
every month. So you look back at that
and you're like okay well that was one
month it wasn't even doesn't even
compare to like what we're doing now.
So absolutely it was it was ab you know
I I think you can almost objectively say
that it was a good idea at this point.
Did the amount of people that come on
and the sort of both the scale of the
community and also the sort of maybe
impetus to to monetize some of these
people as well. Did that did you guys
change your sort of your DLC, your free
DLC and then your like paid for stuff
because of that or did you maybe expand
it because there was more people
playing? Like talk about your kind of
the next year of of what you guys were
doing with the adding ice hockey and
basketball and all that sort of stuff.
Uh so we always had the the theory
really that
we just wanted to keep people playing,
you know, that was what we loved about
it. Um, we knew that the hardcore
players, the guys who are really
competitive, they they didn't need much,
honestly. They they were making their
own game, but that's like us, uh, the
the vocal minority. Um, the majority of
people who play are more casual players.
They're the guys who get together in
their dorm room and and play a few
rounds of split screen. Um, so we had
these two audiences that we wanted to to
care for. And even though uh the
competitive scene is much smaller than
the casual scene, we kind of look at
them equally. The reason is these guys
pull in these guys. These guys hear
about these guys and what they're doing
and all the amazing things they're
doing. Like Reddit was huge for us. And
part of the reason was we had all these
guys from Battle Cars,
you know, the Kernovi and the Gibbs and
guys like that uh that were doing these
amazing things and putting up animated
gifts on Reddit and they were like, "Oh
my god, there's a whole new level to
this game." I can't tell you how many
times people said you can fly in this
game. I've been playing this for a month
and I didn't know that. Um, and so they
really feed each other, but they're very
different. Uh, they they want different
things. So, we didn't focus on what
would make us money. We we knew that
would just come. Um, and I think that's
a right way to look at things. Uh, we
focused on what will support these
players, what will keep them going, man.
Psionics is awesome. thank you for
giving us. This is exactly what we
wanted. So, we listen to them. We we you
know, they they probably think we don't
read all of their posts. We read
everything. We read everything that
people write. Um most of it we already
had in our backlog anyway. It's just a
matter of prioritizing things. I wish we
could be faster at it honestly because
people are get really excited about
something and then we get excited too,
but it takes us three months to make it
and by then they're like, "Oh, finally
Cionics does something about it." No,
like we immediately were on that. you
just had no idea.
But um uh yeah, you got to cater to
those too. So you've got things like
rumble mode. It caters to the casual
audience um really well. And you got
things like uh spectator support for
esports and all of those features that
caters to the the uh competitive the
competitive guys. Um so we try to
balance those two things and make sure
that people continue to play. It's kind
of the same way people look at
free-to-play games is it's all about
engagement. even though we had no
in-game monetization, which we have now,
but you know, we didn't for more than a
year.
Yeah. Um, was the rumble mode like a
sort of a weird call back to your
original design doc for this?
It actually it had some inspiration, but
uh it was done by a completely new
designer here, uh, who hadn't, uh,
hadn't, as far as I can know, hadn't
even played that. So, um, that was
interesting, but I think it still had a
lot of influence from just the psionics
way of doing things. Uh, kind of
anything goes, um, craziness, but we
wanted everything to still be very
physicsy and so on. Um, but it it was,
um, uh, we took that a little bit of the
handcuffs off. So, for competitive,
we're very protective of making sure
that the game is fair. It's got to be
fair or there's no esport there,
right? Um, with with rumble mode, we're
like, well, let's give them, especially
the casual players, something where it
doesn't have to be fair.
Yeah.
It's like Mario Kart, you know, the blue
shell. Doesn't have to be fair. It's
still fun. Um, so, uh, that was really
the the motivation behind that. It was a
much bigger success than we actually
thought it would be.
Was there any sports that didn't make it
in that because you got ice hockey out
and then you got the the basketball
stuff?
Uh, we've tried some other sports. Um, I
think some people have even found a few
in in our code in places because
everybody's hacking the game now. Um,
uh, but, uh, some of them may appear
later, so I can't say which ones they
are, but um, we're always trying other
sports and other things to see what
works. But the thing is, we're not going
to put something out just because it
looks kind of like another sport. It's
got to be fun, you know? So, until we
figure out a way to to make it fun, then
it doesn't it doesn't go. Were the ice
hockey and basketball were they in that
sort of that idea for the open world
thing where you go to different
stadiums?
Uh no actually ice hockey goes all the
way back to original battle cars. Um we
tried uh an ice hockey mode. Um we
didn't have enough time to put the the
the appropriate amount of time into it.
But uh this time we had a lot more time
and resources and we made it work in a
way that I I was really impressed with
because the first one didn't didn't work
out. But you know, try try again. Uh how
scalable is Rocket League? Because
obviously we're a year plus from launch.
It's had so much content added to it.
Like you said, you've now got the sort
of the chest unlock stuff in there as
well, which has expanded that out. How
much can you add to this before it gets
too topheavy?
uh you got to be careful. Um some of the
directions we're going in now are trying
to expand what we consider the core game
experience and just make that more fun
and and um uh you know giving you a lot
more there's a lot more cosmetic type
stuff that you can do. Uh there's
definitely we want to keep out keep
putting out casual modes that that are
fun for a while. Um we're not really
trying to create new esports with them
though. um it it keeps people coming
back to the game and playing and
engaging and so on. But you're right, it
is a balancing act where if you dump too
much stuff in there, you obscure it and
um it it doesn't have the purity that
the game currently has. So, uh we're
very aware of that and we're always
trying to protect that.
Is there an idea for is there a Rocket
League 2 or is this like your platform
that you're going to be working on?
At the moment, it's our platform. Um
it's a successful platform and has a
huge number of people. there's no reason
for us to to mix that up. Uh it we're
going to kind of wait and see how it
goes. You know, that that sentiment may
change at some point. Um just like in
the way that we follow the community and
figure out what they want from the game.
At some point, maybe that's something
that everybody wants and it and it makes
sense. I think right now though, um it
makes sense to keep um building on what
we already have.