- I'm actually amazed that the, in this 
case, the very first conceptualization
of the idea actually survived. Like it was, 
it was not exactly the same thing,
because it was not one day. It wasn't like for
 a period of one day. It was four days.
But it was the same idea. One map, 
you spend as much time as you want.
When you exit, you go to the next period. 
Like that was here from the beginning.
And the other thing that was here from
the beginning was there is a sequence of
action that you need to do to break, you know, the
 cycle and immediately below assassinations.
Like, that sounds like it because you don't 
change, you don't go too far from the tree.
Of course, during production at some point
 you're like, yeah, what about one more?
What about one less? Like each time we tried to 
add, remove, change that structure somehow,
put something before, after, it broke it somehow.
DANNY O'DWYER: While Deathloop may 
have always had four areas and four times
in which to explore them, from my recent 
chat with game director Dinga Bakaba,
it's about the only thing in this 
game's design that stayed the same
throughout the entire production.
Here at Noclip, we take your feedback
 incredibly seriously, and recently
it's come to our attention that many
 in our community are frustrated by
the lack of coverage of games by Arkane studios.
So I just wanted to let you know that
we're going to be working really hard to
fix that at going forward. What are
 they called? Immersion sims?
Deathloop, the latest title from 
Arkane Lyon Studio, is the game
on the tip of everyone's tongue right now.
And what's special about it is that it
seems to have created a new language for
the immersive sim subgenre of games
that the studios are known for, games in
which systemic design allow for loads
of player choice and terrific moments of
emergent gameplay. You know, those 
times where your actions domino,
and the end result is something
 cool and unexpected.
But Deathloop is a unique experience
even to fans of immersive sims.
And while Dinga didn't want to
spill all the beans just yet,
he is going to let us in on how many
elements of the game came together.
Things like the intro, how much help they 
give the player in highlighting objectives,
the style of the game's four maps, and even a 
melee combat system that was scrapped
in favor of a single terrific kick.
But first of all, who was the team 
at Arkane Lyon making Deathloop for?
Was this for diehard fans who love
 games like Dishonored and Prey,
players who don't usually finish 
immersive sims, or somebody else entirely?
- But we had an ideal playtesters that we were,
 we were talking about. An ideal player,
or sometimes, we sometimes even say
the ideal player every now and then.
And I think we definitely, my question was, 
how can we make the ideal player
not the focus, like not the person who 
will have the most fun with the game.
How can we make that a bit more
democratic, for lack of a better term?
Like you don't need to be in the know, like every
 once sometimes, someone asked us
or was wondering online about this on 
Dishonored 2. Am I playing it the right way?
It was a stab in my heart, because we do 
everything to make sure that you can
play it however you want. We say it,
 and then people feel guilty.
And every time a review that is a bit harsh or 
a Steam review would say about Dishonored,
this is a game that doesn't know what it wants to be,
 whether it's stealth, or combat, or adventure.
What we are trying to solve is when
you know the systems and you know
the environments, you know the
tools, you know all those things,
the game is so enjoyable. And how
much of a portion of our audience gets
to that level of familiarity? And that's what 
we are going for. And that's why we were like,
okay, let's make something more 
focused rather than something huge
so that you can build that familiarity.
Second thing was okay, let's try to have
replayability not being a meta thing, you know,
but part of the experience? How can you build 
familiarity before it's the last five minutes
of the game, and you feel awesome, 
and then the game wraps up?
That's more or less how sometimes we see 
people feel in Dishonored or Prey streams.
Like I got this figured out, and then you play for 
one hour or something, and then it's a wrap.
That's where the singularity is between the 
player who will come back and play it again
and really enjoy it, and the one who said, 
oh, I'll definitely come back. That's a great game.
But they don't, because we 
have the lives that we have.
DANNY: Deathloop spends a good three
hours explaining how it all works,
So I'm not going to attempt
to unpack all of that here.
But its grand objective, its murder
 puzzle as the team calls it,
is something truly unique to this game.
Introductory levels are tricky to
design for just about any game,
but in Deathloop, there was a
lot more to explain than usual.
COLT: Oh, whoa. Whew. That was one 
ridiculous nightmare. Oh, I gotta stop drinking.
DINGA: We needed to teach the mechanics, 
like in any games. We needed to teach the,
the story, the characters, and make you care.
We needed you to care for for
 someone and ideally Colt.
Then the world presents this weird world. Like 
we've had some experiences with early playtests
in something like Dishonored where people
would actually be off-put by the fact that
the world is so different than ours. Like, why 
does it have to be called an audiograph?
Just call it a radio.
Like all these things came into play test, and 
that was sometimes difficult to make choices.
So you need to introduce the world in a way
 that after that you can introduce whatever
batshit crazy thing. People will be okay with it 
if you do the job right at the beginning.
COLT: Oh, they just disappeared? That felt
too easy. I've done this before, haven't I?
DINGA: So introducing the world and then,
and I think that's the most difficult
thing, was the loop, the campaign,
the game structure, the main story, and the rest.
 Like this, like all these other things,
you're like, yeah, that's just 
what you do in most games.
But contrary to something like Dishonored 
where there was like a dedicated tutorial map,
and then there is the couple of mechanics
that we introduce in the first maps.
And even some later on, right?
You had a little bit of control on
the player experience to say, yeah,
let's make the streets so that you have to see this
 wall of light and deal with it one way or another.
Here it was actually very difficult to know
 what people would do as soon as they are out
of the beginning of the game.
We need to teach them Deathloop. Like
we need to teach the players Deathloop.
COLT: I don't know any damn code.
DINGA: Let's make a strike team for the 
intro map, you know, and we did that.
And then, nah, that's not enough by any stretch of 
the imagination. Let's add tutorialization now.
So there was the tutorialization, not just the 
intro, like the tutorialization strike team.
And then that became the first 
three hours strike team.
And that became what we ended 
up calling the guided tour. 
And I think that team did a tremendous job.
Like it was a lot of disciplines that
needed to be in that strike team for a lot of
reasons, because if you need a new way
to tutorialize something, you need UI,
you need programming. Like it
was not just designers. It was like a
mini team that was like, just hammering
on the beginning, like chiseling it like marble
and some folks like playing it, playing through
 it two times a day, sending pages of, yeah.
I can do it in my sleep, the beginning now, I think.
DANNY: Dinga told us they tried 
every version of this intro possible,
from an overly handholded version to a
 Fromsoftware style of telling the player
absolutely nothing and 
having them figure it all out.
And while some immersive sim fans may
crave that type of hands-off approach,
he said it was far too frustrating for
most. Play testers would spend far too
long trying to solve problems. But when
they did, the payoff was incredible.
Figuring out how they could reconcile
the frustration with this powerful
epiphany was a primary focus of the team.
Deathloop tells you a lot of things.
It has objective markers, it telegraphs
where it wants you to go, and catalogs key
information on an evidence board.
This is very different to the design
language of most immersive sims.
And according to Dinga,
this was all about not bothering the
player with too much to unpack themselves.
As he said, being aware of 
the player's cognitive load.
- Cognitive load is that there is just
an amount of information starting,
like there is an amount of information, 
of complexity that just makes you feel bad.
It doesn't mean you will not get through it. 
It just makes decision-making slower.
It, you know, prevents enjoyment. Too much to 
handle would be the less vague term, you know?
You know, we have, we hold players
 in high esteem at Arkane.
Like we do not go for, you know, people
 are dumb. We need to play for them.
That's not the case. But there is being smart, 
and there is having pleasure solving something.
If you're focusing on this puzzle, like, let's just 
have the player figure out this puzzle right now
while they are also trying to understand how 
the vision cones work, how your inventory work,
where they are wondering what
 happens when they die.
Like you see what I mean? You're actually 
wearing yourself down to the other complexity
of the games, and don't worry. Halfway through
 the game, you will have a lot to deal with.
And you feel super smart, and 
you know, like, I got this, like,
I'm starting to think with this thing
that sounded overwhelming at the
beginning, and it feels great. The reality
 is yeah, for this to be able to exist,
I think it was important that on
some other things, it's very clear,
very straightforward, and you can focus
 on the how I do it rather than the what.
DANNY: Speaking of cognitive loads, 
this is all getting a bit complicated.
So how about we sit back and chat about
the visual design of this game for a second?
We didn't have time to talk to co creative 
lead and art director, Sebastien Mitton,
so we asked Dinga to explain the
visuals of Deathloop's four areas
and what design purpose each
level was created to satisfy.
DINGA: I think Updaam was the opportunity
to make that clash that he was talking about.
I want to feel that it's a desolate place.
I want to feel that there is a history,
that this is a place where people have
lived before. So there is this kind of, you know, 
Northern European feel in the architecture,
but I also want the sixties party layer.
And that's where all the experimentations
with the, the plastic extrusions,
like all those really cool, like
the painted, like all those,
a lot of those experiments happened in
this district because that's one of the
first that happens, you know,
that was our vertical slice.
So it's one that was pushed to the
earliest. That sort of traditional
urban level. That's the shit we like
love to do since, you know, Dishonored.
Can we make our levels even more
sandbox in a way in terms of navigation?
This one is actually I think the Ryu of 
our Street Fighter, in terms of level, like
that's the one that makes all
other possible. The complex was,
but this is a place that, where the
nature is very impressive. So,
you know, what if man was, you
know, man human being was not here,
but also it's the scientific area, 
the most scientific area.
So it has like the highest
contrast in terms of technology.
Like the desolate areas and the high-tech.
 So that was the contrast.
Fristad Rock. So here we wanted another contrast. 
We wanted to contrast between the very
kind of a messy area around the bunker, 
FIA's bunker, and lavish elegance of club of Frank.
And Karl's Bay was let's crank up the party,
 amusement, entertainment, themes here.
And the buildings are not too high.
 It's one of my favorite invasion maps,
because the first are here with the small houses,
you can get on every house and have
sometimes some duels running around after
one another on the roofs and try to snipe or like,
 I really liked the navigation of Karl's Bay.
DANNY: Games go under dramatic changes
over the course of development.
So we asked Dinga to explain one element
of the game that changed a lot from
what we play today. And
his answer was interesting.
Deathloop has a terrifically powerful kick,
 a move that I assumed was a throwback
to the terrific kick in Dark 
Messiah of Might and Magic.
But it turns out its origins 
were a little bit different.
The kick got progressively more powerful
over the course of development as the
team dialed in the engagement 
distance of combat.
And this is because originally Deathloop
actually had a melee combat system similar
to Dishonored, and the reason it 
was canned was actually down
to multiplayer invasions. That style
 of combat may have worked,
but they had to scrap it because of
variances in latency that were different
depending on who you were fighting.
DINGA: In the beginning, you could
defend with the machete, and parry and block.
Like we said, okay, let's just ask 
ourselves all the questions that just put
the fencing of Dishonored. We'll figure it out
 later. But as soon as we added the multiplayer,
something went wrong. The client, which is 
the invader, has a delay over the host,
which you are not feeling when 
you have hitscan bullets
because we have like a number of things, 
like there is technology for that.
Blocking was okay, but parrying,
 like timed parries
were problematic. And the worst
part is yes, you can accept it.
But the problem was switching. It
was a different timing with the NPCs,
but different timing from Colt to Julianna, 
and again, a different timing
you know, Julianna parrying Colt. Like it was
three situations. And I think it was,
I think, because in Dark Souls
 there is a difference,
but at least there is only really
the monsters are different.
Like it's a bit different in that. 
So I think we accept it. We know it exists,
but we accept it. In Deathloop, it was
really hard to accept, like very,
very hard, especially when people were used
 to the snappy shing of Dishonored.
So then we removed the timed\parry, and it was only block.
And that was boring as hell, because
suddenly I can throttle, 
and fights were like, shing, shing, shing, shing, 
shing, shing, shing, shing, shing, boom!
You know, it was kind of Indiana Jones.
So we said, fuck defense. Let's just
add, replace defense with a kick,
like a big kick that, that makes you
go oof. And if it were to trade hits,
you would accept it as a player.
 Like it's not weird. Like yeah,
I kicked, but it was too late because
the bad thing was on me. I get it.
And if it was soon enough, we could
break your, and stun you
for a very short time, like we did with it.
And immediately people accepted
it much better in playtests.
DANNY: Dinga told me he's been enjoying 
the past few weeks because he's had a back
catalog of time loop based movies and
games that he's finally able to enjoy.
I had asked him if Prey's terrific DLC
Mooncrash was an inspiration at all in
the creation of Deathloop. And he said
that while he'd played a couple of hours,
he then suddenly realized it was as much
a time loop game as it was a roguelike
and immediately put it down, but
he's excited to complete it soon.
So speaking of enjoying himself,
I asked how he and the team have reacted
to the reviews and player feedback.
DINGA: It's funny because when
reviews started to come up,
at first I was, because for some reason
I was used to cases where reviews
were slow to build up or something,
I forgot we sent like a ton.
So I was like, oh yeah, it's not bad,
but it will go down. And then I watch,
and it was like 60 or 70 already.
That's where I started running around
in this room and jumping and yelling.
Hopefully my neighbors don't report me. 
But we are happy. It's better than
we hoped. We were going for
some people will love it, love it.
 Some people will hate it.
No one will be indifferent. That was the goal.
 And the proportion between the two groups,
like we didn't expect it to be what
it is now, which we've, you know,
so many people liking it.
The one thing that I'm the most pleased
that I've read a couple of times,
not only in reviews, of course, in players' 
feedback on social media and forums and stuff.
It's, this is a game where I'm used to play 
a certain way, and I feel alright, you know,
to try things differently. Like the fact
 that people were encouraged to
try to play differently and approach
the game differently than what they're
used to from our past games or
games that are more or less similar,
that was the, honestly, that was the
best thing I could read. Like as a,
as I said, the difficulty as a designer is
how do you prevent people from
making a space of possibility a straight line. 
And I'm happy that that works with this game.
COLT: I'm always succeeding, even when I'm not.
How do I keep my weapons again?
- The infusion process? Isn't that
why you came up here?
COLT: Not going to lie. Me told me to.
- You're not the only one with other 
me's, you know. You're not special.
COLT: Yeah, but if I succeed...
- Yeah, if. Good luck.
- Hey, what's up. Thank you very much
for watching this video on Deathloop.
Of course, if you want more 
coverage of Arkane games,
you can check out our documentary on
Dishonored, our documentary on Prey,
our documentary on the 
history of Arkane Studios,
which goes into the design
 of three canceled games:
The Crossing, LMNO, and Half-Life Ravenholm, 
which is a game, just like LMNO actually, that we
premiered, we showed the first ever
 gameplay of right here on this channel.
And we also did, just in case we weren't
done with the immersive sim stuff,
we also did an episode of our retrospective show, 
Greatest Hits, on Thief: The Dark Project,
which also covers the second and 
third Thief games and a lot of the
Looking Glass Studios, you know, alumni, 
which sort of bleeds into, you know,
Arkane is kind of like the spiritual
studio successor to the folks over at LGS.
Thank you so much for checking out our channel
 and for supporting, especially if you're a patron,
if you're one of the terrifically named people 
here beside me who support our work.
We're, you know, endeavoring to mix 
it up and keep everything fresh
during this whole pandemic phase.
Also just so you know, you know, 
doing these like smaller videos
closer to launch on a studio
doesn't mean that in the future,
we might not also do a big doc on the game.
So if you're looking forward to more 
on Deathloop, we'd certainly love to
have that opportunity. In fact, let me show you, 
it came up in our conversation with Dinga. 
I'm looking forward to hopefully 
in the future hanging out with him
and talking about game design once again. 
This is what he had to say.
- You know what isone of the most common
 things that I, like just yesterday,
of course, yeah. We, some of us
met to just at least, you know,
yell together a little bit.
And I think one of the two or three sentences
that I've heard the most was,
"the Noclip for this one would be 
the most interesting."
So just dropping it here. So let's save 
a few bullets in case that happens.