Since Doom mastered the template of the first person shooter over two decades ago,
we've been subjected to over 20 years of design iteration.
That doesn't exactly leave much in the way of new ground for the genre to stomp on.
So what do you do when you're asked to recreate a feel of a game that came out over 20 years ago,
While you're expected to have it sell in an incredibly unforgiving first person shooter marketplace?
The three pillars of Doom 2016's gameplay are:
monsters,
guns,
and level design.
And today, we're going to take the time to look at how each one was crafted.
But there's another aspect of Doom that provides the fuel for your psychotic rampage,
It's extraordinary soundtrack by talented producer Mick Gordan
So we should probably have a quick chat with him too.
Today we get technical and dive into the design of Doom 2016.
It's combat chess, glory kills, curious level design, and furious soundtrack.
My name is Gerry Keehan.
I'm the lead level designer on the Doom project and the lead level designer here at Id
I joined the team back in 2003 during the development of Doom 3.
You remember delta 3? The teleportation level?
"Yes"
Yeah, that was one of mine.
Some of the alpha labs levels, delta labs.
The only ones I didn't really touch were the hell maps.
That was another designer.
"What was it like trying to re-imagine a game like Doom?"
"Because you worked on the old UAC and there was a vision of what that thing was."
"What was it like 12 years later, almost like going back to remodel your old home?"
I think about this, like how did we get here.
The fondness of Doom 1, right? and fans, you have a huge fan base.
What does a Doom 1 game look like today?
Some of the things about doom 3 -  graphically fantastic
Doom 3 had accolades for how good It looked.
There was controversy, maybe even devision with the fan base
of horror verses fast paced, and it's like can you match those two together?
Can you do an awesome visual experience but bring back what was Doom 1 to people?
Well it was fast, it was fun, it was fearsome, it was crazy.
It was not like anything anyone else had played ever before.
then what does that look like, what game do we need to make?
That at it's core drove us.
[Danny]
Gerry said the direction the team eventually went in didn't look anything like what we expect from most single player campaigns.
In fact it found it's roots in a multiplayer mode his team was originally testing
Before that part of the game was out sourced to Certain Affinity.
[Gerry]
Ultimately, the layouts, the spaces
really is an evolution of that multiplayer idea.
The dance, the movement around the space.
The balance was striking a believable place to a multiplayer layout
So in res-ops for example, you get to what we call the Imp room.
What It looked like originaly was a box with some crates
And from there it goes to "Well we're going to start to do multi-tiers"
Because we went forward in a lot of levels and made progress in some of the hell maps
and places were there was a lot more verticality and over and under.
So then we revisit those boxes and say "Okay, how do we make this place just as fun"
But you have to tailor them back because you only have Imps for example or Hell Soldiers or whatever.
And so you have to go "Okay, well we need to make the space fit the combat we are going for and the type of AI we have"
[Danny]
From talking to the team there are a number of terms they all seem to use.
They talk about "steering into ideas",
"Going where the fun is".
But the term I heard more than anything else refers to the driving force behind Doom's gameplay.
From it's level design to the movements to how you are rewarded with health and ammunition for using glory kills.
Three simple words.
Push
Push Forward
Push Forward Combat
[Gerry]
You think about multiplayer, you're not backing up.
You're going forward to the next location.
"I see the ledge, that place is an advantage, I'm going to go there."
So that was in the mind of just about everyone.
The push forward idea was that we don't want to be scared and backing into a corner.
Thats kind of the picture, not necessarily that you would be, but stay away from that.
So how do we make sure of that? In things like the glory kills, that played into it beautifully.
Getting loot and health from the bodies.
It's like "Oh! go that way and get that stuff!"
because normally you end up with less health in an egagement
so it's just like go forward and do it again.
We basically used that as "Move forward because you are going to do more damage moving forward than you will going back."
It was one of the things that when we first started showing the game
at E3 or Quakecon or whatever.
People would comment on the glory kill and they were like
"Screw these glory kills man, they're going to slow down the gameplay"
And it's one of the things where you can't say it, you can't say "No no no"
But people are so used to the sync interactions in a lot of games.
I think that one of the best parts of the way the animatic played out and the way that they were implemented
like, right from the get go,
Is that you never felt like they were in the way.
They happen quick, and so much of the animation takes place after the actual syncing
that you get the beauty of the animation that you would normally have if it's like a quick time event or a totally synced event
But we take the player out of the sync so fast
You can be turning and they guy can be continuing his animation over here
So it never feels in the way
[Gerry]
The design of the levels really played into that a lot.
One thing we wrestled with was locking you into a room and making you do it.
We tried to make it as fun as we could.
[Danny]
"Was there a time where this wasn't the case, where you could just like barrel through levels?"
There were a few places like that and it does present problems
like what happens when I drag all of this AI into another room.
And then you end up where you're backed in and can't do anything.
So there was a concerted effort to try and pace those things out properly
We did have to lock the doors and not let you out until you deal with the situation
You can't have all the AI in the level chasing you through it
because if you put an AI on the screen, it's costly, it costs something.
[Danny]
So the team steered into it, pushing forward at all limits
Into danger, utilizing choke points and open areas.
But the system was limited, as the demons were capable of traversing the environment with abilities far greater than most first person characters.
So they steered into that as well, and leveled the field by giving the player the ability to mantle.
[Gerry]
The mantling came as a result of moving fast through the world.
We wanted it to be fast, because that was a core element of Doom, you felt fast.
Whether you were or not, but you felt fast, and that was what we want
When you go back you remember Doom 1, It was fast.
So that was like "Ok that's going to be our top billing, that's going to be one of our top core elements of the game."
So we wanted to kind of blow the lid off of level design.
in terms of "Well It's going to be this corridor shooter it's going to be whatever" like pigeonhole it into something.
We used it. We said "Now we have this awesome mantling ability"
"Lets just use it everywhere."
"Lets build levels. Secrets? Sure! I can mantle to get to the secret."
[Danny]
While much of the game's combat is centered around these closed off areas,
there are some interesting set pieces that break up the flow.
The Argent Tower level, with its long bridge, was designed not only to teach the player how to double jump,
but also to teach them where to mantle.
There's an old trick frequently used in level design.
"Light leads the way"
If you're ever looking for the exit in an area of a FPS,
it's usually telegraphed by some sort of eye catching light source.
Doom's mantling system used a similar trick, by highlighting climbable surfaces with green LEDs
But sticking big green indicators all over the levels was a difficult challenge to overcome.
[Garry]
That was a tough thing for us because, again, we're very art heavy, we love the quality and look of things
and you could almost not put anything in the levels that didn't look gaudy.
When you do that it was like "Well, how do we distinguish the ledge grabbable surfaces from the non-ledge grabbable surfaces"
and green lights ultimately payed off.
and it came through in a lot of the prototype maps, just like "we'll just put green lights here"
And so we were like "Well why not just do that?"
And it works for the most part, because for most people green is good, green is go.
So it's more of a phycological thing and so we tried to do it as naturally as possible so it wasn't too gaudy.
[Danny]
Many first person shooters involve you taking on waves and waves of enemies.
Think Call of Duty, Battlefield, or Id's canceled Doom 4
You take on waves of similar looking enemies utilizing cover and pushing forward once an area is clear.
On the face of it that sounds like most FPS games, right?
But Doom works a bit different.
Doom is a game where you enter areas only to be surrounded by enemies.
At the start that's just Imps, lets represent those as pawns.
But as you progress through the levels, the game introduces new enemy types,
which combine with the ones you've already mastered.
The Summoner, who darts across the map in an instant.
The Hell Knight, who jumps around in close quarters.
The Pinky, who charges in straight lines.
What this creates is a form of combat chess,
where the player is in an enclosed combat arena with increasingly varied enemies to battle.
The further you get, the more demons you're tasked with slaying.
But against such increasingly challenging odd, how is the player expected to survive?
The player's massive load-out of guns, what's know as a hyperspace arsenal.
The weapons in Doom are rooted in the earlier games,
But with the ability to modify them to create entirely new ways of firing.
The team put month of work into creating a variety of modifications for each weapon.
The standard rocket launcher, for instance, had mods that allowed for remote detonation,
Locking on to enemies,
Charging for more explosive rockets,
And the ability to fire swarms.
Not every modification made the cut
but the ones that did created a thrilling arsenal of weapondry
That are as varied as the demons they are made to destroy.
[Hugo]
The Imp is just amazing
He's the character you can just keep fighting again and again.
You get a room full of Imps in our levels with they way these guys set this stuff up
and you're just going to get good results.
Well they were the easiest, honestly. They were the hardest and the easiest.
Because they are a staple.
Consequently, they were the most robust, the largest amount of animations went into them.
So really we could put them anywhere
So we weren't limited in the design of the levels with the Imps.
They could go anywhere. They could do anything.
Probably, some of my favorites
Probably the Pinky. I love that he's this freight train.
There are times where I am in the last level of the game or any level of the game
and you're doing the dance and feeling like a rockstar and you're kicking major ass
and he just plows you from the side, just like 
*freight train noise*
and you're like "Holy shit" ya know?
[Gary]
He has again a limited animation set, but his role was he didn't have a ranged attack or anything like that.
He basically B lines it for you and you step aside, shoot him in the back because he has armor in the front now.
And we thought It was a fun game mechanic to be like "oh, okay if I figure out..."
"I could waste a whole bunch of ammo and get him from the front"
"or I could- wow if I actually do my double jump"
Because you have the double jump by the time he's introduced and you can double jump over him
or to the side of him and get him when he comes by.
I love that about him, I think he perfectly complements the dance.
And that's what it is. As you play through the game
You're playing chess, combat chess, the combat puzzle that you have to solve
and your tools and the amount of chess pieces on the board increase
and the size of the chess board and the type of chess board increases as you progress through the game.
The thing about the Barron is that he is the largest AI we have.
So his leaps are naturally going to be larger
All his movement is much broader and bigger.
So the space has to accommodate that
The Revenant is probably my favorite because he's so straight metal.
I mean he belongs on the cover of an Iron maiden album.
I like that he looks insane, because there's humor in everything.
I have a hard time, as you can tell. I try not to take things to seriously.
And I like to focus on the emotional response that you'll get from the consumer
Like when I show you something- I put a product in your hand, I put a new phone In your hand, we sit in a car.
You watch a movie that we worked on or play a game that we made.
What are you doing?
I want to see. Are you going like this?
*gasps*
Well maybe we're making that type of game and we want you to be scared.
Are you smiling the whole time? Because that's how you should be on Doom.
Totally we wanted you to smile. We didn't want you to shriek or cover your eyes. Smile.
So when we showed it at Quake-con and you see the the Revenant, the Revenant just makes you smile.
Because he looks ridiculous.
He's loosing his mind, he's never not screaming.
It's just hilarious.
And he makes everybody smile.  To be honest
it is why we get away with the level of violence that we do.
Because it's kind of all okay
"It's all in good fun! I'm just gonna rip his arms off."
Ya know, like this is fun, we're having fun!
Because if it's just a little bit mean spirited, I think it's
tonally gets a little more harsh
and mean spirited and we didn't want that.
"Popcorn horror", that's what we called it.
"Popcorn horror: horror for the whole family"
⛧ Rip & Tear - Mick Gordon ⛧
While the music in many games complements and underscores the action,
the music in Doom is really front and center,
like a death metal orchestra playing to your every footstep.
As someone who loves music, but has absolutely no idea how the creative process for writing music even begins,
I was excited to have the opportunity to sit down and talk to the game's composer, Mick Gordon.
He had just arrived back at his home in Melbourne Australia,
after appearing on stage at The Game Awards the previous week.
The first question I had for him was "How do you even start to craft a soundtrack"
"for a game that is still in development?"
[Mick]
The start of each project you spent this big time kind of
coming up some sort of joint creative language.
Where you're both able to use similar words and you both understand the same meaning behind those words.
If there's any ambiguity behind the conversation,
18 months later when you've got no time left, you're going to run into all sorts of trouble.
So it's important at the start of every project, we always spend that time
discovering each other's creative boundaries and what each person means.
So when somebody says "Hey lets make it really heavy", what does that actually mean?
Because heavy to them might mean something comepleatly different to someone else for example.
I always try to on every single project to have some in studio time.
When I visited the Id studios in Dallas, It was incredible!
I mean, you've been there.
The glass cabinet that greets you when you enter the office is amazing,
It's full of all those clay sculptures and things that they used 20 years ago to make the demons back then.
[Danny]
It must be quite intimidating to try and re-imagine such an iconic sountrack
What was your creative process sort of starting this whole venture?
[Mick]
Yeah, whenever you're working on a huge franchise like Doom its important to put that
that legacy on a high pedestal.
It really is, I'm a big believer in that.
I'm not a big believer in pushing everything aside from the past and then trying to create something new.
I think it's really important to pay a really strong tribute to that legacy that has come before.
That being said, If you focus on that too much, you're going to get very laser focused and become intimidated
and scared and loose your confidence with the work that you're doing.
So one of the first things we kind of did was actually just cross out the word Doom.
I just starting ignoring that word and said "what is this game all about?"
It is very much a modern first person shooter, don't get me wrong,
But it's futuristic, it's a futuristic science fiction, it very is.
It's set far far far off into the future.
There's obviously the invasion, the hellish invasion.
What does that actually mean? What does hell mean?
What has hell meant to different civilizations and people in the past?
Where does that come from? What does hell mean today?
How is hell being illustrated by Hugo and the team in this game?
What does Mars mean? What does Mars mean in terms of isolation?
Being away from Earth, planet Earth, Home essentially.
What does that mean? Being the only human left on a barren planet?
What does it mean to be scared of demons? Are you scared of demons ?
And through that process of looking at every single facet of Doom we kind of stumbled on this idea that
you're the enemy of the demons in the game.
Once we started looking at it from that angle it started to make a lot more sense and we were able to get away
from that Doom hang up in the past and find something that was new and original for today.
When I visited the Id offices and I chatted to Hugo and Martin
one of the big, big, things that everybody talked about was that they realy didn't want
heavy metal in the game, they didn't want it to feel like a heavy metal thing.
And I totally understood that at that point too because they didn't want it to feel like some cliche corny thing.
They didn't want it to feel like Bill and Ted basically.
That was everybody fear, to feel like a Bill and Ted game.
So we spent the first couple of months just experimenting with synthesizers
and coming up with different synth sounds and seeing how far we could push synths.
And we did things like take synths and ran them through guitar pedals and stuff like that
to try and make them really aggressive and angry and play the role of a guitar
But it had a different sound and had a different sort of vibe about it.
And a lot of that stuff was heard in the original Quakecon demo that was behind closed doors,
but some of that stuff ended up showing up in the E3 Demo as well.
After that E3 demo the reaction from fans was "It's kinda cool, but it didn't feel like Doom"
And after that E3 showing we started incorporating a little bit more guitar elements
And once we started with 5% it started to feel really good and started to feel more like a doom game.
We started adding 10% and then 15%
and by the time we finished we had a pretty guitar chunky soundtrack in the end
The music in Doom- Its pretty front and center,
It's not like some sort of track that's playing in the background
A lot of the time it's not so much complementing the player as it is driving the player.
[Mick]
I'm a really big fan of 90's video game music.
To me some of the best music that we have in the industry came from that period.
The stuff that went into the original Killer Instinct and the original Doom and Banjo Kazooie and Perfect Dark
and these sort of great games from that period.
One thing that all of those games really shared in common was that the music was really front and center.
You really knew the music back to front, you could sing those melodies back to front.
And I feel as we've progressed through the years a lot of things have progressed,
but music is not one of those things. Music has been pushed to the background.
So with this because doom is obviously a big franchise from the 90s
I kind of wanted to pay tribute to that regard as well where the music should sit up front and center.
The player should be aware of the music.
The music needs to play that sort of emotional pay off role.
It is the reward for doing well, it is the motivator. It tells them that
"Yes, you are OK, you are doing well, everybody's scared of you, you're the killer here."
And that's definitely something I try to do in a lot of my work is bring the music more up front.
Get people to remember music again, get people to enjoy video game music again.
[Danny]
The soundtrack for doom is incredibly varied, and to be honest has quit a lot of music in it.
I asked Mick how exactly do you plan for all the various tracks that the game required?
So essentially you have the over all hierarchy
At number top you have Doom, so everything you do needs to sound like it's part of Doom
Underneath that we'd have 3 different areas that were lower in the hierarchy
One of those areas was UAC,
One of those areas was hell,
And one of those areas was kinda more industrial gritty lava based sort of stuff like the factory
so the sort ot thing you would hear at the start of the level.
so that's the beginning of the hierarchy
Under that you have all the different individual scenarios that happen.
So that spider mastermind for example, that's very much a boss battle so it's a bigger sort of track.
But it occurs in hell, so it has that sort of thing, that big part of it.
But It has that element of that industrial thing as well.
So we kind of start building within that hierarchy.
And then once you have that hierarchy decided upon, basically they'd sent me gameplay footage
And I'd sit there and throw it up on the television
and it's kind of weird, I'd throw the gameplay footage up on the television
and I'd grab a controller, and the controller's not even plugged in, it's a video, I can't play it
And I'd just sit there holding it, pretend I'm playing the videogame
Because that's my gaming space, I'm used to getting certain emotional reactions to video games in that space.
So while I'm watching the video and certain things happen within the video,
I get a feeling of where that music should probably be taking that situation, that scenario.
And I sit there with a little app on my Iphone and it's a little metronome app
and I just tap on that metronome, and that gives me a beats per minute that feels appropriate for that battle.
Then what I do is take that back into the studio, and by that point I've already got what the music need to do
and the tempo that it needs to be at.
At that point we also know where that situation is going to be occurring within the hierarchy.
So once we got all that information we can actually sit down and start building the track.
The reason I do it like that is because we got a framework you're able to actually work to.
If you just kind of went in raw or whatever without any idea, It's very difficult to come up with stuff
Usually we just kind of work on that stuff and send it over,
and then you don't hear it again until the game comes out.
I remember sitting here and I was working on something, I can't remember what it was,
but anyway it was a really late night and I was working up until 4 o'clock in the morning
and Doom just got released on all the digital outlets
and while I was working away I had a couple of twitch streamers up and they were playing through it.
And a that point you have no idea whether the music that you've done for the game is actually good or not.
You really have no idea.
It's all just a fly by the seat of the pants type of thing for the whole 18 months, you just rush rush rush.
And I remember watching one of these Twitch streamers, and he got up to the second level
and his head started bopping when the music came on
I was like "Ahhh! I think this thing might turn out okay, I think it might be alright."
[Danny]
During my time on the project, talking to the people behind Doom 2016,
I feel like I have a much clearer understanding of the type of company Id Software is.
This isn't a massive studio with hundreds of employees pumping out games every year.
Nor is it a cocky indie start up, with ego's battling for attention
Id is a place where people work together closely.
Where talent, passion, and expertise is valued.
Where collaboration thrives, and the finger prints of every team member can be felt in the final creation.
This Doom meant a lot to a lot of people.
For fans it was phoenix from the nostalgic flames.
To critics, one of the best games of the year.
But to the people who work at Id, Doom was much more.
It was a battleground, one that they walked away from stronger, more unified, more confident than ever.
And for those of us who like to play games with Id Software written on the box,
That should be very exciting indeed.
Thank you so much for Watching Doom Resurrected.
If you'd like to support our work to tell more authentic stories about video games,
then please consider becoming a patreon.
We want to take a moment to thank everyone who has joined us in this journey so far in 2016
and we look forward to creating many many more video game documentaries next year.
See ya then!
⛧ BFG Division - Mick Gordon ⛧