- Hello, and welcome to the final
 part of our fantastical tale.
We sit on the eve of the rebirth
 of Square Enix's new world.
Almost exactly three years after
 the original catastrophic launch,
Eorzea was going to be getting a second chance.
But this time everybody knew it 
wasn't going to be getting a third.
Once Dalamud had struck, Yoshida-san
 moved the 1.x patch team
into the main team working on A Realm Reborn. 
Taking lessons from contemporary MMOs,
feedback from players over the 1.x phase, and 
elements that work from the original version,
they crafted a modern Final Fantasy 14
 set in a vibrant world that reflected
the energy of the franchise.
And for Yoshida-san and some other members of 
the team, this was going to be a very public thing
as they took the short train ride 
from the office in Shinjuku to Shibuya
to take part in a very special launch event.
- As I was heading to that event in
 Shibuya, I took a train that morning.
Of course there were some rehearsals to be 
done beforehand, so I left my house early.
And I was thinking to myself, oh 
yeah, we're about to release.
At this time, I was standing 
by the doors of the train.
And I was standing to the right side
 of the door, and then to my left
I saw this college student in green 
colored clothes, I remember.
And then he walked closer to me 
and in a very small voice, he said,
"Mr. Yoshida," he told me, "I really want to 
congratulate you on the release. I am a player."
So that happened. Then we then get
 to the event, and we were all on stage
as we talked about how we got here, the background 
of all the events that happened up until now.
And finally, the mic was passed on 
to me. So I recalled what happened
in the train that morning, and I just,
 I had to pause. When I thought about
what we've gone through, I was
 at a loss for words for a moment,
and then that's when the crowd
 started cheering me on.
"Hang in there, hang in there."
As I mentioned in a previous interview, an MMO's
 launch is not the end of the development.
It's more of a beginning of a long marathon.
And there's no time for being 
absorbed in an emotional recollection.
But just being there, pausing, and 
then the audience cheering me on.
It just got to me, and so I got a little teary 
eyed. It's a little embarrassing to say.
- Final Fantasy 14: A Realm Reborn is a great
 MMORPG experience on both PC and PlayStation 3.
Grounded in tradition and learning from
 the lessons of the games that preceded it,
it thrives on the strengths of its excitingly
 varied and flexible class system
and highly mobile combat.
- The game's rough launch is mostly over, but you 
still might have to contend with log in errors.
But this is by and large a very good
 massively multiplayer game
filled with lots of stuff to do, 
gorgeous vistas to behold,
and lots of adorable narrative touches.
- The challenge ahead per Square is to 
achieve the delicate balance of questing,
dungeons, and fates for the second half of the
 leveling process as well as it has the first.
But considering the stunning reversal of
 fortune that Square has achieved here,
it seems like anything is possible.
DANNY: So what was it like then on your end,
 after years of working on this game,
having the launch, basically being required to 
work on two separate games at the same time,
patching one, and then building an entirely 
new one almost in secret for a large part of it,
to then see...
What was it like reading reviews and reading
 message boards when people were like,
oh fuck, they did it.
- It was, yeah. I mean, we were just as surprised.
I mean, not as surprised because again, 
it was, it was definitely different.
You know, in those months before releasing
 the original, I mean, I knew that the game
wasn't in good shape. And so it's kind of, 
you're lying to yourself, trying to say
no, this is going to be good, 
they're going to like this part.
It's going to be okay. It's going to be okay.
But, with A Realm Reborn, playing it is like,
this is a really good game.
I mean, you're playing and enjoying it,
you know, but there's still that
little bit in the back of your 
mind that's like, you know.
And it's what we were told, is that
 once the game has been reviewed,
even if you try to rebuild it, everyone's 
going to remember the old.
They're not going to look at the 
new, and Metacritic never forgets.
When 14 came out, the original, 
and it was maybe people like, okay,
I think I'm a hardcore offline Final Fantasy
 guy, but I'll try out this new one.
But then, okay, it's terrible. 
See, I knew it. It's terrible.
They're not going to want to 
come back for a second time.
It's like, no, I already 
played that. It was terrible.
And so there was just this feeling that, even if
 it's a really great game, no one's going to play it.
They're just going to brush it off because
 it's the bad Final Fantasy Online
that I tried in beta, and it sucked. 
So I'm not going to play it anymore.
So yeah, we were afraid of that. 
But then wow, it was just...
I mean, servers breaking. Well, not breaking,
 but servers getting so packed with people
in those first few days, and then 
seeing the reviews come in.
And then they start saying things like you saved
 the franchise and you've saved the series.
And I don't know,  remembering what it was like 
at the launch of 1.0, and then just being able to,
because who gets to re-experience a bad launch? 
It's something you don't get in the game industry.
DANNY: Especially in MMOs.
- And we did, and it was a great 
experience to be able to say...
It was just that vindication of like all of
 that extra work that we had put in.
It was what Yoshida-san had promised us. 
If we worked hard and we did this right,
that in a year and half's time,
 you know, we can do this.
And a lot of people didn't believe him, and, you know,
 a normal person probably wouldn't believe him.
But, I mean, maybe that's why we were able
 to do it because all of the abnormals remained
and made something that was, you 
know, literally impossible happen.
- Because the servers were so crowded, 
we saw people not being able to play.
They had gone out of their way to purchase 
the game, but they can't play. That's ridiculous.
And of course, it's an online game, so you have to
 be able to connect to the servers in order to play.
Before even worrying about reviews, 
the fact that we were creating a situation
where people bought the game 
but couldn't play was shocking to me.
I mean, we didn't anticipate so many
 people coming to play the game,
so that of course was one
 of the contributing factors.
But before I could even 
react to some of the reviews,
I think I was more focused on 
trying to rectify the situation
and allowing people to log in.
So we were addressing that issue 
for the first month and a half or so.
And we paused shipping units, or selling the game. 
That's about all I can remember doing at the time.
DANNY: With most other genres, 
this would be the part of the story
where we fade to black and roll credits.
But such luxuries don't exist in the world
 of massively multiplayer online games.
In fact, after the release of A Realm Reborn,
 or 2.0 as they call it internally,
the team applied the same content-rich 
patching schedule they had undertaken with 1.0,
releasing a significant 2.x patch to the
 game every three to four months.
Over the next two years these patches
 progressed the story of ARR,
added in epic raids and new modes
 such as 72 player PVP battles.
But just like before, while the team 
was working on these 2.x patches,
they were concurrently building 
an updated version of the game:
the first expansion pack, Heavensward.
- I think it was 2014, October 
or maybe September time,
and some of the dev team 
members came up to me and said,
"Yoshida-san, you told us that it would 
get a little easier after ARR launched."
And I said, no, for an MMO that's really as
 big a scale as what we're trying to accomplish.
The first initial sprint is going to be all the 
way up to the release of the first expansion.
So sorry!
[LAUGHING]
- What was in our minds was, you 
know, not having another letdown.
Don't take for granted that the rebuild was a
 success. We can't just expect our users to say,
oh, they're going to release another expansion
 so we can do whatever we want.
Doesn't matter, they'll buy it. Ha ha ha. 
You know, there was none of that sense.
One good thing that came out of the
 failed launch is that it's instilled into the
developers, all of the developers' minds that,
 you know, we have to always strive to be better.
We can't, you know let our guard 
down. It's in our, it's in everyone's mind,
and it's always lurking back there. 
And we don't want to repeat that.
And because of that, everyone is like 
always on the top of their game.
DANNY: Is that still there even now? 
Because it's been three and a half years.
- Well, yeah. I mean, the old guard, yes. We all have that.
We all have that. But it's not all
 the old guard anymore.
People have moved off onto other projects.
Some people have left the company to go
 freelance, you know, explore new opportunities.
A lot of new people have come in, and so a lot of
 people don't remember what happened in 1.0.
DANNY: Oh, you summer children.
- That's right! Exactly. Exactly.
And us old timers can tell them, 
(IMITATING OLD MAN VOICE) well, back in my day.
(SPEAKING NORMALLY) and they'll be like, 
uh-huh, yeah, okay, whatever.
And, you know, sometimes it does feel 
like that. But there's always the chance that
you can just get too full of yourself and 
not do 100%, not learn from your mistakes,
and that, you know,  the community 
will just be like, no, we're done.
And, you know, we were lucky to
 be to be given a second chance.
We were really lucky to have that 
second chance actually succeed.
I don't know. A third time? I don't know if
 I want to press my luck any further.
It's not a fun situation to be in.
The things that I've learned over these 
past seven, eight years working on 11,
the original and the new, and the expansions,
 is something that I'm going to carry with me
to all future projects, as it will with all
 of the other devs that have done that.
A piece of that Final Fantasy 14 1.0, a piece of
 ARR and expansions will be with all of them,
and hopefully they'll be able to use 
that in all their future projects.
DANNY: Heavensward was another win for the team.
 Critically praised and loved by the community,
it helped push cumulative subscriptions
 for the game beyond five million.
In fact, the amount of players
 in the Eorzea has kept rising.
- So of course there's fluctuation, 
definitely, but I do believe that we are
slowly rising in the numbers as well, 
and I feel that it may be atypical
for an MMO to be trending like that.
With Final Fantasy 14's game design,
 I never want to make it so that
you have to play 14 continuously
 and have to log in every day.
I want to avoid forcing people to play,
 because everyone is so busy.
And I don't think everybody could log
 in every day and put in the time to play.
Even a big fan of MMOs like me.
So I think it's OK that people come back when
 there's a major update to play through it at once,
play the content and then eventually wean out or 
slow down and maybe play other video games.
Or spend some quality time with your family.
I think moving forward, MMOs have to be 
like that, or else it won't stand a chance.
And then once an expansion pack comes out,
that is when it has as much content 
as a brand new standalone RPG.
Then that's when we all come back and then
 enjoy the latest Final Fantasy together.
That's the kind of game design that we've 
always kept in mind as the fundamental base.
So there are ups and downs with the patch updates,
 but people hear the good reviews and join.
So I do believe keeping these 
numbers increasing is the ideal,
and 14 has been going on like that.
But I would love for even more
 people to come and play.
So I always want to continue taking on 
challenges and pushing ourselves even further.
DANNY: The latest expansion pack, 
Stormblood, comes hot on the heels of
two years worth of 3.x patches which have added
 fresh storylines and features to Heavensward.
With it comes increased level caps,
 new dungeons, jobs, raids, zones,
and some changes to the battle system.
Stormblood will also mark the end of
 the game's lifetime on the PlayStation 3.
But, of course, in the intervening years, the team
 has since launched the game on the PlayStation 4.
Final Fantasy 14 had been a 
financial disaster for Square Enix.
Subscriptions were turned 
off for most of the 1.x era,
and the company poured significant funds 
and trust into the team tasked with its rebirth.
The importance of this franchise 
to the company is mirrored by
its importance to its players and 
of course the development team.
This is a group of people who have 
dedicated years into ensuring that this game
came back from the dead. Yoshida-san says
 he only needs about four hours sleep a night.
I asked him about his social life. He says he 
doesn't really remember anything except work.
He speaks fondly of those players that 
stuck with the team, those Warriors of Light
that were saved at the end of 1.0.
His respect for fans of this game, and 
all Final Fantasy fans, is clear to see.
The realm of a Eorzea is totally different now:
a bustling, vibrant place full of 
stories, quests and adventurers.
A world expanded upon even more
 with the release of Stormblood.
But the old world, the story 
of 1.0, the fall of Dalamud,
and the people who survived the
 cataclysm, will always live on.
Those who were there, be them
 player or developer,
will forever be bound together
 by that experience.
- Instead of a lot of games that will
 create these myths for their games,
we have a myth that actually happened. 
But because it happened so long ago
and only a few people saw it, most of the 
new players now, they look back like,
did it really happen? What is this battle with
 the white raven on Rivenroad?
It was just this a grand battle with all 
different levels and these dimensional riffs,
and it sounds like an actual myth. But it's not just 
a story we made up for this. It actually happened.
And as the game progresses
 and new players come on,
it's further and further back in history
 that this really cool thing happened.
I mean, that visual works cut scene. I mean,
 I remember watching it and just like,
goosebumps all over.
I'm watching with the all the directors and
 producers, the director of the visual works.
And we're all sitting there, and we're all watching. 
And I'm just watching, and I got like a tear in my eye.
Yeah, it's dust. And I mean it was that 
powerful because it kind of encompassed
not only what the character went through. It was 
an image of what we as developers had done as well.
At the beginning we're all, let's do
 this, it's going to be an adventure!
We're like that first cut scene with the party
 that goes out, and they have their Guildleve,
and they go out and they fight the Morbol.
That's us at the beginning. And then 
the release hits you, and you're down.
I mean, then you have that cut scene
 where everyone's working together
to make something new, and then it failed. 
But no, it didn't fail, and agh! And you just,
all of the memories of the past years, 
the good and the bad, all come together.
And it's just so overwhelming.
And that's pretty much the reaction then, when we
 finally released it to the public, that we got.
I mean, so many people. I just remember 
checking out the forums. People were just like,
I've been in tears all day, I've watched it ten times.
And to see that, that everyone felt the same
 way, it wasn't just the development team.
It's that you have these hardcore group of very, 
very loyal fans that, they believed in the game.
We believed in the game. We stuck 
together. We were able to build
this new thing that's not just for us, but it's
 opening up the doors for a whole new audience.
But remember we were there first. We're the
 ones that stood by it, we're the ones that did this.
And they have the pride in that. 
Those players, those Warriors of Light
that were the before meteor guys, Yoshida-san
 in interviews will always talk about those people
that supported us. We couldn't have
 done, I mean, it sounds so cliché.
"Oh, we couldn't have done it without your support."
Literally, we could not have done it. 
Literally, we could not have done it.
I mean, if those people hadn't remained, 
we would just have been like, nah, let's forget it.
We're not going to do it. We wouldn't have put as
 much effort in. It would have just been, okay,
Yeah, whatever. Let's just, free to play. You know?
DANNY: Back when 1.0 came out, could you 
have imagined that three, four years later
you'd be in a fan event with 
thousands of people in Germany?
- No, I don't really imagine that.
Yeah, one day. We were always saying 
one day we want to run a big fan event.
We were actually dreaming of having a huge
 fan festival in the future at that time.
But actually, yeah, we made it. 
So that was really great.
DANNY: Some dreams come true.
- Yes, yes.
- I've been with the Square for a while, but, 
and I'm sorry if this sounds kind of strange, but
I don't really feel the sense of being 
tied down or belonging to the company.
After all, when creating games, it's very
 important who you work with.
For this project, I was able to work
 with people I wanted to work with.
And we were able to accomplish
 something really big.
And so I was looking forward to it, 
and I had fun doing it.
And so this overall experience 
was a challenge but a lot of fun .
- One thing I did want to emphasize was, as I 
mentioned on our first day of interviews
when talking about 1.0, it wasn't 
a mistake of just a single person,
nor was it the development team's problem.
But it was a company-wide mistake. All of the
 bad elements came out with Final Fantasy 14.
And I don't mean release when I say
 came out. It was more about all of those
bad elements emerging with the 
release of the original Final Fantasy 14.
I strongly believed that was the case.
As of now, the company was able to
 successfully revamp Final Fantasy 14,
and then we were able to release Final Fantasy 15.
And through that, I believe the company's
 starting to change little by little.
And I feel we should change even more. 
Perhaps some people may have started
to feel a bit more stable at this point,
 but I feel we should still change more.
So I hope we were able to convey
 that through our interviews.
Some people expect a lot from games
that are being created by Square Enix.
People from all over the world.  I was like that too.
But some people believe Square Enix
 has not reached its full potential.
I know there are people who believe
 Square Enix can do even better.
And so in order to do that, we have to 
change and take on even greater challenges.
This part too. I hope I was able to convey
 this through our conversations.
I will say that is our intention.
I want to make sure our message is getting
 out there, even if a little at a time.
So of course if players or the company desire for
 me to continue to create with Final Fantasy 14,
I will do my best. But, of course, if the 
players and the company desire for me
to work on another project, 
I could potentially work on that.
Or if they decide I should do both projects 
simultaneously, I would probably have to do that.
But at the very least, I belong to 
Square Enix as a member of staff.
And I do not run my own company. So 
what the players expect from Square Enix,
and how corporate views this, is very important.
That's not to say I don't have any 
games I want to create on my own.
But if I wanted to make what I wanted, I feel
 it's fine to leave the corporate situation
and start up my own company.
However, as long as I am wanted, 
I will give it my best.
That being said, I feel like now is 
a good time to start thinking about
if somebody can take on even just the 
producer side or the director's side of my job.
- The tale of the death and rebirth of Final 
Fantasy 14 Online is a cautionary tale
in corporate hubris. It's a story about the 
power of humility, respect and unity.
A fun story for those of us 
who knew nothing about it,
cherished times for those who were fortunate
 enough to be there when it all happened,
and a wonderful reminder of something
 we come across so often in life:
the idea that reality can often be
 even more amazing than the fantasy.