DANNY: So what did you think 
from your perspective as CFO?
To fix this problem, it's going to cost a lot of 
money. It's going to involve creating a new game.
It's going to involve keeping 
the other game still running.
Did you think at that time that that was a 
solid investment, that that's what Square Enix
should be doing, or did you think
 that it was a risky venture?
- Of course, just looking at that particular facet 
of having to make a game, it's definitely risky.
But considering this is a numbered 
Final Fantasy title, one of our flagship titles,
continuing to allow service of such a poorly
 received game, I feel that that would have
been a larger issue. And it would 
cause big damage to us as well.
So, we believe that the investment to remake 
this game or to revamp this game is something
that was required, of course. And it was 
very risky, but I believe it was something
that was required for us to do.
- Hello, and welcome back to our series on the 
Fall and Rise of Final Fantasy 14 Online.
We rejoin Yoshida-san and the team at 
Square Enix at the start of a long adventure.
And with players leaving en masse and the clock
 ticking, it was time for them to formulate a plan.
But how exactly do you rebuild an 
MMO while people are still playing it?
Yoshida-san set his eyes on a 2013 launch date 
for the new version of 14, as he wanted to have
the game out for fans within 
the PlayStation 3's lifecycle.
But to do this, while still patching 1.0, he 
would have to create an entirely new MMO
in less than half the time of
 most conservative estimates.
So before we get into specifics of what exactly
 was changed, I wanted to know how he did it.
So for a moment we step away from game design
 and dive into a critically important aspect of
video games development that we 
rarely talk about: project management.
DANNY: Designing an MMO, I just imagine the timeline
 for something like this is at least five years
for anything, and you're being asked to
 do it in less than half of that probably.
When you're designing games, when we 
talk to people, so much of it is iterative.
You create something, and then you refine it, 
and you brush, and then you look at it again.
But you didn't have that luxury. You had to make
 sure that the version of A Realm Reborn
that was coming out at that date
 was the final package.
So did that change the way 
that you had to set up the team
and the way your workflow kind of went?
- You've said it should take about five years to 
design an MMO. I want you to really emphasize that!
So in order to reduce the risk 
of any sort of schedule trouble,
there were some tweaks that I put into
 managing the staff members that I had.
And, this is kind of difficult to put it well, 
but you don't have those one in a hundred
type of programmers so much.
And we did need to make a whole lot 
of assets in a very short amount of time,
and so we had to match it to the
 average skill level, so to speak,
and try to lower the chances of risk happening. 
And I have a little bit more to say.
So what I did in order to make this more visible
 is, say, for example, we were creating a job.
Let's say the Dragoon job.
At first glance, you might think it's just one 
single task, create the Dragoon job, but it's not.
Because of course you have the job, 
but you have the different actions
that are assigned to that particular job. 
And so you would need programming for
a single job action. So we'd figure out
 how much time it takes to do that.
In order to do that you would 
need the specification documents.
So say, for example, we take a look at that
 task of creating a specification document.
It's two hours to create.
Then a request for review is sent to me, 
and then my review takes about 15 minutes.
We went through everything thoroughly. 
That's the level of detail that we went into
adding visibility into our tasks.
We boiled it down to the absolute minimum
 task element to manage our workload.
So, I think by doing that, the staff members
 may have been a little bit stressed
because of seeing all of that. But that's
 how I started to break it down.
And so once I broke it down to every
 single little task, I had staff members
assess how long it would take for 
them to do the single minimum task.
When you can say, if I finish the task
 in this time, I would reward myself.
Then the other extreme: if it takes me
 longer than this to finish my task,
I'd be ashamed to be accepting pay. 
Sort of a worst-case scenario.
I had each staff member assess the minimum
 and maximum time it would take for them
to complete a particular task, and I 
would have them report those timings.
And then I would take the average time
 it would take, looking at those numbers,
and then that's the number I would
 base my sort of scheduling off of.
So it's like a very minimal task, like 
micro-micromanaging that aspect of it.
And so I did that on a weekly basis
 at first so that my staff members would
get used to that system. And once we go 
through the work week I'll see the results.
Like every time they report something, 
I can start seeing like individual parameters,
like say, for example, Yoshida reported
 the minimum amount of time each time,
but when you look at the actual results,
 it's leaning more towards the maximum amount.
And so when I would go back in 
and sort of take the average amount,
I wouldn't literally take the 50 percent amount.
 I will know that this person tends to
lean more towards the maximum side. 
So I would sort of add that to my estimate
for the following week. And so I would take
 a look at that for all of my staff members
and sort of get a personal 
snapshot from my staff.
And also for the number of work hours per day. 
I mean typically we would think eight hours,
but you would need to factor in 
bathroom breaks and different meetings.
And this is not only meetings that 
would take place in a conference room.
When you're talking with your teammates
 desk to desk about certain specifications,
I would count that as a meeting as well. 
So I actually calculated each workday
to contain six working hours. 
And so we did that for all.
Once we got used to it, we would extend
 the period that I was doing the calculation.
We went from weekly to biweekly. And also I 
would make sure to do a stand up meeting
on every morning report 
on the status of where you are.
And then if there are any outstanding tests
 from the cross-functional teams that is
stopping your work from progressing, 
we would need to have identified that as well.
So that's what we would report on
 on a daily basis as well.
It was kind of like the SCRUM method,
 a little bit modified but very similar
to that sort of management style.
But this sort of micromanagement style,
 I would not recommend it at all.
It's only because we were trying to 
recreate an MMO in less than two years.
I would have to convince my staff members, 
saying it's not going to be more than two years.
So I really strongly do not recommend this.
- I mean, anyone can come in and say, oh yeah, 
we're going to rebuild the game. Follow me!
But he came in with, you know, this huge Excel 
that had all these lists of everything on it:
what we're going to do here, 
what we're going to do here.
This is when we're going to do them by,
 and this is what we're going to do here.
And to see that, it's like, okay, 
this isn't just a stopgap type of thing
where a president's like okay, crazy, here. 
Let's just change the leader
and hopefully things will, you know, 
get better. It was an actual,
okay, this guy really wants 
to do this. He has this plan.
DANNY: Yoshida had them running like a 
well-oiled machine. So it was time to get to work.
First things first, they had to start 
the roll-out of patches for 1.0.
But a critical part of the failure of the 
first game was the poor communications
the development team had with their community. 
So to keep diehard fans on board during
this protracted period of redevelopment, 
they had to be a lot more transparent.
- What we explained to players very first is
 that it was a failure. I mean, a failure.
So we need to restart the game.
But at that time we didn't announce the relaunch. 
A Realm Reborn was not announced.
But we are going to fix this game.
We need more communication. So just list 
all the changes, planned changes.
So some upper management people didn't
 like this because if you show this to the players,
players will know what we will do.
So after that, you did this. You did this. 
But you didn't do this. You didn't do this.
Everyone can check that. So I mean, 
some people didn't really like it that way.
But I mean when Yoshida-san and myself are 
discussing how we deal with the community,
what we need to do is to establish the trust.
- Of course if you look at the number
 of players Final Fantasy 14 has now
it may seem like a small amount of people,
 but back then a lot of media and players were
bashing Final Fantasy 14. They were saying
 Final Fantasy is done and over with.
And they would criticize the
 people who stayed with us.
They'd say, why would you play such a game?
 But the people who did stay with that fanbase,
these are the people who said, well, it's Final 
Fantasy 14. They're going to do something about it.
Or I still enjoy playing the game
 regardless. Leave us alone.
They mentioned that 11 had 
a lot of its troubles at first,
but they believed that things would 
get better. And so they continued playing it.
So numbers-wise, yes, it may seem 
small, but those are the very people
who supported Square Enix and 
Final Fantasy throughout all this.
And so if we ignored them, I thought
 Final Fantasy would probably be over.
Above anything else, we had to 
treat this element as most important.
That was the biggest reason.
It's a trust that we have had to get back from those
 people who stuck with us throughout the years.
It didn't matter if we spent millions of dollars,
 it's a cost spent for something we
wouldn't have been able to repair later. 
I believe that's what trust is.
So that's what I felt was important 
about continuing [to patch the 1.X series],
and that's what I explained 
to the corporation as well.
We needed their help.
We needed them to be on our side.
DANNY: Next, Yoshida split his team in half, 
some working on the new version of 14
and others working on the updates to 1.0, 
what he called the "guts" version of the game.
But with so much of the game requiring
 fixing, where do you even start?
- First of all, I think I wanted
 the interface to be playable.
I'm sorry to say this, but the first time
 I touched Final Fantasy 14 was just awful.
I could not play. Literally. This is 
supposed to have been only on the PC,
but it was required for you
 to have a game controller.
It was ridiculous not being able to
 play with a mouse and keyboard.
And so no matter how much content
 or jobs we created for the game,
if the interface won't allow you to get
 there, people won't be able to enjoy it.
People would quit the game altogether.
So I did want to take the time, first 
and foremost, to be very thorough
about repairing the interface
 and make it playable.
The first time we touched the game, 
I quit in about five minutes.
I think this is really silly, 
but I didn't know how to quit.
I didn't know what to do, so I 
tried to go to the top right corner.
You see the X button, and I clicked it. 
And a dialogue pops up saying,
"if you quit, your progress might not be saved!"
Of course I'm an engineer, and I understand
 that it's constantly overwriting
your progress onto the server. And it's 
supposed to be some kind of disclaimer
for those rare cases that a save might fail.
But I mean, it's unbelievable, 
that dialogue popping up there.
People will be scared to quit the game!
So I mean, if you click no, you're 
going to go back to the game screen.
So you press X, and the dialogue pops up again. 
So how am I supposed to quit this game?
DANNY: Interface isn't sexy. It's not something you 
tend to hear a lot about in video games coverage
because really, when it's done correctly
 you're not supposed to notice it.
So when the early patches for the game
 concentrated on interface
and quality of life updates, much of the
 community began to get frustrated.
The team needed to fix it quickly, so Yoshida
 employed the help of a Square veteran,
one of the developers on 
that original 1.0 taskforce.
- My name is Hiroshi Minagawa. 
I work on the user interface,
not only the design structure of it 
but also the visual aspect of it as well.
So I'm 47 years old right now, but I joined the 
company when I was 25. So 22 years ago now.
At the time it wasn't even Square
 Enix. It was still Square.
I first worked on Final Fantasy Tactics,
 and I was the art director on that game.
So typically if it were a standalone game, 
I would consider less information on screen
something that's more simple and streamlined.
But with Final Fantasy 14, I had to consider
 about more about customization.
Almost like a tool, utilizing it as
 an extension of the player
and allowing the player to be 
able to customize it as they like.
So the battles in Final Fantasy 14
 move at a relatively speedy tempo,
and so I did believe that using 
your D-pad to move your cursor focus
and then selecting was not
 the optimal way to control.
I already wanted to implement a 
cross hot-bar to select a different one.
It's a system that I'm familiar with because
 I had been creating very similar systems
on other games that I had 
worked on and was utilizing it.
So I didn't feel like it was
 too difficult of a challenge.
So when we change the way something
 is displayed on screen there,
of course people will take notice. It was 
such and such previously, but now it's this.
So for example, inventory used to be 
listed in text. But once it becomes icons,
people had complained that, oh I don't 
know what it is. Which item is what?
And so can we have both a text listing and 
an icon? It's kind of difficult to do both.
So we actually have a list of outstanding items
 that we've had since the release of A Realm Reborn,
and some of these items get implemented
 even over two years after the launch.
- The next item I really felt needed revision
 or change was the battle system.
If you don't have a properly working battle 
system, you won't be able to make content.
Revising the interface is number one, and then 
the battle system, and then came content.
I think that was the proper order
 that I wanted to tackle them.
The party system back then, you would have
 been able to make a party with 15 people.
On top of that, the magic points or MP,
 there wasn't a way to manage it.
So the healer would cast the strongest
 cure spell, "curaga" or "Cure3,"
no matter how many times it would 
cost that your MP didn't fall to zero.
So, why do you need or any other spells?
So it was basically 15 people in a party
 trying to beat this monster, casting all of the
healing spells that you want, and it
 was just really rough. Very rough.
And so I wanted to make sure that it was 
changed into something more strategic
with calculations. Or else the
 content won't be interesting.
And so while I was trying to go
 through and revise my interface,
I also tried to make sure that we
 fix the battle system as well.
While I was making those preparations, 
one of the big challenges, or like
an issue that I wanted to tackle was to implement
 more Final Fantasy elements in this game.
Because at the time there were no
 specific jobs. There were no paladin.
There was no black mage or white mage.
 You couldn't ride chocobos.
Ifrit made its appearance, 
but you couldn't fight it, etc.
So I felt that what we needed to do
 was to first include those elements.
Ifrit, Garuda, what you would call a summon.
I felt that we really needed to 
implement those as the boss battles.
Of course chocobos. This is an MMO, 
you've got to be able to ride a chocobo.
And then the job system as well. 
There weren't specific jobs,
and I identify Final Fantasy with the 
job system. So that had to be in there.
So as I was trying to revise and revamp
 the interface and the battle system
and lay that foundation for these
 elements to be implemented,
I was going through that and 
created the different specifications for
these elements to be put in.
And slowly but surely, I did notice the response
 to the changes that we had been making.
People were starting to mention that,
 oh yeah, this is a good game.
And the number of players also have
 been steadily, more slowly, but steadily,
increasing, which also was
 great emotional support for us.
It was very motivating to see that,
 and it made us relieved that
as long as we are making a good, 
solid game, people will appreciate that.
At the time we released 
seven jobs at the same time.
I forgot which patch it was, but it 
was in 7 jobs at the same time.
That was one single game designer
 that was handling that.
DANNY: The team had their sights
 set on what needed to be changed
and how they were going to do it. For the first
 time in years they were feeling hopeful,
and even better, players were finally 
starting to respond with positivity.
But right as they were settling into this
 new reality and finding their rhythm,
disaster struck.
[ALARM SOUNDING]
For six minutes, Japan shook. 
A 9.0 earthquake had struck
200 miles northeast of Tokyo, and a resulting
 tsunami devastated coastal regions.
What followed was a humanitarian and
 infrastructural disaster that can be
barely comprehended. While the country
 rallied to help those affected,
Tokyo suffered aftershocks 
and frequent electrical blackouts.
I asked Yoshida-san if he'd like to share
 how this had affected the team.
- Even if it was a couple hundred miles 
north of Tokyo, we did feel a quake as well.
Some people decided that 
it was safer to stay at the office.
So they would stay overnight and
 just continue to watch the news.
And of course, yes, there were family 
members that were affected within our
development team as well. So, you know,
 at that point, I didn't feel that it was
appropriate to continue pushing
 forward with development.
Before being a developer, they are human beings.
And all over Japan electrical power was needed. 
And, you know, when we thought about
how can we help, and it might not 
have made such a large impact.
But just our way to contribute, we decided
 to power down the servers for
a certain amount of time. We thought
 how could we show our support
and to contribute toward the
 situation and to be of help.
We felt sorry for our players, but we decided
 to temporarily power down the servers.
So once we turned the power back on to
 our servers, I actually received a few letters
from the players in letting me know 
that they were able to contact their friends
through the realm of Eorzea. Their friends 
actually logged in, and they were able to
confirm on their status when telephones
 and whatnot were not available.
They were able to log in to Eorzea, and they
 were able to check on their friends
and confirmed they were okay.
 So yes, if power is needed,
we can contribute by powering down the servers.
But at the same time I also felt that keeping
 Eorzea going was also beneficial.
There were actually comments that 
thanked us for keeping Final Fantasy 14
up and running and for continuing operations.
Also from a development standpoint, the 
content of the battle that we're going to face
after Ifrit was actually going to be a
 Leviathan, which is like a sea serpent.
So at that point we decided, no, there's
 no way we can release that content
with this situation happening. So we had to 
quickly change course to implement
the Moogle battle, and so we had to fix that
 so we could release that content instead.
I don't think it was too difficult to get to work.
 Of course there were people who
couldn't come to work, and Square Enix
 itself had to close for a few days.
And so there was a period of
 time we didn't go to work,
but I think we were all thinking about
 what we could do in order to help.
But was there a point in all of just going
 to Fukushima and jumping in there?
I'm sure there was a flood of people
 going into Fukushima trying to help.
And when we considered about it, 
we wanted to provide an environment where
afterwards, when those people who were affected
 by the incident get a chance to settle down,
they would have a comfortable
 environment in-game.
Ultimately, what can we do? 
Well, we make video games.
So we felt continuing to make 
games was what we could offer.
I think that was the sort of 
stance that we were taking.
We didn't necessarily talk about it verbally,
but that was the kind of stance that
 we had as we returned to work.
DANNY: Over the coming months, the team
 would release patch after patch for 1.0.
1.17 introduced eight player parties 
and more stable network infrastructure.
1.18 dropped in June 2011 and was a huge
 patch that made the game much more playable.
Level caps lowered for story quests.
It added Grand Companies, class adjustments,
 instanced dungeons, and auto attack.
Yes, would you believe this 
game still didn't have auto attack?
It featured a more user-friendly map
 interface and also scrapped
the controversial fatigue system.
- And so we need to take this
 concept that Yoshida-san has created,
make it fit with the current world, write stories
 around it, make the transition seem seamless,
and then in the new world make it so that there is
 still some connection with that old world
that will be understood by those core players
 but won't alienate new players.
It won't be something like, oh, you 
didn't play that old stuff in 1.0,
so you're going to be completely lost. 
Because we don't want to do that either.
We want to get new players to come
 that didn't play the original one,
and we don't want to have them have to
 play the original to understand this one.
And so trying to work the story that way 
was challenging but also a lot of fun.
We got to try a lot of things. We had a lot of
 freedom then, especially on the 1.0 stuff
because in a sense it would only be released 
for a few months and then will be gone forever.
And so on one hand, that's really exciting
 because we can do whatever we want.
We can create these crazy stories,
 have these crazy characters
in all these crazy situations and, 
you know, go balls to the wall.
But on the other hand, we're working 
day and night on something that
only a few thousand people are going 
to see and will be gone in six months.
I really think, I look back at it now, and I think we 
did a lot of our best work during that 1.X.
And it's sad that no one is ever going to see that.
Maybe there are some videos up on YouTube where
 people can still go back and check them out,
but a lot of the best stories, some of the most 
crazy stuff went on during that 1.X period
because it was pretty much no 
holds barred, anything can happen.
We had like crazy cults, and you had 
like people from the Garlean Empire.
And there was like propaganda, 
giant dragons, and machines.
And it was just anything goes type of situation 
there, and it was just really a lot of fun.
DANNY: 1.19 signified the one year anniversary.
 Players finally got personal Chocobos,
and in the distance one light in the night sky 
burnt slightly brighter. A sign of things to come.
- At the very first time it was just
 some rumor between players.
Oh, is it getting bigger? No, I don't think so.
DANNY: This was also when Square Enix announced
 that an entirely new version of the game
had been in development since 
January and that current players
would receive copies of it for free.
They also announced that player's 
character data and progress would be
transferred to this new version, 
what they were then calling version 2.0.
A roadmap for patches was outlined,
and it was announced that monthly fees 
would be reinstated as of January 2012.
As an incentive for players to keep playing
 while the fees were introduced,
they announced legacy campaign which 
rewarded players who paid for at least
three months of service with 
permanently reduced monthly fees.
Those players would also get
 an exclusive Chocobo mount,
while as a thank you for their 
support during the redevelopment,
their names would be featured 
in the credits of the new game.
- In 2011, October 14th, that is when we 
announced around A Realm Reborn is coming,
and we are going to create a completely new Final
 Fantasy 14. And so you have these people going,
huh? Are you going to continue updating this? 
What's going to happen?
It was so much fun.
[LAUGHING]
DANNY: 1.2 was the final patch of 2011.
 It saw all the servers renamed,
while the moon Dalamud 
now seemed larger in the sky.
1.21 came in March 2012, introducing a 
new job system and two new dungeons.
1.22 followed in April. Dalamud grew closer.
And now some players are 
beginning to have nightmares.
Ominous dreams greet players who
 log into the game while at an inn,
the community all the while
 trying to figure this out.
Is the moon going to destroy the world?
Then how will player data be saved in 2.0?
They wouldn't have to wait long for answers.
That summer, a trailer revealed that 2.0
 would be titled A Realm Reborn.
And Yoshida-san conducted numerous 
interviews explaining the future of the game
and the features players can expect.
On September 12th, 2012, the 
final patch for 1.0 was released.
The game updates to 1.23b, and with it
 comes an enormous Dalamud,
its mechanical outer shell now in full view,
players now realizing that 
this world didn't have long left.
On November 1st, 2012, a final in-game battle began.
Square Enix made entry free 
for the final week of the game,
while a haunting song can be heard playing
 on the wind across the entire realm.
While the server struggled to deal with the
 load, players got together with their friends
one last time as a development team in Japan 
spammed enemies outside capital cities.
One group of players outside of Ul'dah 
has become legendary, attempting to
protect the city with what we now
 call "The Great Goobbue Wall."
- Right before Dalamud hit Eorzea, we had to do
 some chaotic situation to the existing world.
So what we decided to do is to spawn
the strong enemies near the main cities.
Even when I pop that very strong, I mean Manticore,
 or the Morbol, or giant monsters,
players kill instantly. Yeah, instantly. Yeah, 
I just snapped, and oh, geez.
You killed my monster again. So what we can do 
is just to keep spawning lots of monsters.
And then in the very late night when I 
was doing, keep spawning the monsters,
one programmer, I mean, I've 
never talked to him before, but
just came down to my desk and 
then just gave me a bit of paper
with some numbers. Numbers which I understand, 
this is the number of a certain monster
I can type in so that I can then spawn
 a very new, stronger monster.
So I say thank you very much to the
 programmer. So that was a very fun moment.
DANNY: You were like, playing God.
- At first I felt like God. Hey players,
 can you beat my monsters?
But no, no, no. I was very weak, weak God.
DANNY: They were God.
- Yeah, they were God.
DANNY: So it was then, on Sunday, November 11th, 2012,
just over a year after Final Fantasy 14
 was originally launched,
with Dalamud hanging in the sky, 
that the servers were finally turned off.
And as they did, a trailer dropped, showing
 players what was to become of their old home.
- Well, I mean it's, I mean, it's pretty simple.
You had something that not a lot of people liked, 
and everyone wanted to forget about it.
So rather than you know, just taking that 
and doing it over and just reimagining it,
why not destroy that and start over?
If we leave too much of that original 
core there, then it will just linger on
as that kind of cancer that, you know, 
will always bring us back to that failure.
Why not just clean the slate?
But on the other hand, and this is where,
 you know, things got kind of complicated,
is that, you know, no matter how bad 
the reviews were and how many people
bought the game but then left the game, 
there was still this core of players,
both in Japan and Europe, North America, 
that were passionate about the game.
In the state that it was, they were
 passionate about the game.
They were passionate about the
 series and their characters that
they had created and were now living in this MMO.
And so, you know, it would have been easy
 to just say, okay, bye guys. You know.
But if you do that, then you've basically
 alienated the only group that stuck with you,
you know, for all of those years, when 
everyone else is slamming the game
and talking about how bad it is.
I mean, those guys were troopers. 
They would go on the forums.
They were defending the development team 
when a lot of times we didn't deserve defending.
So that idea to wipe the slate clean but 
not make it something completely new,
make it something that was connected 
in some way to that, to the old game.
The decision made by Yoshida-san to, 
okay let's, you know, bring down Dalamud,
destroy the planet, destroy the
 realm, but then bring it back.
Figuring out a way to make that
 happen within the current story,
make it feel natural, make it feel
 like that was always the plan,
was the biggest challenge I think.
- The team at Square Enix had 
worked themselves to the bone,
not only recreating Final Fantasy
 14 in A Realm Reborn
but also by dedicating time and money to
 ensuring that 1.0 players felt part of that story.
The moon Dalamud had crashed into the
 world of Eorzea. That world was gone forever.
Only one question remained...
What was going to rise out of its ashes?