DANNY: Square is buried deep 
into the culture of Japan.
Originally a spin-off from Masafumi Miyamoto's 
father's power line construction firm,
for over 30 years its games have helped power 
the rise of Japanese games development.
There are no shortage of games that 
live under the Square Enix banner,
but none as big as Final Fantasy.
From our Western perspective, there's an 
air of mythos around the company.
The accepted truth behind the series’ title
 is that it was named Final Fantasy
as it was Square’s make-or-break game 
to avoid impending bankruptcy.
And even if the real answer has 
more to do with creating an acronym
that could be pronounced by both 
Eastern and Western audiences,
it's that first story that gets told. 
That's the legacy of this series,
stories about adventures that get passed 
from generation to generation,
as nearby as the arcades of Akihabara 
and as far as the playgrounds of Europe.
As the Final Fantasy series has 
moved from numeral to numeral,
there have been high points and low.
But with each new game comes the promise
 of a new story, a new myth.
The story of what happened with 
Final Fantasy 14 is one such myth.
What we know about it comes from old reviews, 
archived message boards threads,
and through conversations with those 
who were there. The reason for this
is that the original version of Final 
Fantasy 14 doesn't exist anymore.
Unlike the vast majority of other old games,
 there is no way of playing it.
It was redacted, painted over.
Where once stood a game that threatened 
to sink the Final Fantasy brand forever,
now stands the second most popular 
subscription MMO in the world.
And as the years pass us, the myth
 of that original version
and its incredible redemption story
 are at risk of disappearing.
How did it all happen? How did the same 
studio that shipped a broken mess
turn it all around in two years?
Why did they make the decision 
to keep the old version still alive
while secretly working on a brand new game, 
and how did they manage to make all of this,
the redesign and rebirth, part of the game's lore? 
We knew this was a story worth telling.
Not only for those who were there to see 
it all go down, but to the millions of you
who have never heard about this,
who never knew the extraordinary lengths the 
development team went to to save this game.
So we did just that. Pack your bags, friends. 
Noclip is heading to Tokyo.
Hello and welcome to Shinjuku, Tokyo. Home of 
Godzilla, restaurants full of dancing robots,
and Square Enix, one of the most prolific 
video game companies in the world.
For the past few months I've been 
playing catch up with this story.
Playing the latest version of the game,
 talking to players, and watching
community retrospective series like 
the Speaker's Network's fantastic
Fall & Rise of Final Fantasy 14.
My goal? To make sure we asked the right 
questions when we sat down with the team.
During our time here in Shinjuku, 
we’re going to talk to everyone
from the engineers who worked on 
the original game, to localization leads,
community managers, and even 
the CEO of the company,
All to allow them to opportunity to tell
 their side of this fascinating story.
The fall and rise of Final Fantasy 14 happened 
in real time in front of millions of people
around the world, but we wanted to know about 
this story from an entirely new perspective,
from inside the corporate machine 
that made it happen.
That led to its terrible launch 
and ultimately its incredible rebirth.
- My name is Michael Christopher Koji Fox. 
I am the English localization lead
for Final Fantasy 14.
My middle name being Koji it's not something
 I gave myself. It's a name my father gave me.
My father was stationed in Japan for two 
years in the navy when he was young,
went back to the states, met my mom, had me. 
They wanted to give me a Japanese name.
The family was having none of that so 
they kind of snuck it in the middle name.
But then they always called me Koji so I guess, 
you know, the joke was on the rest of the family.
You know, my dad being in the Navy 
didn't really learn a lot about Japan
other than he really liked Japan,
 but he didn't learn any of the language.
So I always knew that my name 
was Japanese, but beyond that,
I really didn't know anything about Japan.
But there was always that little seed in there. 
And then when I got into high school,
there was a Japanese class, and I like games. 
Oh, they make games in Japan.
Hey, let me study Japanese. If I study Japanese, 
I can play all those cool Japanese games
that never come out over in America, 
and it kind of just snowballed from there.
When I graduated from high school 
I took a trip to Japan for three weeks,
homestay type of thing, and I fell in love 
with it. And during that period I got to visit
a lot of schools and a lot of English classes 
in those schools. And I thought,
wow, I could probably, I know English.
 I could do this, this will be easy!
It wasn't as easy as I thought it was 
going to be, but I studied a couple of years
at a university in America then
 transferred over to Japan.
Started over, four years at a university in Japan.
DANNY: Wow.
- Got my teaching license, and yeah.
DANNY: It's hard work being a teacher.
- Yes. I mean, I loved it.
But I mean, it was very draining.
And that's why pretty much after you'd
 go to school six in the morning
for morning basketball practice 
because I was the basketball coach.
Because as my principal said, hey, 
you're tall, you're the basketball coach.
Then you get into classes. I mean I'd have my 
homeroom class, then I'd have, you know,
six or seven other classes teaching. 
Then you'd have after school, all of a sudden,
it's, oh, there's after school basketball. 
And then you'd get home and you'd correct.
So I was really always at school every day. 
It was very draining.
And I would go home and I would play FF11.
It was how I was able to relax, and being able to 
go into my little room, and turn off the lights,
and put on my headphones and you know get into
 that world of Vana'diel was something
that helped me escape from the stress.
And then it just happened to be one day I
 was online checking for 11 related information
and I saw that Square Enix was hiring, looking 
for a translator, and it just kind of, wow,
that would be really cool.
DANNY: Koji wasn’t alone. Final Fantasy 14
 was launched in 2010,
but the story of this game starts eight years 
earlier with the launch of Final Fantasy 11.
Square’s first MMO, the early days of online. 
Many of the team who worked on 14 started on 11.
One of those was Kasuga-san, who joined
 the company in 1999 to build the
network infrastructure for the fledging MMO.
- I handled network and server related matters.
At the time, PlayStation 2 was implementing 
online connectivity for the first time.
Of course, online connectivity was 
available through the Dreamcast,
but for the PlayStation platform 
it was the first time they were
implementing the online element to it.
So I was in charge of writing programs for 
network related things for the PlayStation 2,
such as TCP/IP drivers.
Back then we were still on modems for 
communication transmissions,
so PPP transmissions.
ADSL was starting to get implemented, too. 
I wrote programming for PPPoE
for the authentication of ADSL. 
Really the lowest part of the network
that no one would write programming 
for anymore, was what I was working on.
- So with Final Fantasy 11 it was the first time 
for Square to do an MMO to that scale in Japan.
And there were many many different things.
Am I allowed to say more? 
[LOOKS AT PR AND LAUGHS]
But for MMO titles overseas 
like there was Ultima Online
and other, different predecessors
 in the overseas market.
But most of the games, if not all
 of them, were basically on PCs only.
And so coming up with the idea of having an MMO
on a console was treated as something
 that was almost impossible.
As well this was in the PS2 era with
 the hard-disk, and there were
so many different arguments 
that were going on around that.
Their perspective was that it was impossible 
to do. So it was quite a challenge.
MICHAEL:  11 was my first MMO. 
I hadn't played one before.
I remember purchasing the PlayStation 2 
broadband unit. Because they were all sold out,
I ended up paying double on like some 
Yahoo Auction or something like that.
Ridiculous but I had to play it. We got a new 
internet connection. We were on a regular modem
at that time but because we need a new 
modem we had to upgrade to ISDN. 128!
But yeah, it was definitely worth it.
It was something that was completely 
new to me but, you know, fascinating.
And ever since then I've been into MMOs. That was
 the gateway drug for me. Going in from FF11
and then  trying some of the western MMOs
 as well, getting into World of Warcraft,
seeing the differences between the two.
- Personally I think it's very different here in
 Japan than in the western market because
yeah, it is for everyone in the globe. 
It's the very first MMORPG on a console,
PlayStation 2. And of course it was
 the first cross-platform MMO
between PlayStation 2 and Xbox 360.
The obvious one is that most Japanese people 
don't really like to speak, or chat, in public.
DANNY: Right.
- So I mean In the world there is a lot
 of characters, but it's very quiet
because people are using tell 
instead of say or shout.
But if you go to the western game world, I mean,
every single one is shouting. 
So I mean, that's a huge difference.
- You know while in the west you have your 
Everquests and you had your Ultima Onlines,
in Japan there was none of that.
So Final Fantasy 11 was really 
one of the first MMOs in Japan.
And so getting to work with basically
 the pioneers of the Japanese MMO
was really exciting. On the other hand, I mean,
 you could also say that it was possibly
kind of a curse in the sense that
 they were all doing their own thing.
They had their vision of what an MMO should be
 and what a Japanese MMO should be.
And then me again not having played an MMO
 before, getting on this team and thinking,
okay this is an MMO, and translating 
away, and working in that project.
I kind of, you know, started thinking, okay, 
this is what an MMO is. This is what an MMO is.
And then that one day I start playing
 WoW and it was like, oh... oh.
Seeing the differences between
 the two and saying like okay,
what I thought was the norm in Final Fantasy 11, 
you know, the grinding for 20 hours
to go up one level, and then only to have
 your level drop when you pull too many crabs,
and it kills you ,and you've lost five hours work.
I thought that was normal. And then like,
 oh, that's not normal, is it?
The Japanese base game Final 
Fantasy 11 had already released,
and they were working on the first expansion 
pack, Rise of the Zilart. I was part of the team
that was working to get the base 
game and Rise of Zilart all translated
before the Japanese Rise of the Zilart was 
finished so we could all release at the same time.
DANNY: Right, did you get it on time?
- Got it on time. I haven't missed a 
deadline yet. That's one thing I'm proud of.
DANNY: Final Fantasy 11 was 
a huge success for Square Enix.
It established a concurrent userbase of 
around a quarter of a million players for years.
It was the most profitable Final Fantasy game 
ever and at one stage was the sixth most
popular game on all of Xbox Live. More than that,
  it established the Japanese style of MMO.
And when the decision was made 
in 2005 to start work on a sequel,
the new MMO was built around the 
things that made 11 successful,
focusing, like most Final Fantasy 
games do, on beautiful graphics
and an interesting battle system.
This new game was to be directed and produced 
by the same duo that had shipped 11,
series veteran Hiromichi Tanaka 
and Nobuaki Komoto.
Final Fantasy 14 was announced for 
Windows and PlayStation 3 in 2009.
But behind the scenes the development 
team was struggling to put the pieces
of its new world together.
- What I believe are some 
of the problems in looking at
that first version of Final Fantasy 14 was
that the initial concept was for 
the game designers to write
the scripts to create the game.
Of course there is an advantage of 
utilizing scripts in that the game designer
can write the script and 
then it's executed quickly.
You don't have to consult with
 an engineer to talk about
how the game is structured, or you
 don't have to debate on the
different parameters that have 
to be set if a script is used.
So the majority of the game elements were
 built upon the usage of scripts that kind of
automate the process.
The user interface was affected by this 
as well. When those scripts are running
it uses a lot of CPU resources.
The usage is extremely high to 
just run these different scripts.
So as we try to execute something in game, 
it led to the servers being slowed down,
because it's trying to execute
 these different scripts.
And so whatever we tried to do would
 lead to the slowdown of the servers,
and then the load that was on 
those servers was just too heavy.
And we could not do anything robust 
or rich in terms on in-game depiction.
And interface-wise a lot of it 
was being executed via a script,
so those were some of the 
problems that we were facing.
- Like I mentioned before, again 
localization, being in a position where
we get to see all the parts come together first, 
we were some of the first to realize
that, you know, Houston we have
 a problem, that type of situation.
I mean, you know, you had the battle team. 
They were like, yes, we have
this great battle system with stamina 
and these things that you can do.
And you had the story team. Like yes, we have 
this story. Oh hey, we have these guildleves
and all of these parts. And everyone was 
really, really proud of their parts.
You know, look at this grass,
 it's so beautiful. Look at this barrel,
it's, you know, the the most beautiful barrel
 ever to be represented in graphical form.
DANNY: It's got as many polygons as a character.
- Yes! And all of those parts, all these teams,
 again, very very proud of their work.
I mean you have, the team was, you know, put 
together some of the best minds in Square Enix.
You had people that were leads, that could 
probably even create, lead their own projects,
were all together. And it became a lot 
of just tiny little groups making something
that was really great, but once you
 put it together it was kind of a mess.
and no one really knew that except for
 localization and probably QA as well.
And we were like, okay, we need to do 
something, but by then it was one of those,
it's kind of too late to do anything. But for us, 
we would, we'd be looking at the text,
and some of it, you know, it wouldn't make sense.
Or it would just be very bland, and thinking,
 if there's any way to make this game better,
what can we do? It's like, well, I can take this 
text and maybe add some more stuff into it,
add some more flavor to it. And, you know, 
maybe that will distract people from the fact
that the battle is not that fun. I know, right?
DANNY: At a fundamental level, the piecemeal
 design of the game was causing problems.
Graphics were inconsistent. While many
 elements of the world were
copy and pasted ad nauseum, some environmental 
objects had as many polygons and shaders
as a character model.
The battle system was just confusing. The game 
didn't have elements fundamental to modern MMOs,
things like jumping, auto attack, and the ability
 to interact with the map using a mouse.
It had a system that nerfed hardcore players
 to make sure they didn't level up too fast.
The UI was confusing. Crafting was
 complex and took forever.
And simply, there just wasn't enough content.
The closed beta wasn't going well. 
They needed more time to fix these problems.
So the open beta was pushed back
 to within a month before launch.
The team knew there were problems,
 and they were getting frustrated.
- So the tasks just discussed were done during 
January 2010 to the actual release of August.
When we took notice of the game not being good,
 was ultimately when the beta started
around August, through 
September, October timing.
And then we went into the beta phase. 
And then more people were
starting to notice that they 
were having a problem here.
In actuality, the team's feeling was that, 
before the release, before the beta started,
people were questioning whether or
 not we should even release this game,
whether it is at a quality 
to release it to the world.
Of course not officially, but 
amongst developers they were
taking notice of it and deliberating about it.
DANNY: When 1.0 was getting made was it just, 
was the mentality that oh, we're not,
that's like their thing? And we have our 
very own successful thing over here.
We're going to just make another one of those.
- Right. That's really what it felt like, 
is that we're going to continue doing
what we did because it succeeded before.
 Why wouldn't it succeed again?
And seeing that direction, you know, them 
taking that direction and knowing that,
having worked on 11, that yes they were
 very successful. Seeing the success
that they had with Final Fantasy 11, 
seeing these great creators you know creating
something that was I mean, revolutionary.
But then on the other hand knowing that what
 they were doing was, but maybe that might not,
worked six or seven years ago, but a lot
 of things have changed since then.
I mean I think there was even one guy on 
the localization team that got to that point
where he just got so frustrated that he 
just wrote this scathing mail and sent it out
to the whole team before telling anyone else 
on localization he was going to write it.
And then we all get it at the 
same time as the dev team.
We're reading it like, wow, this is 
really terrible. I hope he doesn't...
Oh, he sent it to the whole team. 
Because he just got really frustrated,
because he could, to him, they were being 
very stubborn. You know, they hadn't moved on,
whereas the rest of the world had 
moved on and adapted, you know,
with the release of WoW and what they
 had done. Whereas the team here was like,
no, we're going to stick with what 
we know, and that's good enough.
- Then we started feeling more 
concerned about the situation.
This is not fixed, not fixed, not fixed. Then, 
oh, you announced the launch date.
But it's not fixed? But still some 
major portion of people are
thinking, still believing, alright,
 it's beta. Still beta.
Last beta phase, but still beta. So it could 
be fixed or changed at launch time.
- It kind of went from thinking, okay, 
this project's going to be great to
uh oh, there might be some problems.
 Can we fix them? Can we fix them?
Okay. we can't fix them. Is there anything|
 we can do? I don't know. It was, yeah.
It was a very taxing experience.
DANNY: The team crossed their fingers and hoped 
that the game's beta problems were simply that,
the same issues that most MMOs
 have, ones that could be fixed
once the game entered live operations.
And so Final Fantasy 14 Online
 launched on September 30th, 2010.
It sold well its first week, and after a month had
 over 600,000 players swarming into its world.
But it didn't take long for the cracks to appear.
The problems in the beta
 were echoed by new players.
The game was sluggish, the servers crashed,
 and Eorzeans quickly ran out of things to do.
Quests were limited, and the fatigue system 
even made grinding for XP next to impossible.
Critics ate it alive too.
- Let's get right down to it. 
Unless you've got the patience of Job
or are some kind of masochist,
 you shouldn't play Final Fantasy 14.
Its problems are so vast that I could
 spend hours talking about them:
the awful interface, the recycled content, the 
stringent limits on questing, the useless maps,
the stupid market ward. These issues
 and dozens more constantly
have you asking that age old 
question, what were they thinking?
DANNY: So what was it like seeing public reaction?
- Yeah, it was, I mean, very disheartening. 
Because you'd want to look at those,
and you'd want to say no, no, they don't understand.
They didn't know what's going on here. 
But deep down, you'd know they were right.
And that was what kind of, you know,
 that dagger in your heart, and it's twisting.
Because you want to defend what you worked on.
 I mean, the people that I worked with
are the greatest people. I mean, still work with a 
lot of them. I'd worked with them before on FF11.
I consider them not only coworkers but friends. 
And then you see people on online, you know,
bashing the work they did. And I know how hard
 they worked. I know how many hours they put in.
And I know that like in the last three or four
 months people were basically living at work,
all putting their 100% into this game that was, 
you know, destined to kind of crash and burn.
But, and then to have people 
online just say, oh that sucks.
This person is a piece of shit 
and their work is terrible.
It hurts, but it hurts more 
because if I was not here,
and was a user, and had played that game,
 I probably would have said the same thing.
- So at the time I was CFO, but I
 did notice the biggest difference
between all the issues that
 happened around Final Fantasy 11
versus the original 1.0 Final Fantasy 14,
 was that despite all the issues
that were happening with Final Fantasy 11, 
the game was still fairly received well.
But of course there were some 
operational issues surrounding
Final Fantasy 11, and it was kind of 
expected for those problems to happen.
But the game content itself was going well
 received, and people were accepting,
and they thought that it was okay.
But with Final Fantasy 14, the 1.0 version of it,
what I felt was problematic was that the 
game itself was not regarded very well.
it was actually received very poorly at and 
after launch. I really felt that sort of reaction.
And so you are not too far from the
 launch of the old Final Fantasy 14.
There was worry and concern within the
company about can we continue doing this.
- I mean the first few months was just an 
endless stream of translating apology mails
from producers and directors
 and, you know, finding out,
trying to figure out different
 ways of saying we're sorry.
Because the more you say it, 
the less weight it has.
But Japan being a country where people 
apologize a lot, that's part of the culture.
But then trying to translate that, it's like 
okay, this is the tenth time I've said sorry
in this one post. And then as an 
American myself, I think people are
going to look that as insincere. You know,
 the more you apologize, the less sincere,
and then trying to explain that to the team.
 It's like, no, we have to apologize.
It's like, yes, you have to apologize but...
And it just became we weren't 
talking about the game anymore.
We were talking about how to translate 
apologies. And it seemed like that lasted for
you know, a couple months.
- Actually we see a huge drop, I mean 
right after the launch. At the launch time,
we got some, a good number of the subscribers. 
Again, that fell, as you can imagine so.
It was a failure, and we announced that
 failure, so we saw a lot of decline.
- As mentioned earlier the developers were 
already sort of skeptical even at the beta,
even pre-beta phase.
There were feelings that this 
game is very premature,
it shouldn't have been released
 to the world at this state.
But before the launch there was this sort of 
broad feeling that maybe it will resolve itself.
Maybe once it's launched maybe. 
Sort of like a glimpse of hope.
We had nothing to back up this feeling,
but we were hoping that it would all 
work out well once we launched the title.
But the magic didn't happen. Once 
released, our fears did come true.
It was not ready to be released to the
 world, and I think everybody already
had that worry in their minds 
somewhere in the back of their head.
And so it wasn't difficult for 
everybody to realize that there is
some kind of fundamental issue 
that we need to resolve.
So it wasn't difficult to convince the other team 
members that we were running into an issue here.
DANNY: Today Square Enix is based across 
multiple floors in a modern office complex
in Shinjuku, Tokyo.
It's a company that is often 
designing multiple projects at once.
And while Final Fantasy was being 
developed in another part of building,
a different game was being made, produced by 
a Final Fantasy fan. His name? Naoki Yoshida.
- The first game I have played was on the 
Japanese system. It's called Family Computer.
The American system, I believe it's 
called Nintendo Entertainment System.
But the original Mario Brothers
 was the first I played.
Up until now, as a child I always thought
 a TV is something that you look at.
But when I first got a chance to play
 with Mario Brothers and got to hold
that controller in my hand, I wish I was 
actually playing this at my friend's house.
But being able to move something that's
 on the TV screen using a controller,
it was just shocking to me.
And of course another very impactful
 video game was the Dragon Quest.
It is one of the titles that spread 
the whole RPG gaming in Japan.
It's not about action or the
 back and forth of numbers,
but it was very story driven. 
That was very impactful for me as well.
And so that kind of prompted me
 to focus in on the RPG genre as well.
And of course the Final Fantasy game 
that came out the following year
after Dragon Quest took a more cinematic movie 
like approach to depicting these pictures.
So those two games, Dragon Quest 
and Final Fantasy, are definitely
very memorable games for me.
DANNY: Like most Japanese game 
players of the time, Yoshida-san played
all the early Final Fantasy games. He holds 
them in very high regard, though he still
holds the bitter memory of not being able to 
save before the last dungeon in Final Fantasy 3.
But when he was 11 years old, a brand new
 type of gaming experience arrived at home.
His uncle gave him a PC. On this PC the young
 gamer learned how to program in BASIC.
His first video game centered 
around trying to break into a bank vault.
But this PC also exposed him to spectrum of 
gaming that eluded most Japanese players,
western role playing games.
He fell in love with Diablo and was stunned
 when he first went online and played
with other players.
- And then the following year one of my 
seniors had recommended to me Ultima Online,
and I joined in their beta. And so that would
 have been my first MMO game. And that was
like the third time I received such a huge shock.
This time it's 3000 people concurrently playing 
on the same game. That was a big impact to me as well.
Ultima Online, especially in the earlier days, 
I felt like the level of freedom was very big.
Some players would have the title of 
"Lord" and be very gentleman-like,
a sort of community leader-type. Plus I 
created a separate, completely evil character
that would kill other players.
 I played a lot as both.
And so through Ultima Online
 I was able to sort of study
what kind of like engineering is 
required for an MMO type game.
So yeah, around then I think I was playing games
 on PC just as much as I was on a console.
And so I also looked into some 
FPS games and then also 3D MMOs.
Everquest was one of them. I just, 
I got to tell you it was very difficult to
obtain a package of Everquest in Japan.
I would travel to Tokyo on a business
 trip, and I would go to Akihabara.
And I would search like a zombie trying to find it.
Moving from store to store asking, 
"Do you have Everquest? Do you have Everquest?"
DANNY: Yoshida-san would embark on a 
career in games that would eventually see him
joining Square Enix to work 
on the Dragon Quest series.
Though he wasn't working 
on the Final Fantasy team,
he was part of the umbrella group that was 
allocating programmers to various projects.
He didn't have granular visibility on FF14, 
but he knew the team was struggling.
I asked him from his perspective as a producer,
 where he thought the game's problems
were coming from.
- This may be at risk of being
 cut by corporate PR, but
a middleware by the name of Crystal Tools was 
in the process of being developed company wide.
And a lot of the really talented 
programmers were pulled from
all different projects and different lines. 
So many different projects were missing
our lead programmers, our main programmers.
So I feel that that is one of the reasons
 that led to the failure of 1.0 as well.
And then two large points that were
 involved in that sort of problem.
One of the problems was that because
 Square Enix in the PlayStation 2 generation
had produced games that were revolutionary,
 with very high graphic quality
and quality gaming experiences also, that it
 was regarded as perhaps on top of the line
of the world, that the corporation itself 
became very arrogant, so to speak.
We had that extraneous sort of confidence that,
 oh, we have the world's number one graphics,
and only we are able to 
accomplish that kind of quality.
And I feel that that extremely large 
success had become a sort of shackle,
and I think we had become 
very arrogant, very prideful.
Back then, we had swordsmiths, 
artisans that make katanas.
We compared them to swordsmiths 
creating katanas one by one, by hand.
And they would create world-class
 quality, but meanwhile the world is
developing technologies so 
that they can cover that sort of
tedious manual labor through technology.
And so going back to the gaming 
industry, once PlayStation 3 came out,
technology finally had caught up, and 
you are able to cover those tedious task
through technology. But Square Enix did not
 change our old methods of creating assets.
And then we didn't have the resources to catch 
up on the technology to cover for that as well.
And then the programmers we knew that 
we had an issue that we needed to catch up
technology-wise were wrapped
 up in creating middleware.
And of course the artists are in 
that sort of artisan mindset thinking
that, oh, I make the worlds best graphics.
And so it was a very laborious and time
 consuming way of creating our assets.
And I believe that that is one of the large 
problems that we had in terms of the original 1.0.
So the second problem relates to, of course 
pride is very important. But with great success,
they started thinking that because they 
are great, they don't need to look at other games.
So say for example with an MMORPG, if you
 ask anybody who knows MMORPGs what is
the most well known MMORPG 
that you know. If you asked 100 people,
I'm sure 100 people will say World of Warcraft.
But did the staff members play Warcraft? No. 
None of the people were familiar with that game.
So I gave that example of World of Warcraft not
 because I wanted to talk about whether or not
the developers knew World of Warcraft
 or not, but I just wanted to point out that
we need to look at what would be our 
rival and what users are experiencing
in terms of the latest gameplay experiences.
And I felt it was very unbelievable that 
no one was doing the research for titles
outside of your own, because you won't know 
where you are unless you look at other games.
Even with online games.
Final Fantasy 11, of course there was
 great success on that title as well,
but that was actually based on a lot
 of the developers looking at Everquest.
And they've thoroughly looked at it, and 
studied it, and played it. And they applied
that sort of knowledge in order to
 make 11 such a great game.
It's like if you're trying to open a new restaurant 
when you go in and do absolutely no research
on the surrounding competitors
 and open up a new restaurant, right?
DANNY: So just at the launch stage, then, of 1.0, 
what was the feeling within Square Enix?
The beta was quite close to launch. Were 
people anticipating that there would
be negative feedback, or were they less
 aware that that was going to happen?
- I was on a different team, of course,
 but I was reading up on the internet
that the response to the beta was poor. 
And I mean, at that time, of course,
whenever an MMO launches, I know
 the internet tends to get up in arms,
and they try to complain about it.
The development team does 
do server stress tests,
but of course the player wants
 to play it as soon as they can.
So of course it is anticipated that 
server crashes and things like that.
So I mean I wasn't involved in the team, so I
 was looking at it from the outside perspective,
but I was thinking that because it 
is the same team who worked on 11,
so I thought it was just the consumers comparing
 it to the high level of completion of FF11.
And so I thought eventually that
 sort of animosity would die down.
But coming from an insider perspective,
 there were apparently a number of people
within the original development team that
 thought if we continued moving forward
with this, we were in a very bad situation.
The company, Square Enix, had turned
 around and told those people that,
well, that's how it was 
for Final Fantasy 11's launch.
We had missing functions that 
were a lot of negative feedback,
but we were able to patch it up and fix it.
So the company had decided to conclude 
that beta phase and then go into launch.
This is information that I found out
 when I talked with and interviewed
with some of the development staff 
members after I had joined the project.
But yeah, there were indeed people
 within the development team
that did raise their voice that it was,
 we were in a very bad situation.
But the company had ultimately 
decided to move forward anyway.
DANNY: Eventually corporate realized 
that this wasn't usual launch problems.
So they called on a few select members
 of the team to create a task force.
This task force would research what 
changes the game needed and the resources
the development environment 
would require to do the work.
Members of that team would talk to 
Yoshida-san about their worries after hours.
His thoughts were that the current 
organizational structure would need
to be modified if the team was 
going to make the changes required.
In October of 2010 Yoshida-san, talked to
 then Square Enix President Yoichi Wada
and suggested they initiate
 a company-wide emergency
to get the team the resources they needed.
Wada-san spent a few days talking to the 14
 development team about their concerns.
And while a lot of the team had suggested that 
the current task force was in fact up to the task,
some members of the 14 team had pleaded
 to have Yoshida-san join the project to help.
So it transpired that in late November 
corporate took the decision to remove
Hiromichi Tanaka from the team and move 
Nobuaki Komoto from director to lead designer.
Both of their vacant positions
 would be filled by Yoshida-san.
At the time he was leading a team that 
was working on an original IP for Square Enix.
He was disappointed to leave that team
 but was excited for the opportunity
to work on one of the company's crown jewels:
 a numbered Final Fantasy game.
So he got right to work.
- So I believe there were three major
 points that I had to accomplish with this
sort of transition, of course the first 
being that the top level were going to be
swapped out from the original 
team, and then that our task force,
that was said was going to be sort of like the lead.
There would be a core team that
 was involved with the development.
And because I was on the Dragon Quest side, I did
 not know these people on the development team.
Of course some of them 
I knew their names and faces,
but I had not had a chance to work with those
 people, so it was literally just saying hello.
That was kind of like my beginning,
 and I told them that because
I have not worked with you, so if you
 don't like what I do in my job,
you are more than welcome to leave the team.
But please give me about three months
 to work together to see what we are like,
what you are like, what I am like. And that's
 the kind of talk that I deliver during my speech.
I did mention to them that we are going
 to take this challenge on one more time.
At that time we didn't have any plans
 of A Realm Reborn just yet.
But I did communicate that we're
 not going to give up on this project,
and we're still going to push through.
So there were people who already knew me,
 and they would be just as encouraged.
Like, oh yes, I'm going to go and do this.
And some people reacted like, this is 
impossible. You're putting too much on us.
Or some people just got frustrated 
because they did not like what was going on.
So I think that was the kind 
of general reaction that I got.
And there's a team member on the XIV
 sound team even now, Masayoshi Soken,
was there when I did this speech in 
a large hall to the development team,
also was in charge of adjusting 
my microphone there.
And when I delivered that speech, he was
 the only one I can still clearly remember.
He was like, yes, I'm going to do it!
- I saw both reactions. I saw the, oh my
 god, we just went through a year of hell.
and now he's asking us to go through a 
year and a half of hell to this point that might
be another failure. Because no one had taken 
a game and rebuilt it in this manner before.
So basically he's saying like, 
yeah, you just have to trust me,
and you could, you know, waste 
another year and a half of your life.
And it could be a failure. But you're going
to have to believe me on this one.
And so yeah, a lot of people were like,
 I can't do this anymore. I don't know.
And I can understand that because again,
 it was a gamble. But then on the other hand
there were a lot of us, myself included. But I mean
 a lot of people on the team that were like,
no, I mean we worked so hard on this. 
And we did our jobs the best that we could.
But for a lot of reasons, some circumstances
 that were out of our control,
decisions made by higher ups, decisions 
made by other teams that affected our work.
And there's nothing that we could do 
about it. But we had put our all into it,
and we were invested in the project. 
And we still believed in the project.
To have someone from the outside 
come in, and not just come in to say
okay, forget it. We're just going 
to do it my way or the highway.
He asked our opinions. He laid out a roadmap.
 He gave us a vision and a hope, and it
even though it seemed like it would be difficult
 to achieve, it didn't seem inconceivable.
DANNY: Yoshi P knew there was no
 time to wait. He worked with corporate to
make sure the team had time off, 
both for them to relax,
but also to give him time to build the new vision,
to do research playing other MMOs,
 and ultimately to draft his plan.
To deliver the vision, and how
 the team would need to do it.
They had very little time to fix 
this game, so once they started,
the specifications document 
would have to be watertight.
And as captain of the ship, he 
needed to be able to answer
every question the team may have, quickly.
Yoshida-san was now at the helm of his
 first Final Fantasy, and as an avid MMO fan
he was looking forward to 
getting in there and fixing it.
What he couldn't have known at this stage
 was the scale of the job ahead of him,
that no matter how much they patched Final 
Fantasy 14 Online, they couldn't ever fix it.
What they'd have to do was something 
that no developer had ever done,
to rebuild an entire MMO while the
 original version was still running.
- I don't think that they realized 
immediately that it was something
that couldn't be solved via patches. I think they 
still believed that if we patch it, it'll be fine.
And it wasn't until they re-evaluated
 and then brought in the new blood,
Yoshida-san came in and told them, 
okay, this is not something that can be patched.
If we want to fix this, we're going to
 have to take a drastic step.
DANNY: Yoshida spent 7 weeks researching and
 returned with two options for corporate.
It was then he realized that it would be 
impossible to convert the current game
into an MMO that could last the test of time. 
Ultimately though, this was a decision that
corporate had to make, so he returned 
with two plans, Plan A and Plan B.
During this meeting, he explained
 that Plan A would be to patch the game
and make it more playable, but that ultimately
 the game would never really satisfy players,
and though Square Enix may make their money back,
the damage to the Online brand
 would be catastrophic.
And then there was Plan B.
- Plan B was apply patches to the current 
version of Final Fantasy 14, but alongside that,
in the background we would build 
a completely new Final Fantasy 14.
Of course just listening to those two
 options corporate would have been like,
what are you talking about,
 trying to divide up your team?
But I told them also because we had promised
 our fans that we would release a PS3 version.
We would need to launch this
 within the life cycle of PS3.
So we wanted to get the game out if not by the
 end of 2012, then sometime within 2013.
Of course there was a very high risk, and we've 
never done it before in the games industry.
And on top of that we're releasing
 it under the same title.
But I think at least by taking
 on this challenge we'd get
the fans to realize that Final Fantasy
 is doing something crazy again,
or something really great.
And they will see our effort 
in trying to regain their trust
and trying to make good on the damage
 we had caused to the franchise.
So that was my presentation to corporate,
and I was going to leave it up to them 
to decide upon Option A or Option B.
Of course, as you may already be aware, corporate
 did choose Option B, and here we are today.
DANNY: Final Fantasy 14 1.0 
was in a state of disarray.
Square Enix had decided to suspend 
subscriptions to help ease the negativity
around the game, while the PlayStation 3
 version was indefinitely postponed.
For the next 2 years Yoshida-san and his new team
 would work tirelessly on not one, but two MMOs,
patching the original 1.0 to fans expectations
while secretly working on a brand
 new version of Final Fantasy 14.
In our next episode, we focus on that 
2 year period and tell the incredible story
of the falling moon of Dalamud, the death
 of 1.0, and the birth of a new Eorzea.