I remember one of my senior colleagues, calling me over and saying, just pointing at his computer screen
which had the article about the mod on it and he said 'is this you?'
and I said 'yea'. One senior member of the profession
said to me, once he found out that I'd been modding in my spare time, that every waking hour of you life should be
spent dedicated to your legal career and that was his way of saying
drop this game dev nonsense, it's not going to lead anywhere.
[classical music plays]
Salve friend, and welcome to one of the most unique game development stories in recent memory
My name is Jake Dekker and I used to work with some of the NoClip crew back at my previous job at GameSpot.
It was there that I made several documentaries on various mods in role-playing games.
So, when The Forgotten City blew up earlier this year Danny reached out to see if I could help them tell this story, and I happily obliged.
The Forgotten City is a game with almost no combat in which you interview NPCs and attempt to solve a mystery before a calamity kills them all.
It originally started out as a mod for the Eldar Scrolls V: Skyrim.
A mod created by one person with almost no game development experience.
But that's not the end of the story. Nick Pearce not only spent years of his life re-imagining his mod as a standalone game
but in doing so he risked his entire life savings and jeoparized a high-powered career
which if he quit, he'd never be able to return to.
In this documentary we are going to explore how he made this game, and the personal development story that lasted almost a decade.
Also for those worried about spoilers, fear not. We will not be spoiling puzzle solutions, or the story beats of the mod or commercial game.
That said, if you want an entirely clean playthrough we recommend playing a little bit of The Forgotten City before you watch this.
[classical music plays]
The story of The Forgotten City began nearly ten years ago, when Nick Pearce a well-established lawyer based in Australia
started modding the Eldar Scrolls V: Skyrim in his free time.
With almost no prior experience, Nick had to teach himself nearly every aspect of development
from coding to design all while working in one of the most demanding fields there is.
I was writing a novel at the time, and while it was great, I wasn't as passionate
about it was I was about video games, and so I though 'how can I write a video game?'.
And you know it's this catch-22 you can't write a video game until you've written a video game.
And so,  the only way to break that catch-22 was to just make a mod. So, I started teaching myself how to make mods.
But yea, I had to learn, you know, the very basics. So, level design, and lighting, and nav meshing
and scripting, and learning the proprietary scripting language of how to make things happen in the game.
The first thing I did was I just made this big underground city in a state of ruin
and while it was pretty cool it just felt like a big empty world and do, then I thought
What would it be like if you could travel back in time within this city
and so, that gave me the idea of introducing this time-travel mechanic.
So, I allowed the player to go back in time, and meet the inhabitants of the city before it was ruined.
And just, you know, entrusted them with figuring out who or what was going to destroy it.
In the first draft of that mode, it was a really bleak fixed-ending where
where, you know, the player was saddled with an enormous amount of guilt because
their interference in the timeline was ultimate what caused the city to be destroyed
and that wasn't a great ending and so, it occurred to me that
what I could do to make the story a whole lot better was to give the player the opportunity to go back to the beginning
of that day all over again, and try to use what they had learned and gathered
to make things right and so, the logical step was to essentially just invent a timeloop
So, I just said alright, lets make it so that when all hell breaks loose you can escape back to the portal
from which you emerged, travel back to the beginning of the day and start again. I ended up having to figure out
time-travel, but not just time-travel, dynamic time-travel where you could go back and forward in time. No one had done that before in that engine.
So, I just had to kind of bash my head against a wall until I figured it out
and that was huge challenge for getting the story to work because you start in
present day in the city, travel back in time, and then when everything goes to hell
you've got a chance to escape back to the time portal from which you originated
and you go back to the beginning of the day sort of groundhog day-style and so I had to have
the ability to reset time quickly on command and so, it evolved quite organically in that way.
And at the time I hadn't actually heard of any other time-loop games.
I'd never played Majora's Mask, I later found out that came out in 2000.
At the time, I was just thinking about how to make sure the player had as much agency as possible
and how to make sure that they had freedom and felt ownership over the outcome of the the game.
And so, that also necessitated that there be multiple endings because, you know, if you're caught in a time loop there's all sorts of ways it can end
And so, the endings, all the different endings they came about organically because if you are in a time loop, you know, logically
doing certain things like killing the person who creates the time loop that's going to have a consequence.
[combat sounds followed by melancholic music]
When the mod took off, it took me a really long time to decide I was going to make it into a standalone game.
So, at the time, I was working as a lawyer, I had a pretty well established career. I'd been working for ten years but I'd discovered this
really burning passion for modding and by-extension gamedev.
So, I made this mod, at the time it was just a passion-project. I spent 1700 hours on it
but it was my first project and I really didn't expect it to be a big thing. I though, you know, maybe if a few thousand people play it
then the 1700 hours that I spent on it, divided by those few thousand people that would mean it was a good ratio
of my time to their enjoyment and then that would be fine. But yea, I didn't expect it to be downloaded by 3.7 million people, which is where it's up to at the moment
and that's crazy like. At a certain point you can't even conceptualize how many people that is. You starting thinking in terms of stadiums.
That's a lot of stadiums full of people. And I didn't know, I was delighted with the reception, it never occur to me to
make it into a game, and Kotaku wrote an article saying it was ambitious enough to be it's own game.
That was very flattering but I didn't take it very seriously, and then I met a couple of devs here in Melbourne at League of Geeks who said why don't you
standalone game and the reason that I didn't, as I told them at the time was
One - I don't have time, I have a job. Two - I don't have a budget 'cause making games is really expensive and three - I have absolutely no idea how to make standalone games.
But that conversation planted a seed, and so for the next twelve months I just sort of ruminated on it again and again.
Just trying to figure out how I was going to solve all these problems and in the end I solved all of the problems by
One - quitting my job, that was just the most insanely risky thing I've ever done in my life.
Two - you know, digging into my personal savings.
and Three - hiring this amazing unreal engine programmer, who had all the experience that I was missing, to join my team so we could make a prototype.
Yea so, ultimately I felt I had to make a choice between continuing in the legal profession and gamedev
and people definitely didn't understand and I knew they wouldn't which is why I never, sort of, made it clear
to them, I didn't talk to my professional colleagues about what I was doing because I just kept my worlds separate.
And that became impossible once PCGamer started running articles about the mod.
I remember one of my senior colleagues just calling me over and just pointing at his computer screen which had the article about the mod on it and saying 'is this you?'
and I said 'yea'. When I was back in the legal profession
one senior member of the profession said to me, once he found out that I'd been modding
in my spare time that every waking hour of your life should be spent dedicated to your legal career.
And that was his way of saying, you know, drop this gamedev nonsense it's not going to lead anywhere.
And yea, the relationship deteriorated after that.
I mean, it felt like jumping out of a plane without a parachute and
all I had was a plan to teach myself how to fly by the time I hit the ground.
So yea, I just worked 80 hours a week for the last four and a half years just to make sure that the project was a success because the consequences of
failing would have been devastating. When you leave the legal profession for that long, you can't get back in.
As a general rule, people just won't employ you because your skills and experiences are no longer useful.
And so yea, this project had to succeed and so I worked really long hours.
And I want to make a point of saying that's not something that I encourage or condone and certainly I would never
allow my staff to work those kinds of hours, that's not healthy or sustainable.
But for me, it was necessary because I was still learning and I had to make sure the game was successful. Because I just had so much on the line.
[folk music plays]
While many of The Forgotten City's core ideas were established in the mod the story needed to be re-written and overhauled
for the standalone game. Nick and the team needed to land on setting that could not only facilitate the themes of the mod
but also give it it's own style and personality, it was here that Nick decided to leverage another one of his other passions.
So, for the game I changed the setting
from fantasy to a sort of more-historical setting., for a few reasons.
The first one is that I've always been really fascinated with Ancient Rome.
The novel that I was writing was set in Ancient Rome.
So, I already had a library about the width of my arm span of
reference books on Ancient Rome. So, that was something that I was really interested in and it's always been a fantasy of mine
to be able to travel back in time to Ancient Rome as an outsider and just, sort of, walk among Romans and witness the really majestic art and architecture
and sort of, witness their customs. And I think a lot of other people have that fantasy as well.
It's just really really interesting period in history.
And so, that was the first reason, the second reason is that the story of The Forgotten City is about
collective punishment, you know, that this is a city where if one persons sins everybody dies
and collective punishment was really well known to the Romans.
They had this military practice of decimation where
one in ten soldiers could be executed for the crimes of the collective and they also had the Roman poet Virgil telling a very famous story
about Baucis and Philemon where the gods wiped a city off the map for failing their bizarre secret morality test.
So, the story that I was trying to tell fit naturally really well into that framework of history and mythology.
And the third reason is something that I can't really talk about just for spoiler reasons.
But I think when you get about halfway through the game you sort of go
Oh... Ooooohhhhh... Okay that's why it's set in Ancient Rome.
I think you probably know what I'm talking about but changing the setting to a real-world setting allowed me to just go all in
with that stuff and that's something that I really, that I find fascinating.
And I think it's sort of really struck a chord with a lot people as well, because you don't see that in game very often.
[folk music plays]
When I decided to make the game setting an Ancient Roman city
I realised very quickly that I was going to need some help because
I knew just enough to know how little I knew.
And so, I reached out to this fellow called Dr. Philip Matyszak
who has doctorate in Philosophy from Oxford and teaches at Cambridge.
And when I reached out I thought there's no way this guy's gonna be interested, it's just an indie game after all.
And he's so impressive and he's written 17 books.
And you know, he's very very learned. But yea, he was really interested and it turned out he was an avid gamer and he had clocked about 2000 hours in Guild Wars and Guild Wars 2.
And so yea, for about 20 months he and I exchanged well over 300 emails.
We jumped on countless calls, including video calls where I'd sort of
Fly around the world showing him what we'd done with it and he'd would just give advice as he saw things and make little corrections.
You know, he'd tell us about things, like those pillars are too close together or there should be six pillars there instead of four.
Technically that's not a temple, that a shrine. And one of the things he noticed was, you know, that
our carrots were orange instead of purple.
And he explained that they should be purple and that carrots throughout history had been purple until something like the seventeenth century.
It was a really wonderful enriching experience actually, and he's a really funny hilarious guy. We talked about all sorts of issues from
graffiti, to how romans swore, to toilets and, you know, some pretty earthy topics.
Some of that's evident in the game, if you wander into the public toilet, you see an actual historically authentic Roman public toilet, complete with cleaning stick.
Communal cleaning sticks that are just horrifying from a hygiene perspective.
And he also introduced me to a wonderful archaeologist called Dr Sophie Hay
who has twenty years experience excavating the ruins of Pompeii. She helped us out
with getting architecture and art right, and make to sure that all our mosaics, and niches, and end columns, you know, the interior
domes of our temples and shrines were sort of historically accurate as well. So, we put a lot of effort into
making sure that we are delivering on that implied promise of showing people how it would feel to travel back in time in Ancient Rome.
The historical setting also meant that Nick had to rethink how he wrote his characters.
One of the more interesting examples of this is Duli, the poor fellow you find locked-up near the markets.
So yea, I had to think carefully about how that was going to look
because you can't just transpose them directly, you have to change their name and you have to
give them a back story that actually makes sense in the context of an Ancient Roman city.
in the first century A.D. So, I did some research into, you know, how people with disabilities were treated
in Ancient Rome, and it's actually kinda horrifying.
The twelve tables of the republic dictated that people with disabilities or children with severe disabilities
would just have to be killed as soon as they were born.
So yea, obviously it was a much harsher period in history.
And so, I had to think about how we're going to have that view toward people with disabilities
manifest and was that going to, how would that look in this city
where everybody's terrified that somebody is going to, you know, commit a sin or make a mistake that's going to break the golden rule.
And so, in the end seemed like a natural conclusion to have Duli essentially locked up
at the beginning of the game, so he's essentially been imprisoned because they can't kill him.
But they also don't want to leave him free, because they're concerned that he's a liability. And so, it's quite a
I think a heart-wrenching story to see how this endearing guy, with a disability,
has been treated by these Romans who, you know, have a much harsher perspective on people with disabilities than we do.
[ambient music plays]
Part of that implied promise was also making sure that the standalone game looked and played as good
if not better than the mod. Using the Unreal engine as the foundation, Nick and the team
needed to build out a world, complete with features and technology comparable to the Bethesda creation kit.
A game engine created by the biggest RPG studio in the world.
I always think of the mod as a rough first draft of that the game became.
My mission right from the beginning was to just level-up every aspect of the mod that could be leveled-up.
And so, when I decided to re-imagine it as a standalone game we were at a massive disadvantage because all we had was, you know, we started with
Unreal engine, which is an awesome engine, but we didn't have any of the tools or the gameplay mechanics that were required to make a game.
And so, we had to, from scratch, build all of the, sort of, underlying tools and systems for the game that the mod was built on.
When you mod, it's a bit like standing on the shoulder of a Giant. You know, a lot of the work is done for you.
But when you make a standalone game you've really got to build just everything yourself from the ground up, and that is an immense amount of work.
And so, it's an absolute credit to our programmer, Alex Goss, who did the work of an entire team of programmers over four and a half years by getting the
game to work and work well.
It's easy to see how well The Forgotten City looks and plays  now, but one of the largest hurdles that team had to overcome were the facial animations.
There's a reason why facial animations are hard to come by in smaller scale 3D games, and it's because it's incredibly difficult.
Unfortunately this wasn't an option for Modern Storyteller, the entire game was designed around conversations.
To make things even tougher for the team, they didn't have a budget to hire a dedicated animator.
So, if you think about all the narrative driven games in the last, sort of, five or ten years, things like Firewatch, and Dear Ester, and, you know, Ethan Carter, and that kind of thing.
The one thing they have in common is that they carefully avoid, NPC dialogue, and I think it's because it's just breathtakingly difficult
And so, most indies don't even attempt it, but we didn't have that luxury because the mod had
good quality, you know,  dialogue with characters and this game is about talking to people so
it was absolutely critical that we had character dialogue. We also didn't have a budget for an animator which made our predicament even more challenging.
We did our best initially, and it did not go well. People really didn't like the early character
animations and dialogue system, and with good reason, it wasn't great.
So, after we got a shellacking from some mainstream media, I reached out to a fellow called Shon Stewart from Obsidian
who very kindly offered some of his time and got us on a zoom call and gave us a huge amount of really valuable information about how to make character dialogue animations.
And so, with that help we redesigned an entire sort of modular library of animations. And sort of, figured out the logic of how to make
it all fit together. And I think from a consumer perspective or even a press perspective
its very easy to underestimate how difficult this process is
like if you think about an idyllic animation system from the ground up, you start with
just a static character, and obviously just having someone just stare at you static it just looks awful
So, then you've got to have lip-sync that obviously syncs with the dialogue, and that's one step. But then its very-robotic and it looks really inhuman
So, then there's another layer, which is that you have to have them breathing or idling gently, So their, sort of, shoulders have to gently rise and fall
So, they're standing there looking at you, their shoulders are gently rising and falling, but it's still looks really robotic and alien because they're not blinking and they don't have any expressions
And so then you have to make sure there head, sort of, bobs gently in rhythm with what they're saying. Otherwise they look far too still, even if their whole body is moving
people. you know, when they start talking to you their head starts moving a little bit and then start of falls and becomes a bit more still once they stop talking.
And then you've got to think about blinking, and blinking it's not just a regular rhythm, it changes dynamically depending on their emotional state and you've also got to think about
facial expressions and emotional state. But the challenge there is that you can't have it override a lip-sync because the lip-sync and the emotional state will compete with eachother and you'll get jankiness.
So, to have a character dialogue animation system working with all these simultaneous layers and to have
it work perfectly and come across like you're talking to a real person is breathtakingly difficult.
Even with an animator, and we didn't have an animator, so it was really just me and Alex Goss, our programmer,
trying to figure out how to do this. And look, I think the results are pretty good, they're not AAA, but I think
given how difficult it is to do, I think it's miracle the game's animations look as good as they do honestly.
Building out an engine and crafting a believable world is only half the battle though, the game also needed to be fun.
And for a game that has you repeat the same day over and over and over again, this can get a little tricky
The team needed to come up with sensible ways for players to skip things they had already done while making each loop feel meaningful
So, Nick and the team had one major question  they needed to answer; How does a game like The Forgotten City not feel repetitive?
It was really important to me that looping through time didn't feel repetitive and that it felt fun.
And so I went back and watched one of my favorite movies of all-time, Groundhog Day.
And one of the ways that they make sure it's not repetitive when Phil Connors is looping through time is that they
cut, so that if a scene is redundant they just cut it, so what you end up with is
like a montage of Phil Connors doing the same scene a bunch of different ways, it's just a bit different every time and you don't have to worry about watching the lead-up to that scene over and over again
But you can't really do that in a video game, because the player has agency and control over where the camera is pointing, so you can't just jump from one scene to another so it would just be really disorienting.
And so the way, the technique I came up with to overcome that is quest delegation
So, for example, if in the first time loop if you manage to save a woman's life then next time you loop through time
We're not going to make you go and save her life again. We're just going to let you have a simple conversation with this helper NPC, Galerius and he's just going to run
and you know save that woman's life for you and so in that way
we were able try to stop the game from feeling unnecessarily repetitive because you never have to do the same thing more than once for the most part.
And then of course, that sort of mechanic, I made it so that it was sort of immersed into and ties into the story of the game and ultimately
you know, the errands that you send him on have story consequences and they snowball into a meaningful story outcome.
The other objective was to make it feel fun, and so when I as re-watching Groundhog Day, one of the things that was really clear to me was
that this sense of playfulness and fun from the movie comes about because the main character has the freedom to do whatever he wants from a virtually consequence-free environment
And so, with a lot of the quests and just activities in the game I wanted to create that sense of fun
so that when players are experimenting and goofing around that they can go a do a bunch of stuff that's entertaining and also just
even in dialogue where a character will start talking to you and you can cut them off and say look we've had this conversation before, you're about to say X, Y, and Z - and they will start to freak-out
they realize that they have had the conversation before, but how is that possible?
It's a lot of fun just sort of seeing their reactions and exploiting the knowledge that you have from previous time loops.
For example, swindle con-men out of their ill-gotten gains, that's really emotionally satisfying to do.
You know, if it had taken itself a lot more seriously. I think it probably would have missed out on some of that fun and tone is a really interesting thing with The Forgotten City.
Because, on one hand there are moments of levity and there's this sort of felling of fun
and exploration and there are jokes, some of which land better than other, but at the same time some of the other subject matter is really quite dark.
You know, there are people killing themselves or essentially finding themselves in what is tantamount to slavery.
But what I think is also the, the flip-side of that is that you get to undo some of that darkness, you have to sort of start dark to go lighter
And so, finding the right balance of tone was a challenge, but I think it actually worked out remarkably well in terms of how
the sort of competing tones worked together but I think that's just because that's what life is like, there are moments of levity
and there are moments of really dark stuff. I don't think you have to apologise for including both in a game, I think that's just what life is.
Along with making each loop feel fresh, Nick and the team worked hard to make sure players were given enough freedom while also keeping them relatively on-track with the narrative.
The Forgotten City is a mystery after all and it's important for players to chase whichever lead they choose.
We placed a lot of trust of trust in the intelligence of players to figure out these things out for themselves. And I think that's a sort of key design philosophy.
Because we are making games for intelligent thoughtful adults who enjoy figuring things out for themselves so spoon-feeding them
it's just not what they want and it doesn't give them that sense of agency or ownership over the ending that they get.
And that was really important to us, I want people to get to whatever ending they get to, and to feel like they deserved than ending because of the decisions they made.
And when you get to the canon ending, I wanted that to be the ultimate emotional reward for
really thoroughly exploring and investigating, and making smart decisions and making smooth arguments.
It is difficult to make sure that players experience the best of the story while also being free to roam and do things in whatever order they please.
And there are a few techniques that we used to do that. For the most part players are free to wander the city and talk to
people in any order and we have to anticipate that. So, there are lots and lots and lots of little conditions that say
if you talk to this person without talking to that person first then you'll get this type of dialogue. And keeping track of that is
it's brain-bendingly challenging. But there are certain key
beats in the story that you really want players to experience. So, to that end, we do sort of try to
gently nudge them in that direction, and one of the ways we do that is, in the game at least, there is a
there are these golden statues scattered throughout the world, and one of the mysteries is why these statutes occasionally kind of whisper to you when you walk past.
And sometimes they'll give you cryptic hints but in the back end there's quite a lot of logic that dictates
what the whispers to you should be at any given time. And they sort of help guide the player toward where we hope they'll go
in a sort of non-intrusive and immersive way. Originally, they we just supposed to be something that was sort of haunting and unsettling.
But then, it occurred to me as people were testing the game and some people were struggling with it a bit
The statues whispering a bit more as a sort of immersive tutorial device. I personally really dislike it when games give you a text
message telling you what to do. Sometimes, there will be this pop-up saying 'you should go and do this'
I wanted to avoid that at all costs so in the end I settled on re-purposing this existing whispering statues as a way of gently nudging the player in the direction that we wanted.
And that ends up having greater plot significance as well, it ends up woven into the story and that helps it kind of feel
natural and immersive rather than this sort of tacked-on device that we're using.
And look there are certain parts of the game that we just accept that players won't necessarily discover and I think that's okay because
ultimately even if you play through the game and miss out on a whole ending or a whole story line that leads to the best ending
that's actually kind of good because it means that you've got something to look forward to the next time you play.
[ambient music plays]
On the eve of the release before any of the reviews had come out I really didn't know what to expect.
I thought maybe we'd get you know 60s or 70s, and I'd sort of braced myself to be happy with that.
Because you know it was our first game, and it's a fiercely competitive industry and who knows what people want?
It's just so incredibly subjective. And so, I just took stock of where I was, and I thought
I don't think I'm going to read these reviews, because I had already done what I had set out to do, in the sense that I had
made a game that I was really proud of and I had a wonderful time doing it.
And you know, its been an incredible journey and I've learned so much, and I probably wont worry about the reviews.
And then I got a major major reviewer DMing me on twitter to say 'Hey, we're giving it a 9 out of 10, just FYI.'
And then it just sort of blew my mind, and I really didn't expect that, I'd just been bracing myself to just not care about the critical response.
And so then at that point, I just went forget it, I'm just going to have to read the reviews. And I was absolutely blown away by
the critical response. I think on metacritic, we've now get a weighted average of 85 on PC, and higher on XBOX Series.
So, now I think the game is currently ranked 15th best game of 2021 which
it doesn't sound like much, but then you consider that there are like ten thousand games released on steam every year
so that's actually pretty good. Its so incredibly gratifying to hear reviewers and users just having a wonderful time with it.
Fundamentally, you know, when you're in the entertainment industry when you sort of
look at whats really important its just making people happy. And if its entertaining and making people happy in whatever way
you can, whether its through encouraging them to be thoughtful and introspective and grapple with some
philosophical questions or just goofing around in the time loop then that's a wonderful thing.
And I think we could all do with a bit more happiness during a global pandemic. So, I'm very happy it's touching people's lives in that way.