[JAUNTY MEDIEVAL MUSIC PLAYING]
- (IN A KNIGHTLY VOICE) Ah, hello. You must be 
the new recruit. Well, welcome to your training,
and let me be the first one to welcome 
you to the wonderful world of Chivalry.
This documentary--
[COUGHING]
(SPEAKING NORMALLY) Sorry. This 
documentary on the design of Chivalry 2
could not come at a better time, as the issue
 of designing fun and accurate swordplay
has come up in several of 
our recent documentaries
on some of the most celebrated
 sword based games ever made.
In our docs on Thief: The Dark Project, 
Dishonored, and most recently Deathloop,
some of the most experienced designers
in their field have talked to us about
the difficulties of making swords 
work in first person games.
It's no wonder so many of them stick to guns.
(KNIGHTLY VOICE) Take this standard 
video game weapon. You just point it at
whoever it is you want to murder, and you
 press the button. Bang! And they're dead.
And video game controllers are quite
 good at that: pointing at something
and pressing a button.
Swords, on the other hand, they're 
analog and a lot more complicated.
Hiyah!
(SPEAKING NORMALLY) In recent years games 
like Mordhau and Kingdom Come Deliverance
have wrestled with this problem, 
but no team has more experience
with the long metal swinging 
things than Torn Banner Studios,
creators of the Chivalry franchise that
finds its design roots back in City 17.
And while we're on the subject of 
turning the average keyboard warrior
into a skilled footsoldier, we're also going to
 explore how Chivalry 2 attempts to
focus the game's armies into working
 together for a common goal.
(KNIGHTLY VOICE) Okay, that's quite enough 
chitchat between old friends.
How about we talk to the experts
and uncover the design of Chivalry?
[MUSIC ENDS]
2. Chivalry 2. The second one. 
Or the third. There was a mod.
[LAUGHING]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
(SPEAKING NORMALLY) In 2007, Steve Piggott
 joined a Half-Life 2 modding group
that was working on something 
near and dear to his heart,
a game where swordplay was the focus.
Over the course of the project's time,
he eventually became team
lead of Age of Chivalry,
a mod that was attempting to add realistic
melee combat to an engine that up to
then was only good at
swinging, well, crowbars.
STEVE PIGGOTT: Generally what games do 
for melee is they just have like a large box.
They don't really care about being overly 
precise. It's just you hit in front of you.
And we took and really kind of
turned a machine gun into a sword.
[LAUGHING]
So normally when you shoot bullets, 
they draw things called tracers,
and there's like hit detection lines 
to see if you're hitting your enemy.
So we did that, but we made them, 
you know, just the length of the sword,
so they would terminate at the certain length.
And then as you do your swing you're
 sort of firing multiple bullets across.
And that gives you the ability to have your
 actual swing path dictate your hit detection.
So that was kind of our core 
innovation that started the melee.
So we got lucky enough that Age of Chivalry
got put on Steam as one of the free
mods that you could get in the 
early, early days of Steam.
You know, it kind of blew up, 
and it got really popular.
And we're like, okay, you know, up to 
this point, it was just a hobby project.
And we were like, let's do this for real.
And we found out pretty early we weren't 
going to be allowed to use the source engine.
So and then we found out that the Unreal Engine
 was going to what they called the UDK,
Unreal Developer Kit, which was a royalty free-- 
Or royalty structured, no upfront fee.
So for us, that was, hey, no barrier to entry here.
And that's pretty much how we ended
up making Chivalry into a real game.
DANNY: Chivalry: Medieval Warfare was released
 in 2012, created by a remote team of 12
now going by Torn Banner, who didn't get paid 
until the game launched and started selling.
But much like Age of Chivalry, 
it found an audience.
Arguably it was creating an audience. 
And with each version of the game,
the team was learning more and more
about how to make this type of game.
STEVE: We share the view that our fans have
largely of Chivalry 1, where it was a
great game, but it had a ton more
potential than it was able to capture.
So in a sense, Chivalry 2 was a little bit 
of a revenge mission, coming back
with more resources. And it's always been about 
making the ultimate medieval combat game.
[EXPLOSION]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
DANNY: (KNIGHTLY VOICE) Today we're going to 
uncover the design of sword based gameplay.
And this comes in two forms,
the soldier and the army.
(SPEAKING NORMALLY) How does a 
game make being a soldier fun?
Using weapons, understanding how to engage 
in fights, and making dying enjoyable?
And what about the larger army?
How does Chivalry 2 get you to feel
like you're part of something bigger?
How does it direct players and keep the
pace engaging over large scale maps?
(KNIGHTLY VOICE) So first things first. 
Let's explore how they turn the average peasant
into a bloodthirsty sword, swinging maniac.
STEVE: You know, the most common
 complaint about fighting games
is that there's the skill disparity, and 
you just can't play with people who
you're not in the same league with. And obviously
 first person shooters have a similar problem.
and we're putting them both together.
So you know, that's a core challenge for us,
and we for sure wanted to tackle it across the
 spectrum in all the ways that you mentioned.
We wanted to make sure that if you're 
no good at the combat at first, it's still fun.
So that's sort of the skill floor. But more
 than just the skill floor, you know,
we want to make it so that you can get in 
a sword fight, and you lose that sword fight.
In the first Chiv 1, you didn't even get the feeling 
that you were in a sword fight. You'd just die.
So we did a lot of core innovations to 
make it so you feel like there's an exchange,
even if you lose that exchange, that you're
 getting the fantasy of swordplay.
And then also, you know, we wanted it to make
 it so that dying was actually enjoyable
because you're going to die a lot in our game. 
It's a medieval, like, meat grinder.
We knew people were going to die a lot, lot 
more in our game than other games even,
and we wanted that to be fun. So that's 
where sort of like the ridiculousness
and some of the Monty Python
 inspiration comes in.
- The basic thing is, you know, you're a medieval 
knight, and you have your really heavy weapons.
And the greatsword is always the 
perfect example to bring to everyone
new and recommend everyone 
needs to play with as well.
It's slow, it's heavy, deals a lot of damage, 
and you can hit multiple opponents.
There's a lot of finesse to the combat,
and it's very accurate to the tracers.
So our combat system is the animations
 that our animators create,
where the swing, you know, literally 
informs how you're going to hit.
Unlike most games, you, you really have full 
control over your camera and the swing,
and you can control it and manipulate
 it throughout as well.
And that really is the key 
component of the combat.
TOM BANNER: Turn into your swing, 
and break  them all with one slash!
STEVE: So Chivalry 1 was really just
a timing based defense system.
So you'd block, and it would just defend.
And that worked relatively well.
But again, when you had a huge skill gap,
 it meant that you would just never block
an attack of someone who was better than you. 
So you would never get an exchange, a flow.
And all of the combat is built on this initiative 
system, which is sort of like a violent dance
back and forth between the two players. Your 
every exchange, even if you don't deal damage,
actually sets you up for your next move. 
So all of the timings, all of this is worked out
really intricately, and it lets you chain 
your actions together in unique ways
and sort of put your opponent in a
 position where you have an advantage.
And so it really, the whole system comes 
alive as you get better at the game
and as you understand it.
So we went to Chivalry 2. We were like, okay, 
we need to make it so that players are,
you know, at least able to participate in 
this dance. You know, at least you could see
how you could get better.
[SHOUTING]
[CACKLING]
DANNY: Games that attempt to simulate something 
come with their own set of design challenges,
one of which is that while the systems
themselves may be more complicated than
your average game, players often want the
more gamey and handholding aspects of
the experience to be stripped back.
That means stuff like in-game prompts
 and a cluttered user interface.
But Chivalry 2 is a game that is telling
the player a lot of things, far more
than in the earlier games. So how did
the team reach this design conclusion?
RASMUS: It's a hard balance of, you know,
how do we stick with a very minimal
like medieval experience where
 we're not informing players
with damage numbers or damage texts?
But also how do we make sure that everyone
really understands and feels informed
of what's going on? When you have so
many players as well, just relying on,
you know, sound and animations. 
It's sometimes a struggle for just,
you're surrounded. There's players everywhere.
And I think because you see
yourself in first person,
you don't necessarily see what has
happened to your character at all times.
And that's a big challenge compared
to third person or a fighting game,
which we use it for reference a lot.
You see when you're interrupted
and what that looks like.
But when you just see your hands, it's hard 
to convey that you were staggered.
and like you're trying to be catching your breath.
So that's where it also comes in,
 you know, text pop-ups.
STEVE: You know, for a fighting game, 
you're looking at your character, right?
They're looking at each other. But in our 
game it's eye to eye, you know.
You feel, it's much more personal.
It's much easier to pick up
on what your opponent's doing.
And that's why we wanted to provide more
combat options, because that's how you
can express yourself with a different
play style. And so as you get that,
it's not just as you see one player, but as you come
 to know the player you're fighting against,
you can actually learn their strategies. 
There's a lot of depth and variety in the combat.
RASMUS: So the very basics of
understanding, you know,
how the swings work when you get
hits, that is very approachable.
But then the more difficult mechanics
and the timings and the nuances of
it, that is something that was
a struggle in the first game.
And that's where we added a lot of the, you know,
the text pop-ups or different UI
elements really tell you what happens,
you know, what does being
interrupted means, or, you know,
what does fainting mean? And those
have really helped just in our own team,
during development we found, but people 
started using the terms across the team.
It wasn't just me and Steve who understood
the combat, but everyone started,
you know, talking about things even internally.
 And that's how we knew that it worked.
DANNY: Visual cues are helpful,
but in all the chaos Chivalry has to 
do a lot more to help the player
understand what's going on.
Much of it you may notice,
but some tricks are a lot more subtle,
especially when it comes to audio.
- Yeah, there's a ton of different audio
systems that we have in place that make
interactions you're involved with
sound different from combat nearby,
because that was the first thing we
noticed. We wanted really crunchy,
heavy impacts that just really felt like
 you're smashing somebody with a
medieval sword or a mace, you know? 
But then we realized, oh, if we do that,
just if there's tons of 
people fighting around you,
you can't tell what's happening with your fight.
So there is this system that exaggerates or add 
sounds into exchanges you're involved with
so that even in the midst of the meat grinder,
you can get those combat cues
and know what's going on.
[SOLDIERS SHOUTING]
[GROANING]
[WEAPONS CLANGING]
- They have only 30 troops left.
We are down to 10!
STEVE: And because of the way 
our combo system works,
it's not like a fighting game where
you hit a bunch of buttons in advance.
Ours is like a free flowing combat system 
where as you're sort of swinging,
you have until the last possible minute
to make that decision of what your next
move is. So the audio cues ended up
being the indicator to your opponent
that you have made a change, and they
need to kind of look at you again.
So it's kind of like use the ears to signal the eyes 
that they've got to update their information.
It's one of those things that you pick
up as you get used to the game more,
but a lot of it comes down to
like the contour of the animation,
like the outline of the shape is making.
Because your peripheral picks up much
faster than the center of your eyes.
And then, so we use the audio and the peripheral
vision stuff to try and trigger you that,
hey, danger's coming.
One of the greatest moments that
 we can capture because of this,
in a gun game, you don't get this 
sense generally, but in a sword game,
there's this moment of anticipation 
where sometimes you just know.
You know that you're going to die.
It's a quarter of a second and
you just whiffed your swing.
So you can't defend yourself, and
it's coming, and then you get smashed.
And we actually find players 
love that experience.
They love to know. It's a really clear
reinforcement, I've made a mistake.
And then of course the head comes
off, and the blood spurts everywhere.
And it's just this really satisfying event.
You know we've found before that having 
sounds be radial actually reduces the amount
of information in certain cases. So some
of our sounds have like a cone
base to them so that you can tell
the person's looking at you.
because if they're just
running by behind you,
it doesn't really matter as much as
if they're running at you, right?
So we do things like that,
and same with the projectiles.
When the projectiles come near you, 
you'll hear the woosh so that you know
it was a near miss.
We do a lot of things that are based
 on your position and the angle
that things are coming at you. 
Because on the audio side for us,
it's all about separating just this constant
 base level of just armor smashing
and people screaming and dying. And how 
do I get any information out of this chaos?
RASMUS: You know, the amount of grunts and screams
 that we have recorded for every voice actor
is probably excessive by most games' standards.
And there's different kinds 
of grunts that we, you know,
we try to track the voice actors to, 
you know, do this kind of grunt for when you're
lunging forward and starting a swing.
We'd scale them with different pain levels
and different things that we know as well.
And it's something in general that we
want to keep as a big thing to inform,
you know, the player of
what's going on. So, you know,
there's always a commander telling
you what to do in the objective maps.
COMMANDER: Brothers, the town
 square is nearly lost!
RASMUS: You know, what is the
story, what are we doing?
What do you need to do as the soldier?
So both from the objectives in the levels
and into the combat we make sure that,
you know, the VO and the voices is one of the
main communication points for how you
understand the game.
[BATTLE CRIES]
- What now?
[GROAN]
DANNY: Okay, we can't talk about the 
audio in this game without mentioning the
role of voiceover in Chivalry 2, 
and yes, the screaming,
There aren't many games that have
a dedicated button for screaming,
but what may surprise you is that
the inclusion of all this chatter, and
screaming, and even the emotes,
they're not just for the memes.
They're actually a crucial part of the
wider design of Chivalry 2, a way of
making you, sitting alone at home,
feel connected to both your fellow
soldiers and the wider battle.
- Yeah, I think it's the importance of 
multiplayer, the importance of knowing
that there's another person
 there having that experience.
And that's where so much of the VO 
and the role-playing comes into it,
because these battle cries have\become incredibly contagious.
It's not just the battle cry. It's the laughter, 
the taunts, the insulting people.
What other game is going to let you
quote Shakespeare and kill someone with a
chicken? You know, that's kind
of our approach to it. We just,
we want to give you the whole
spectrum of the medieval fantasy.
RASMUS: So I think the comradery of the 
game is the one that we can't get across
in trailers really. So you know, when you 
battle cry 'cause you're running out
from spawn, and like the people next to you. 
And we always spawn people in groups
so that you can get that feeling.
And a lot of the humor and that kind of stuff,
I think we can sell in trailers
and get people and they'll sense.
But the comradery and the
interactions with other players,
that is really one that you can only
really experience in the game, I think.
- (KNIGHTLY VOICE) Okay, recruit. 
We've talked about how the developers
at Torn Banner can  turn you 
into somewhat of a soldier.
Now let's explore the other side of 
this design coin, the battlefield.
(SPEAKING NORMALLY) The maps 
in Chivalry 2 are pretty long,
taking around 30 to 40 minutes to 
complete, which when you think about it
is a fairly long time to spend 
screaming, swinging a sword,
and chopping people's arms off.
So how does the game attempt to keep
you engaged in all this intense action?
There's a lot to unpack here, from the
pacing of the encounters to level design,
storytelling, even including
the tone of the experience.
(KNIGHTLY VOICE): To explain this, let's start
 where Torn Banner Studios did:
at the beginning of the battle.
- Feydrid Kearn stood and bled for us. 
Now he rests here in peace.
The heathen horde is at our holy gates.
Protect Feydrid's tomb and 
the holy city of Galencourt!
- En garde!
- Protect the city of Galencourt 
and safeguard Feydrid's tomb.
STEVE: Yeah, so we had this like 
core medieval movie influence,
and then we also really don't like 
the way that some games go about
becoming super gamey, where the 
objectives are point A and point B.
And they don't even try and pretend
there's like a real in world
meaning to these things. So we want
you to feel like you're on the,
on the battlefield, like emotionally,
but games tend to not do that so well.
I think games tend to just have this artificial
 layer between you and the experience.
There's a lore behind the game.
And then every map has an actual real
world context within the battle that's
going on in between the two factions.
Coming up with a scenario, and starting you
in that scenario, and having you
play through it all the way.
So how we got to peasants was one of the things 
that regal armies to is they just slaughter.
They just go in and sort of make
an example out of an area, right?
And so what does that look like?
Well, it looks like you're working in the
fields, and then all of a sudden this army
comes screaming over the hill. And you've
got a hoe, or a shovel, or pitchfork,
and you just, you know, you've got
30 seconds to see what you can do.
And the whole point of that is it's not balanced.
We kind of think of them a little bit
like the pistol round in Counter-Strike.
Before anybody can afford better weapons,
there's pistols. And so there's that,
that's kind of what that first clash is.
The moments that you get or that the
unique memories of, you know, I killed,
killed a knight as a peasant, you know?
Or I was just slaughtered instantly
and trampled, like both are great.
You know, what would a medieval army
actually do if they came into this space?
That's always our mindset for the 
objectives. And it takes a ton of work 
to handcraft a new game mode
for every stage of the map.
And our maps ware like seven maps stitched
together and would come with new game
modes for each one of them.
And the reason we do that is so that it
feels like a real place that you can put
yourself in. And you're running through
the streets, stealing the loot,
killing the peasants. That's what
 it's all about. Movie scenes.
[SCREAMING]
RASMUS: You know, when we look at our
 references or movies, it's always,
you know, the story to it. You're not just on 
the field. There's a reason to be on the field.
So when we started one of our first
maps, which is Wardenglade,
it's just an open field. And that, we 
thought that was the best start.
It was the simplest, and it was pure combat.
But even there, we make sure that
 we started with a battle speech.
Everyone's lined up, and then you 
rush into battle. So we did that kind of
Braveheart reference sort of, basically.
 So in every map, you know, we just,
we want that immersion in the world and
not just to be fighting for fighting's sake.
I think one of the things that can maybe
be hard to even realize when you're
in the game is the pacing changes that we add.
Maybe you start in an open field, and
then it gets into a really chaotic,
really tight and claustrophobic area. 
And if you always played that, you know,
tight experience, you would tire out in
15 minutes, can't handle it anymore.
STEVE: Yeah. Pacing becomes hugely important, 
especially 'cause these map experiences
are already now between half an hour
 and 45 minutes the player's playing.
So you need to change the pacing throughout
 so that not a one note experience, right?
So we found it's crazy fun to take 64 players,
 and put them all in a tiny space,
and make them just kind of grind it out for
 a little bit. And then it gets, it gets too much.
Then you want to kind of break it off
more. So in something like Lionspire,
that's one of our maps. You start
 out, and the first experience is
you're on this big wide beach,
and there's a ton of space.
So it's very wide open, but there's like this 
big clash. And then people are spread out,
and you get these one-on-one 
duels happening everywhere.
And then once the ram gets to the gate, all the
 combat goes [MAKES WOOSHING NOISE],
and everybody's all in one spot. And it's just 
about, you know, just kind of American football
kind of just grinding out those extra couple
of yards. And then the gate comes down,
and it opens up again.
And so that's a good example of how 
throughout the level we're trying to do like
hourglass kind of shapes 
to play with the pacing.
It's almost like a water pressure concept
of how narrow are we making the spaces
in order to increase the pressure that
players are experiencing the chaos.
DANNY: Here's an area of game design 
we don't often get to talk about,
but one that's crucial to keeping the pace 
of a game like Chivalry: the respawn system.
Behind the curtain, Chivalry 2 is doing a lot 
to ensure that players charge each other
in groups instead of wandering
aimlessly around the battlefield.
STEVE: So one of the worst feeling things
is when there's a ton of defenders,
and the attackers just trickle in one-on-one
 and get swarmed and beaten every time.
So we do a lot of work with
the spawn system to make it so that,
you know, there are spawn waves that come 
and respawn and groups of people all at once.
That's why there's not a single respawn timer when 
you die. It's variable so that we can clump people.
And you come in as a, as a force to be
reckoned with rather than, you know,
just a raindrop against an ocean.
RASMUS: It's one of the unique things that
 we picked up right away that, you know,
not many games do, is that we start people running.
You don't spawn and then you kick up running.
We start you like running at full speed.
you're charging into battle. 
And that helps enormously in keeping
the pace up and feeling like there's no
downtime for the player. And 
of course there's, you know,
the usual stuff like making
sure that the paths are clear.
But a big thing is that we try to
create the vistas where you always see
where you're going and where people are fighting. 
And just seeing people fight in the distance,
that's all you need. The rest is 
just bonus on top of that.
But if you see someone fighting,
that's where you're bolting.
And that's where we spawn 
you bolting in the direction of.
STEVE: That's one thing we really tried to
 improve in Chivalry 2 over Chivalry 1,
is the amount of downtime. The reason people 
stop playing games is some mixture of
downtime and frustration points. And so 
what we try and do is make sure that
the experience, we look at what the average
 experience is and what sort of the
ends of the spectrum in terms of how long 
you're running and how long before you respawn.
And those values are all very tightly
tuned, and the whole maps had to be reworked
many times as we were figuring
this out in the first place.
Because first person shooter players are the
 most picky people in the world in terms of pacing.
And when it comes to this, if they're just
 sitting on the sidelines for long enough,
let's go quit and play something else.
So we knew we had to keep the pace high.
We knew we had to get people to run in,
die, and run back in, and feel like that
was something that, you know, you're
 spending most of your time fighting
rather than traveling and being dead.
So playing with how long people are
dead versus how long they're running in
different stages is sort of how we, 
you know, I talked about how the width
affects the water pressure, but that's how we
 affect the depth between the two teams.
The width is sort of how much are people
fighting in a group versus one-on-one,
and then the depth compression is
more just how much time people fighting
versus running. And we'd play with
that so that if there's, you know,
an experience where one team is supposed
to be overwhelming the other one,
or that they're spawning faster,
there's there's pressure from, you know,
the attackers more than defenders. 
And we do the opposite in other cases.
DANNY: We've spent most of our time here
talking about the ways in which this game
guides the player, how they train you to be
 a soldier and make sure you always know
where you're meant to be during the battle.
But all of this control is in 
service of a greater freedom.
It's what allows Torn Banner to take
their hands off when it matters most.
(KNIGHTLY VOICE) To allow soldiers of all skill 
levels to create beautiful emergent moments
in this bloodthirsty sandbox and create 
stories that will echo through the ages.
STEVE: I love a lot of the VIPs because 
the players can dictate their strategy.
And it's like killing the king, it's just
 the climax worked really well.
And where the VIP goes, the rest of the 
team has to dynamically adapt to that.
RASMUS: Yeah, my favorite one has been the 
falling traps. When players don't realize that
you know, the body that is hanging by the
 noose, when you shoot it, it falls down.
And that's the kind of surprises that
I love that we were able to work in.
You know, I love the break in combat that an
oil pot creates where it's this fire.
Everyone just scatters and has to redirect.
STEVE: It's actually really funny. If you turn
the gore off, 'cause you can do that,
the heads are just cabbages.
[LAUGHING]
But you can get, in the world
 you can find cabbages too.
And food's fun because if you battle
cry while holding it, you can eat it and heal.
But you can also just lob tomatoes and apples
 and cabbages at people and kill them with that.
We kind of just wanted, like anything that you
could pick up, you could hit people with.
It's about putting the players into
the narrative so that they're writing.
Getting the game out of the way.
We're not trying to be the funny ones.
We're trying to make the player the funny
ones. We're trying to make the player
the ones who tell the story
based on what happened.
That's what creates memories is these
unique story moments where these crazy
things happened, and you can
laugh about it for years.
So integrating people to the narrative
so that they can write their own stories.
- (KNIGHTLY VOICE) Thank you for 
watching this video on Chivalry 2,
and thank you to all the 
beautiful people whose names
are apparently flying past my visage,
 who funded this entire effort.
(SPEAKING NORMALLY) Can I drop the accent? I should
 keep the accent for the sake of consistency.
(KNIGHTLY VOICE) And thank you to everyone
 who supports us on patreon.com/noclip.
It is you who allows us to afford
 such beautifully crafted,
realistic looking Halloween costumes
like this one, and this fine sword,
which is actually quite heavy,
which was made in China, no less.
Thank you to the armies of China for 
supplying us with this, this beautiful beast.
If you would like to subscribe to us, that 
would be terrific. We'd really appreciate it.
We also have a podcast channel
you might not know about at
youtube.com/noclippodcast. And
of course, if you become a patron,
don't forget that you also get lots
of goodies, lots of, lots of freebies,
things like podcasts, extra ones,
extra videos, behind the scenes things,
a lot of other updates and shite
which probably is a bit old now.
But there's a lot of good things in there as well.
And you'd help us poor independent film creators
 make high production value pieces like this.
Also we are currently saving up for a 
recreational vehicle so we can travel the world
and in fact other parts of the United States 
with our curious brand of infotainment.
Thank you so much for watching.
My voice is about to break.
So we better stop.
For Agatha!