Hello friends. Since we launched Noclip
eight months ago we've had the
opportunity to visit studios all around
the world and tell stories about some of
your favorite games and developers.
And thanks to your incredible support we've
got many more exciting stories to tell
this year and hopefully beyond.
Good morning friends. Hello and welcome, in case you haven't noticed
because there's a 7-eleven behind me, to Japan.
Those of you who are patrons are used to a steady
diet of bonus videos such as our various
behind-the-scenes features and community
Q&As. But if there's one thing we've
heard from our community here on YouTube
it's that you'd love more and honestly
we'd love to make more. There are so many
more stories out there we'd love to tell
but we're a small team and to ensure we
keep these videos to a high standard of
quality, each project requires time to produce.
the worst thing we think we could do is
sacrifice quality for quantity.
So we thought what if we just simplified the
production? Could we make shorter videos
that are just as interesting as our
long-form docs? What if we created a
shooting space at an event, invited a
bunch of interesting people to come and
chat to us for an hour, record those
conversations and turn them into chattier
or looser more off-topic videos?
Well as you've probably guessed that's exactly what we did.
Introducing Noclip Sessions. Interesting chats with people in the
industry on a wide range of topics.
We shot our first round of sessions of the
patreon offices in San Francisco during
the annual Game Developers Conference.
We talked to Harvey Smith about Deus Ex
Dishonored and Arkane's reboot of Prey.
[Harvey Smith ]
And it's another alt-world that's
beautiful. It's like what if Kennedy had lived
and the Russians and the Americans had worked
together....eh what if the Russians and the
Americans work together? 
[interviewer] Haha, imagine that?
Imagine that...
[interviewer] I can't imagine a world
in which that's the case.
We chatted to Zoe Quinn about
the bizarre history of FMV games.
[Zoe Quinn] It's weird right like I grew up with a 3DO
instead of like a normal console like a
normal person and I also got it in like
1989 or something like way late after it already died.
[interviewer] How does that happen?
We had conversations about accessibility,
virtual reality, mental health and video
games both big and small.
Hell, we even invited a few old friends back.
Hey guys...good to see you again.
[Marty] We're back!
So while you're waiting for the next big project to come
out we're going to be releasing Noclip Sessions
Tasty little videos for you to
snack on in anticipation of the main course.
Thank you so much to all of our
patrons for funding us to the point
where we can expand into new areas like this.
And thanks to the over 100,000 of you who have already
subscribed to this channel.
We're incredibly humbled by your support
and excited to see what you think of our
upcoming projects. Our first round of
Noclip Sessions will be rolling out in the next few days.
See you then