Hi friend. How you doing? Thanks for
coming out to visit me i really
appreciate  it. It's like what they say
it's not until you quit your job that
you realize you your real friends are.
So thanks for hanging out. You thirsty?You want some drink? It's really hot
you should probably yeah have some
So yeah. I've left my job. A job that I
worked really hard to get in the first
place a job that I move country for
twice
basically my dream job. So why?
I joined the games press because i had a strong
belief that gamers deserve a media
that reflects our passions. A press that
uses its access to tell stories about
how games get made, the people who play
them and the ways in which they affect
our lives. Stories that make us proud to be gamers.
Over the past few years I've
put that belief into practice in my
shows and my various documentary series
on games like Overwatch, No Man's Sky and
The Witcher 3: Wild Hunt. But I truly
believe there are hundreds of these
types of stories out there left untold
stories i'm desperate to chase down and
tell so I'm going freelance so I can
spend more time telling them
All right here it is i'm starting a Patreon so if
you enjoyed my live streaming shows
orf my opinion show becoming a patron will
allow me to create bigger brighter
versions of them. But this patreon is
about something much more than those
You see I'm also going to use it to begin a
new type of gaming outlet. A new kind of
games coverage one without reviews or
news or click bait or advertising
One that focuses entirely on short-form
documentaries. Docs about games
Videos that not only entertains but help
educate and preserve gaming history
I'm going to create the ESPN 30 for 30 of
video games. The Anthony Bourdain No
Reservationsm the Top Gear of gaming.
Video game documentary shorts funded by
gamers telling stories that matter not
the advertisers or publishers but
stories the matter to us. With it we're
going to walk through gaming's walls and
take a peek at the other side. That's why
I'm calling it noclip.
Think about favorite upcoming game or a cherished
childhood classic. Imagine a youtube
channel that focused entirely on 
making docs about these games.
Imagine a feature on your favorite
streamer or a gamer in a part of the
world you never even heard of. These are
the types of stories i'm going to tell
and if you know my work you know I've
gotten pretty good at turning over
quality documentaries faster and more
economically than anyone else
We're aiming to release a set of documentary short each
and every month plus if your patron
you'll get access to much much more.
Patrons will get access to heads of
extra content including exclusive
behind-the-scenes episodes, patron only
chat rooms exclusive Q&As, unedited
cuts of interviews, production credits
and more. And more pledges we get the
further we can travel the longer we can
stay the more sick music I can license
and the more we can put towards
accessibility initiatives such as
translations for international viewers
and subtitles for deaf and hard of hearing gamers.
So if like me you think that games coverage should be more than just a race for views, then help me do this
Help me build noclip and we'll create a
vault of amazing video game
documentaries that we can
all be proud of
thanks for your time
See you soon patrons