- I'm Suda51.
I'm the CEO, game designer, and scenario 
writer at Grasshopper Manufacture.
I feel the main reason that we've been 
able to come this far and survive
this long is put simply we've continued running. 
We've been running the whole time.
We start up on a game, we develop 
the game, we finish it off,
and we pretty much immediately 
go onto the next thing.
Immediately come up with the next idea
 and keep running with these ideas,
keep running with these games, 
with development.
And over the years, there's been a lot 
of changes. I feel that in general every
five years or so, most companies have some 
kind of milestone or some kind of turning point
and we've had a few of those so far. 
And, as you said, it's been 20 years,
and now I come to GDC and I see 
people that I knew from back in the day,
people that used to work at Grasshopper.
And it's really kind of amazing 
being able to see each other here.
And we talk about this stuff a lot, but it's 
been 20 years, and we've managed
to keep surviving. And it's really kind of 
warming to think of it that way.
But basically, I think the reason we've been able
 to continue this far is just constantly running.
There was a game that we made way
 back in the day called Flower, Sun, and Rain
and there were a lot of changes  going on 
at the time, a lot of things going on
in and out of the company. And I'd say right 
around the time that we made the game
and just after we made the game, 
in general, that was probably one of
the most difficult periods we've had 
so far in Grasshopper history.
We spent an entire year working on a game,
 and that game ended up being cancelled.
And after that we worked on a series of 
smaller games kind of back to back to back.
But things were really kind of rough at 
the time, and as CEO,
I felt responsible for the company, for everyone. 
And that  was the first time I really
felt that if we don't do something big and 
drastic now, then the company is simply
not going to survive.
- Garican, relax.
- There's an important message for you.
SUDA: After that came Killer7. That was kind of a 
really big turning point for us because it was
the first experience we really had releasing 
a game overseas. Not specifically for,
but it really was partly for overseas. And we 
put out Killer7 and the Grasshopper name
became a lot more well-known 
outside of Japan.
Pretty much immediately after that, we started 
working on and then released No More Heroes.
So, that was a really kind of a full-on period. 
We were constantly working,
constantly pumping stuff out, and it felt 
like the time went by really quickly at that time.
Just being busy, doing so much stuff at once. 
But that was when Grasshopper really
started getting more known around the world, 
outside Japan, and some of our biggest
titles were born. So that also really 
stands out in my memory.
Yeah, there have been a lot of changes 
over the years actually as Grasshopper
has sort of evolved and a lot of stuff 
has changed in the company culture.
Our working style has changed. Back in the day, 
we started as a relatively small company
where I could be a lot more hands-on, acted as 
director and also write at the same time.
I was able to be a lot more hands-on with 
the staff and with what they were doing,
and the company gradually started growing. 
And it was right around the time we put out
Shadows of the Damned in collaboration with EA 
that the company really started getting a lot bigger.
Around that time, I think at its height we 
had about 5 different teams working
on different projects all at once. And I 
think about 150 people at the peak.
And since then, again, things have changed.
We've had people come and go, shaking up
a lot of stuff at the company. Right now, the way 
we work is a lot more similar to the way
we used to work back in the day.
Now we've got a smaller core team,
and we work on a single project at once. 
And I'm able to work the way we used to work
back in the day. I'm able to be a lot 
more hands on. I'm able to speak with
each individual staff member, give them more finely 
detailed instructions and ask them what they need,
and work more closely with them, which is great. 
Making Travis Strikes Again, it was fun.
It was a fun game to make. And I'd say this time,
some of the goals were adding onto
a lot of the Travis legacy and mythology. 
One of the main goals for me personally in
developing Travis Strikes Again was team-building:
creation of teams within the company,
making sure that we could get a team working 
together and held together. So that was
probably my biggest goal with this is 
proper team-building. As you said, this helped to
lay the foundation for the way Grasshopper 
will make games from now on.
We have a core team of about 20-30 people, 
and everything revolves around this one team.
And the team did such a great job working 
together and working on the game this time
that from here on out, that's how we're going 
to be doing games. One team at a time.
DANNY: Congratulations on the book.
- Oh, thanks so much. Thank you.
Thank you.
DANNY: So what are some of
your favorite parts of the book?
- My photo.
Yeah.
[ALL LAUGHING]
No, no, no.
[LAUGHING]
No, no.
One of my favorite parts of the book is 
this Killer7 art here. I was really happy
to be able to make cover of Game Informer,
and I was really happy with the art. So yeah, I've really 
got a soft spot for that particular art.
DANNY: I enjoyed looking through it
because there were so many memories,
but also games that I didn't know about. 
Like what's the game with the frog?
- Ah, Frog Minutes.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Yeah, yeah.
So, so, so, so.
This is actually the first iOS app 
that we made at Grasshopper.
This was made way back in the 
beginning of iOS game development,
and I thought it was a really great game. 
But unfortunately now it's no longer available.
There's this really beautiful kind of forest-looking 
area, and you tap on different parts
to kind of rustle the grass, and frogs will jump out. 
You feed the frogs, rustle some more grass,
get some more frogs out. And basically the point 
of the game is gathering a whole bunch of frogs.
DANNY: And then Diabolical Pitch.
- Yeah.
DANNY: I saw an interview you did with Archipel
two years ago where you were
at a batting cage. You're a big baseball fan. 
Was it fun to work on that?
- Yeah, I do like baseball, but what I especially 
like is going down to the batting cages
and just hitting balls, and throwing them 
sometimes, too.  But that's always been
the biggest draw for me. But I've been playing 
and watching baseball since I was a kid,
so it feels really familiar and really close to me.
DANNY: So what's the key reason
for you to come to GDC?
Is it business? Is it media? Is it networking?
Like why do you come here?
- Actually, I come for a combination of those things, 
but this time the main reason I'm here
is an announcement that was actually released this 
morning, that for the first time in 25 years
I'm going to be coming back to a series 
known as the Fire Pro Wrestling series.
And I'll be coming back to the Fire Pro world 
again for the first time in 25 years.
Yeah, it's the third batch of DLC 
for the one everyone's playing right now.
There was a scenario that I wrote way back 
in the day known as Champion's Road.
The scenario I'm writing right now is going to be a direct 
sequel to that called Champion Road Beyond.
As far as staff from way back in the day, 
there are a few people who are not necessarily
in Grasshopper itself now, but are in the 
same company group, in Gung Ho.
There are people at Grasshopper now who worked 
on Killer7, that's probably as far back as it goes.
Unnecessary overtime is simply not allowed
 at all. So, if you work too much overtime,
first you get a warning saying, hey, chill a bit. 
Be sure to take off Saturday and Sunday,
and go home on time and everything. So, you know, 
we have a set schedule, set working hours,
and it sort of makes it easier to automatically 
hit that work life balance because
even if you wanted to, we're not allowed to 
do all the work that so many developers
are kind of forced to do, 
just by the nature of their work.
So, at Grasshopper, it's a bit easier to keep that 
work life balance than it is at a lot of companies.
So, I've really been trying for a while but 
especially right now, I'm trying my best to
make Grasshopper an environment in which people 
can have fun developing and creating games.
I want people to be able to think, wow, 
working at Grasshopper is fun, you know.
Working on games, developing games here is 
actually fun. So again, especially now,
I'm trying my best to realize that sort of 
environment for a company.